bs 
SSE: 
: eae 
‘ ai aha sitaa nae 
ἘΣ oe Es ante PERE; 
SSS HE εἰ ees ss Ξ 
RSS ΞΈΝΗΝ : ἘΠΕ = Hey 
CS SSSE ESS Se Sei ᾿ ΞΡ : fier 
ἘΣ ΕΕΈΝΗΝ ἘΣ £ 3 ξ : ULL Eee 
τὸς ΞΕ Ξ ἢ 2 Ξ 
ΞΞ = Ξ Ξ i ae 
Ξ Ξ ἘΣ 
Ξ Ξ Er 
= ae 
aaa i eed 
ELELUEUES E Bee 
Spee ἘῈ3 AAESERS EUEEEES 
ae Ξ Ξ Ξ : PESTS τς ἘΞΌΒΕΣΣΙ 
τ τεξεβεεξες: : : = τες : peErrees pEeeeEcEs 
SSSSSS SESS SSS : Ε ἜΤ ΈΝΝ ELVES ἘΠ 
Ξ =e Ba ERREESS 
= 3 ἘΣ Ξ EEE 55: state 
3 ES Ξ ἢ SERS ered 
33 Σ = ree ES 
eee zs: EEPESE E ast Ξ 
S34 = ΞΞΞΗ͂Ξ :Ξ ΞΞΞ : 
fees = ΞΞ yivrsete ae 
Saas ἘΞ Ξ ἘΈΞΞΕΣ Εν 
S385: ΕΞ Seabee τὲ ey were 
= SEE ΞΆΞΞΕ ἘΞ ΞΞΞΞΞ 
ἘΞ ΞΞ ΠΣ ἔτ ΣῈ SEEEES 
= ΞΞ EERE ET EEEESCES ἘΡΞΕ: 
: as Petorerepeeres M Sey E Ed 
ἘΠΕ REL REE ἘΠΕ Ree ΕΣ bee 
23 ἘΞ 5: ἘΠῈΞ ξ ΕἸ 
= oh rs rr μιὰ 305 o τ τε 
ἘΞ ἘΞ ΡΑΞΕΕΣΞΞΠΉΞΗΣΣ ΞΞΞΞΕΞΕΣ εἰ ; 
ae ἘΞ ΞΕ ΡΟΣ ἘΞΞΞ Σ᾿ 5 rss 3 Ξ ξ 
reese Sts ΞΞΞ Ξ 
= 
ES: 
SSUSSS SSE SES Sees Sea RSSSS 


CORNELL 
UNIVERSITY 
LIBRARY 


Cornell University 


The original of this book is in 
the Cornell University Library. 


There are no known copyright restrictions in 
the United States on the use of the text. 


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924101104952 


THE 


PULPIT COMMENTARY, 


EDITED BY THE 


VERY REV. Η. ἢ. M. SPENCE, D.D.,, 


DEAN OF GLOUCESTER ; 


AND BY THE 


REV. JOSEPH S. EXELL, M.A. 


WITH 


INTRODUCTIONS 
BY THE 


VEN. ARCHDEACON F. W. FARRAR, D.D., F.R.S.—RIGHT REV. H. COTTERILL, D.D., F.R.S.E. 
—VERY REY. PRINCIPAL J. TULLOCH, D.D.—REV. CANON G. RAWLINSON, M.A. 
—REY. A. PLUMMER, M.A., D.D. 


FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY 
New Yorx anp Toronvo. 


A ged 
δ * 


THE 


PULPIT COMMENTARY, 


EDITED BY THE 


REV. CANON IL. Ὁ. M. SPENCE, M.A,, 


VICAR AND RURAL DEAN OF ST. PANCRAS, AND EXAMINING CHAPLAIN TO THE LORD 
BISHOP OF GLOUCESTER AND BRISTOL ; 


AND BY THE 


REV. JOSEPH 5. EXELL, M.A. 


GALATIANS. 


Exposition: 
By THE REV. PREBENDARY E. HUXTABLE, M.A., 


LATE SUB-DEAN OF WELLS AND VICE-PRINCIPAL OF WELLS THEGLOGICAL COLLEGE. 


‘omiletics : 
By REV. PROFESSOR 1. CROSKERY, D.D. 


Homilies by Various Authors: 


QEV W. F. ADENEY, M.A., REV. R. M. EDGAR, M.A, 
REV. R. FINLAYSON, B.A. 


FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY 
New YorRK AND TORONTO, 


THE EPISTLE OF 


PAUL TO THE GALATIANS. 


INTRODUCTION. 


Gatatia, 


Gavatia was a tract of country lying on the northward part of that elevated 
tableland which forms the central portion of the great peninsula we call 
Asia Minor. On the south, those uplands rest upon the long range of the 
Taurian Mountains running more or less parallel with the coast. On the 
north, they are upreared, first by the Olympus range, which, commencing in 
the neighbourhood of Prusa (now Brusa), pursue a generally eastward 
direction, until, after being pierced by the river Ancharias (Akaria), which 
rises in those highlands, they are continued by the Aladag and Ulgaz 
Mountains as far as the Halys (Kizitl-Irmak). Anciently these lands were 
to a considerable extent occupied by the Phrygians, then deemed, according 
to Homer (‘ Iliad,’ 111. 185—190), one of the finest races of mankind. But 
in the earlier part of the third century before Christ, hordes of Gauls, 
after a detachment of their hosts had been repulsed in an attempt to swarm 
into Greece, had managed to cross the Hellespont (3.0. 279), and had 
poured themselves upon the western districts of Asia Minor, carrying 
havoc and rapine in every direction. With the details of their ensuing 
history we need not trouble ourselves. It is sufficient to remark that at 
length these wild tribes got bounded in within the limits of that country 
to which they gave their own name, being a district which they had wrested 
from its former Phrygian occupants. In the year B.o. 189 they were con- 
quered by the Roman general, Cu. Manlius Vulso. The Romans, however, 
found it advisable to allow them for a long time to remain to a considerable 
degree independent, under princes of their own. One of these was the 
Deiotarus whose name is familiar to the readers of Cicero as a friend and 
a useful ally of his when Proconsul of Cilicia, and as afterwards defended 
by him, in his ‘Oratio pro Rege Deiotaro,’ when arraigned before Julius 
Cesar on the cherge of attempting to assassinate him. This Deiotarus, 
GALATIANS, 3 


f INTRODUCTION TO 


n.c. 65, first united the Galatians under one sovereign. On the death of a 
successor of his, Amyntas, B.c. 25, Galatia, with the addition of some 
neighbouring districts, was constituted into a Roman province under a 
governor. 

In consequence of this it came to pass that the term Galatia is used in a 
wider and in a narrower sense. It sometimes designates the country 
properly so called; sometimes, the Roman province made up of this 
Galatia and other districts added thereto, which were different at different 
times. At the period we are now concerned with, these additional districts 
were Lycaonia, Isauria, and a portion of Pisidia; all lying to the south-west 
and south of Galatia proper. If the term as used by St. Paul denotes the 
country which was coextensive with the Roman province of that name, we 
might reckon the Churches of Antioch of Pisidia (now Yalobaich), as well 
as those of Iconium (Konieh), Derbe, and Lystra, cities of Lycaonia, as 
among “ the Churches of Galatia.” This hypothesis, however, is shown by 
Bishop Lightfoot (‘ Galatians: the Churches of Galatia’), as well as by 
others, to be untenable. It is the prevailing opinion of critics, and may 
be confidently assumed as the fact, that the word “Galatia” is used by 
the apostle with reference to this country in its stricter and more proper 
sense, 

At this time the Galatians were divided into three septs. (1) The 
Trocmi, occupying the easternmost position, on the right bank of the 
Halys, their capital being Tavium. Not far beyond their eastern border 
lay Comana (now Tokat), consecrated by being the sleeping-place of St. 
Chrysostom and of Henry Martyn. (2) Next came the Tectosages, whose 
capital city, Ancyra (Angora), the capital also of the Roman province, lay a 
little north of the very midmost part of the peninsula of Asia Minor; it 
was famous in ancient times, as it is now, for the soft camlet fabrics woven 
from the fine hair of its goats. (3) Westernmost were situated the 
Tolistoboii, or Tolistobogii, whose capital, Pessinus, situated south-westward 
from Ancyra, lay under Mount Dindymus, and was world-famed as being 
the chief centre of the worship of Cybele, the mother of the gods; 
“Dindymene” (Horace); “cui Dindyma cure” (Virgil); the worship 
the report of which was blazed abroad everywhere by reason of the hideous 
self-mutilation of some of its priests, “ Galli,” or “ Corybantes,” and for 
the frenzy of its devotees, excited by hautboys and bronzen timbrels (“‘ Cory- 
bantia sera ”’). 

It has been stated that the Gauls gave the district which they occupied 
their own name. In explanation of this, we must observe that Galat is the 
form under which the name, which in Latin is Gall, commonly appears in 
Greek authors after the time of Herodotus, in whose ‘ Histories ’ it appears 
as Kelt. The Gallie of Hurope, both Cisalpine (Lombardy) and France, 
were each of them by the Greeks called Galatia. In fact, the “Galatia” 
now before us was a third Gaul. It is to be further observed that when 
St. Paul, writing at the close of his life from Rome, tells Timothy (2 Tira. 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, ii 


iv. 10) that Crescens was gone to Galatia, the word was commonly, and 
perhaps rightly, taken by Greek commentators, as referring to a Huropean 
Gaul, and rot to that in Asia Minor. Galat has very much the appearance 
of being the very word Kelt slightly varied in its utterance; but it is not 
quite certain that it is so; it may rather be the case (Bishop Lightfoot 
thinks) that Galat and Kelt were diverging forms of the same word, applied 
to different branches of the Celtic race. It has been surmised that both 
exhibit the same root as Gall, with a Celtic suffix. 

It is interesting to observe that the Gauls embosomed in Asia Minor 
retained with “Celtic tenacity” their own original tongue to so great an 
extent that their language is declared by Jerome, in the Introduction to 
his Commentary on the Epistles, to be in his own time, which was more 
than three centuries later than St. Paul, very much the same (eadem fere) 
as he had heard spoken by the Gauls at Tréves. They used, however, the 
Greek language as well, for which reason they were at times called by the 
Romans Gallo-Graci. Indeed, the Greek tongue, which under the empire 
got to be used even in Rome itself more customarily than Latin, was in 
vogue, as Jerome likewise observes, all over the Hast. They were thus 
bilinguals at least—not a few also, no doubt, being acquainted with the 
language of their Roman masters as well. Such was beyond question the 
case of many of the countries subject to the Roman empire (comp. John 
xix. 20). Thus when Paul and Barnabas were visiting the neighbouring 
country of Lycaonia, they no doubt addressed the people in Greek, assured 
of being understood by them; while they themselves failed to catch the 
import of the cries uttered by the Lycaonian populace, who in their 
excitement reverted quite naturally to their own more native speech (Acts 
xiv. 11—14). 

The Galatic Land. It is noticeable that St. Luke does not use the word 
“ Galatia” at all. He twice finds occasion to specify the district, and in 
both instances he names it “the Galatic Land” (Acts xvi. 6; xviii. 23). 
No doubt he found this designation of it already in use, though no instance 
of its occurrence elsewhere has been produced, and chose to employ it in 
preference to “‘ Galatia,” in order to make it more immediately obvious to - 
the Roman readers to whom he was addressing his narrative, that it was 
not the entire Roman province of the name that he was now referring to. 
So alsa then he uses the term “ Phrygia ” in both cases in close connection 
with “the Galatic Land,” there being no Roman province so called. He 
thus conjoins the two, as being linked together by a certain measure of 
identity in their populations; for in all probability not a few of the 
original Phrygian inhabitants still dwelt in the country, though now forming 
a stratum of population subordinate to that of their Gallic conquerors. At 
all events, “the Galatic” had originally formed ὦ part of the country of 


the Phrygians. 


ty INTRODUCTION TO 


Rexicion or THE GALatians. 


The Gallic invaders do not appear to have at once adopted the worship 
of Cybele; for when, in the third generation after the conquest, they were 
attacked by the Romans, the Phrygian priests of Cybele met the Roman 
general, clad in the robes of their office, and chanting wild strains of 
prophecy, in which they announced to him that the goddess approved of 
his enterprise, and would make him the master of the country (Lightfoot, 
quoting Livy, xxxviii. 18; Polybius, xxii. 20). Perhaps this prediction had 
later the effect of making the Gauls, through its accomplishment, more 
ready to submit to the claims made on behalf of the goddess to their 
homage. At all events, they appear subsequently to have embraced her 
worship most cordially. The fervid fanaticism of her rites would naturally 
present a great attraction to the temperament of a people so excitable as 
they were. Among the inscriptions found at Pessinus, as also at Comana 
(Tokat), there are several, Bishop Lightfoot observes, specifying priests of 
Cybele by names which are evidently Gaulish. Her worship lingered long 
in this its old home: the Emperor Julian found it still subsisting there, and 
tried hard to revive this, as well as other Gentile cults, into renewed vigour. 
The Galatians, however, served other gods as well (ch. iv. 8). At Tavium 
the principal object of worship was a colossal bronze statue of Zeus. At 
Ancyra there was a magnificent temple of Augustus in white marble, still 
subsisting in ruins. As their Lycaonian neighbours recognized Hermes as 
one of their divinities as well as Zeus, we may well believe that his cult 
also was accepted by these Gauls; both were adopted from the Phrygians, 
the former possessors of the soil, together with probably much, at least, of 
their other idolatrous worship. As being a less civilized race than that 
which they dispossessed, they might have been on that account the more 
ready to lend an ear to their religious teaching, especially since these idola- 
trous cults were very commonly localized, and consequently claimed to be 
taken on by the new-comers along with the places to which they were at- 
tached. They had besides brought with them forms of religious or idolatrous 
observance of their own, which, after the manner of idolaters, they would 
more or less amalgamate with those others ; but of these we know nothing. 


Jews mv Gawatia. 


Amongst these idolatrous nations there was scattered far and wide a 
large diffusion of Jews, forming, in respect to the spread of the gospel, a 
most important element of the population. In addition to circumstances 
tending, here as elsewhere, to their diffusion, it appears that there were some 
which in Asia Minor were especially operative. Antiochus the Great, King 
of Syria, before he was compelled towards the close of his long reign to 
give way in the year B.o. 191 before the advancing power of Rome, held 
sway over a wide belt of country reaching from the shores of the Aigean 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, % 


» σι, 


right across the continent as far as beyond Babylon, And we learn from 
Josephus (‘ Ant.,’ xii. 3, 4) that this king, with a view to the consolidation of 
his power, ordered his general Zeuxis to remove two thousand Jewish families 
from Mesopotamia and Babylon into Lydia and Phrygia, and to locate them 
“in the castles and places most convenient ;” at the same time securing to 
them the free exercise of their religion, making them grants of land for 
building homes and for husbandry, and conferring various immunities 
indicative of his confidence in their loyalty to his government. If this 
scheme was fully carried out, it would infer the implantation in those 
countries of a population of not less than ten thousand people. Some of 
these could hardly fail of becoming established in Galatia. It is, indeed, 
quite supposable that the disquiets in these parts of his dominions which, 
as he tells Zeuxis, led him to adopt this measure, had their origin in part in 
the turbulent spirit of the Gauls recently settled in Asia Minor or still 
roving about unsettled. At all events, these Jewish settlements in 
“Phrygia” would become nuclei, sending forth ramifications which would 
quickly spread in districts so fertile as Galatia was. That Jews did abound 
in the Galatic region in particular is evinced by another fact recorded by 
Josephus (‘ Ant.,’ xvi. 6, 2), who tells that by Augustns’s command a copy 
of an address which he had received from the Jews, together with a decree 
of his issued in consequence of it, which ensured to them protection in 
their religious cbservances, was inscribed upona pillar in his temple at 
Ancyra, the capital of the province. Accordingly, we find in the history of 
the Acts abundant proofs of the great influence which the Jews were able 
to exercise in all these parts of Asia Minor of whose evangelization St. 
Luke has given any details; and the like may be presumed to have been the 
case in other places his references to which are only brief and allusive, 
The important influence of the Jewish population of “those parts” (Acts 
xvi. 3) is further shown by the circumstance that, in consideration thereof, 
St. Paul at Lystra or Iconium thought it advisable to circumcise Timothy 
to facilitate his evangelizing work. 

Roman roads. The spreading abroad of the now commercial people of 
the Jews was favoured by the accommodation which the Roman government 
provided for easier locomotion, in the roads it built intersecting these 
countries of Asia Minor in all directions, and they are particularized (we 
are told) in the Itineraries, and some of them are still in existence. These 
passed through Gordium, formerly the capital city of Phrygia, and still in 
those days an important centre of traffic, lying on the north-western 
frontier of Galatia, and went out by Tavium, another important centre of 
commerce on the eastern side. These roads had no doubt much to do with 
the direction of the course which St. Paul took in his three great journeyings 
in Asia Minor. On this subject the reader is referred to the interesting 
and highly illustrative chapters in Conybeare and Howson’s work on St. 
Paul, in which Dean Howson follows up the apostle’s travels in those 


countries (ch. vi.—viii.). 


vi INTRODUCTION TO 


The Jewish tincture of the Epistle. Attention has been drawn by Dr. 
Jowett and others to the especially Jewish character which in this Epistle 
marks St. Paul’s reasonings and style of illustration. And this has been 
supposed to favour an inference which has been deduced from ch. iv. 9, that 
the persons he addresses were to a great degree actually Jews. This 
inference, however, itself rests, as I venture to think, upon a mistaken 
view of the apostle’s meaning in that passage (see note, in loe.); while 
further he expressly affirms, in the immediately preceding verse, that the 
Churchmen he is writing to had before their conversion been in bondage to 
gods which were really no gods. Moreover, that they were Gentiles is 
clearly implied in ch. ii. 5, “ That the truth of the gospel might continue 
with you,” and is rendered certain by their not having been circumcised, 
but only solicited to receive circumcision (ch. v. 2,3; vi. 12). The Jewish 
tincture which St. Paul feels at liberty to give to his discourse admits of 
being more satisfactorily explained by other considerations, which have not, 
so far as I have observed, been sufficiently taken into account. 

The method which the apostle uniformly pursued in his work of evan- 
gelizing the heathen, that is, by addressing in each place “the Jew first,” 
was both justified and recommended for his adoption by the consideration 
that Jewish converts might be expected to supply the most ready and, 
when genuine believers, the most reliable instruments for the religious 
guidance in the first instance of the newly formed Churches. The new 
economy was professedly based upon the old, being in fact its proper and 
its all along designed development; so that “the scribe discipled to the 
kingdom of heaven” stood in a position, relatively to other Christians, pre- 
eminently favourable for being qualified to instruct his brethren drawn from 
the Gentiles: out of his already well-filled treasure he could bring forth 
things old as well as new (Matt. xiii. 52). The “old things” were familiar 
to his hand, and when illuminated and more completely vitalized by 
combination with the new, were immediately available for the most effective 
enforcement of the doctrine of Christ. 

First presbyters mostly Jewish converts. We read in the Acts that when 
Barnabas and Paul, retracing their steps homewards, visited Lystra, Iconium, 
and Antioch of Pisidia, confirming the souls of the disciples, they appointed 
for them elders in every Church (Acts xiv. 21—23). We read this at first 
with some surprise; how was it possible that communities composed of 
converts so recently made, and after the small amount of Christian instruo- 
tion which was all they could have possibly received, should be able to 
supply men qualified to take the lead in teaching as well as in practical 
guidance P_ Having in view bodies of converts in the present day gathered 
in by our own missionaries, for example in India or in China, it strikes our 
minds that the appointment to the presbyteral office of neophytes so recent 
would seem to be a measure which, if unavoidable, would, however, be 
fraught with great hazard. But our embarrassment is gréatly relieved 
when we recall to mind the converts from the synagugue. Here were men 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. vil 


—Apollos, for example—who from their earliest years had becn familiar with 
those sacred writings which were able, as St. Paul reminds Timothy, to 
make men wise unto salvation through faith in Christ Jesus; so that when 
the way of God had been carefully expounded to them, they would find 
themselves, under the Spirit’s guidance, thoroughly equipped, as in fact 
Apollos proved himself, as men of God for every work of the ministry 
(2 Tim. iii. 16,17). We cannot help feeling persuaded that it was in the 
main from this rank of converts that those presbyters were chosen. And 
obviously the same consideration applies to those who had been appointed to 
“teach in the Word” the members of the several Galatian Churches (ch. vi. 
6). They too, we may confidently assume, were in most or many cases 
converts from the synagogue. 

The Old Testament the only Scriptures, and handled after the methods of 
Jewish schools. Further, we must bear in mind that now and for some time 
later the only Scriptures which Sunday by Sunday furnished those sacred 
readings, which in the Christian assemblies, after the model of the sabbath 
services of the synagogue, formed the basis of expository comment and of 
exhortation, were the same as those referred to by the apostle in the passage 
just above cited, that is to say, they were the Scriptures of the Old 
Testament. In these their teachers searched for and found, and by these 
they delighted to illustrate, those truths relative to our Lord’s personal 
history, which were embodied in the brief summary of Christian faith 
instilled into the mind of the Church (comp. 1 Cor. xv. 3, 4, ‘‘ According to 
the Scriptures”). The histories of the Old Testament, its prophecies, its 
devotional utterances, the precepts of the Mosaic Law itself as illustrative of 
spiritual principles (1 Cor. ix. 9), were, we feel certain, each successive 
Lord’s day presented to the view of the Christian brotherhood, by men of 
originally Jewish culture, but adding to that culture, and so qualifying it, 
the all-important elements of the truth of the gospel. Now, it is obvious to 
suppose that, in the hands of such teachers, the methods of Biblical comment 
and illustration would to a very great extent be the same as they had been 
familiar with previously to their conversion, from their rabbinical education 
in the Jewish schools and from the synagogue preaching. 

It is, of course, not meant that these readings and expositions of the Old 
Testament constituted the whole of the service, or of even the public 
addresses, on the Lord’s day. Without importing into our conception of 
the Church life of just this time the features which mark it in the por- 

_traiture given fifty years later by Pliny, in his celebrated letter addressed 
40 the emperor from Bithynia, we are able, however, to form some notion of 
its nature from glimpses afforded by the Acts and the Epistles. And 
forming our judgment from these, we cannot doubt that the Holy Eucharist 
was celebrated at least every Sunday, and probably oftener; that more or 
less in connection with this, the feast called Love (Agapé) was held, fur- 
nishing opportunity for religious converse; also that ‘psalms and hymns 
and spiritual songs” were sung or chanted (Eph. v. 19). Moreover, those 


lil INTRODUCTION TO 


who had gifts of prophesying and of speaking in tongues had opportunity 
given them of employing their gifts for the good of their brethren (1 Cor. 
xiy.); and prayers were offered up which all could take part in or expresa 
sympathy with. Thus the reading and expounding of the Old Testament 
Scriptures by no means formed the whole or even, perhaps, the main part of 
the business of these fraternal assemblies. But neither, again, need we 
suppose that the reading of those Scriptures with instruction founded 
upon them was confined, as it perhaps was in the synagogue (Acts xv. 21), 
to one day in the week. In those days of early religious fervour, and of 
thirst for the “ spiritual milk which was without guile,” meetings for social 
worship and mutual instruction were, we may well believe, held from day 
to day and from house to house, at which there would be going on a 
perpetual repeating and inculcating of the ideas and words of Scripture, 
with still the same Jewish tincture in the mode of expression and of 
illustration, 

This had been going on now for some years. Now, when the apostle wrote 
this letter of his to the Galatians, this instilling into the minds of the 
Gentile converts of Christian truths clothed in the garb of Jewish thought 
had been going on, in some at least of the Galatian Churches, for not less 
than five or six years. By which time these disciples, with the quickness 
and vivacity of intelligence which then, as Cesar tells us, characterized 
the Gallic temperament, even as they do now, must have imbibed so much 
of Jewish theological thought Christianized as would qualify them readily 
to apprehend and assimilate any such trains of thought and reasoning as 
those which we find in this Epistle. Their case was different from that of 
the Thessalonian believers when the apostle wrote his two letters to them - 
these last were not yet prepared to receive instruction couched in those 
forms—their conversion from heathenism was too recent; and accordingly 
in those two Epistles we do not find it. But the Galatian converts stood in 
a different position, as did also the Roman Christians (Rom. vii. 1), and 
the Corinthian (1 Cor. x. 1, 11, and passim), and those to whom was sent 
the encyclical letter which we know as the Fpistle to the Ephesians 
(Eph. iv. 2; v. 30; vi. 2); all these, though mainly Gentiles, were become, 
by the time those letters were sent to them, familiar with the Scriptures of 
the Old Testament, and could be addressed as being so. 


Cuourcnes or Gaara. 


In Galatia there does not appear to have been any one city which St, 
Paul made his head-quarters for evangelistic work in any such way as in 
Asia he made Ephesus his head-quarters, and in Achaia Corinth. We have 
no mention of Pessinus, or of Ancyra, or of Tavium. The Epistle is 
addressed to “the Churches of Galatia,” as if there were a number of such 
Churches, no one of which, perhaps, contained so large a body of members as 
to give it a distinguishing pre-eminence among the rest. In those days, in 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, ix 


countries over which Christianity was extensively diffused, each considerable 
town, or village even, had its own several “Church” presided over by 
presbyters of its own, and in organization independent of the others. We 
read, for example, of “the Churches of Galatia,” “the Churches of Mace- 
donia,” and “ the Churches of Juda,” but never of (say) “the Church of 
Galatia,” or ‘the Church of Judza,” or the like. At the same time, no 
city, however large its entire population, or however numerous the believers 
dwelling in it, is spoken of as having more than one Church; for example, 
there was only one Church at Corinth, only one at Antioch in Syria, only 
one even in Jerusalem, although in this last city, as St. James told St. Paul 
(Acts xxi. 20), there were “tens of thousands” (μυριάδες) of believers. 
Three centuries later, as we learn from Bingham (‘ Antiquities,’ 11. xii. 2), 
in the peninsula now called Asia Minor, “not much larger” (the author 
says) “than the Isle of Great Britain,” there were, “as appears from the 
ancient Notitiss of the Church,” four hundred “ bishops,” some of them in 
towns of quite small size. Now, whatever may be thought of the sense of 
the word “ bishop ” in the days of the apostles (cf. Phil. i. 1), there can be 
no question that, in the fourth century, each several “ bishop” betokened a 
separate Church presided over by him. There were, then, in the fourth 
century, four hundred Churches in Asia Minor. Considering the size of 
Galatia, a considerable aumber of these may be supposed to have apper- 
tained to this district, some of them from the days of St. Paul. 

History of the Galatian Ohurches as gathered from the Epistles. Of the 
previous history of these Churches, as also of their subsequent history in 
the apostolic age, our information is extremely slight. The only particulars 
which we possess relative to the evangelization of this region are drawn 
from the Epistle itself. In the fourth chapter the apostle reminds his 
converts that his preaching the gospel to them at “the former time” (ver. 13) 
was occasioned by a bodily illness. But whether he means that it was illness 
that led to his coming among them, or that befalling him whilst already 
there it necessitated a longer stay than he would otherwise have made, is 
not quite clear. But the former seems the more probable interpretation. 
The great salubrity of the northern part of this great inland plateau of 
which Galatia formed a part is well known (see note on the passage). 
Next, the apostle makes most grateful acknowledgment of the quite extra- 
ordinary enthusiasm of personal attachment which the Galatian converts 
had then evinced towards him (see ch. iv. 14, 15, and notes). He also 
adverts, in ch. iii, 2, 5, to their receiving the Spirit, and to the Spirit being 
supplied to them—erpressions which show that in their case, as was indeed 
very generally the case when the apostle himself first brought the gospel 
to a new neighbourhood, its testimony had been sealed by the impartation 
pf charisms. Further, the form of expression in ch. iv. 18, “the former 
time (τὸ πρότερον), implies that there had been another visit afterwards 
before the writing of the Epistle, and probably only one other. That thore 
‘had been in this second visit a palpable diminution in the fervour of personal 


x INTRODUCTION TO 


attachment which had so gladdened hia heart in his first visit, is not 
necessarily implied in the manner in which he expresses himself; for the 
phrase, “the former time,” qualifies no more than the reference to his 
illness; but since three or four years had intervened, such a change was 
hardly to be wondered at, especially when we consider the changeableness 
which is the reverse side to the Celt’s enthusiasm in his friendships ; though 
St. Paul, who held the love of his disciples so dear, would naturally fee] 
pained and disappointed if their reception of him then really did show any 
coldness. The reference which, shortly after the writing of this Epistle (as 
I venture to think), the apostle made to these Churches in 1 Cor. xvi. 1 will 
have to be considered more fully further on. 

Their history as gathered from the Acts. Comparing with these indications 
.that which we find bearing upon the subject in the Acts, written probably 
four or five years later than the Epistle, we find, in perfect accordance so 
far as it goes with the Epistle, mention made by St. Luke of two visits paid 
by St. Paul to “the Galatic Land.” The first took place in the early part 
of that great missionary journey which the apostle, after his separation 
from Barnabas, made in company with Silas. Starting from Antioch, he 
first visited the Churches already subsisting in Syria and Cilicia. Then 
going, as appears most likely, through the passes in the Taurus which were 
called the Cilician Gates (see Conybeare and Howson), most probably in the 
spring of a.p. 51, the two holy evangelists came to Derbe, -Lystra, and 
Iconium. In this neighbourhood the apostle adopted Timothy into com- 
panionship with them in the work. They then “ went on their way thrcugh 
the cities [apparently those of Lycaonia and Pisidia], delivering unto them 
the decrees for to keep, which had been ordained by the apostles and the 
elders which were at Jerusalem” (Acts xv. 41—xvi. 4). The lapse of some 
time seems indicated by the manner of expression in Acts xvi. 5, “So the 
Churches [apparently of the parts just now referred to] were strengthened 
in the faith and increased in number daily.” The sacred historian then 
adds, “ And they went through Phrygia and the Galatic Land, having been 
forbidden of the Holy Ghost to speak the word in Asia [that is, the Roman 
province so called]; . . . and came over against Mysia.” That is all that 
St. Luke says about Galatia here. Hvidently his main interest in recording 
this whole journey lies in that introduction of the gospel into Europe 
which in especial it was designed by Heaven to effect—a subject which 
occupies his entire attention from this point down to the eighteenth verse of 
ch. xviii. Hastening on, therefore, to that most especially interesting part 
ef this narrative, he abridges the earlier part of it into the brief statement 
which has now been cited. 

In Acts xviii., beginning from ver. 22, St. Luke proceeds to relate some 
particulars of another great missionary journey made by the apostle. He 
is not now accompanied by Silas, but appears to have Timothy with him, 
together with, no doubt, other associates in the holy enterprise. After 
“galuting the Church” of Jerusalem, probably in the year a.p. 53 or 54, 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, ΣΙ 


-“Φ 

“he went down to Antioch; and having spent some time there, he went 
forth, going through in order the Galatic Land and Phrygia, stablishing all 
the disciples.” Then, after an interesting parenthesis respecting Apollos, 
the historian adds (Acts xix. 1), “Paul having passed through the upper 
country [that is, the upland plateau in the northern part of which the 
Galatic Land and Phrygia were situated], came to Ephesus.” At Ephesus, 
as we learn from vers. 8 and 10, he spent upwards of two years, spreading 
the knowledge of the- gospel far and wide in the province of Asia; after 
which he crossed the sea to visit the Churches previously founded by him 
in Europe. 


Dare or tue Apvostie’s LEAviING EpHesos. 


In the reference which St. Luke here (Acts xviii. 23) makes to the 
“Galatic Land,” we observe that, mentioning it as before in conjunction 
with Phrygia, he now reverses the order in which the two districts are 
named. This suggests the impression that the apostle approached those 
countries by a different route from before, one which brought him into the 
Galatic first. This would be the case if he had ascended the plateau from 
its eastern or Cappadocian side. A few years later there were believers in 
Cappadocia so numerous as to call for especial mention by St. Peter in the 
grecting of his first letter: “ΤῸ the sojourners of the dispersion in Pontus, 
Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia.” Before starting for that long 
continuance in the West which probably he had already in view, St. Paul 
appears to have been anxious to secure in the first instance, so far as he 
might, ground already occupied. That he made a point of doing this is 
shown, both by the words, “stablishing all the disciples,” and the phrase 
“ going through in order (καθεξῆς) ;᾿ both expressions point to centres of 
converts already formed. After completing the visitation of the Churches 
in the Galatic and Phrygia, he probably inspected also the stations of 
Christian work dotted over other portions of “the upper country "—for 
example, in Lycaonia and Pisidia—before descending to the lowlands to 
reach Ephesus. Now, when we consider that this extended tour from 
Antioch to Ephesus by a circuitous route, involving also frequent detours as 
well as frequent stoppages necessary in the prosecution of his evangelistic 
work, means a journey of not much less than a thousand miles, for the most 
part probably on foot—the traveller a man of by no means robust health, 
one subject to attacks of illness—we can hardly suppose but that the 
greater part of a year at the very least must have elapsed from the time of 
his leaving Jerusalem before he reached the capital of “Asia.” Τῇ so, then 
supposing the visit to Jerusalem to have been a.p. 53 or 54, it was probably 
not till the spring of 57, perhaps not till the spring of 58 (comp. 1 Cor 
xvi. 8), that the apostle left Ephesus for Macedonia. 


xii INTRODUCTION TO 


WHAT LED TO THE WRITING OF THE EPISTLE. 


The manner in which the Epistle opens makes it clear that the apostle 
addressed himself to the writing of it under the impulse of strong emotion, 
excited by tidings from Galatia which he had newly received. He had 
learnt to his grief and astonishment that they were giving heed to certain 
who would fain “turn the doctrine of the gospel of Christ into ite clean 
contrary,” and yielding themselves to their direction. 

The seducers probably not strangers, but Churchmen of Galatia itself. Who 
the seducers were the apostle nowhere explicitly states. We read in the 
Acts (xv. 1) that the Judaizing trouble at Antioch, which occasioned the 
important conference held at Jerusalem, had originated with “certain men 
coming down from Judma.” And in the Hpistle itself (ch. ii. 12) St. Paul 
refers to the coming to Antioch of “ certain from James” as having, again 
in that city, led to serious embarrassments indirectly connected with the 
same great Judaistic controversy. This has suggested to many the surmise 
that the fomenters of the movement in Galatia, which was manifestly of a 
Judaizing character, had likewise come from Jerusalem or from Judea, and 
some have considered that the apostle’s reference in the Epistle to such 
persons having been the cause of the second trouble at Antioch was a 
significant though veiled allusion to a similar cause of likewise the Galatian 
trouble. The existence of this shade of allusion is, however, purely hypo- 
thetical, having no ground in what is really written, That “the troublers” 
lad come from Judwa or from any other place out of Galatia is a conjecture 
both ungrounded and unnecessary. No hint of this is given in any one of 
the several references which the apostle makes to them: none in ch. i. 7, 
nor in ch. iii. 1, nor in ch. iv. 17, nor in ch. v. 10—12, nor in ch. vi. 12, 18. 
The words (in ch. v. 10), “ He that troubleth you shall bear his judgment 
whosoever he be,” appear to hint a certain eminence of position held by 
one or more of these mischievous teachers; and possibly this is also alluded 
to in the words (in ch. i. 8), “ Though we or an angel from heaven preach a 
different gospel,” etc.; but the requirement of either passage is amply met 
by the supposition that one, or more than one, of the Galatian elders or 
deacons themselves had committed the offence. This would be only in 
accordance with what we read in Acts xx. 80, where the apostle warns the 
Ephesian elders that from among their own selves should men arise, 
speaking perverse things, to draw away the disciples after them. Possibly 
it may have been this very experience of his, then quite recent, in respect 
to the Galatian elders, which, together with probably other experiences of 
a similar kind, prompted that utterance of warning at Miletus. The 
intimation in ch. v. 12, that it might be a very good thing if those who 
were unsettling them would even inflict apocopé upon themselves, seems far 
more appropriate and possible on the supposition that they were Galatians 
who had fellow-countrymen among the priests of Pessinus, than on the 
supposition that they were persons belonging to other lands. But most 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. xiit 


especially the apostle’s words in ch. vi. 12, 13 favour the belief that the 
trouble originated with certain who were themselves Galatians. They are 
spoken of ag “undergoing circumcision” (περιτεμνόμενοι : see note; the 
competing reading, περιτετμημένοι, comes to the same result: they had 
evidently not been circumcised until they engaged in this movement) ; 
moreover, they have no real care for the Law themselves, but only wish to 
save themselves from the risk of being persecuted—persecnted, that is, 
through the instigation of Jewish neighbours ;—a description wholly inap- 
plicable to persons coming from James or from Judea. 

The features of the noxious movement. The mischievous movement, then, 
appears to have originated with certain Gentile members of these Churches, 
who had loosened the hold which they had once appeared to have on the 
fundamental truth, that faith in Christ is the alone and the sufficient ground 
of justification before God, and were blindly and, so to speak, flounderingly 
casting about for other means of obtaining justification. The means they 
were grasping at consisted in obedience to certain selected prescriptions of 
the ceremonial Law. That they did not mean the adoption of the entire 
ceremonial institute is shown by ch. v. 3. They had plainly not got to 
that as yet. Circumcision was indeed being seriously talked about (ch. v. 2), 
and the passage in ch. vi. 13 favours the belief that some of those most 
forward in the movement had already made a beginning of submitting to 
the rite in their own persons. It is distinctly stated that, under their leading, 
Galatian Churchmen were toying with the observance of “days, and months, 
and seasons, and years” (ch, iv. 10), with a sort of ignorant but solemn 
pedantic earnestness which must have been piteous to witness. In what 
sort of doctrinal statement they formulated their “strange gospel” does 
not appear. One thing, however, is clear—by some means or other they 
were instilling the sentiment that faith in Christ needed, in order to com- 
pletely justify, to be supplemented by some degree of conformity to the 
ceremonial Law given through Moses. That such was the spirit of their 
teaching is apparent from the teaching which St. Paul puts forward for the 
purpose of counteracting it; for to that end he insists upon these two theses 
—that faith in Christ Jesus is the sole ground on which any, whether Jews or 
Gentiles, are made sons of God; and that the ceremonial Law was a purely 
pedagogic and provisional institution, for which there is no longer any 
place at all in the relations between God and his people, The genius of 
the movement is also illustrated by the apostile’s relating the incident of St, 
Peter’s misguided action at Antioch, and the reasoning by which he himself 
openly convicted his error. For the mention of this incident would have 
been irrelevant if it had not involved ag its basis the emergence of asimilar 
mode of thought and feeling. The similarity consisted in the fact that 
Cephas was treating those Gentile believers who did not conform to the 
ceremonial Law as if they were not standing on the like footing of accept- 
ableness with believers who were conforming thereto—the very misappre- 
hension which was now working in the minds of these Galatians, both the 


xiv INTRODUCTION TO 


misleaders and the misled. Since on that occasion at Antioch, Cephas had 
most certainly not enunciated in words the doctrine that faith without 
ceremonial observances was insufficient for gaining acceptance, but only 
appeared by his actions to be teaching it, it may be surmised that perhaps 
neither did these Galatian subverters of the gospel in words preach their 
“strange gospel,” but simply preached it by their actions; namely, by 
themselves practising, and by encouraging others to practise, certain 
Mosaistic observances; by studiously vaunting and glorying in such prac- 
tices; and by discountenancing and putting out of the pale of fraternal 
fellowship those who kept aloof from such Mosaism. They perhaps did not 
directly disown Christ as their Hope of acceptance, but they were turning 
elsewhere for comfort and joy. Such movements of thought and fecling 
especially when embodying themselves in distinguishing badges of outward 
ceremonial action, are apt in general to be very catching with unwary and 
unstable souls; and we need, in particular, not wonder that among people 
of Celtic warmth, fickleness, and impetuosity of temperament, it should 
have spread with great rapidity from Church to Church, as it seems to have 
done. 

The attitude of the disevangelized party towards St. Paul. No tendency 
of the kind now described could be followed out by any without its rending 
them away more or less consciously from the guidance of St. Paul. It may, 
in fact, be considered in no small degree probable that the open detaching 
of themselves in the eyes of the Jews from discipleship to Paul was, with 
some of the ringleaders in the movement, one of the objects directly aimed 
at. It is in this way, as is explained in the notes on the passage, that the 
otherwise enigmatical statement in ch. vi. 12 meets with its satisfactory 
interpretation. They therefore allowed themselves to speak detractingly of 
his apostolic mission : an apostle of some sort, they said, he might be; but 
no such apostle as Cephas was; an authority attached to his leadership of 
infinitely less account than attached to James, the Lord’s brother ; there 
were scores and scores of apostles going about, with quite as much claim to 
be listened to. If any showed themselves unwilling to renounce one who 
had once been so highly esteemed and loved, they were plied with other con- 
siderations. Paul himself, they said, was aiming at the introduction of the 
adopting of circumcision by his disciples, in the end, when circumstances 
were ripe for it (ch. v. 11, on which see note): when among Jews, who 
indeed was more of a Jew than Paul? and then again, let them look a¢ 
his circumceising Timothy! If any would fain hold fast by Paul, very 
likely they would, after all, find themselves to be not running counter to his 
real feelings and purposes, though it might be perhaps something like 
forcing his hand, if they took the bold step of at once being circumcised 
At all events, they might with some plausibility, though certainly with utter 
falsity, pretend that nothing would be more pleasing to James and the other 
venerable pillars of the holy mother Church of Jerusalem, 

Oomparison of Galatian with Oolossian and later defection, With much 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. xv 


obscurity hanging about the precise nature of the perversion which St. Paul 
is encountering in this Epistle, thus much is certain: like certain members 
of another Church in that peninsula four or five years later, they no longer 
were “holding fast the Head;” “vainly puffed up by their fleshiy mind,” 
they were urging their brethren to “subject themselves to ordinances,” 
arbitrarily selected, of outward observances; hoping to find in these mere 
“shadows” that satisfaction for the requirements of man’s sinful soul 
which was to be found only in Christ (Col. ii. 16—23). Theosophic 
speculations, such as were rife at Coloss, are not, however, spoken of by 
St. Paul in connection with Galatia. In the next two or three centuries a 
great number of incongruous and monstrous forms of religious teaching 
and practice flourished with rank luxuriance in the peninsula of Asia 
Minor, Galatia holding a sad pre-eminence, as well as in neighbouring 
countries to the east and south-east ; schemes of heresy evolved out of end- 
lessly varied intermixtures of cabalistic Judaism and Oriental theosophy 
with elements of Christian doctrine. The Epistle to the Colossians and the 
pastoral letters afford indications of some such as already emergent; but 
the prophetic spirit gave the apostle forebodings of far worse than these to 
come. If the Head were not held fast, there would be no security against 
the incursion very quickly of the direst delusions. With trembling anxiety, 
therefore, the apostle hastens to check at once any tendency to depart from 
the gospel once for all proclaimed to the world. 

The apostle distinguishes the deceivers from the deceived. The apostle 
makes a distinguishable difference between the seducers and their victims, 
The latter he warns—with stern severity, indeed, but with severity alternating 
with expressions of yearning affectionateness—that they are falling away 
from the God who called them to be in the grace of Christ; that they are 
foolishly yielding themselves to illusive spells; that they are on the eve of 
falling from grace; that they are being driven away from country and 
home; that the mother of us all is demanding that the sons of the bond- 
woman—and such they are becoming—shall be cast out. But those who 
are subverting the gospel he denounces as anathema; they shall bear their 
judgment, whosoever they be; as witting maligners of Christ’s servants 
they deserve no better fate than to rank with priests of devils; practising 
the works of heresy, they shall not inherit the kingdom of God. 


Tas Errect PRODUCED BY THE LETTER. 


We have no direct evidence to show what consequences ensued from the 
sending of this letter. It would be hard to believe that it failed of success. 
Indeed, its preservation to be enrolled among the volumes of the sacred 
canon would seem to be of itself evidence that it had proved its effective- 
ness as an arrow of the Messiah’s quiver sharp in the heart of his enemies 
whereby the people had fallen under him. But the present writer ventures to 
think that the fact that it was successful may be come at in an indirect way, 


xvi INTRODUCTION TO 


The apostle, in both of his letters to the Corinthians, mentions, and in the 
Second especially urges, that a collection should be made on behalf of the 
poor of Judwa, In the former letter he writes thus: ‘“ Now concerning 
the collection for the saints, as I gave order to the Churches of Galatia, so 
also do ye. Upon the first day of the week let each one of you lay by him in 
store, as-he may prosper, that no collections be made when I come. And 
when I arrive,” ete. (1 Cor, xvi. 1—3). Now, when was it that he had thus 
given order to the Churches of Gulatia P 

In the present Epistle he adverts to the relief of the poor of Judma as a 
matter which he was wont to make an especial point of promoting. In the 
second chapter, when giving an account of the recognition which at 
Jerusalem “those accounted to be pillars” had accorded to himself and 
Barnabas as ministers of the gospel to the Gentiles, he adds (ver. 10), 
“Only they would that we should remember the poor; the very thing this 
which I was even of myself zealous to do.” But he makes neither directly 
nor indirectly any request to the Galatians, that they should make a col- 
lection for the poor of Judea. Again, in the sixth chapter he enjoins 
upon them that they should share with their teachers whatever good things 
they themselves possess ; adding, as if addressing persons who were proving 
themselves backward in the practice of this duty, a solemn and affecting 
exhortation to works of beneficence, both towards men in general and 
especially towards such as are of Faith’s household. But here, again, there 
is no word respecting any collection for the Judwan poor. 

In the Second Epistle which he sent to the Corinthians he informs them 
that he had told the Churches of Macedonia, from whose midst he was then 
writing, that Achaia had been prepared for a year past” (2 Cor. ix. 2; 
vii. 10). This statement needs not to be insisted upon as one of literal 
exactness; neither the apostle himself as is evident, nor the Macedonian 
brethren to whom that was said, would be likely to regard it as other than an 
utterance of warm feeling, expressing rather the speaker’s general sensation 
of the length of the interval than the result of an exact retrospect. If six 
or eight months had elapsed since the brethren in Achaia had signified 
their hearty response to the apostle’s proposal to them to make such a 
collection, the apostle might now, in the sanguineness of his heart, have 
spoken to those then about him in the way that he here describes. That 
signification of their hearty response to his application had been coeval 
probably with their-sending to ask him, as 1 Cor. xvi. 1 implies that they 
had done, in what way he wished them to set about making and forwarding 
the collection. Now, an interval of (say) eight months would bring us back 
to the closing portion of his stay at Ephesus. When from Ephesus he 
signified to the Corinthians (1 Cor. xvi. 8) that he purposed continuing in 
that city till Pentecost, he was probably writing about the time of Easter 
(1 Cor. v. 7); and some such interval seems required for the important 
work which he then anticipated to be lying before him there (1 Cor. xvi, 9). 
[ would next put it to the reader, whether, in pondering 1 Cor. xvi. 2, he 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, xvii 


does not feel a certain air of freshness and recency hanging about the fact 
alluded to in the words, “as I gave order to the Churches of Galatia”— 
whether the apostle does not mean something like this, “The other day I 
received from the Churches of Galatia a similar request that I would state 
66 them in what manner I wished this business of the collection to be 
managed, and the reply which I made to them I now make to you.” 

This is, at all events, the impression which the words convey to my own 
mind. If it be a just impression, then, taking into account the entire 
absence in this Epistle to the Galatians of any reference to a proposal of 
such a collection having been up to that time made to them, the following 
interpretation of the whole circumstances would seem ἃ coherent and 
probable one. 

Towards the close of the apostle’s long abode at Ephesus, but some while 
before he wrote his First Epistle to the Corinthians, he had formed the plan, 
after he had visited the Churches in Macedonia and Achaia, of taking a 
journey to Jerusalem; and having this before him, he wished to set on foot 
a collection for the poor in Judwa among the Gentile Churches of which he 
had the oversight in Asia Minor and Europe, the procecds of which should 
be taken by himself or by “apostles” of the Churches accompanying 
himself, when he repaired to the Jewish capital. 

This plan was in his mind when that painful account reached him of the 
wavering allegiance of his Galatian converts to the gospel, which made it 
necessary to write this letter. With such a danger threatening the vital 
interests of the Christian cause in that region, it did not seem seasunable to 
directly moot the question of a collection just then; their attachment to 
the gospel and to himself as its apostle needed to be re-established in the 
first instance ; not until this had been effected could he hope for a satis- 
factory response on their part to an appeal of his for a charitable contribution 
to be forwarded in connection with himself. He refrains, therefore, from 
asking them in his letter for a contribution. But having, as it were by the 
way, told them of the request which James, Cephas, and John had made to 
him that he would remember their poor, and having added how greatly he 
himself was conceined to do so, he contents himself for the present with 
taking occasion, from the niggardliness with which they assisted their 
teaching ministers, to insist emphatically upon the evil consequences to 
themselves of sowing only to their own selfish gratification, and upon the 
blessed reward which awaits a persistent course of beneficence; and there 
loaves it. I£ the confidence, which he tells them he felt towards them in 
the Lord that they would after all prove faithful to the gospel, were 
realized, the hints which he had let fall tending towards the appeal he 
desired to make would be sure of themselves to bear fruit; they would at 
any rate pave the way for making it. Meanwhile he must wait in anxious 
hope for the result, which at present was a matter of infinitely greater 
importance, of their return to a cordial faith in Christ Jesus. 

How deeply the suspense affected him we may in some degree imagine 

@ALATIANS. ) 


.“ 


xviil INTRODUCTION TO 


from the account which he has himself given in his Second Epistle to the 
Corinthians of the anxiety with which he had awaited Titus’s return, when 
he had despatched him to Corinth to ascertain the effect produced by his 
first letter, and of the unspeakable relief with which he had heard of their 
eager and impassioned submission to his remonstrances concerning the 
incestuous offender (2 Cor. ii. 12, 13; vii. 416). 

Weeks and weeks would he have to wait before the return of his mes 
sengers to Galatia. Who these were we know not, but our minds naturally 
glance at Timothy, who probably was of Iconium, and Gaius of Derbe, both 
places in the adjoining district of Lycaonia; also at Luke, of perhaps 
Antioch; for these with others were in St. Paul’s company in this journey 
(Acts xx. 4); at Titus, too, the reliable messenger later on under some- 
what similar circumstances to Corinth. Naturally the apostle would send 
his letter by one qualified to help forward its effect by wise, faithful, and 
strong-hearted words of his own. But time would have to be allowed for 
his letter to do its proper work after it reached Galatia; for it was not one 
single congregation, but a number of detached Churches, these perhaps not 
situated very near together, in which the evil leaven had been working ; 
and Galatia was a long way off from Ephesus, Ancyra (Angora), the 
principal city, being as the crow flies three or four hundred miles distant. 

We cannot doubt, however, that the period of anxious expectation was 
ended by the receipt of joyful tidings. What he wrote some months later, 
on the occasion of Titus’s return from Corinth, was (very supposably) 
dictated by the very remembrance of this happy hour. “Thanks be unto 
God, which always leadeth us in triumph in Christ, and maketh manifest 
through us the savour of his knowledge in every place” (2 Cor. ii. 14). The 
drooping faith of the Galatians in Christ Jesus their Lord had been revived ; 
they had shaken off the “bewitchment” which had dimmed their view of 
his all-sufficient grace and had lured them away to the vanities of Judaizing 
ceremonialism. Breaking with those who had misled them, their personal 
attachment to the apostle had reasserted itself with even a measure of its 
former Celtic enthusiasm. And now their cry was what they conld do to 
testify to their Lord and Saviour the sincerity of their repentance and 
devotion to him; what also to convince their wise and loving father in the 
gospel that his confidence towards them in the Lord had not been misplaced. 
For one thing he had incidentally, but perhaps significantly, alluded in his 
letter to his anxious desire to assist his needy brethren in Judwa. Gladly 
would they take part in this. In what way would he advise them to make 
the collection of their contribution? And how should they forward it to 
Judoea when made ἢ 

In some such way as this, it may with probability be surmised, had the 
apostle been led to give to the Galatian Churches those directions which he, 
soon after aa I think, repeated in his First Epistle to the Corinthians, 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. xiz 


Darr oF THe Eprstut. 


If the above reasonings, from data which are confessedly in some degree 
problematical, appear, however, to be on the whole approvable, then we arrive 
at the result that the entire business of the Galatian trouble had been 
brought to a satisfactory conclusion before the apostle despatched his first 
letter to the Corinthians. This, as was above stated, he did probably about 
the Haster-tide of either the year 57 or the year 58. We may, therefore, 
assume it to be probable that the Epistle to the Galatians was written 
sotne time in the winter months preceding that Easter, possibly as late as in 
the preceding January. 

As the Epistle was written after St. Pan] had visited Galatia a second 
time (ch. iv. 13), we are constrained to assign it to this third great journcy 
of his; for it would be doing great violence to the probabilities of the case 
ποὺ to identify the two visits which the language of the Epistle presupposes 
with the two which are mentioned in the Acts. 

An earlier time in the journey has been assumed by some on the ground 
that, the words, ‘so quickly,” in ch. i. 6 mean, “so soon after you were 
called,” or “so soon after I left you.” But the phrase probably means 
simply, “so quickly upon being tempted.” See note in loc. 

The cast of thought and language in this Epistle has so marked an affinity 
to that in the two Epistles to the Corinthians and the Epistle to the Romans 
that the critical instinct protests loudly against a longer interval being 
interposed between its composition and that of any of the other three than 
the consideration of other kinds of evidence renders necessary. 

If we suppose that the Galatian letter was written three or four months 
before the Haster-tide on which, in great probability, the apostle wrote his 
First Epistle to the Corinthians, then, since we know that the following 
Easter-tide found him at Philippi (Acts xx. 6), after leaving Corinth, from 
which he had despatched his letter to the Romans, it follows that the whole 
noble quaternion was issued forth to the Church within little more than 
one year, 

It has been shown by Bishop Lightfoot that the comparison of the 
manner in which identical topics are discussed in these letters severally 
makes probable, by this branch of internal evidence, the fact, which is 
attested also so far as the Epistles to the Corinthians are concerned by 
references contained in them to matters of personal history, that the Roman 
letter was written the latest of the four. That this is so is due to the 
character worn by the Epistle to the Romans, as being rather a calm and 
deliberate treatise, than a letter properly so called evoked by the exigency 
of particular emergencies. 

But this method of argument appears to the present writcr to become 
extremely precarious when it is pushed further than this, for determining 
the position in point of time of the Galatiau Epistle relatively to the two 
Epistles to the Corinthians. The strife which St. Paul, just at this juncture 


“zr INTRODUCTION TO 


of his ministerial career, that is to say, during his third great missionary 
journey, was called to wage incessantly and strenuously wherever he went 
with Judaizers, with opponents or corrupters of the doctrine of our freo 
justification through faith in Christ, and with impugners of his own 
properly apostolical authority, would inevitably have led to the formation in 
his mind, long before he left Ephesus, of a stock, so to speak, of considerations, 
phrases, and probative texts, ready to be severally produced in ever-varying 
grouping, and with varying degrees of fulness in the propounding of them, 
according to the changing mood of the writer or the shifting entourage of 
circumstances. There is no ground for imagining that we have in Galatians, 
or in 1 Corinthians, or in 2 Corinthians, any more than in Romans, tokens 
of the earliest presentment to his mind of any of these objects of thought. 
On the contrary, they must in all reason be assumed to have been each one 
of them a good while before quite familiar to his consciousness. 


Oxssect anp ConTENTS OF THE EPISTLE. 


The apostle’s object in the Epistle is to recall the Galatians to the gospel which they 
had at the first received from himself—the unchangeable gospel of justification by the 
free grace of God, simply through faith in Christ, and not by deeds of the Law. To 
thia end he finds it necessary to make it clear that he had received from Christ, and 
from no man, alike his function as apostle and the message which, as such, he had to 
deliver,—two points inseparably intertwined. 

[This was necessary because, in the earlier part of his ministry in Asia Minor, when 
acting with Barnabas, and even again when acting with Silas, he had borne the function 
of an apostle from men ; whereas in the present stage of his ministry he had been 
compelled openly to assert, what had all along been the fact, that he was an apostle 
delegated immediately from Christ, without in this respect any human intermediation 
at all. On these two points, namely, the two distinct senses of the word “ apostle,” 
and the circumstances now leading St. Paul to openly assert his apostleship in the 
higher sense, the reader is referred to the two dissertations which close the Intro- 
duction.] 

The first. chapter is taken up with the proof of the two points above indicated; the 
second with their illustration. 

Ch. i. 1—5. The greeting—clearly distinguished in this-respect from the greeting in 
his two earlier Epistles, those to the ‘I'hessalonians—insists upon his apostleship as 
being of the highest character, while it also devoutly and adoringly holds forth to view 
the redemptive work of Christ, the great remedy, as the apostle feels, for the evils 
which he has now to encounter. - 

Vers. 6--10, “The gospel ye received from me {s unchangeable; when in your 
midst, I told you, and now repeat it, that he that perverts its main essence, whatever 
lis station, must expect nothing less than destruction as an accursed thing,” 

Vers. 11,12. ‘For I received it directly from God.” 

Vers. 13,14. “It was no part of my early education ; I was then an eager Judaist, 
persecuting the disciples of this gospel.” 

Vers. 15—17, “ And after God had revealed it to me, I had recourse to no human 
creature for instruction, but forthwith gave myself to its proclamation.” 

Vers. 18—24. “Threc years after, not earlier, wishing to acquaint myself with 
Cephas, I visited him at Jerusalem, and was his guest a fortmight ; but saw no other 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. xxi 


of the apostles, except James, the Lord’s brother, be accounted as such. After that 
I was discharging the work of my ministry in Syria and Cilicia, having been all the 
while, from the first, personally unknown to the Churches of Judea; they only were 
hearing of me that, without any communication with them, I was preachinz the gospel.” 

Ch. ii. 1-10. Here St. Paul, with reference to the relations which he held to the 
pther apostlés, brings out the fact, that when he went to Jerusalem for the purpose 
tn part of comparing his statement of the gospel with that which was presented by 
“those of reputation,” particularly on matters bearing upon the position of Gentile 
believers towards the Law, what he heard from them in no way modified the doctrine 
which he taught; they, however, in the most public and marked manner, recognized 
its truth, recognizing likewise his ministry to the Gentiles as co-ordinate with theirs 
to the circumcision. 

Vers. 11—21. The apostle then draws attention to a remarkable occasion, on which 
he had made good, to the approval of the Church at Antioch, his position as an apostle 
compared with that of Cephas, and had by reasoning vindicated his teaching on a 
matter closely relevant to his present controversy with the Galatians, showing that 
conformity with the Law of Moses inferred no superiority in a believer, and its neglect 
no inferiority, for that the cross of Christ had for God’s people annihilated the Law. 
“41 identify myself,” he had then said, “ with the crucificd Christ: his death to the 
Taw is my death to the Law; his life in righteousness and joy is my life therein too.” 

Ch. iii, 1—14. With this thought fresh on his mind, the apostle next addresses 
himself directly to the case of the Galatians. ‘Ye too have beheld Christ crucified, 
and yet now——! Is there witchcraft at work? ‘lell me, through what received ye 
‘ne Spirit? Was it not through faith simply resting in the Redeemer? And now are 
ye perfecting, forsooth, the work of the Spirit by mere carnality ? Ye suffered bravely 
the evils which Jewish bigotry brought upon you because ye would have none of the 
Law: will you now stultify that confessorship? Your own experience of the out- 
flowing of spiritual gifts and of Divine blessing (ver. 9) was in connection with simple 
faith in Christ; ye were thus proved to be justified, as Abraham was, by faith. No 
such blessing comes ever through ceremonial works of the Law; the Law works only 
a curse; it plainly tells you so; tells you so that ye may find blessing in Christ who 
bore its curse on our behalf.” 

Vers. 15—18, “The promise solemnly given to Abraham and his seed, of blessing to 
come to all nations through Christ, cannot be set aside by the Law given hundreds of 
years later.” 

Vers. 19—28. “No doubt the Law had a function divinely assigned to it; but its 
subordinate position was shown in the very mode of its communication, being given 
as to beings kept at a distance from God, and making their sin fast till faith should be 
revealed.” 

Versa, 24—29. “The Law was our childhond’s keeper, till faith should come. Now 
faith ἐπ come, we are become sons of God having put on Christ. Ye Gentiles are 
Christ’s, and thus Abraham’s seed, and, according to the promise, heirs of blessing.” 

Mh, iv. 1—7. The apostle here resumes the position of ch. iii. 24, of the Law being 
ths sistodian of God’s people’s childhood. ‘ We were then treated as mere children, 
no way our own masters, under the A, B, C, of a worldly religion. But now, through 
the incarnation and redemption of God’s Son, we are made sons in enjoyment of our 
inheritance ; and, what proves our sonship, God has poured into our hearts the joyous 
iree-hearted Spirit of adoption.” 

Vers. 8—11. “In those days, we at any rate were God’s worshippers; but as for 
you, ye were idolaters : and set ye, of Gud’s free choice and constraining grace adopted 


gaat ee 


xxil INTRODUCT!ON TO 


in among his reople, must needs be setting yourselves, forsooth, in opposition to his 
appointments, and must be going back again to that miserable A, B, C, with your 
‘days, and months, and seasons, and years’ !” 

Vers. 12—20. Here follows a passage broken into small bits by strong emotior. 
Earnest entreaty; earnest assurances that he had no quarrel with them,—he had too 
tender a remembrance of their affectionate love to him for that: could they suppose 
him to be other than loving to them? Others, who were paying them court, had no 
such tender care for their welfare as he. “Ὁ my darling children,” he cries, “my soul 
is in travail for you, that Christ may be formed within you, not the Law! Would 
I knew how best to deal with you!” 

Vers. 21—31. Casting about for some line of thought to get hold of them, the 
apostle bethinks himself of the story of Sarah and Isaac in connection with Hagar and 
Ishmael, as presenting a kind of allegorical prediction of the two covenants; portraying 
the supernal Jerusalem and freedom and secure joy on the one side, and Sinai and 
servitude and imminent expulsion on the other. | 

Ch. v. 1—4. This leads on to the warning. “ We now are free: do not again get 
held in a yoke of slavery; else ye will find yourselves, as Ishmael, dissevered from 
Christ and fallen from grace.” : 

Vers. 5—12. Disjinted sentences follow, intermingling terse statements of sweetest 
doctrine with bewailment of the sad interruption in their cnce happy career; warning 
against the contagion of evil; confident hope that they wall not disappoint his wishes ; 
threatening of judgment upon their troublers; indignant refutation of those men’s 
sianders touching himself; an outflashing wish that they would just make manifest 
what they really were by self-eviration. 

Vers. 183—24. The summary in the first verse, “ Ye have been made free men,” is 
here repeated, to form a new starting-point for exhortation conceived in a calmer and 
more equable mood, and embodying a beautiful contrast between the flesh and its 
works, and the Spirit and its fruits. 

Ver. 25—ch. vi.10. Warning against vain-glory and combativeness. Exhortation 
to cultivate mutual tolerance and helpfulness; one’s own improvement in place of 
censoriousness; liberality in maintaining their teachers; diligence to sow, not to one’s 
own flesh, but to the Spirit ; perseverance in beneficence. 

Ch. vi. 11—18. Conclusion. “Those who wish you circumcised do not care about 
the Law, but only to curry favour with the Jews and escape persecution. But my sole 
boast is the cross of Christ; and in Christ circumcision and uncircumcision are nothing, 
renewal of heart everything: joy be with those who feel and act by this rule! Let 
none dare to harass me any more ; for Jesus’ marks upon me evidence his presence with 
me. The Lord be with you, bretkren]” 


LITERATURE. 


The literature available on this Epistle is very copious. Among the most helpful 
may be mentioned the following :—Chrysostom; Jerome; Theodoret; Calvin’s 
‘Commentarius ;* Estius, ‘In Epistolas;’ Cornelius ἃ Lapide; Grotius (in Poli 
Synopsis) ; Bengel’s ‘Gnomon ;’ Riickert’s ‘Commentar ;? Windischmanu’s ‘ Er- 
klarung ;’ De Wette’s ‘ Handbuch ;’ Mcye#'s ‘ Kommentar ;? Bishop Ellicott’s ‘ Critical 
and Grammatical Commentary ;’ Bishop Lightfoot’s ‘ Epistle to the Galatians ;’ Dean 
Howson, in ‘Conybeare an Howson’ and in the ‘Speaker’s Commentary ;’ Arch- 
deacon Farrar’s ‘Life and Work of St. Paul.’ No student should forget to use 
Luther’s ‘Commentarius,’ which he fondly and proudly ca'led his ‘ Catherine de Bora? 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, xxiii 


DISSERTATION L 


Vane import or ἽΠῸ ‘Term “ APOSTLE” AS APPLIED IN THE New TESTAMENT. 


The use of the word “apostle” before tt was adopted by Christ. The Greck word 
ουόστολος, of which apostle is the Anglicized transliteration, is employed by classical 
a .thors to describe a person only in the Ionic Greek of Herodotus—in whose histories 
it occurs twice (i. 21; v. 38)—in the sense of “envoy,” “commissioned messenger.” In 
tha Attic form of the language the word is of not unfrequent occurrence, but always 
with a different meaning; never denoting an individual person, but only “a naval 
expeditionary force ” (Liddell and Scott, ‘ Lexicon’). In the Greek used among the 
Jews, the sense of the word as employed by Herodotus, but not, so far as critics have 
observed, found in any intermediate writer, reappears afresh. Thus in 1 Kings xiv. 6 
(“I am sent to thee with hard tidings”) we have in the Alexandrine text of the 
Septuagint, Ἐγώ εἰμι ἀπόστολος πρός σε σκληρός, “1 am a hard apostle unto thee.” Sym- 
machus, the Jewish translator in the second century of our era, uscd ἀποστόλους to render 
the iHcb.ew word ¢strim in Isa, xviii. 2, where the Septuagint gives a different rendering 
of tLe H brew word, though in three otber passages (Isa. lvii. 9; Prov. xiii. 17; xxv. 18) 
rendvring it either “ambassador” (πρεσβευτής) or “ messenger” (&yyedos). It appears 
from dificrent statements cited by Bishop Lightfoot, in his important remarks “ On the 
Name ana Office of an Apostle” (‘ Galatians,’ pp. 92—101), that, at least subsequently to 
the destrution of Jerusalem, the Jews used the term to designate persons employed 
to convey - trcular letters despatched by their authorities; and, in particulir, that they 
80 termeu he members of a sort of council attending upon their patriarch, assisting 
him in his deliberations, conveying his orders to Jews at a distance, and collecting 
of these tl τσ contributions to religious objects (Eusebius, ‘ Montf. Coll. Nov.,’ ii. 425; 
Jerome, ‘Cc. mm. ad. Gal.,’ i, 1; Cod. Theodos. xvi. ‘ Tit.,’ viii. 14; Julian, ‘ Epist.,’ 25; 
Epiphanias, Heeres.,’ pp. 128, 184). Now, as we cannot suppose that the Jewish 
authorities w suld have chosen to borrow the term from the usage of those whom they 
regarded as 4 shorred Nazarene heretics, we are led to infer that Christ, in thus desig- 
nating the tv slve, applied for his purpose a word which was already in vogue among 
the Jews, and used by them in a signification more or less cognate to that which he 
himself had in view in his own application of the term. 

This conclus on is confirmed by the consideration that, in the Epistle to the Hebrews 
(iii. 1, 2), the eriter, whether St. Paul or one writing under St. Paul’s sugvestion, 
applies the tern ‘apostle ” to Christ in such a connection as to warrant the belief that 
he does so as viewing Christ as standing parallel with Moses; leading us on to the 
further surmise that the Jewish theologians were themselves wont thus to designate 
Moses himself. That they were accustomed to do so seems probable enough when we 
consider how frequently the verb ἀποστέλλω is used in the Septuagint Version of the 
earlier chapters of Exodus with reference to Moses’ mission, and compare our Lord’s 
words respecting himself in John xvii. 18. 

The review of the confessedly very scanty materials which are at hand relative to 
the use of the term extrinsically to its application in the Christian Church, b:fings us 
to the following as probable conclusions :— 

1, That at the period near tle commencement of the Christian era it was current 
as designating an individual person, only in the Greek spoken by the Jews, 


ΧΧΙΝν THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 


2. That the Jews employed it exclusively to designate persons deputed by some 
eminent authority, and not to describe a mere ordinary messenger. 

3. That it was applied exclusively to persons whose mission related to matters 
connected with religion; so that the term was invested in the minds of those who used 
it with sacred associations. 

In the New Testament two kinds of delegation principally denoted by the term. The 
evidence furnished by all the passages in the New Testament in which the word 
“apostle” occurs, seems to make good the following statements: that, apart from that 
application of the term to the Lord Jesus Christ which we have in the Hebrews, it is 
ured in these books with reference to two kinds of delegation only : the one being that 
which was imparted immediately by Christ himself, without human intervention,—this 
being the higher kind of apostleship; the other, that which was received from a Church 
or from Church officials, appointing the recipient to the discharge of some function 
relating to sacred things. 

These two different kinds of delegation constituted two forms of apostleship, which 
were quite distinct from each other, and operative in, so to speak, different planes of 
action. Cases, however, might occur in which an apostle of the former class was dele- 
gated by a Church to execute a specific commission when the commission thus received 
would constitute him an apostle of the second class, In such a case the delegate would 
be an “apostle” in both senses, the two senses still continuing distinct. 

Apostles delegated immediately by Christ. The only individuals assigned in Scripture 
to the higher form of apostleship are (1) the “twelve disciples,” or “ the twelve,” who 
appear so prominently in the Gospels, who, having been elected, and expressly named 
“apostles ’’ (Luke vi. 13) by our Lord himself early in the course of his earthly minis- 
try, were (with the exception of Judas) confirmed by him afresh in their apostleship 
(Acts i, 2) after his resurrection ; (2) St. Matthias, likewise chosen by Christ himself to 
fill the place among the twelve vacated by Judas’s fall, on one of the ten days following 
next after his ascension ; and (3) St. Paul. 

We need not hesitate to assign Matthias to the class of those appointed to be apostles 
by Christ himself. For they surely misconstrue the narrative relative to Matthias in 
the first chapter of the Acts, who find therein an election by the eleven themselves of 
a new twelfth member of their body. For, on the contrary, the eleven appear in the 
record to have shown themisclves especially careful to recognize the fact that it apper 
tained to Christ himself, both to “ choose” which of the two disciples, who alone were 
by their antecedents qualified to be witnesses with themselves of the Lord’s resurrection, 
was the one that, according to the prediction of the psalm, was to “take Judas’s office;” 
and also to “show” to them which it was that he did choose. The xajpo: were used 
for the lot, not for voting. The judgment of the Church respecting this appointment 
is incidentally shown by Acts ii. 14; vi. 2; for the ¢welve must have included Matthias. 
“The appointment, being directly Divine, superseded the laying on of hands” (Bishop 
Jacobson, on Acts i, 26, in ‘Speaker’s Commentary ;’ whose rendering, however, of 
συγκατεψηφίσθη by the words, “by vote numbered,” is very questionable; the ψῆφος in 
the verb being here merely a counting and not a voting pebble). 

The characteristics of these apostles may be described as being in the main the 
following :— 

1, They were witnesses of Christ’s resurrection, having seen him alive after his 
passion. 

2. They were the chief depositaries of the truths of the gospel, which were tmparted 
to them, either from the lips of Christ himself or through his teaching Spirit, to form 
Chirist’s message through them to the world. By them, either thz~wselves personally 


DISSERTATION L XV 


or mediately through men standing connected with them and recognized by them, was 
this gospel to be proclaimed, and the Church community which was founded upon this 
gospel to he organized and established. 

3. They were gifted with an accumulation of miraculous powers, which both were 
their credentials as Christ’s delegates, and enabled them for the discharge of their 
function. 

4, They were the only human beings statedly empowered to impart miraculous 
gifts to other men, 

5, They alone of men wielded the rarely exercised miraculous power of inflicting 
the discipline of bodily suffering, which apparently on one occasion (Acts y.) included 
the infliction of death. 

To them, in short, was assigned an altogether unique position in the kingdom of 
Gud—a position which Christ mystically described as a “ kingship,” in the exercise of 
which they sat upon thrones, judging tle mystical twelve tribes of Israel; and which, 
in another form of symbol, constituted them the “ foundation ” on which the Church 
was built—the “twelve foundations ” of the city “ New Jerusalem.” 

In no other persons were these great characteristics seen united as they were united 
in them: “none dared to join himself unto them,” as possessing like supereminent 
prerogatives. Portions of the offices and of the supernatural gifts which were clustered 
together in their persons were, it is true, by the Holy Spirit distributed “according to 
his will” among members of the Church, for its primary establishment and for its 
permanent life and regulation; and the apostolic function, elevated as it was, was still 
homogeneous with the character and function of the entire Christian community : 
nevertheless, the “glorious company of the apostles” stand in the history of the 
Church unique and alone. Having been “given” for the one specific purpose of 
founding the Church and fixing the faith which was then “once for all delivered unto 
the saints,” their function, after the analogy of the earthly work of Christ himself, 
neither needed nor was designed to be perpetuated through successors, whether in 
one line or in several. In its very dda the apostolate was essentially provisional and 
intransmissible. 

Apostles deleguted by the Church, Passing on for the present from that higher appli- 
cation of the term “apostle,” in which it was used to denote one who received his 
apostolic commission direct from Christ himself without any human intermediation, 
we have to consider another application of the term which was in vogue in the 
Christian Church; for we have to observe that, among Christians, the word was 
frequently applied to messengers procecding upon some religious errand with credentials 
οἵ a public mission from this or that Church, 

Use of the word “apostle” in 2 Cor. viii. 23; Phil. i. 25. This fact is disguised in the 
Authorized Version by the word ἀπόστολος being twice rendered ὁ" messenyers ” (2 Cor. 
viii, 23; Phil. 11. 25)—a rendering which removes from the eyes of the English reader 
an application of the term “apostle” which supplies a yaluable clue for the detcr- 
mination of several questions relative to this subject. 

The apostles Andronicus Gnd Junius. With the two passages Jast referred to, in 
respect to both of which there can be no manner of doubt as to the import of the 
term, we haye probably to group some others. In approaching the consideration of 
these, however, we are confesyedly proceeding to ground more or lege cpen to debate. 

In Rom. xvi. 7 St. Paul writes, “Salute Andronicus and Junias [or, ‘ Junia’], my 
kinsmen [#.e. most prabably, ‘my fellow-Israelites’] and my fellow-prisoners, men such 
as are of note among the apostles (of τινές εἰσιν ἐπίσημοι ἐν τοῖς ἀποστόλοις), Who alsv were 
in Obrist before I was.” Tbe noun “ Junias” may with probability be taken as 8 


xxvi THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 


contraction of “Junianus.” If the nominative of the proper noun is “ Juuia,” as some 
suppose, then the two persons may be conceived of as bearing a similar relation to each 
other and to the Church, to that borne by Aquila and Priscilla, just before mentioned 
by St. Paul. ᾿ 

The chief point of discussion, however, in relation to this passage lies in the words, 

~ “ of note [or, ‘distinction ”] among the apostles.” Their most obvious sense is that they 
were apostles distinguished among others who were such; the form of expressicn being 
like “blessed among women,” “ among those born of women none greater,” etc.; and this 
view is confirmed by its being the interpretation which was without hesitation adopted 
by the Greek commentators. But the difficulty of explaining how Andronicus and 
Junias could have been “ apostles,” both perplexed ancient interpreters, leading some of 
them to the very improbable surmise that they were two of the seventy sent forth by 
the Lord—a surmise which would make the following clause very lame and super- 
fluous—and has induced some modern critics of eminence to take the clause differently, 
viz. as pointing to the estimate formed by the twelve apostles of these two disciples. 
In confirmation of this latter view, reference is made to two passages in Euripides 
(‘Hippol.’ 103; ‘Hec.’ 379), in which the phrase, ἐπίσημος ἐν βροτοῖς, occurs, in the 
former with reference to a goddess who could not be reckoned among “ mortals.” 

The difficulty, however, found in the more obvious interpretation disappears if we 
consider that, when a person had been commissioned by a Church as its delegate, 
and especially if so commissioned more than once, the circumstance would naturally 
attach to him a special title to respect among the brethren, in consequence of which he 
might, even after his envoyship had been discharged, still continue to be so styled. 
Thus high priests who had been deposed from their office still continued to bear the 
title of high priest. At least, we need not hesitate to admit that St. Paul might use 
the words in question in the sense of “men distinguished among those messengers that 
Churches are wont to depute to brethren living elsewhere.” 

It is very supposable that Andronicus and Junias had been themselves deputed by 
the Church at Jerusalem to visit Jewish believers in Rome, converted when visiting 
Jerusalem. Compare the ἐπιδημοῦντες “Ῥωμαῖοι, “ sojourners from Rome,” spoken of in 
Acts ii. 10. Such a supposition, when we take into our view the delicate position 
which St, Paul himself held towards the ruling minds of the Jerusalemite Church, 
would seem to accord well with the respectfulness which he so studiously evinces, 
The term “ fellow-captives” does not necessarily infer any personal relations pre- 
viously subsisting between these two “apostles” and himself; it may denote no 
more than that, they having like himself suffered imprisonment in the service of 
Christ, he was desirous of testifying at once the sympathy and the respect which on 
that account he felt towards them. 

The passage viewed in this aspect serves to iJlustrate the manner in which the office 
of Church envoy was in those days regarded. In particular it transpires from it that 
the title of “apostle” was a highly honorific one. This tincture of sentiment colouring 
it and distinguishing it from the more commonplace designation of ἄγγελος, messenger, 
may perhaps be discerned even in the two instances in Which it occurs in Herodotus, 
But at any rate this certainly appears to have been the case when the term as denoting 
a messenger came to be revived in the later Greek ; the fact that its use in this ἐδαὲν 
was in some degree an archaism very possibly helping to invest it with a certain air of 
respectfulness; and it may very supposably have been on this account that it was con- 
sidered the fitting designation to appropriate to persons receiving a commission relativa 
to sacred things. 

At all ovents, in actual fact, not only is this the sense in which alone it is appned in 


DISSERTATION I. XXVit 


our aacred books, but its honorific complexion is also in most instances quite distinctly 
recognizable. 

Very clearly may we feel this to be the case in the passage which I before had occa- 
sicn to cite from the Hebrews (iii. 1). For both must it have seemed to the writer of 
that Epis‘le that the designation of “Apostle ” was in itself one which it was not unmeet 
tv apply to Christ the Son of God, and also we see it there placed side by side with the 
title of “ High Priest,” tothe Jewish mind the most exalted of all human funstionaries. 
The considerate reader also of the passages, 2 Cor. viii. 23 ; Phil. ii. 25; Rom. xvi. 7, 
cannot but feel that St. Paul regarded it as being a highly honourable distinction among 
Christians that one should be thought worthy of being an “apostle of a Church.” 

The pscudo-apostles at Corinth. Animportant illustration of the position held ‘in the 
Church by those who in this secondary sense were named “apostles,” is supplied by 
the manner in which St. Paul, in the tenth and two following chapters of his Second 
Epistle to the Corinthians, treats of certain persons who had come among those 
brethren in this character. 

These particular persons, it appears, were “ Hebrews” and “ Israelites,” belonging, that 
is, to the highest class of Jewish purists, and had come tv Corinth bearing credentials of 
their apostolic mission in the form of “‘ commendatory letters” (2 Cor. iii, 1). This makes 
it appear a highly probable supposition that they had been sent forth by the Church of 
Jerusalem, like certain persons referred to in Gal. ii. 12 as having come to Antioch 
“ from James,” who through their Israelite prejudices exercised so noxious an influence 
in the Antiochian Church. This supposition helps to explain their taking so much upon 
them, backed as they would be by the “ Cephas” party and perhaps the “Christ ” party 
in the Corinthian Church, These men St. Paul describes as “sham apostles, treacherous 
workmen, disguising themselves as apostles of Christ (ψευδαπόστολοι, ἐργάται δόλιοι, μετα- 
σχηματιζόμενοι eis ἀποστόλους Χριστοῦ )” (2 Cor. xi. 13). These expressions do uot at all 
warrant the idea that they had not really received the commission which they professed 
they had received. The apostle writes here in the same sense as he does in ch. ii. 4, where 
he describes certain persons in the Church of Jerusalem as “ sham brethren, unwarrant- 
ably brought in, who had unwarrantably come in to spy out our liberty (τοὺς παρεισ- 
dereus ψευδαδέλφους, ofrwves παρεισῆλθον κατασκοπῆσαι τὴν ἐλευθερίαν ἡμῶν) ;” who, however, 
no doubt, really were brethren, that is, outwardly members of the Christian brother- 
hood; only, their inward habits of feeling 4nd thinking were altogether incongruous 
with their external position as professed believers in Christ. In like manner, we may 
confidently assume that these pseudo-apostles also really were “ apostles ; ” but teaching as 
they did a different gospel from that which the Corinthians had received from Christ 
through St. Paul, a falsified gospel which was an inspiration of Satan, and being there- 
fore in reality “ministers of Satan,” thwarting Christ’s work in Corinth instead of 
furthering it, their spirit and their mode of action gave the die to their assumed cha- 
raoter of being “ apostles” in Christ’s Church; they were “ pseudo-apostles.” 

Coming, then, as we must believe, to Corinth as “ apostles,” we learn that they 
claimed from the brethren there in that character an extravagant amount of deference 
and of shows of respect, far beyond what St. Paul had himselfever thought of claiming ; 
¢zacting from them in particular, as is clear from several intimations droppod by the 
apostle, payment in no moderate measure for their ministerial service. All this is 
directly pointed at in the words, “ Ye bear with a man, if he reduceth you to the con- 
dition of slaves, if he eateth you up, if he catcheth you as his prey, if he uplifteth him- 
self, if he smiteth you on the face ” (2 Cor. xi. 20). Their enormous exaggeration of their 
importance as “apostles” suggests to the indignant and disgusted Paul, smarting at 
the wreng done to his owr beloved disciples, the use, two several times (2 Crv, xh, 5; 


xxviii THE EPISTLE TO. THE GALATIANS. 


xii. 11), of that phrase of withering scorn, “Those who are 80 super-excessively apostles 
(τοὺς ὑπὲρ λίαν ἀποστόλους). It seems stranze, by the way, that many interpreters, 
including even Chrysostom, should have supposed that St, Paul is in these words refer- 
ring to some of the twelve. In these three chapters the writer’s mind appears altogether 
absorbed by the antagonism between himself and the pseudo-apostles ; to none of the 
venerated twelve does he in these chapters make the slightest reference. 

The professed function of these pseudo-apostles. It appears to be a form of (pro- 
fessedly) evangelistic agency which is indicated in these chapters as exercised by the 
“apostles ” spoken of—a kind of agency which, in those ages, was undoubtedly much 
employed by the Church. At times “apostles” were delegated and sent forth by 
Churches for the discharge of other functions; for example, Epaphroditus appears to have 
been despatched by the Philippians as “ their apostle,” to bear to St. Paul a practical 
expression of their sympathy with him in his imprisonment. The “apostles” mentioned 
in the eighth chapter of this Mpistle to Corinth (ver. 23) were deputed to be treasurers 
of the alms collected among Gentile Churches for the poor in the Churches of Judea. 
But the specific business of the ‘‘ apostles” now under consideration, as well as very 
supposably that of Andronicus and Junias mentioned above, seems to have been, at 
least in part, of a missionary character, 

St. Paul seems to have in view such as being the professed and legitimate calling of 
those pseudo-apostles, when he censures them as he allusively does, as “ glorying beyond 
the measure assigned to them” (2 Cor. x. 15); that is to say, exercising their ministry in 
a field of labour already occupied by another apostle—an apostle owning a higher mission 
than theirs in any case could be. Instead of evincing the respect due to him, viewed 
even as a fellow-worker of their own class of apostleship, they had rudely and inso- 
lently sought to thrust him aside in the estimation of the Corinthian Church, in 
order to make room for themselves; nay—and this touched the inmost feeling of his 
soul far more than any disrespect shown to himself personally—they sought to thrust 
aside the gospel which he had delivered to that Church, in order to make room for a 
gospel which they were themselves bringing. And the gospel wherewith they would 
fain bave replaced his was in some way or other a vitiated gospel: they had in some 
way tampered wilh the proper message entrusted to the evangelist, as is implied by 
his expressions in 2 Cor. ii. 17 and iv. 2—* corrupting,” “handling deceitfully the Word 
of God.” What was the precise form of the adulteration is nowhere clearly indicated, 
neither in these three chapters of direct encounter with these adversaries, nor in that 
earlier part of the Epistle which is 80 pervaded by the consciousness of their presence 
and by indirect reference to them. We can only surmise; but, considering all the con- 
ditions of the case, the surmise appears more than merely probable, that they aimed 
ultimately at modifying both the faith and the religious policy of the Corinthian Church 
after the same lines of reactionary Judaizinz, as those men worked upon, who are sc 
sternly censured in the second chapter of the Galatians. 

But however, both the existence and the distinguishing character of that pseudo- 
apostleship which is here presented to our view reveal to us both the existence and the 
legitimate character of a genuine form of apostleship which this other simulated, 

Those pseudo-cpostles called themselves “ apostles of Christ ;” “ ministers of Christ.” 
We must not overlook the emphasis and persistency with which these impugners of 
St. Paul’s position connected their own official character with Christ. They said they 
“ were Christ’s ” (2 Cor. x.7); “ ministers of Christ ” (2 Cor. xi. 23); and, what is of 
especial interest for us, as will be shortly seen in our present inquiry, that they were 
“apostles of Christ” (2 Cor. xi, 18). Let us look more closely at these several particulars. 

1, In claiming to be regarded as “ being Christ’s "—that is, as “ belonging to Christ.” 


DISSERTATION L ax 


as this genitive means in 1 Cor, iii. 283 an] in Mark ix, 41—the nxt verse shows 
that they did not refer subjectively to their own spiritual devotion to Christ, nor to 
their being as individual believers accepted with Christ, but to their official character as 
men acting in Christ’s employ,.and in their office authorized by him. Compare the 
expression, “ We-are God’s fellow-workmen,” in 1 Cor. iii, 9, which appears to mean 
“ joint workmen with each other in God’s employ.” 

2. When, again, they affirmed that they were “ ministers of Christ,” on the one hand 
the word διάκονοι, in its technical sense, points to work of public service in the Church ; 
but on the other, as connected with the genitive Χριστοῦ, it also expresses the relation of 
servantship to Christ. So that we have again here the notion of, so to speak, employees 
of Christ ready to go about such offices of service as he appoints them to. The phrase, 
however, does not imply any such personal intercourse as that, for example, which sub- 
sisted between Christ while upon earth and his apostles or other disciples then attendant 
upon him; for we find it applied to persons who never saw our Lord, as Timothy and 
Epaphras (1 Tim. iv.6; Col. i. 7). The attendantship denoted is of a spiritual kind, 
being a ministry in the Church, which is Christ’s body. But while this was their out- 
ward guise, they were, St. Paul intimates (2 Cor. xi. 15), in reality Satan’s “ ministers,” 
not Christ’s, 

3. This sense of “ministers of Christ” serves to illustrate the meaning in which 
they claimed the designation of “apostles of Christ.” As the phrase, “ minister of 
Christ,” expresses a relation to him similar to that which an employee bears to his 
employer, so the phrase, “ apostle of Christ,” seems to denote arelation to him analogous 
to that which an apostle bore to him that delegated him.! According to this construc- 
tion of the designation, these men would seem to have laid claim to Laving been in 
some sense delegated by Christ. But we have no need to suppose, in this case, any 
more than with reference to the title “ ministers of Christ,” that they claimed any 
immediate personal relation to our Lord similar to that held by the twelve, but only 
that spiritual ecclesiastical relation to him which they may be deemed to hold whom 
his Church, acting in his Name and under his guidance, has commissioned for the par- 
ticular work in which they are engaged. 

The honourableness of a Church apostles function. The cases which have been now 
discussed have brought to light the fact that, besides the twelve commissioned directly 
by Christ in person, there were, in the infancy of the Church, persons who received 
the name of “ apostles” in consequence of being despatched by some public body in 
the Christian community forthe execution of some trust connected with the Christian 
cause, and that, amongst other forms of sacred business entrusted to them, one was that 
of spreading the gospel. ; 

The degree of estimation which the title, in general an honourable one, conferred upon 
its bearer would naturally rise with the dignity of the service which he was com- 
missioned to discharge. If an “ apostle” whose business related simply to the collection 
and custody of alms, or to the conveyance to a venerated father in Christ of an affec- 
tionate contribution to his needs, appeared in the eyes of his brethren invested with a 
certain measure of dignity by reason of the public confidence thus reposed in him, much 


"It is possible to understand the genitive as used like the genitive Θεοῦ in the clause 
above-cited, “ We are God’s fellow-workers,” that is, “in God’semploy.” Taken thus, the 
phrase, “apostles of Christ,” might mean “ Church apostles,” belonging to Christ; employed 
by Christ, as other Church officers are. But such a construction would seem somewhat 

τ harsh in itself and hardly warranted by usage; atleast we do not find similar designations 
applied to other Church officers—no such designation, for example, as “a bishop,” or “ an 
elder,” or “an evangelist,” “of Christ.” 


XXK YHE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 


more would this be the case when he had been set apart for a no less responsible 

‘function than that of conveying to men the message of the gospel and of propagating 
the Church, In such a case the designation of “apostle” inferred among Christians ἃ 
twofold distinction, as it also carried along with it a claim to his maintenance by his 
converts. 

Fictitious honourableness. As has been scen, it was a distinction so significant as te 
be capable of being abused for purposes of vain-glory, or insubordination, or even 
cupidity for gain. 

The fact also that the office of public envoy was styled by the same title as had been 
by Christ himself assigned to the twelve, would hardly fail of attaching to those who 
bore it an additional halo of respect. The twelve disciples were “apostles of Christ ;” 
and they too were “apostles of Christ.” Although it would be quite clear, upon a closer 
inspection of the circuntstances, that the predicate was not really identical in the two 
cases, and that the element of dignity accruing from the supposition that it was 
identical was a fictitious one, it may nevertheless have often imposed on the unwary, 
and Church apostles over-greedy of honour may at times have not been too scrupulous 
to make an unfair use of this implement of imposture. That the “ pseudo-apostles ” 
at Corinth were not too scrupulous to do so seems almost suggested by what St. Paul 
says of these “ guileful workers” in the thirteenth verse of the eleventh chapter. 
They certainly, at any rate, demanded that they should be deemed quite as much 
apostles as St. Paul was, and even more certainly so. 

Probable cause of the disuse of the title “apostles” in the Church. It may here be 
remarked, by the way, that in all probability this liability on the part of the unwary 
to misconceive the relative character of the two apostolates, and the opportunity thus 
offercd to unprincipled bearers of the apostolic title for imposing on their brethren, by 
each of which causes the distinc#ive pre-eminence in the kingdom of God owned 
by those who were apcetles in the higher sense was infringed upon and their authority 
impaired, led to the early and total discontinuance in the Church of the use of the 
term as applied to those who were Church apostles only. The last occurrence! of 


1 Since these words were written, there has come to light and been given to the 
world by Bryennius, Metropolitan of Nicomedia, a tract in Greek of the early Church 
which perhaps qualifies their import. This tract is entitled, ‘Doctrine of the Twelve 
Apostles.’ It is, in effect, a brief manual of moral instruction, and of directions as to the 
administration of the two sacraments, and a few other matters of Church regulation, 
closing with a solemn reference to the second coming. The precise date of its composition 
is being debated; but it certainly was compiled very early, and not improbably before the 
end of the first century. In this manual, directions are given in chapter xi. as to the 
treatment of “apostles.” The twelve are not mentioned or referred to, excapt in the title 
heading the tract. The passage is as follows: Whosoever shall come and teach you all 
the things before mentioned, receive ye him. . . . As to the apostles and prophets. 
according to the rule laid down in the gospel, 80 do ye. Let every apostle coming to you 
be received as the Lord; and he shall not remain a single day [only], but if there be need 
a second also; but if he remain three, he is a sham prophet (ψευδοπροφήτης). Let the 
prophet when he goes forth receive nothing but a loaf of bread [to last him] till he reach 
his lodging for the night; but if he asks for money, he is a sham prophet.” Then follow 
directions respecting “prophets.” It is obvious, I think, that the apostles here spoken of 
answer exactly to the account above given, founded upon indications supplied by the New 
Testament, of itinerant missionaries of the gospel, holding or professing to hold a Church 
commission. The title given to them appears to seal beyond question the extremely carly 
date of the book; while, on the other hand, the directions given for their treatment 
corroborate most strongly what has been above written respecting the “apostles ’ of 
2 Corinthians and of Rev. ii. 3. 


DISSERTATION I. xxxi 


the title as thus applied is probably that found in the message to the Ephesian Church 
tn Rev, ii, 3: “Thou canst not bear evil men, and didst try them who say they are 
apostles [that is, authenticated envoys of Christ’s own Church], and are not, and didst 
find them false.” 

St. Luke's applying the term “ apostles” to Barnabas and Paul. The considerations 
above adduced relative to a secondary form of apostolate engaged in evangelistic labour 
enable us to understand, what otherwise appears a puzzling phenomenon—the use by 
-St. Luke on two occasions of the desiguation “apostles” with reference to Barnabas 
aud Paul. Both passages are found in the fourteenth chapter of the Acts. In ver. 4 
we read, “The population of the city [Iconium] was divided ; and some sided with the 
Jews, and some with the apostles.” And in ver. 14, the Lycaonians of Lystra being 
about to offer sacrifice to them as gods, “ When the apostles, Barnabas and Paul, heard 
of it, they rent their garments,” etc, 

Now, very often in the Acts does St. Luke introduce the term “apostles,” but not 
in one instance is there any reason for our understanding the term otherwise than 
as reciting the twelve or some of the twelve; while in most of these passages the 
sequence of the narrative makes it absolutely certain that it is the twelve that he has 
in his mind. 

On the other hand, on no other occasion except in the two passages just cited does 
St. Luke give this designation either to St. Barnabas or, which is yet more remarkable, 
even to St. Paul. ὃ 

Further, nowhere’ else in the New Testament is Barnabas so styled. Though in 
several passages he is presented as holding a position closely prowimute to those who 
were apostles in the highest sense, yct nowhere is he called an apostle, 

Delegation of Barnabus and Paul from Antioch, In reading this section of St. 
Luke’s narrative comprised in the thirteenth and fourteenth chapters, which records 
the evangelizing journey made by Barnabas and Paul in company, we cannvt fail to be 
struck with the especial stress which the writer lays upon the circumstance that this 
journey was undertaken in obedience to an express commission which was given them 
“by the Holy Spirit,” through the prophets and teachers and the brethren at Antioch— 
a commission apparently “setting them apart” for this particulur act of service. So 
we read in vers. 2—4, “Aa they [Barnabas, Symeon Niger, Lucius of Cyrene, Manaen 
Herod’s foster-brother, and Saul] ministered to the Lord, and fasted, the Holy Ghost 
said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto 1 have called them 
[to wit, by inwardly moving their own souls thereto]. Then, when they had fasted 
and prayed and laid their hands on them, they let them depart. So they, being sent 
forth by the Holy Ghost, went down to Seleucia,” ete. In conjunction with this 
account of their first being sent forth on this journey, we have to notice the terms in 
which its conclusion is described. We read in Acts xiv. 26 thus: “And thence they 
sailed to Antioch, from whence they had been committed [or, ‘delivered over] to the 
grace of God for the work which they had completed.” Viewing these last words, 
%for the work which they had completed (εἰς τὸ ἔργον ὃ ἐπλήρωσαν), with those in 
Acte xiii. 2, “Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called 
them (apoploate... εἰς τὸ ἔργον ὃ προσκέκλημαι αὐτούς), we are led to infer that the laying 
on of hands mentioned in Acts xiii, 3 had respect, not to an investing of these two 
servants of Christ with any permanent position in the Church, but simply to a com- 
mending of them to the Divine grace in the evangelistic journey on which they were 
sent forth. This particular engagement took them probably a year, or a year and 
a half, to fulfil. On their return to Antioch, however, it was at an end, and they were 
then free to revert to the course of ministerial work with which they had beer 


xxxil THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


previously occupied: “ They tarried no little time with the disciples,” taken up, that is 
to say, with the ministering as before among the Antiochian believers (Acts xiv. 28+ 
xv. 35), Ἶ 

All τ making it clear, as it does, that the sacred historian has very distinctly 
present to his mind the character of special envoys sent forth upon a specific missien, 
as then borne by Barnabas and Paul, renders it also in the highest degree probable that 
when, in Acts xiv. 4, 14, he makes use of the word ἀπόστολοι in reciting their personality, 
he does so with reference to this especial envoyship. 

The Church envoyship of Barnabas and Paul. St. Barnabas and St. Paul, then, are 
presented here in the character of envoys of the Church. And if, in reference to this 
procedure in the Divine government of the Church in subjecting St. Paul, who had 
received immediately from Christ himself the grace of apostleship, to this inferior form 
‘of delegation received at the hands of men, we may, without incurring the charge of 
irreverence or presumption, venture to interpret its motive or purpose, it way be said 
that, in his going forth with St. Barnabas upon the business of forming new branches 
of the Christian community, it was expedient and even necessary, with a view to 
the maiutenance of the visible organic connection of these new communities with the 
apostolic Church, that their founders should bear the character thus assigned to them 
of apostles issuing from the already subsisting Christian body. 

‘heir apostolate wore an especially sacred character. Not only did it issue from the 
Church of God sanctified in Christ Jesus; not only was it conferred for the discharge 
of an eminently sacred function; but it was, further, a direct’ emanation from the 
Holy Spirit, declaring his will by direct extraordinary revelation. This circumstance 
exalted this instance of Church apostleship to an especial eminency above ordinary 
cases of sacred envoyship; in fact, it raised it to a position of dignity closely 
approximating to that kingly form of apostleship held by the twelve. 

Their Church apostleship involved subsequent obligation. It transpires from the 
subsequent narrative of the Acts that, although St. Barnabas and St. Paul had “ ful- 
filled the work” for which they had been designated when they returned to Antioch 
and gave in their report to the Church expressly convened to receive it, they never- 
theless regarded themselves as still holding an especial relation to its results, For 
on their return to Antioch from a journey to Jerusalem, on which they had been 
despatched with other brethren to confer with “the apostles” and the mother Church 
on the Christian position held by uncircumcised believers, we find (Acts xv. 86) St. Paul 
proposing to his late co-missionary that they should start afresh on a journey of 
visitation, comprising the round of cities in which, in their former expedition, they had 
preached the Word of the Lord, to see how their new converts fared. 

Anti-Hellenic prejudice lingering in the mind of Barnabas. We cannot wonder 
that they should fcel this to be a business especially incumbent upon them. Who 
should so naturally care for the estate of those brethren as they, their fathers, who 
through the gospel had begotten them? We perceive, however, that St. Paul was 
the one who both the most quickly recognized and the most heartily carried out this 
inward, and no doubt Heaven-prompted, yearning of spiritual fatherhood towards those 
uncircumcised converts, Loving and ingenuously evangelical as St. Barnabas had 
heretofore proved himself to be, as, for example, most notably when he first came down 
to Antioch and so frankly and gladly welcomed the work of grace in the hearts ot 
Gentiles (Acts xi. 23), yet, just about this time—a time so fraught with heart-searching 
conflict for men born and bred in the bosom of Mosaism—his behaviour, as glanced 
at in ch. ii., proved that he had not been yet able to disenthral his spirit out and out 
from all remains of Judaistic prejudice. In general the maxim holds good that the 


DISSERTATION 1, axcziil 


leaven of truth, however frankly it may have been admitted into the soul, still requires 
time for the full moditication of former habits of thought and feeling; and this, we 
may suppose, was the case with St. Barnabas; nay, perhaps, even with St. Peter 
himself, 

It was not St. Barnabas, then, but St. Paul, who was the first to propose their 
undertakiug this work of visitation. And it may be further surmised that, when 
St. Barnabas insisted upon their being again accompanied by Mark, his doing so was 
not altogether prompted by the partialitics of kinsmauship, as has been so commonly 
supposed, but was quite as much due to the same secret bias of feeling in favour of the 
more Mosnistically minded of his brethren, as not long before had warped his behaviour 
when he “ was carried away with Peter’s dissimulation.” St. Luke’s narrative says 
nothing whatever of the relationship, but merely recites, as St. Paul’s objection to Mark, 
that his conduct in their former journey hal proved him not the fit man to share 
in their work of evangelizing the Gentiles; for that, as soon as ever they had begun 
to throw themselves into that work in Asia Minor, he bad at once left them. 

What, in St. Paul’s view, disqualified Mark for accompanying them. What was the 
precise reason for Mark’s then leaving them is not stated, either here or in the fore- 
going passage in the history (Acts xiii. 13) which refers to this incident. Conjecture 
has ascribed it to deficiency in courage, or to unsteadiness of character, or even to 
home-sickness. When, however, we take into account the general complexion of 
Church affairs at this time, and the very determined manner in which St. Paul resisted 
St. Barnabas’s proposal to take him with them, it seems more probable that the con- 
tention hinged upon the burning question of the hour—that question the right decision 
of which St, Paul regarded, and justly regarded, as a matter of most vital importance, 
namely, how the Church was practically to carry out the principle of the absolute 
indifferency of circumcision in respect to a Christian’s status among his fellow-believers. 
The most probable solution scems to be that Mark had relinquished the enterprise 
of evangelizing Gentiles before, and in St. Paul’s estimation was unfit to be a fellow- 
worker now with men going forth on the highly responsible business of authoritatively 
organizing Gentile Churches, because, though no doubt accepting the truth that a man 
is justified by faith in Christ alone without conforming to the ceremonial Law, he 
nevertheless, like the vast majority of Jewish believers, had not as yet been able to 
wholly divest his mind of those feelings of antipathy to an uncircumcised person 
(ἀκροβυστίαν ἔχοντι, Acts xi. 3) which were inwrought as it were into the very texture of 
the Jewish character. If this was the case with Mark, there would he great cause 
to fear that, in moving about amongst Churches of which Gentiles formed the pre- 
dominant element, he might evince, as Barnabas himself his patron had lately permitted 
himself to do, a more cordial sympathy with the Jewish or with Judaizing members 
than with their Gentile brethren standing upon their gospel liberty. 

It was not cnough that the great principles of evangelical doctrine should be 
acknowledged or taught, Apart from correct doctrinal teaching, it was of absolute 
necessity that those newly won disciples should be able to [66] the presence, on the 
part of those coming among them as shepherds of their souls, of a genuine hearty 
brotherly kindness towards themselves, a caring for their welfare and their enjoyment 
of Church fellowship, and their sensibilities even, as great as for those of any high- 
caste Hebrew who mizht be found amongst them. This was what St. Paul saw to be 
required here; an acceptance, not constrained and reluctant, but cordial, thorough-gving, 
and even joyous, of the maxim that in Christ Jesus there was neither Jew nor Gentile, 
neither circumcision nor uncircumcision; and the uncompromising manner in which, 
even to the rending asunder for a while of a most precious friendship, he insisted upom 

GALATIANS, d 


xxxiv THE EPISTLE TO TUE GALATIANS, 


the rejection of Mark as a fellow-labourer in the work before them, is best accounted 
for on the supposition that he could not as yet discern in the young man this complete 
emancipation from the prejudices of a Jew. 

Separation of Barnabas and Paul. After the painful rupture which ensued between 
the two holy men, the blame of which, so far as we are able to judze, lay altogether 
on the side of Barnabas, the latter, recognizing the present call of duty to which 
St. Paul had drawn his attention, undertook one portion of the proposed tour of 
visitation, sailing away with Mark to Cyprus, This island, far more densely peopled 
then than now, was not only their native country, or at least St. Barnabas’s, but also 
opened before them an ample and congenial sphere of labour in a population of which 
Jews formed a very large if not even a preponderant proportion. An agreement appears 
to have been come to that St. Paul should himself undertake the remaining part of the 
service. Accordingly, adopting Silas for his fellow-worker, he embarked on the exten- 
sive, laborious, aud perilous enterprise of retraversing the ground already twice gone 
over in Asia Minor, being no doubt prepared further to go on elsewhere, whithersoever 
the Spirit of Christ should lead them. St. Luke, signifi-antly silent as to any similar 
circumstance attending St. Barnabas’s departure, adds, “‘ Paul set forth, commended to 
the grace of the Lord by the brethren.” 

St. Paul and St. Barnabas repeatedly appointed Church envoys. The character 
of (Church-commissioned) “apostle,” which had before been stamped upon Paul’s 
personality when sent forth with Barnabas, might, apart from this special fresh 
commendation of him to the Divine grace in the work now before him, have been 
considered to be still clinging to him when going forth with Silas; for the work was 
the proper and indeed necessary continuation of that for which he had been set apart 
in conjunction with Barnabas, At all events, that renewed commendation by the 
brethren implied the renewing of the stamp of apostleship upon St. Paul, as it also 
imparted the like character to Silas. 

On four several occasions before this had St. Paul received in the Church either a 
commission or a recognizing attestation which would of itself, according to the usaze 
of the time, entitle him to the appellation of “apostle;” and on each occasion in 
conjunction with Barnabas. 

1. When sent up from Antioch “to the elders” at Jerusalem with a contribution 
for the needs of the Christian poor of Judea (Acts xi. 30; xii. 25). 

2. When, upon a special sacred designation for the function by the Holy Spirit, 
they were sent forth in company upon their evangelizing tour in Asia Minor (Acts xiii., 
xiv.), when the appellation of “apostles” is expressly assigned to them by the 
historian. 

3, When they, in conjunction with certain other brethren, were despatched to 
Jerusalem by the Antiochian Christians to confer with the apostles and elders on the 
question of the necessity of circumcision (Acts xv. 2). 

4. When they were commissioned by the apostles and elders, acting with the 
expressed concurrence of the whole Church of Jerusalem, to bear, in conjunction with 
* Judas Barsabas and Silas, leading men among the brethren,” to the Gentile converts 
of “Antioch and in Syria and Cilicia,” that important letter, the Magna Charta of the 
Gentile Church, by which the Church “and the Holy Ghost” solemnly guaranteed the 
freedom of Gentile believers from the Mosaic Law. 

With reference to what passed on the important occasion of that conference at 
Jcrusalem we have further to note the following words which St. Paul wrote to the 
Galatians some years later: “ James [the Lord’s brother, head ruler of the Church οἱ 
Jerusalem] and Cephas and John [the chicfest of the twelve apostles], who are recog: 


DISSERTATION L RXXV 


nized as being pillars, gave tc me and Barnabas the right hands of partnership, that we 
should go to [or, * work for Ἶ the Gentiles, and they to the circumcision” (ch. ii. 9). 

This public formal act of the “pillars” of Obrist’s Church both metropolitan and 
universal, embodied in the shaking of hands in the presence (no doubt) of a general 
meeting of apostles, elders, and brethren, conferred upon St. Paul and likewise, no 
doubt, upon St. Barnabas, the Church’s commission to be envoys of the gospel to the 
fyentiles in permanence; for ministrations, not limited, as on that former occasion at 
Antioch, to some one special work of service, but indefinitely and without limitation. 

Thenceforward, wherever in the Gentile world St. Paul went bearing the gospel—and 
the like holds true no doubt also of Barnabas—he came as a formally authorized apostle 
of the Church, and therefore also, the Church being Christ’s body and his vicegerent 
as herald of salvatior to the world, as an “apostle of Christ.” This apostleship, let 
me again observe, was not identical, but ran parallel with that which St. Paul had held 
from the beginning of his Christian life, reccived from Christ himself with no human 
intervention. 

That the title, “apostles of Christ,” was borne by men who patently and (no 
doubt) confessedly by themselves had received no such immediate appointment from 
Christ in person as the twelve and St. Paul had received, has already been made clear 
from 2 Cor. xi. 18 (see above, p. xxix.). 

St. Barnabas had yet earlier than the first of the four occasions above recited received 
a like apostolical commission; namely, from “ the Church ” at Jerusalem, when he was 
sent down to Antioch with authority to inquire upon the spot into the real ground of 
the tadings, toen felt at Jerusalem to be so astounding, that “the hand of the Lord” 
had there been effecting the conversion of Gentiles [“Ἑλληνας, not Ἑλληνιστάς], owning 
no connection with the synagogue (Acts xi, 20-22), 

That first arrival of St. Barnabas at Antioch was followed by his making that city 
his principal place of abode for a long continuance; at an early period of which he 
went over to Tarsus to engage Saul’s co-operation with him in the building up of that 
highly important community of Gentile converts then rapidly forming in Antioch, 

Though we are unable to define what was the precise ecclesiastical status held by St. 
Barnabas during that time in the Antiochian Church, we cannot doubt he occupied a 
very prominent position in it; looked up to and reverenced and exercising by weight 
of opinion a leading influence in its affairs, not merely on the ground of his eminent 
ministerial gifts and of his noble personal character, but also as having come there in 
the capacity of an apostle, delegated by no less an authority than the mother Church 
of Christendom and the twelve apostles, who as yet were still making Jerusalem their 
head-quarters. , 

St. Barnabas’s partial deflection to anti-Hellenism. The “sweet reasonableness ” 
which would scem to have been a natural constituent of Barnabas’s character, elevated 
by the haliowing influences of the Holy Spirit, had in his case very greatly softened the 
strict formalism and narrow-mindedness which still attached to Jewish believers in 
general, and especially to the Pharisean scction of them. In liberality of sentiment, in 
large-hearted candour, in love of the human race in general, he proved himself on 
various occasions to be far ahead of the great mass of his believing fellow-countrymen. 

Nevertheless, the character of apostle from Jerusalem, in which he had in the first 
instance come among the Antiochians, and which, as we have seen, was again and again 
anew bestowed on him, formed a tie strongly linking him, in his ministerial work at 
Antioch, to the Jerusalemite Church. In consequence of his sustaining this character, 
brethren of the circumcision coming down from the capital would naturally resort to 
him, would attach themselves to his immediate society, would expect to receive from 


axel THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


him countenance and support. Thus, so to speak, clustering around him, they would 
be likely, especially would they be likely if they were old associates of his at Jerusalem 
or high in Church estimation at home, to bring to bear upon his mind, with reference to 
the relations between the circumcision and the uncircumcision, an influence which would 
be antagonistic in its tendency to the influence, for example, of St. Paul and of others 
who heartily accepted and carried out into practice the principle of the absolute indif- 
ferency in Christ Jesus of all such outward distinctions. Their influence would tend 
likewise to neutralize the effect which, but for this, the habit of brotherly association 
day by day, both in the Church and in private, with spiritually minded Gentile 
believers, could hardly have failed to produce, in dispelling from his spirit any still 
lingering remains of the old anti-Hellenic prejudice. 

It is in this frequent association as an apostle of the Jcrusalemite Church with the 
members of that Church from time to time visiting Antioch, that we may probably 
find the explanation of certain portions of St. Barnabas’s behaviour subsequently to 
his return with St, Paul from the conference at Jerusalem, which, after what we are 
told of his previous history, appear both so painful and so disappointing. ‘The chord of 
Judaistic sensibility, which else might have slept silent in his soul, and by continued 
inaction in time have perished altogether, was, by that no doubt often recurring inter- 
course with rigorous Mosaists from the capital, kept alive and vibrating. It was a 
perilous thing for even this “ grey-haired saint,” this hitherto “surest guide,” to permit 
himself thus to toy with “ the old leaven of malignity.” For thus it came to pass that 
on 8 certain occasion, when men standing well with James had come down from 
Jerusalem, the Gentile brethren became aware, to their astonishment and indignant 
grief, that Barnabas, their revered and confided-in teacher Barnabas, was allowing 
himself to be so far overmastered by the treacherous inward sympathy with Judaical 
bigotry as at length to think it shame to be seen by those visitors familiarly consorting 
as heretofore with the uncircumcision, brethren in Christ though they were,—so far, in 
fact, overmastered, as to be seen, in the wake of, alas! Cephas, slinking back from that 
former brotherly association with them which, however, had only embodied in pal- 
pable action faith in the great cardinal truth of the gospel. Well was it for them both, 
and well also for the Christian cause at Antioch, that the fearless, whole-hearted Paul 
was at hand to unveil to their own selves the unfaithfulness which they were showing 
to their real inward convictions, and by public rebuke check its hurtful contagion. 

‘Apostleship of Silas. We have now seen that the title of “apostles,” in that lower 
sense of the term in which it denoted Church envoys, was justly applicable both to St. 
Paul and to St. Barnabas, and also in fact was in that sense given to them. 

We have next to consider the case of Silas. When he went forth sharing St. Paul’s 
labours in that second great missionary journey of his recorded in the Acts, did he 
share with him likewise the right to the title of “apostle” in the sense now assigned 
to the word? and was the term in this sense actually used of him ὃ 

The answer to these questions is in part contained in the particulars relative to Silas 
which have been already noted. But it will be convenient to gather all the facts of 
his case together under one view. 

The high position which, prior to the conference at Jerusalem, Silas held among the 
Churchmen of Jerusalem is distinctly attested by St. Luke (Acts xv. 12), when he 
designates Judas and Silas az “ men taking a lead (ἡγουμένους) among the brethren.” 

At the conference itself the two men were selected and delegated to bear the missive 
then agreed upon to “ the Gentite brethren in Antioch and Syria and Cilicia,” and were 
at’ the same time directed to corroborate its statements by word of mouth. With 
Judas Barsabas we have no further concern ; after this mission he is altogether lost to 


DISSERTATION ἢ, axxvil 


Ra oe 


our view. But of Silas it may be remarked that, while staying at Antioch as his head- 
quarters, and while moving about, as to carry out the business entrusted to him he 
no doubt did, both in company with Panl and apart from him, among the Christians in 
those parts, in Syria and Cilicia in general as well as in the capital, he would be acting 
all along in the capacity of a delegated envoy, “apostle,” of the Jerusalem conference, 
wearing a character which St. Paul would thus become accustomed to regard as shared 
by him with himself. 

And here we observe another particular mentioned by St. Luke, enhancing the con- 
sideration with which Silas, with Judas Barsabas, would be regarded among Christians. 
He speaks of them as “ being themselves also prophcts,” whose earnest and diligent exhor- 
tation, he tells us, proved of great bencfit to the Antiochian believers (Acts xv. 32). 

After discharging this commission, Silas and Judas returned to Jerusalem to those 
who had sent them forth upon it (πρὸς τοὺς ἀποστείλαντας αὐτούς, L. T. Tr. Rev., instead 
of the words, πρὸς τοὺς ἀποστόλους of Textus Reccptus; the same editors expunge ver. 
34, Ἔδοξε δὲ τῷ Slag ἐπιμεῖναι αὐτοῦ). Later, however, we find Silas ayain at Antioch; at 
ieast, when St. Paul, then apparently at Antioch, desired a companion for his second 
journey therefrom, he “ selected ” Silas to be the one to go with him, 

All this proves the high estimation in which Silas was held by the brethren, both at 
Jerusalem and at Antioch. He would naturally appear to them as a man well fitted to 
move side by side with Paul, whose peculiar calling as an “apostle” in the higher 
sense was a fact as yet but imperfectly disclosed to the Church. At the same time, 
St. Luke’s dxpression (ver. 40), ἐπιλεξάμενος Σίλαν, indicates a certain subordination as 
marking his position in relation to St. Paul—an inference which is confirmed by the 
manner in which St. Luke proceeds to narrate the commencement of the expedition ; for 
he employs the singular number in the verbs found in Acts xv. 40 down to xvi. 3, 
writing also σὺν αὐτῷ, not σὺν αὐτοῖ,, in Acts xvi. 3, Z2rnishing a marked contrast with 
the plural number which he uniformly employs in narrating St Paul’s journey with 
Barnabas. 

On the other hand, we cannot doubt that Timothy, whom St. Paul attached to the 
party, and also Luke himself, who was about this time (cf. ἐζητήσαμεν, Acts xvi. 10) 
likewise enlisted in the service, and perhaps others, were as truly ὑπηρέται as Mark had 
been, helping in evangelistic work under Paul’s direction, and in training for a “ better 
degree” (1 Tim. iii, 10) to be attained by-and-by ; Timothy, however, as it should seem, 
holding among these subordinate workers the chief place. 

Nevertheless, it is evident that Silas held in the party a higher position altogether 
than any of these last-named subordinates; and when at their starling from Antioch 
Paul was “ delivered over (παραδοθεὶς) to the grace of the Lord by the brethren,” we 
cannot doubt that this solemn and formal act of commendation embraced with St. 
Paul his coadjutor Silas as «ell; and that,as Barnabas and Paul when going forth on 
the former journey, so now Paul and Silas when going forth on this, went as alike 
“apostles,” and sealed, we may also feel assured, with the like Divine sanction as Bar- 
nabas and Paul had been when they had been “ sent forth by the Holy Ghost” (Acts 
xiii, 2, 4). ' 

The particulars now alleged relative to Silas’s close association with St. Paul and 
to acts of delegation or recognition whereby the Church connected them together as its 
authorized agents, sufficiently evince, not only that it would be perfectly justifiable, 
but also that it would be extremely natural and obvious, for St. Paul, when he had 
occasion to speak of the ministerial office exercised by himself and Silas in con- 
junction, to describe it, and, if need were, to argue upon it, as a ministry exercised by 
“apostles” or by “ apostles of Christ ” (see above, p. xxxv.) 


xxxviil THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


And we are able to adduce an instance of St. Paul’s actually doing this, namely, in 
what we read in 1 Thess. ii. 5, 6. 5 

“ Paul and Silvanus and Timotheus.”” We shall, however, be better prepared for 
entering into the spirit of what St. Paul writes in 1 Thess. ii. 5,6 when we have 
taken note of certain particulars in the account which St. Luke gives us in the Acts 
(xvii.) of that very sojourn at Thessalonica which the apostle is there speaking of. 

It appears from St. Luke’s narrative that, although St, Paul certainly throughout that 
great second missionary expedition occupied the position of chief and director among 
his fellow-travellers, being in fact named alone as agent, both, as already mentioned, 
at its commencement and at its close (Acts xviii. 7—22) when Silas is no longer men- 
tioned—very conceivably, during St. Paul’s eighteen months’ sojourn at Corinth, Silas 
had gone elsewhere—yet in respect to that earlier part of the time which was spent in 
Macedonia and Achaia, and which we are now concerned with, Silas appears very 
prominent in the story, both as sharing in the ill treatment which St. Paul underwent 
at Philippi (Acts xvi. 19—40), and also as being closely at his side at Thessalonica, both 
in evangelistic labours as indicated by the wording of the statement, “‘consorted with 
Paul and Silas,” in Acts xvii. 4, and in exposure to the danger of suffering further per- 
secution (ibid., vers, 5—10).! 

However it may have been elsewhere, here in Macedonia, so closely were Paul and 
Silas associated with each other, both in doing and in suffering, that the Thessalonian 
converts must inevitably have entertained sentiments towards them of equal or almost 
equal reverence and love, regarding both the one and the other of them 4s alike their 
tender, faithful, self-denying foster-fathers in the faith, and feeling assured that both 
would have been alike well-pleased to impart to them, not the gospel of God only, but 
also their own souls, s> dear had they been to those two fathers of theirs in the gospe} 


' There is no just ground for supposing that Luke regarded the stay at Thessalonica as 
bounded by that period of three weeks during which the “apostles” sought to win the 
Jews to the faith. The narrative may be construed as taking at the commencement of 
ver. 5 a fresh departure, prior to which there is no difficulty in our supposing even a con- 
siderable interval to have elapsed since the last of those three sabbaths which it has spoken of. 

In comparing the histury with the Epistles, we cannot but be struck by the fact that the 
history makes no mention of any Gentiles being converted at Thessalonica except such as 
were already connected with the synagogue as σεβόμενοι Ἕλληνες, whilst the First Epistle 
describes those whom it addresses as having, in consequence of the “ entering in” of the. 
writer and his companions, “ turtied unto God from idols ” (1 Thess. i. 9). But the comparison 
brings out another fact, which enables us to explain the former. The First Epistle makes the 
reader fee] that the writcr and his companions had beer a much longer time in intercourse 
with the Thessalonian converts than the history tells us of, and this impression is con- 
firmed by the circumstance mentioned in the Epistle to the Philippians (iv. 17), that, 
while St. Paul was at Thessalonica, the Philippians lad on two several occasions “ sent unto 
bis need,” the two towns being about one hundred miles apart. -St. Luke’s narrative, from 
some cause or other, takes up only two detached portions of the whole sojourn—the first 
portion relating to the very partial acceptance of the gospel by the synagogue at its com- 
mencement; the other, which in its substance links itself on to the former, to its abrupt 
termination through the hostile practices of those Jews who did not believe. As this 
fierce outburst of Jewish hostility was dictated by anti-Hellcnic bigotry (1 These. ii. 15, 16), 
and is best accounted for by the two “ apostles” having devoted themselves so mainly and 
so successfully to the uncircumcision, we thus gain further corroborative evidence out of 
St. Luke’s own narrative for u prolonged interval devoted to the evangelization of the 
Gentiles in Thessalonica. The narrative of the history is twcomplete, as it often proves te 
be; but it is not antagonistic to the Epistle. 


DISSERTATION L xxxtx 


(1 Thess. ii, 7—11). Timothy, no doubt, took his part in the work as is shown by such 
passages as Acts xvii. 14 and 1 Thess. iii. 2; but nowhere is Timoth y spoken of in this 
section of the history as standing ona level with them in ministerial position, or 
involved in like sufferings, or as threatened by the like dangers. 

These considerations are sufficient to explain the manner in which St, Paul com- 
mences tha two Epistles which he despatched to the Thessalonians from Corinth not 
long after he commenced his eighteen months’ sojourn in that city. Both these letters 
begin with the same words: “ Paul and Silvanus and Timotheus, to the Church of the 
Thessalonians in God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ : Grace to you and peace,” etc, 
The facts above adduced show that it was impossible for him, when writing to these 
particular converts, to speak of himself as an apostle in a different sense from that in 
which Silas might also have been so designated ; impossible for him to write, for example, 
thus: “ Paul, apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God, and Silvanus and Timotheus 
our brethren,” after the style of the letters to the Corinthians or of the letter to the 
Romans. For it would have worn the appearance of breaking asunder before the eyes 
of those affectionate converts that complete co-partnership in which we feel sure they 
were wont to regard Silas as associated with Paul. There was, indeed, no need for him, 
when addressing disciples so attached and docile as these new coaverts of Thessalonica, 
to introduce any such emphatic asseveration of his own distinctive peculiar apostolical 
authority. This was proved to be necessary later, when he was addressing Churches 
where his authority was either actually impugned, as at Corinth, or dimly perceived, as 
at Rome. But at present this was not required, neither wi uld it have been suitable. 

Further, it may be that as yet the time had not arrived when the Divine guidance, 
under which he habitually and consciously acted, should prompt him te cpenly assert 
that hivh commissionership of his setting hiin on a level with the sacred twelve, which 
some five years later we find him so unflinchingly asserting in the next group of letters. 
Things were, it is true, gradually preparing for its open declaration to the world. His 
position was becoming more and more ascendant in the Church ; his relative importance, 
as being of all the chiefest herald of the gospel to the Gentiles, was growing more and 
more marked; the conditions of environing circumstances hitherto veiling his magni- 
ficent vocation were rapidly falling away from around him. But the hour, we may 
believe, though fast approaching, was not yet—the hour in which he was to be divinely 
impelled to announce himself an “apostle” in that supreme sense in which Christ 
himself used the term, when giving it to his chosen twelve. 

St. Paul speaks of Silas and Timothy as apostles with himself. We are now, as J 
apprehend, in a position for understanding the manner in which St. Paul applies the 
term “ apostles ” in 1 Thess. ii. 5, 6. 

The whole passage is as follows :—* For neither at any time did we resort to any 
word of fawning, as ye know, nor to any pretext veiling designs of avarice: God is 
witness! nor sought distinction on the part of men whether with you or with 
others [literally, ‘ from you or from others’], though as Christ’s apostles we might, if 
we had so willed, have taken a burdensome position with you.” 

St. Paul is apparently rebutting certain calumnious aspersions with which, as he 
with no doubt good reason surmised, certain persons at Thessalonica, whether unbe- 
lieving Jews or mocking Gentiles, were disposed to assail himself or his fellow-workers, 

St. Paul was wont, by means of the probably ill-paid and dirty work of making 
tent-curtains of coarse Cicilian fabric, to earn money for the purpose of paying his 
own personal expenses, and sometimes those of his subordinate companions. This is 
evidenced, in reference to this second journey of his, besides what we read in these two 
Epistles (1 Thess. ii. 9; 2 Thess. iii. 8, 9), by Acts xviii. 33 2 Cor. xi. 9; in reference 


x) QHE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


to his first journcy taken with Barnabas, by 1 Cor. ix. 6, 15; in referer: to the third, 
by Acts xx. 34; 2 Cor. xi. 10, xii. 14. 

Nor is this statement contravened by the fact that, in this very first visit of his to 
Thessalonica to which he is here referring, he received gifts pressed upon his acceptance 
by generous converts left behind at Philippi (Phil. iv. 15—17). These were extra- 
ordinary expressions of loving sympathy with his evangelistic work (Phil. i. 5, 7), the 
declining of which would not only have been mortifying to the kind hearts of those 
from whom they came, but algo have tended to deprive them of their Divine reward 
(Phil. iv. 17). But these were extraordinary benefactions, more resembling “ mis- 
sionary donations” than the payment of a stipend to ἃ pastor by those to whom he is 
ministering. 

It appears most probable that St. Paul, in the second of the two verses now before us, 
is referring to this particular habit of self-denial, for the following reasons :— 

1. In four other instances he uses derivatives of βάρος with reference to- burdening 
converts with his maintenance; viz. ἐπιβαρῆσαι, 1 Thess. ii. 9; 2 Thess. iii, 8; κατε- 
βάρησα, 2 Cor. xii, 16; ἀβαρῆ, 2 Cor. xi. 14. Compare also the use of καταναρκῆσαι, 
2 Cor. xi. 9, xii. 18, 14. 

2, In ver. 9 he expressly says, “ Working nicht and day, that we might not burden 
(ἐπιβαρῇσαι) any ove of you,” apparently to illustrate the very statement of ver. 6. This 
remark is not neutralized by the interposition of vers. 7, 8. For those verses, stating 
as they do the absolutences of his tender, self-devoting love as like that which a nursing 
mother shows to her offspring, present the exact contrast of that disposition to assert 
his own rights which, if he had required or even permitted them to maintain him, they 
might have surmised to be actuatiag him. These very verses, therefore, form a per- 
fectiy germane introduction to the statement of ver. 9, connecting it with ver 6 as its 
elucidation. 

8. The words ἀπ᾽ ἄλλων (ver. 6) point in the same direction. These ἄλλοι are -not 
Christian converts in other places ; for St, Paul’s relations with them have nothing io 
do with the matter in hand: they are rather the unbclieving world in Thessalonica 
itself. St. Paul refers to his foregoing that position of respectability (δόξα) which to 
people in general he would have seemed to hold, if he had appeared to them to be no 
xetpoupyds or βάναυσος, no vulgar mechanic, but a man possessed of leisure enabling him 
to devote himself to occupations of a purely intellectual or spiritual character. The 
sedulous toil which he devoted to ἃ mere mechanical employment, especially an 
employment so repulsive as that of tent-making, was in reality a self-abasement; and 
so he expressly describes it in 2 Cor, xi. 7 (ἐμαυτὸν ταπεινῶν). Whatever certain schools 
of Gentile philosophy might theorize, or whatever the maxiins of Jewish rabbins 
might inculcate (see eg. Dr. Farrar, ‘ St. Paul,’ vol. i. p. 23), for him to be continually 
drudging as he did at a mere mechanical employment was a forfeiture of social rank, 
depressing him low down among the base ones of the world. Wherever St. Paul 
refers to this particular of his conduct, we must bear in mind this element of its 
character, its self-degradingness. We must not suppose that all that he is thinking of 
in such passages was the strain of supererogatory toil which he im) osed upon himself. 

We may paraphrase this sixth verse thus: “ Neither did we lay ourselves out to 
stand well in men’s eyes in a worldly sense; neither in relation to you, by impressing 
you with respectful regard for our position and by enforcing our claim to be lifted by 
your contributions above worldly cares ; nor in relation to those around, by wishing to 
appear above the nced to have recourse to surdid occupations and free to live a life con- 
secrated to highcr engagements: and yet, as Christ’s apostles, this is what we were 
fully entitled to do; coming to you in that capacity, we should have been fully 


DISSERTATION 1, ΧΙ 


authorized to stand upon our dignity, and to throw the burden of our maintenance 
entirely upon you.”? 

Now, there are two distinct propositions implied in the last clause of this verse, 
namely, that Christ’s apostles were entitled to claim maintenance at the hands of those 
who received their teaching; and that the persons recited by the pronoun “ we” were 
apostles of Christ. 

With respect to the latter proposition, it is supposed by some that St. Paul, in the 
phrase, “ apostles of Christ,” was at bottom pointing to his own individual person as 
“apostle” in the highest sense of the term; and that he was led to use the plural 
pronoun “ we” in applying thereto this lofty predicate, partly by an instinctive shrinking 
from egotism and self-obtrusion, and partly by a gracious and sympathetic brotherly 
kindness which would fain share predicates, which in actual truth were applicable only 
to himself, with those who in Christ’s service were closely associated with him. 

There can be no doubt that St. Paul does sometimes thus write. It is impossible, 
for instance, to understand in any other sense much that we read in the long passage, 
2 Cor. iv. 7—vi. 10. 

But this method of interpretation cannot be satisfactorily applied in the present 

case. ͵ ᾿ . 
It is difficult to imagine how it could be possible for St. Paul to use the plural 
number, “ Christ’s apostles,” if he alone of the party was an “apostle of Christ” in 
that sense in which the term is supposed to be used. As well might a colonel, whep 
speaking of himself in conjunction with even the highest subordinate officers of his 
regiment, extend to them the title of “colonels in her Majesty’s army.” 

Besides, there is nothing to warrant the notion that it was any peculiar prerogative 
of those who in the highest sense of the designation were “apostles of Christ” to 
expect to be maintained by their converts. The seventy, who never, ao far as appears, 
were sty:ed ‘“apostles,”.were yet authorized by Christ to consider themselves, while 
discharging the service he had enjoined upon them, as entitled to the benefit of the 
maxim, “The workman deserves his wages” (Luke x. 7); and the apostle himself, in 
1 Tim. v. 17, 18, puts it among the fundamental maxims of Church order, that those 
who labour in speaking and teaching had a claim to be paid by the Church. So also 
we read in 1 Cor. ix. 7—14. 

These considerations warrant the conclusion that St. Paul, in the passage unde? 
consideration, uses the term “ apostles ” in the same sense as that in which it has been 
above shown (pp. xxxi., xxxii.) to be used by St. Luke in Acts xiv. 4, 14, and in which 
the designation, “apostles of Christ,” is employed by St. Paul in 2 Cor. xi. 6 (comp. 
Ῥ. xxix.); that is, he uses the expression with reference to the delegation or 
authorization which both he and Silas had received, not only from the Antiochian 
Church, but also from the supreme leadership of the mother Church at Jerusalem. 

Timothy regarded in the light of a Church envoy. The case of Timothy, however, 
claims to be here considered. - 

The addition of Timothy’s name in the greeting prefixed to both the Epistles to the 
Thessalonians—“ Paul and Silvanus and Timotheus”—may possibly not of itself prove 
a particularly close partnership in official standing between the three persons named; 


1 In the apostle’s mind there was an affinity between the two words, δόξα and Bdpos—an 
affinity so close as to lead him (2 Cor. iv. 17) to construct the strange phrase, βάρος δόξης: 
This association of ideas was doubtless due to the fact that in the Hebrew 723 denotes both 
heavy and glorious. It is very supposable that the apostle uses the words ἐπιβαρῆσαι, κατα: 
βαρῆσαι, ἀβαῤῆ, in the passages cited above as comprising, each in one word, the double 
sense of burdening others in supporting one’s own dignity. 


xlii THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


since we have, in the greeting of the First Epistle to the Corinthians, “ Paul, called to be 
an apostle of Jesus Christ through the will of God, and Sosthenes our brother,” where 
certainly such close partnership capnot be assumed. Nevertheless, the conjunction of 
the three names, with no words interposed to mark distinction in office, may be fairly 
alleged as looking in that direction, if other evidence can be adduced favouring that 
view. And such, I venture to think, there is. 

St. Paul, in his third journey, writing to the Corinthians with reference certainly 
to that same second journey with which we are now concerned, expresscs himself thus; 
“For the Son of God, Jesus Christ, who was preached among you by us, by me and 
Silvanus and Timotheus, was not yea and nay” (2 Cor. i. 19). This manner of 
speaking raises 'Timotheus from any such position of a mere “attendant (ὑπηρέτης), ” 
whether upon Paul himself or upon Paul and Silas in conjunction, as Mark had held 
with relation to Paul and Barnabas in the first journey, and assigns to him an inde- 
pendent footing, more or less co-ordinate, by the side of the other two preachers of the 
Son of God—a footing at least so far independent and co-ordinate that the portraiture 
which he had given of the Lord Jesus Christ could be referred to as additional to 
and corroborative of that given by Paul and by Silvanus. 

May it not, then, be the case that when, in the passage more immediately under 
consideration (1 Thess. ii. 6), he says, “We might as Christ’s apostles have taken a 
position burdensome to you,” he refers to the “ Paul and Silvanus and Timotheus” 
from whom the Epistle professes to come, as being all three apostles of Christ? 

An affirmative answer to this query is favoured by the references to Timotheus which 
we meet with in the Epistle to the Philippians. In ii. 22 St. Paul says of him,“ Ye know 
the proving of him [1.6. what, when put to the proof, he was found to be], that as a 
son to his father [q.d. like father, like child] he with me served (ἐδούλευσε) for the 
furtherance of the gospel;” served, that is, the Lord Jesus; for that the person 
whom Timotheus is described as doing service to was Christ and not the Apostle Paul, 
is not only evinced by the very form of the expression, σὺν ἐμοὶ ἐδούλευσε, but also by 
the superscription of the Epistle, “ Paul and Timotheus, servants (δοῦλοι) of Christ 
Jesus to all the saints,” etc. The Epistle to the Philippians, it is true, dates several 
years later than even the third journey, and perhaps seven or eight years later than 
the Epistles to the Thessalonians; but the “ proving” of which the Philippians were 
cognizant may be probably conceived as commencing from the time when Timotlicus 
accompanied St. Paul on his first coming into Macedonia with Silas, though continuing 
through that time also of the third journey when, as we know, St. Paul, being at 
Ephesus, despatched him on a mission to Corinth, visiting the Churches of Macedonia 
on the way (1 Cor. xvi. 10; Acts xix. 22), The passage shows that from the com- 
mencement of this period St. Paul regarded Timothy, not as a personal attendant 
waiting upon himself, but as a fellow-bondservant with himself of Christ, working, 
as he told the Corinthians (1 Cor. xvi. 10), the work of the Lord, that is, the work on 
which the Lord was employing him, even as he himself did. As Paul himself, so also 
Timotheus, vwned a sacred commission which St. Paul felt himself bound to recognize 
and revere. 

In the Acts no account is given, either of any Divine call summoning Timotheus to 
a ministerial function, or of any other circumstances attending his appointment to such 
an office. All that St. Luke states is that Paul, in this second journey of his, found, in 


* Δοῦλοι Χριστοῦ. 8 palpably not a predicate of mere discipleship, as in 1 Cor. vii. 22; 
Eph. vi. 6. The phrase hero, as it almost always appears to do, designates an official 
character (comp. Rom, i. 1; ch. i 10; Col iv. 12; 2 Tina. ii. 24; Titus i. 1; Jos, £15 
2 Pet. i. 1; Jude 1). 


4 


DISSERTATION L ΕΠ} 


the parts near Derbe and Lystra, a “disciple named Timotheus ”—a convert, it should 
seem, won in the former missionary journey with Barnabas—“ who was very highly 
-spoken of by the brethren at Lystra and Iconium ;” that “he conceived the wish 
(ἠθέλησεν) that he should go forth with him,” sharing the sacred enterprise on which 
he and Silas were already engaged; and further, that to qualify him for dealing to 
greater advantage with Jews, “he took and circumcised him.” 

Wa need, however, feel no surprise that we find here no particulars of either call or 
special designation, such as are found in Acts xiii. 1—3 with relation to Paul and 

‘Barnabas, neither does the omission tend to discredit the idea that there were such. 
It would not fall within the scope of the sacred historian’s purpose to furnish such 
details with respect to the various persons who were called to share St. Paul’s labours 
—Aristarchus, Titus, Demas, Trophimus, and others, including Luke himself. The 
circumcision of Timotheus is mentioned, not on his account, but as illustrative of St. 
Paul’s own methods of action. 

Timothy’s ordination. Nevertheless, in the letters which, a good many years later 
as it would seem, St. Paul had occasion to write to Timotheus, we do find indications 
of circumstances attending his first susception of the office which he held in the 
Church, such as serve in some measure to explain those respectful references to that 
office which we have just been considering. 

When the apostle wrote those letters, he had appointed him toa highly important 
and responsible post at Ephesus; in fact, to exercise for a while the like supremacy 
in the regulation of Church affairs in that neighbourhood as St. Paul himself would 
bave exercised had he been there. Timotheus, as many indications show, was 
remarkable for sensitiveness and for the modesty of his temperament—modesty, per- 
haps, amounting to even an excessive measure of self-diffidence; and he shrank from 
the heavy responsibility imposed upon him. It was partly to combat this extreme 
seif-dis‘rust, and not only to direct him how to conduct himself in his new position, 
that St. Paul was now writing to him. 

With the former object in view, he tells him (1 Tim. i. 18) that, in entrusting him 
with this important charge, he was only following out those inspired intimations of the 
Divine will concerning him “which had led the way to him (κατὰ τὰς προαγούσας ἐπί 
σε xpopytelas) ;” that is, as is suggested by the comparison of Acts xiii. 2, which had 
in the first instance led the eldership of the neighbourhood and St. Paul himself to 
solemnly set him apart for the work of an evangelist. The apostle himself feels, and 
enjoins it upon Timotheus to feel, that the “ prophesying” which first suggested that 
long-ago consecration for his work furnished a topic of strong encouragement; so much 
did he feel this, that he brings it forward again in 1 Tim. iv. 14, where he likewise refers 
to it as the means of the “charism” being bestowed which was in him. “ Neglect 
not,” he says, “the gift that is in thee, which was given to thee through prophesying in 
conjunction with the laying on of the hands of the eldership.” 

For the like purpose of encouragement, he twice refers to the “charism,” or “the 
charism of God,” which on that occasion had been conferred upon him. The medium 
of its bestowment, he reminds him in one passage (2 Tim. i. 6), was the laying on of 
his hands; and how efficacious the laying on of his hands was wont to be, when he 
used it in the solemn exercise of his supreme apostolical office, was ἃ matter which 
Timotheus had had abundant opportunity for observing. ‘The “ gift” verily was “ in 
him,” a hoiy fire statedly deposited in his breast, sure to kindle up into living flames, 
mightily effectual if only stirred and fanned by being faithfully made use of. In the 
other passage (1 Tim. iv. 14), in place of this reference to the laying on of his hands, 
and without specifying the proximate medium of the bestowment at all, he reminds 


xliv THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


him that the gift was conferred in conjunction with (μετά, not διά) the laying on of the 
hands of the eldership. This last circumstance of the sacred rite illustrated the high 
character of the commission then entrusted to him. It marked him out, in fact, as 
being in that ministration on which he was then going forth, an apostle of the Church, 
and so an “apostle of Christ.” ‘The eldership, by laying their hands upon him, in the 
solemn hour in which, before many witnesses (1 Tim. vi. 12), he was set apart for 
the service of an evangelist, set to their seal of the Church’s formal authorization in its 
discharge.? 

Weare thus brought to the conclusion that when St. Paul says to the Thessalouians, 
“We might have been burdensome as Christ’s apostles,” he speaks of both Silvanus and 
Timotheus as standing in conjunction with himself. 

Thus had all three been delegated by authoritative exponents of the Church’s 
practical judgment to go forth into the world to proclaim the gospel and to propagate 
the Church. 

Different Church officers specified in Eph. iv.11. In the passage of the Ephesians 
(iv.11) in which St. Paul illustrates, with reference to the ascended Lord, the psalmist’s 
words, “He gave gifts unto men,” he writes, “He it was that ‘gave’ some to be 
apostles, some to be prophets, some to be evangelists, some to be shepherds and 
teachers.” Viewed as spiritually called forth and endued by Christ as the world’s 
Benefactor, Paul was himself an “apostle” in that supreme sense in which the word 
is there used, standing by the side of the august twelve; Silvanus was a “‘ prophet ” 
(Acts xv. 82), Timotheus an “evangelist” (2 Tim. iv. 5), Viewed as parts of the 
visible Church, they were likewise the Church’s accredited messengers and agents. 

St. Paul’s reserve respecting his holding the higher form of apostleship in the earlier 
years of his ministry. Up to this time, that is, up to the latter part of St. Paul’s first 
journey into Europe, there is reason to doubt whether that Divine direction under 
which he habitually acted had led him openly and distinctly to announce and insist 
upon the office of supreme apostleship with which in actual fact Christ had from 
the first endued him. So far as can be discovered, he had hitherto acquiesced in his 
being regarded as an apostle in the like sense as that in which St. Barnabas was an 

apostle, or Silas, or even Timotheus; namely, as an apostle of Christ because he was 
an apostle of Christ’s Church, delegated and sent forth either by some particular 
Christian community or by leading representatives of the Christian body. It is true 
that at the very commencement of his ministry, immediately after his conversion, as 
we learn from this Epistle to the Galatians (i.), he acted more independently ; for 
he proceeded at once to act upon the commission which he had received immediately 
from Christ, preaching the gospel which he had likewise received immediately from 
Christ, without waiting for any ecclesiastical delegation whatever. But later, at the 


" Nowhere are charisma said to be conferred by presbyters. Apostles only, in that 
supreme sense of the werd in which it applied only to the twelve and to St. Paul, appear 
capable of conferring them by the laying on of hands. 

? Timotheus’s function is defined as being that of “an evangelist” by the apostle 
himself (2 Tim. iv. 5). This was a distinct order of ministrints, as appears from 
Eph. iv. 11; Acts xxi. 8; but the precise limits of their office are not now determinable. 
In the main it should seem to have been that of missionaries, to propagate the gospel; 
including, at least occasionally, as we may judge from the so-called pustoral Epistles, the. 
organizing Gs ash aio of nascent Churches, involving the appointment of “ bishops ” 
and “deacons.” Timotheus’s work at Ephesus, as well as that of Titus in Crete, waa 
probably that of an evangelist discharging an occasional service in that neighbuuxhood, 
yather than that of a permanently located bishop. 


DISSERTATION ἵ. xly 


time when in the Acts the method of his ministerial agency begins to be more clearly 
portrayed to us, we perceive him, first, brought into ministerial activity at Antioch 
by Barnabas, who himself had been deputed from Jerusalem to visit the Gentile 
converts in that city and had gone across from that place to Tarsus for the purpose 
of enlisting his co-operation in that field of labour; then, delegated from Antioch 
with Barnabas, whose name stands the foremost of the two in the history (“ Barnabas 
and Saul,” in this order) both now and for some way onwards, to convey to Jerusalem 
a contribution for the poor of the brethren in Judwa; then, delegated from Antioch, in 
conjunction again with larnabas, to go forth upon a far-extended evangelistic journey ; 
then, deputed once more from Antioch with Barnabas (“‘ Paul and Barnabas” now) 
and others to go to Jerusalem to consult the apostles and elders on the question of 
circumcising Gentile believers; then, returning from Jerusalem in company with 
other delegates, to convey to the Churches of Syria and Cilicia the Jerusalem rescript 
on that subject, at which time the hivh attestation of the apostles and leading brethren 
at Jerusalem had been accorded to his own ministerial work as well as to that of 
Barnabas ; and, lastly, embarking upon another extended evangelistic expedition which 
brought him at length into Europe, where, in an Epistle to the Thessalonians, he 
designated himself and Silas and Timotheus in conjunction as “ apostles of Christ.” 

These facts betoken that hitherto, neither in the Church was St. Paul regarded as 
invested with the like supreme form of apostleship as that which attached to the twelve, 
nor was he himself wont to insist upon the assertion that he was so invested. 

But when we come to the group of four letters which, after an interval of some five 
years or more since the date of the two addressed to the Thessalonians, St. Paul in 
the lacter part of the last-named journey despatched to the Galatians, to the Corinthians, 
and to the Romanus, we have to note in these a new tone in speaking of his apostleship ; 
an intense, solemn assertion of a peculiar kind of spiritual dignity ; evidently an 
antagonistic assertion, one called forth by the new form, or at least by the new 
vehemence, of the opposition by which he found himself confronted. 

In respect to this last-mentioned pvint, we observe that, in those twe earlier letters 
of his, addressed to the Thessalonians, he had spoken of bitter hostility and of thence 
accruing persecution. But these had come upon him mainly from outside the Christian 
body, from unbelieving Gentiles and yet more from unbelieving Jews. There isin these 
letters only one reference to difficulties thrown in his path from within—a reference 
by no means explicit, yet with what we know otherwise not hard to explain, The 
“absurd and bad men” from whom in 2 Thess. 111, 2 he asks the Thessalonians to pray 
that he may be delivered, were in all probability Christians; for the clause which he 
adds, “for all have not faith,” would seem a pointless truism unless written of a class 
of persons among whom men would be entitled to expect to find faith.. Already, then. 
in those days St. Paul had found himself hampered in his work, and even perhapa 
personally imperilled, by “sham brethren,” who really were “bad” men as wall as 
“absurd;”-that is to say, men still unweaned from their sins (cf. Phil. iii. 18), and 
moreover possessed with sentiments and predilections altogether “ incongruous with 
their position” as Christian believers. We may safely identify in the persons thus 
des.ribed professed Christians of a kindred character with those whom, not long before 
he thus wrote, he had had to contend with at Antioch and at Jerusalem (ch. ii. 4). 

At that time, however, the evil had not grown to the formidable dimensions which it 
afterwards assumed. But now, in the four letters of this later era, St. Paul is seen in 
the very thickest of the conflict with such false brethren. The reactionary party in the 
Church, which sought to neutralize the properly evangelical element of the gospel and 
to bring Christians back to the bondage more or less of Judaical ceremonialism, was 


xlvi THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 


raising its head in every direction. And those who formed it, finding in St. Paul their 
most effectual and most uncompromising opponent, set themselves to undermine his 
influence in every possible way. They calumniated his moral character, personal. and 
ministerial, and they decried his apostolical authority. 

This latter point is that with which we are now principally concerned. 

By this juncture of circumstances, St. Paul was compelled, acting no doubt under the 
direction of his Master, to openly proclaim, and in the strongest possible manner 
maiutain, his properly apostolical commission ; that is, to proclaim and to insist upon 
the fact that he held a commission, received independently of any human agency, from 
the ascended Lord, himself appearing to him in personal presence and conferring it 
upon him—a commission which put him upon a level with the reverenced band ef the 
twelve; while he had it also to affirm—and this was a point of even greater moment 
than the other, one to which that other owed, in fact, all its own importance—that the 
gospel which he was sent to preach was likewise, as well as his commission, received, not 
from men, but by direct: communication from heaven. 

But this is a subject the importance of which calls for a more specific discussion to 
be devoted to it, 


DISSERTATION IL 


Tue CIRCUMSTANCES WHICH AT THIS TIME LED St. PAUL DISTINCTLY AND PUBLIOLY 
TO ANNOUNCE TO THE CuuURCH HIS PRoPpERLY APOSTOLIC CoMMISSION. 


The religion of Christ essentially untrammelled by outward forms of manifestation. 
Among the most distinctively evangelical elements of the gospel may be ranked the 
two following, forming, in fact, its great preparation and qualification for becoming the 
universal religion of maukind :— 

1. That faith in Christ, apart from any definite ceremonial performances, unless so 
far as the two simple ordinances of baptism and the Lord’s Supper may be so regarded, 
constitutes the alone condition of justification and sonship with God. 

2. That the “ worship of God in spirit,” apart from any definite rigid form of out- 
ward ceremony or observance, is everywhere his true and acceptable service, however 
varying may be the outward form in which from time to time it is clothed. 

The narrowing of Christ’s religion by insistance upon certain forms. But the spirit 
of ceremonial formalism, which is the natural outcome of the unregenerated heart 
when it comes into contact with the subject of religion, proves itself in all ages unable 
to satisfy itself with principles so purely spiritual as these; their bare spirituality 
makes them intolerable. The “natural man” sets himself accordingly to qualify them 
to his taste by superadding, in fact substituting, the injunction upon the conscience of 
some species or other of fixed outward forms or ordinances, in attention to which his 
soul can take refuge from the haunting idea of the need of a spiritual religiousness for 
which it has no inclination, while he has, however, the comfort of knowing himself not 
neglectful of religion altogether. The forms or ordinances selected will soon come to be 
regarded, not as mere seemly external concomitants of worship or of the religious life— 
jo which view, if appropriate in their character and used with 8 prudent appreciation 


DISSERTATION μ, xlvii: 


of their true value, forms and ordinances, thongh of merely human devising, may be 
both necessary and edifying—but as essential, and as in themselves efficacious, for 
making the worship or the life acceptable or more acceptable to God. In consequence, 
in the eyes of those who embrace them, such fellow-Christians as go along with them 
in their observance are to be welcomed as indeed brethren ; while they who do not, 
however truly believers in Christ, and though even confessed to be believers in him, 
are nevertheless regarded as out of the paleof their brotherly recognition and sympatly. 
The Divine injunction, “What God hath cleansed call not thou unclean,” falls upon 
their ears unheeded. The Word of God must be made void to make room for the 
keeping of the commandments of men. 

The selection of the particular forms and ordinances to be insisted upon is evermore 
shiftiug and variable. Being as it is, the child of mere carnal self-will, “ will-worship ” 
(ἐθελοθρησκεία), as St. Paul brands it with being, it takes now and here one shape, then 
and there a different one. We gather out of the Epistles of the New Testament that, 
as early as in the apostolic age, it was continually changing its aspect. 

The narrowing of Christ’s religion by Judaizing forms. One branch of this corruption 
of the faith, the one which we are now more particularly concerned with, engendered by 
the habits of thought which were deeply ingrained in the minds of the Jewish people, 
assumed the Judaizing or Levitical type. 

In its earliest while δῷ the same time its most thorough-going manifestations, coeval, 
in fact, with the very first coming into being of the Gentile Church, it laid down the 
principle that circumcision and the keeping of the Law of Moses were essential con- 
ditions of salvation—essential even in the case of Gentile believers. No believer was te 
be recognized as a brother who did not order himself according to this rule. 

It is obvious how hurtful, not to say fatal, the operation of this dogma, if established 
in the Church, must have proved. It would have darkened the believer’s sense of his 
adoption; it would have set upon the neck of the Gentile Church a galling yoke of 
oitward ceremony ; it would have clogged or even arrested the progress of the gospel 
among mankind. Accordingly, Paul, in concert with Barnabas, offered it the most 
strenuous resistance ; and at Jerusalem itself, being backed by the weighty support of 
Cephas and of James, they succeeded in inflicting upon this extreme embodimcnt of 
ceremonial formalism the check of a public and authoritative rebuke. 

Hard for Jewish believers to unlearn their Jewish particularism, The tendency, 
however, which originated it was too congenial to the soil of Jewish sentiment for its 
roots and fibres not to live on underground, ever ready to sprout forth afresh. True, 
when the question was put plainly and point-blank to the Jewish believer’s Christian 
consciousness, it could not refuse to acknowledge it to be true that faith in Christ did 
avail of itself to deliver a man, whether Jew or Gentile, from all spiritual pollutedness, 
and to present him clean and unrebukable both before God and before man. But the 
leaven of Christ’s Word could not instantaneously permeate and transmute the inmost 
spirit of even his sincerest disciples through and through; the truth needed time, with 
apostles themselves it needed time, before it could modify into full conformity with 
itself habits of thinking and feeling which they had received from their forefathers, 
and had hitherto cherished as the precious heirloom of their race. And if there was 
inuch that even the best-instructed and more spiritually minded among them found it 
haré both to learn and to unlearn, what was to be expected from those Jewish eonverts—~ 
and ao doubt there were many such—whose conversion was only half sincere, or who had 
joined the brethren from some kind of superficial or half-worldly impulse, which left 
the inner core of their convictions and sensibilities untouched ? These might not dare 
to openly gainsay the teaching of the “apostles and elders,” but how should they iu 


slviil THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 


their very inmost heart believe and feel that their circumcision and all their careful 
observance of Mosaic ceremonies and rites—ceremonies and rites which were designed 
to separate them, as in fact they did markedly separate them, from other races—inferred, 
after all, in the new economy no real distinction, and that in Christ Jesus there was 
neither circumcision nor uncircumcision, neither Jew nor Greek? With the large 
balk of the Jewish brethren in Judea this posture of feeling cannot be assumed to have 
existed: Pharisees they had many of them been before their conversion, and Pharisees 
in heart they continued still. x 

Circumstances favouring the spread of the leaven of Judaizing. And wherever they 
went they would be, of course, ready to propagate in other Christian communities these 
noxious sentiments of theirs, and abundant opportunity would offer to them for doing 
this. The Jews in the then existing state of things were, as a people, especially 
migratory in their habits, and moreover many of the Jewish belicvers had first heard 
the gospel through their having come from a perhaps far distant home to Jerusalem 
on a brief occasional visit. ‘ 

We must also bear in mind that throughout the provinces of the Roman empire it 
was the synagogue of each locality that commonly furnished the first nucleus of 
believers; aud with respect to not a few of these first converts everywhere, similar obser- 
vations would apply to those above made with particular reference to professedly 
believing Jews in Palestine. 

Now, it is obvious that, in a congregation of Gentile converts but lately sunk in the 
idolatry and religious ignorance of heathenism, a Christian Jew, as having been trained 
from infancy in the worship of the one true God and in the knowledge of those Holy 
Scriptures out of which the gospel itself sprang, especially if he came from Jerusalem 
the first cradle of the faith, where he had been in contact with those who had known 
the Lord Jesus himself upcn earth, would be naturally felt entitled to especial considera- 
tion when speaking of matters relating to Judaism and Christianity. 

We cannot wonder, thercfore, at finding that, fur and wide among the ancient Churches 
of the Gentiles, Judaizing corruptions of the gospel were early broached, and but too 
readily found acceptance. ‘lhe degrce in which the statement of evangelical truth 
was vitiated, as also the degree in which the actual practice of Judaical observances 
was introduced, would vary in different localities ; but the tendency was showing itself 
in all directions, and, wherever it appeared, it would be the signal for division and strife. 

The widespread and eager controversy ensuing thereupon. And the strife was just at 
this time at its fiercest. Judaizing corruptions of Christian faith and doctrine were on 
all sides confronting and being confronted by those who insisted upon the truth as it 
is in Jesus. These latter maintained that in ne case. whether of Gentile or of Jew, had 
the observance of Levitical ordinances anything whatever to do with the sinner’s justifi- 
cation before God ; and further—as a corollary of this general truth which was just now 
of essential importance—that not only was the Gentile believer free from the obligation 
of conforming in any respect to the ceremonial laws of the Jews in order to his justifi- 
cation before God, but that also this his complete justification before God through faith 
in Christ, apart from any such ceremonial observance, claimed to be openly and prac- 
tically recognized by Jewish believers, by the latter frankly and cordially fraternizing 
with the Gentile as standing, through their mutual union in Christ, on ἃ perfectly 
equal footing with themselves of acceptableness and brotherhood. 

- St. Paul the foremost asserter of Gentile freedom and equality. And the chief cham- 
pion of all, of evangelical orthodoxy, was St. Paul He it-was that had persistently grap. 
pled with the evil when first showing its front at Antioch and then at Jerusalem; not 
single-handed, as we know, yet we cannot doubt the main inspiring genius of the truth’s 


DISSERTATION II. xlix 


advocacy; and he had drawn forth from the Christian consciousness of the twelve apostles 
and of James and of the elders and general body of the Jerusalemite believers, that letter 
of theirs registered in the Acts of the Apostles, which has been not inaptly styled the 
Magna Charta of the Gentile Church’s freedom. Not long after again, as he himself 
has informed us, he had been called to grapple with the mischief, and secure the fruit of 
the preceding victory, at the second great capital of the then Christendom, the yrincipal 
home and head-quarters of Gentile disciples. A Barnabas and even a Peter might some- 
what hesitate and falter, and did; but Paul, never. What he was at Jerusalem and 
then again at Antioch, that, as we have good reason to believe, in every such emergency 
he proved himself still to be—the ever-watchful, keenly discerning, intrepid, uncom- 
promising guardian of the freedom of Christ’s people. He himself knew, and the 
Gentile Churches knew, and the Judaizing troublers of those Churches knew, that “he 
was set for the defence of the gospel.” Those loved and rejoiced in their protector ; 
these feared their invincible adversary, and hated him. 

Animosity of the Jews against St. Paul. For this unceasing vigilant antagonism 
which he offered to the Judaizing influences at work in the Church, replete as it was 
with blessing to believers in Christ in all ages whose freedom from ceremonial bondage 
he was the Lord’s “chosen vessel” to convey to them, redounded in untold suffering 
upon himself. He was already before the peculiar abhorrence of the Jews who did not 
believe because, through the transforming grace of Gud, from being the bitter blasphemer 
and persecutor of Christ, he had suddenly stood forth before the world as his devoted 
and ardent minister. No other apostle, no other preacher of the faith, was regarded by 
his fellow-Jews with any such feelings of rancorous animosity as already on this account 
fastened on the renegade Saul. 

_ And now the Israelite mind found with St. Paul another cause of offence. The 

position which, as a teacher of his Church, Christ had set him to take up in reference to 
the ceremonial law, was one which it was very easy to misconstrue, and with much 
colour of plausibility to misrepresent. It was in this way that the first martyr 
Stephen had perished, stoned to death as one who “ blasphemed Moses and God,” by 
the unbelieving Jews, and to all sppearance misunderstood and forsaken by his Christian 
brethren themselves (Acts viii. 2). Very similar to Stephen’s experience was now the 
experience of Paul. The description of his doctrine, taking no doubt its origin in his 
vigorous antagonism to the Judaizers, which was current among the Jews, not only 
among those who did not believe in Christ, but also among the Christian Jews them- 
selves, was that he set himself to persuade the Jews of the dispersion to “ apostatize 
f-om Moses,” and to abandon the practice both of circumcision and the Levitical 
customs in general (Acts xxi. 21). Race prejudice, but especially the prejudice of 
religious partisanship, is wont to be alike unscrupulous and cruel; and the apostle 
became the object of unceasing malignant obloquy «nd detraction. 

Jewish and Judaizing brethren ready to gainsay St. Paul’s apostleship, Not only 
was his personal character assailed with accusations of insincerity, two-facedness, and 
wilfui perversion of the truth from interested motives—accusations which, as is shown by 
his frequent references to them in his letters, affected his mind with the keenest pain— 
but in particular also the authenticity of his call to teach was impugned. Why should 
he be listened to? His doctrine was palpably not the doctrine of James nor the doctrine 
of Cephas, They did not set themselves to cry down circumcision and the observance 
of the customs ashe did! What the really wished you to believe it might be hard 
perhaps to exactly determine; he said one thing at one time and to one set of hearers, 
and something quite different at another time and with other surroundings; for he 
had “a yea and a nay ” ever on the tip of his tongue, ready to use whichever of the 

G@ALATIANS, e 


ῃ THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


two his occasions at the moment made the more convenient. But whatever his doc- 
trine really was, it came with no authority. Such apostleship as he had at all came at 
last from Jerusalem, and Jerusalem disowned him! Such was the tenor of the wildest 
form of opponency which confronted him. 

St. Paul obliged to assert openly his highest apostolic authority. It had become neces- 
sary, therefore, now that he should openly proclaim that supreme form of apostleship with 
which Christ had invested him, This had not been considered so essential at an earlier 
stage of his ministry. Four or five years ago, for example, when, in company with Silas, 
he first visited Greece, at which time he wrote his two letters to the Thessalonians, ne 
had been content to still rank as one who shared his apostolical character with a Silas or 
even a Timotheus. But the force and malignity of Judaistic oppugnancy had now risen 
to such a pitch as to make it necessary, in the interes‘s of truth and for the protection of 
the Gentile Churches, that he should distinctly and emphatically declare to the world, 
not only the message which Christ had entrusted him with, but also his peculiar com- 
mission for the delivery of that message. And this he was doing, not out of his own 
mind or in pursuance of a judgment which he had himself formed as to what he onght 
to do, but under the sanction and no doubt immediate direction of Christ ; for he held it 
in his power, if need arose and according as occasion required, to sustain his assertion 
that he was endued with this highest form of apostleship by the signal manifestation 
of “the signs of an apostle,” both in the conferring upon obedient disciples of pheno. 
menally miraculous gifts, and also in the infliction on obstinate gainsayers of the truth 
of supernatural chastisement. 

The statements now made, the reader, no doubt, will at once recognize as fully borne 
out by the contents of the contemporaneous Epistles to the Corinthians, particularly 
those of the Second, which is, in fact, mainly devoted to conflicts called forth by the 
Judaizing movement, though not so much occupied as the Epistle to the Galatians by 
the discussion of the Judaistic controversy itself. 

Such was the position of affairs which drew forth from St. Paul the full public 
announcement which he here makes of his properly apostolic office. It is probably the 
very first that he made in an epistolary writing, and it serves to connect the Epistle to 
the Galatians in point of subject very closely with the two Epistles to the Corinthians. 
In fact, we may in this respect regard this Epistle as in a measure introductory to those 
other two, as well as to that which was addressed to the Romans, which was no doubt 
the latest portion of this great epistolary quaternion. 

In Galatia St. Paul’s doctrine impugned rather than hts apostleship. We have, 
however, to observe that we do not owe the definite and emphatic announcement which 
St. Paul here makes of his proper apostolate, especially or principally to assaults made 
in Galatia directly upon his position as an apostle. The fact that such assaults were 
already beginning to be made there is indeed not improbable in itself, and appears to be 
not obscurely indicated by the tone of the very first sentence. But the absence of 
further distinct reference in the Epistle to this particular form of opponency ἰδ οὗ itself 
a proof that it is not this which the apostle now feels to be his direct and chief concern. 
What in the Churches of Galatia furnished the chief occasion for this apologetie state- 
ment was rather their incipient abandonment of the gospel which he had preached 
among them. That which he felt to be here the most important fact was that the 
message was impugned which he had brought them from Christ himself, not that his 
authorization as an apostle to bring it was, viewed by itself, assailed. His present chief 
object, to which his assertion of his apostleshiz is only subsidiary, is to make it 
distinctly felt that the message was indeed Christ’s very own, and that therefore, im 
revolting against that, they were revolting from Christ, 


THE EPISTLE OF 


PAUL TO THE GALATIANS. 


—~e—— 


EXPOSITION. 


, 


CILAPTER L 


Vers. 1—5.—The introductory greeting. 
The style of this greeting, compared with 
those found in St. Paul’s other Epistles, 
gives indications of his having addressed 
himself to. the composition of the lettor 
under strong perturbation of feeling. This 
transpires in the abruptness with which, at 
the very outset, he at once sweeps asi le, as 
it were, out of his path, a slur cast upon his 
apostolic commission, in protesting that he 
was “apostle, not from man nor through ἃ 
man.” It appears again in that impetuous 
negligence of exact precision of language, 
with which the mention of “God the Father” 
is conjoined with that of “Jesus Christ” 
under the one preposition “through,” as the 
medium through which his apostleship had 
been conferred upon him. We cannot help 
receiving the impression that the apostle 
had only just before received that intelligence 
from Galatia which called forth from him 
the letter, and that he set himself to its 


composition while the strong emotions which 


the tidings had produced were still fresh in 
his mind. That these emotions were those 
of indignant grief and displeasure is like- 
wise evident. He will not, indeed, withhold 
the salutation which in all Christian and 
ministerial courtesy was due from him in 
addressing what, notwithstanding all, were 
still Churches of Christ. But all such 
expressions of affectionate fecling he does 
withhold, and all such sy: pathetic reference 
to matters and individuals of. personal in- 
terest, as in almost every other Epistle he 
is seen indulging himself in, and which are 
not even then found wanting, when, as in 
the case of the Corinthians, te has ovession 
to administer much and strong rebuke. No 
such sympathetic reference, we observe, is 
found here. As soon as he bas penned the 
salutation, itsclf singularly cold in respect 
@ALATIANS, 


to those he fs addressing, he at once pro- 
ceeds, in ver. 6, to assail his readers with 
words of indignant reproach. 

Ver. 1.—Paul, an apostle (Παῦλος ἀπό- 
ervdos); Paul, apostle. The designation of 
“apostle,” as here appropriated by St. Paul 
in explanation of his right to authoritatively 
address those he was writing to, points toa 
function with which he was permanently 
invested, and which placed him in a relation 
to these Galatian Churches which no other 
apostle ever occupied. Some years later, 
indeed, when St. Peter had occasion to 
address these same Churches, together with 
others in neighbouring countries, he like- 
wise felt himself authorized to do it on the 
score of his apostolical eharacter (“ Peter, an 
apostle ‘of Jesus Clirist,” 1 Pet. i. 1); but 
there is nothing to show that St. Peter had 
any personal relations with them at present. 
Under these circumstances, it is perhaps 
best in translation to prefix no article at all 
before ‘‘apostle.” This designation of him- 
self 88 “apostle” St. Paul subjoined to his 
name in almost all of his Epistles subsequent 
to the two addressed to the Thessalonians. 
The only exceptions are those to the Philip 
pians and to Philemon, in writing to whom 
there was less occasion for introducing it. 
He had now, in the third of his three great 
journeys recorded in the Acts, assumed 
openly in the Church the pos‘tion of an 
apostle in the highest sense. In several of 
these Epistles (1 Cor. i. 1; 2 Cor. i.1; Eph. i. 
1; Col. i. 1; 2 Tim. i. 1), to the designation 
of apostle, 8t. Paul adds the words, “ through 
(διὰ) the will of God;” ἐ.6. by means of an 
express volition of God explicitly revealed. 
In what way God had revealed this to be 
his will is clearly intimated in this letter to 
the Galatians, in which the words,“ through 
Jesus Christ, and God the Father, who rai--d 
him from the dead,” which take the place 
of the formula, “ through the will of Gud,” 


Se ee 


2 THE EPISTLE TO 


THE GALATIANS. Fou. 1. 1—24 


found elsewhere, indicate that it was through 
Jesus Christ raised from the dead that this 

articular volition of God was declared and 

rought to effect. The formula referred to, 
“through the will of God,” was apparently 
introduced with the view of confronting 
those who were disposed to question hia 
right to claim this supreme form of apostle- 
ship, with the segis of Divine authorization: 
they had God to reckon with. The like is the 
purport of the substituted words in 1 Tim.i.1, 
“ According to the commandment of God our 
Saviour, and Christ Jesus our Hope.” Not 
of men, neither by man (οὐκ ἀπ᾽ ἀνθρώπων, οὐδὲ 
δ ἀνθρώπου); not from men, neither through 
aman. The preposition “from” (ἀπὸ) 
points to the primary fountain of the dele- 
gation referred to; “through” (διὰ) to the 
medium through which it was conveyed. 
The necessity for this twofold negation 
arose from the fact that the word “apostle,” 
as I have had occasion fully to set forth 
elsewhere, was frequently among Christians 
applied to messengers deputed by Churches, 
or, probably, even by some important repre- 
sentative officer in the Church, whetber on 
a mission for the propagation of the gospel 
or for the discharge at some distant place 
of matters of business connected with the 
Christian cause. St. Paul had himeelf 
frequently served in this lower form of 
apostleship, both as commissioned by the 
Church to carry abroad the message of the 
gospel, and also as deputed to go to and fro 
between Churches on errands of charity or 
for the settlement of controversies. In 
either case he as well as others ‘acting in 
the like capacity, would very naturally and 
properly be spoken of as an “apostle” by 
others, as we actually find him to have been; 
as also he would appear to have been ready on 
this same account so to designate himself.* 
That he was an “apostle” in this sense 
none probably would have been minded to 
dispute. Why should they? His having, 
even repeatedly, held this kind of subordi- 
nate commission did not of itself give him 
8 greater importance than attached to many 
others who had held the same. Neither did 
it invest his statements of religious truth 
with a higher sanction than theirs. This 
last was the point which, in St. Paul’s 
own estimation, gave the question of the 
real nature of his apostleship its whole 
significance. Was he a commissioned envoy 


1 For the proof of these statements, the 
reader is referred to the following passages: 
—Phil. ii. 25; 2 Oor. viii. 23; Rom. xvi. 7; 
2 Cor. xi. 5, 13; xii. 11; Rev. ii. 2; Acta 
xiv. 4, 14; 1 Thess. ii. 7; and to the dis- 
cussion of the import and bearing of them 
severally, in the essay on “ Apostles” found 
in the Introduction, 


of men, deputed to convey to others a 
message of theirs? or was he an envoy 
commissioned immediately by Christ to 
convey to the world « message which like- 
wise was received immediately from Christ? 
Those who disputed his statements of reli- 
gious doctrine might admit that he had 
been deputed to preach the gospel by 
Christian Oburches or by eminently repre- 
sentative leaders of the Church, while they 
nevertheless asserted that he had misre- 
presented, or perhaps misapprehended, the 
message entrusted to him. At all events, 
they would be at liberty to affirm that the 
statements he made in delivering his mes- 
sage were subject to an appeal on the part 
of his hearers to the human authorities who 
had delegated him. If he owed alike his 
commission and his message to (say) the 
Church of Antioch, or to the Church at 
Jerusalem, or to the twelve, or to James the 
Lord’s brother, or to other leaders whomso- 
ever of the venerable mother Church, then it 
followed that he was to be held amenable to 
their overruling judgment in the discharge 
of this apostleship of his. What he taught 
had no force if this higher court of appeal 
withheld its sanction. Now, this touched 
no mere problematical contingency, but was~ 
a practical issue which, just at this time, 
was one of even vital importance. It had 
an intimate connection with the fierce 
antagonism of contending parties in the 
Church, then waged over the dying body of 
the Levitical Law. St. Paul’s mission as an 
apostle is most reasonably considered to 
date from the time when, as he stated in his 
defence before King Agrippa (Acts xxvi. 16, 
17), the Lord Jesus said to him, “To this 
end have I appeared unto thee, to appoint - 
thee a minister and a witness [ὑπηρέτην καὶ 
μάρτυρα : comp. αὐτόπται καὶ ὑπηρέται, Luke 
1, 2 and Acts i. 2, 8, 8, 22] both of the 
things wherein thou hast seen me, and of 
the things wherein I will appear unto thee, 
delivering thee from the people [λαοῦ, sec. 
Israel], and from the Gentiles, unto whom I 
myself send thee [εἰς obs ἐγὼ ἀποστέλλω σε: 
thus L. T. Tr. Rev.; the Textus Receptus 
reads eis οὖς viv σε ἀποστέλλω]᾽" (comp. 
Acts xxii.14, 15; 1 Cor.ix.1). But though 
his appointment was in reality coeval with his 
conversion, it was only in course of time and 
by slow degrees that his properly apostolic 
function became signalized to the conscious- 
ness of the Church. Nevertheless, there is 
no reason for doubting that to his own con- 
sciousness his vocation as apostle was clearly 
manifested from the very first. The prompt 
and independent manner in which he at 
once set himself to pr@.ch the gospel, which 
itself, he [6118 the Galatians in this chapter, 
he had received immediately from heaven, 
betokens his having this consciousness, 


# 


on, 1. 1—24.] THE EFISTLE TO 


THE GALATIANS. 3 


The time and the manner in which the fact 
was to become manifest to others he would 
seem, in a spirit of compliant obedience, to 
_have left to the ordering of his Master. 
But by Jesus Christ, and God the Father, 
who raised him from the dead (ἀλλὰ διὰ 
Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ, καὶ Θεοῦ πατρὸς τοῦ ἐγείραντος 
αὐτὸν ἐκ νεκρῶν); but through Jesus Christ, 
and God the Father, who raised him from 
the dead. The conjunction “ neither” (οὐδὲ), 
which comes before δ᾽ ἀνθρώπου, marks the 
clause it introduces as containing a distinctly 
different negation from the preceding, and 
shows that the preposition “through” is 
used in contradistinction to the “from” 
(ἀπὸ) of the foregoing clause in its proper 
sense of denoting the instrument or mcdium 
through which an act is done. St. Paul 
affirms that there was no human instrumen- 
tality or intermediation whatever at work in 
the act of delegation which constituted him 
an apostle. This affirmation places him in 
this respect precisely on a level with the 
twelve; perhaps in making it he has an eye 
to this. The notion has been frequently 
broached that the apostleship which St. 
Paul made claim to was conveyed to him at 
Antioch through the- brethren who there, 
under the direction of the Holy Spirit, 
formally set him apart, together with Barna- 
bas, for the missionary enterprise which they 
forthwith entered upon (Acts xiii. 1—3). 
Bnt words could scarcely have been selected 
which should more decisively negative any 
such notion than those do which St. Paul 
here makes use of. One form of apostleship 
was no doubt then conferred upon Barnabas 
and Paul; but it was not the apostleship of 
which he is now thinking (see essay on 
“ Apostles,” pp. xxxi. xxxii.). In defining 
the precise import and bearing of the expres- 
sion, δ’ ἀνθρώπου, “through a man,” we may 
compare it with its use in 1 Cor. xv. 21, 
“Since δι᾽ ἀνθρώπου came death, δι᾽ ἀνθρώπου 
came also the resurrection of the dead;” 
where in the second clause the word “man,” 
employed to recite the Lord Jesus, contem- 
plates that aspect of his twofold being which 
places him as “ the second Man ” (1 Cor. xv. 
47) in correlation to Adam, “ the first Man.” 
Similarly, the parallel with Adam again in 
Rom. v. 12, 15 leads the apostle to adopt 
the expression, “the one Man Jesus Christ” 
(cf. also ibid. 19). In 1 Tim. ii. 5, “ There 
is one God, one Mediator also between God 
and men, himself Man (or, ‘a man’], Christ 
Jesus,” our Lord’s manhood, in accordance 
with the requirement of the context, is put 
forward asa bond of connection linking 
him with every human creature alike. 
These passages present Christ in the 
character simply of a human being. But 
in the passage before us the apostle at first 
sight appears to imply that, because he waa 


an apostle through the agency of Jesus 
Christ, he was not an apostle through the 
agency of a human being; thus negativing, 
apparently, the manhood of Christ, at least 
as viewed in his present glorified condition. 
The inference, however, is plainly contra- 
dicted by both 1 Cor. xv. 21 and 1 Tim. ii. 
5; for the former passage points in “the 
second Man” to the “Lord from heaven,” 
while the other refers to him as permanent 
“Mediator between God and men,” both, 
therefore, speaking of Jesus in his present 
glorified condition. To obviate this diffi- 
culty some have proposed to take the “but ” 
(ἀλλά), not as adversative, but as exceptive. 
But there is no justification for this—not 
even Mark ix. 8 (see Winer’s ‘Gram. N. T.,’ 
53, 10, 1 b). A less precarious solution is 
arrived at by gathering out of the context 
the precise shade of meaning in which the 
word “man” is here used. Christ is indeed 
“Man,” and his true manhood is the sense 
required in the two passages above cited; 
but he is also more than man;- and it ia 
those qualities of his being and of his state 
of existence which distinguish him from 
mere men, which the context shows to be 
now present to the apostle’s mind. For the 
phrase, * through a man,” is not contrasted 
by the words, “through Jesus Christ,” alone, 
but by the whole clause, ‘through Jesus 
Christ, and God the Father who raised him 
from the dead.” That is to say, in penning 
the former phrase, the apostle indicates by 
the word “man” one invested with the 
ordinary qualities of an earthly human 
condition; whereas the “Jesus Christ” 
through whom Heaven sent forth Saul as an 
apostle to the Gentiles was Jesus Christ 
blended with, inconceivably near to, God 
the Father, one with him; his oneness 
with him not veiled, as it was when he 
was upon earth, though really subsisting 
even then (John x. 30), but to all the 
universe manifested—manifested visibly to 
us upon earth by the resurrection of his 
body; in the spiritual, as yet now to us 
‘invisible world, by that sitting down on the 
right hand of God which was the implied 
sequel and climax of his resurrection. Tho 
strong sense which the apostle has of the 
unspeakably intimate conjunction subsisting, 
“since his resurrection, between Jesus Christ 
viewed in his whole incarnate being and 
God the Father, explains how it comes to 
pass that the two august Names are com- 
bined together under one single preposition, 
“through Jesus Christ, and God tue Father.” 
We shall have to notice the same phenome- 
non in ver. 3 in the apostle’s formula of 
greeting prayer, “Grace to you and pcace 
from God the Father and the Lord Jesus 
Christ ;” on which see the note. We have 


the same comantion of Obrist’s personality 


4 THE EPISTLE TO 


THE GALATIANS, fon, 1 124. 


consequent upon his resurrection in the 
apostle’s words relative to his apostolic 
appointment in Rom. i. 4, 5; where the 
Jesus Christ through whom “he had 
received grace and apostleship,” in contrast 
with his merely human condition as “of 
the seed of David according to the flesh,” 
is described as “him who was declared to be 
the Son of God with power, according to the 
spirit of holiness by the resurrection of the 
dead.” The clause, “who raised him from 
the dead,” has a twofold bearing upon the 
pointin hand. 1. It supplies an answer to the 
objection which may be believed to have 
been made to Paul’s claim to be regarded as 
an apostle sent forth by Jesus Christ, 
by those who said, “ You have never scen 
Christ or beén taught by him, like those 
whom he himself named apostles.” The 
answer is, “You might object so if Jesus 
were no more than a dead man; but he is 
not that: he is a living Man raised from the 
dead by the Father; and as such I have 
myself seen him (cf. 1 Cor. ix. 1); aud he 
it was that in his own person, and through 
no intervention of human agency, gave me 
both the commission to preach and the 
gospel which I was to preach” (see below, 
vers. 11,12). 2. It connects the action of God 
the Father with that of Jesus Christ in 
appointing Paul to be an apostle; for the 
things which Christ did when raised from 
the dead and glorified with himself (John 
xvii. 5) by the Father must obviously have 
been done from, with, and in God the 
Father. It would unduly narrow the 
pragmatism of the clause if we limited it to 
either of the two purposes above indicated ; 
both were probably in the mind of St. Paul 
in adding it. The immediate context gives 
no warrant for our supposing, as many have 
done, that the apostle has just here other 
truths in view as involved in the fact of our 
Lord’s resurrection; such eg. as he has 
himself indicated in Rom. iv. 24, 25; vi.; 
Col. iii. 1. However cogent and closely rele- 
vant some of these inferences might have 
been with respect to the subjects treated of 
in this Epistle, the Epistle itself, as a matter 
of fact, makes no other reference whatever 
to that great event, whether directly or 
indirectly. Should δι᾽ ἀνθρώπου be rendered 
“through man,” the noun understood gene- 
rically, a8 eg. Ps. lvi. 1 (Septuagint), or 
“through a man,” pointing to one individual 
being? It is not very material; but perhaps 
the second rendering is recommended by the 
consideration that, if the apostle had meant 
still to write generically, he would have 
repeated the plural noun already employed. 
Indeed, it may be thought a preferable 
rendering in the other passuges above cited. 
The transition from the plural noun to the 
singular, as is noted by Bishop Lightfoot and 


others, “suggested itself in anticipation of 
the clause, ‘through Jesus Christ,’ which 
was to follow.” In the expression, “ God 
the Father,” the addition of the words, “the 
Father,” was not necessary for the indication 
of the Person meant, any more than in 1 Pet. 
1, 21, “Believers in God which raised him 
from the dead,” or in numberless other 
passages where the term “God” regularly 
designates the First Person in the blessed 
Trinity. It would be an incomplete para- 
phrase to explain it either as “God the 
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,” or as 
“ God our Father.” It is rather, “God the 
primary Author and supreme Orderer of 
all things,” or, as in the Creed, “God the 
Father Almighty.” It is best illustrated 
by the apostle’s words in 1 Cor. viii. 6, “To 
us there is one God, the Father, of whom 
[.6. out of whom, ἐξ οὗ} are all things, and 
we unto him;” and in Rom. xi. 36, “ Of him, 
and through him, and unto him, are all 
things.” The apostle adds the term in order 
to make the designation of the supreme 
God, who is the Source of his apostleship, 
the more august and impressive. 

Ver. 2.—And all the brethren which are 
with me (καὶ of σὺν ἐμοὶ πάντες ἀδελφοί); 
and the brethren which are with me, one and 
all. The ordinary unaccentuated colloca- 
tion of πάντες would be, πάντες οἱ σὺν ἐμοὶ 
ἀδελφοί. Its position here, where, perhaps, 
it was thrust in by a kind of after-thought, 
marks it as emphatic; there is not one of 
those about him who does not feel the like 
grief and indignation as himself in reference 
to the news just now received. We havea 
similar collocation in Rom. xvi. 15. Πάντες 
would be marked as emphatic also if placed 
last, as in 1 Cor. vii. 17 ; xiii. 2; xv. 7; Titus 
iii. 15. Our attention is arrested by the ab- 
sence of any name. A number of persons - 
are named by St. Luke in the Acts (xviii. 
18—xx. 5), and by the apostle himself in 
his Epistles to the Corinthians and to the 
Romans, as about his person at different times 
during the latter part of his third journey ; 
and it does not seem very likely that not one 
was now with him of those who had accom- 
panied him, cither in the first or in the 
second of his two visits in Galatia. ‘The 
most probable way of explaining the entire 
suppression of names is by reference to the 
present mood of the writer; he is too in- 
dignant at the behaviour of the Galatian 
Churchmen to weave into his greeting any 
such thread of mutual personal interest. It 
is enough to intimate that all about him felt 
as he did. Unto the Churches of Galatia 
(ταῖς ἐκκλησίαις τῆς Γαλατίας). The dry cold- 
ness of tone with which this is written will 
be best understood Ly the reader upon his 
comparing the apostle’s manner in his other 
letters, in all of which he ia found adding 


δῇ. 1, 1243 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 8 


some words marking the high dignity which 
attached to the communities he is address- 
ing. He is too much displeased to do this 
now. The plurality of the Galatian Churches, 
each of them apparently forming a distinct 
organization, is expressed again in 1 Cor. 
xvi. 1, “As I gave order to the Churches of 
Galatia;” and agrees very well with what 
we read in Acts xviii. 23, “ Went through 
the region of Galatia and Phrygia in order 
(καθεξῇ 5), stablishing all the disciples.” The 
leaven of Judaizing, whether imported by 
visitants from other regions or originating 
within these Churches themselves, appears 
to have been working very extensively among 
these communities, and not in one or two of 
them only. If the latter had been the case, 
the apostle would not have involved the col- 
lective Churches in the like censure, but, as 
in the case of Colosse, compared with the 
“ Ephesians,” have singled out for warning 
those actually peccant. This fact, of the 
general diffusion among them of one parti- 
cular taint, warrants the belief that certain 
persons had been at the pains of going about 
among these Churches to propagate it. Who 
these persons were, or where they came from, 
there is nothing to show. It has, indeed, 
been assumed by many that, like those dis- 
turbers of the Antiochian Church men- 
tioned in Acts xv. 1 and ch. ii. 12, they had 
come from Judea, or rather Jerusalem. But 
the Epistle gives no hint of this in respect to 
the Galatian Churches. What the apostle 
writes in ch. vi. 12, 18 points rather to the 
surmise that this particular distraction was 
caused by some Churchmen of their own, who 
had given themselves to this heretical prose- 
lytizing in order to truckle to non-Christian 
Jews living in their neighbourhood. Oom- 
pare the apostle’s foreboding respecting the 
future of the Ephesian Church, in Acts xx. 
30. (See note on ch. vi. 12, 13.) 

Ver. 3.—Grace be to you and peace (χάρις 
ὑμῖν καὶ εἰρήνη); grace to you and peace. 
Here, as often, we have combined the form 
of salutation prevalent among Greeks, χαίρειν 
(found in its unaltered form in Jas.i.1, “wish- 
ing joy”), Christianized into χάρις, grace, 
which denotes the outpouring of Divine be- 
nignity in all such spiritual blessings as 
sinful creatures need ; and the Hebrew greet- 
ing, shalém, which in its transformation into 
εἰρήνη may be supposed to have dropped in 
its Christianized signification some of its 
originally comprehensive meaning, which 
comprised all “health and wealth” as well 
as “peace,” and to have generally expressed 
the more limited idea of that calm sense of re- 
evnciliation and that perfect security against 
evil which constitute the peculiar happinesa 
of a soul which believes in Christ. It is 
nevertheless eonceivable that εἰρήνη, 88 
used in Hellevistic Greek, mav at times have 


widened the sense proper to it in ordinary 
Greek into the more comprehensive import 
of the shalém, which it was regularly em- 
ployed to represent. From God the Father, 
and from our Lord Jesus Christ (ἀπὸ Θεοῦ 
πατρός, καὶ Κυρίου ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ). These 
words regularly form a part in the apostle’s 
formula of greeting. With slight variations 
they are found in all his Epistles, except, 
perhaps, the First to the Thessalonians, where, 
though read in the Textus Receptus, they 
are omitted by recent editors. “Our’’ is 
added to “Father” in at least seven of St. 
Paul’s Epistles (Romans, 1 and 2 Corinthians, 
Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians, Phile- 
mon). This warrants the belief that, when 
asin 1 Timothy, Titus, and here, he wrote 
“God the Father,” he most probably did 
80 with reference to God’s fatherly relation 
to the members of Christ’s Church. Tre- 
gelles and the margin of the revised Greek 
text, in fact, read ἡμῶν after πατρὸς here, 
omitting it after Κυρίου. Uniformly in this 
formula of greeting we find only one preposi- 
tion, “from” (ἀπό), before the two names, 
“God ” and “ Jesus Christ ;” asin the first 
verse in this Epistle there is only one pre- 
position, “ through,” before “ Jesus Christ ” 
and “God.” The apostle, looking upwards, 
discerns, as St. Stephen did, in the ineffable 
glory, the supreme God in whom he recog- 
nizes “our Father,” and with him Jesus 
Christ, ‘‘our Lord;” that is, our Master, 
Head, Mediator, “through whom are all 
things, and we through him.” Grace and 
peace coming down from heaven, must come 
from God our Father and Jesus Christ our 
Lord. From the very nature of the case it 
is obvious that the blessings referred to come 
to us through Christ, though also “‘ from” 
him; as also that St. Paul’s delegation as 
apostle, spoken of in the first verse, origi- 
nated from a volition and appointment of 
God the Father, as well as was brought 
about “ through” the ordering of his provi- 
dence. But in each case the preposition 
used by the apostle preserves its proper 
force, uot to be confused by our thrusting 
into it another notion not just then in the 
writer’s view. 

Ver. 4.—Who gave himself (τοῦ δόντος 
ἑαυτόν). This is the strongest imaginable 
description of what Christ did to redeem us. 
The phrase occurs in.1 Macc. vi. 44, with 
reference to the Eleazar who rushed upon 
certain death to kill the elephant which was 
carrying the king, Antiochus: “He gave him- 
self (ἔδωκεν ἑαυτὸν) to save his people.” It 
is applied to Christ also in Titus ii. 14, “ Who 
gave himself for us;” and 1 Tim. ii. 6, 
“Who gave himself a ransom for all.” In the 
next chapter, ver. 20, the apostle writes, “Who 
loved me, and gave himself up (παραδόντος 
ἑαυτὸν) for me.” Similarly, St. Paul writes 


iste. ge 


6 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 


(on. τ, 1—24, 


in Rom. viii. 32, “He that spared not [fe 
‘kept not back’) his own Son, but gave him 
up (παρέδωκεν αὐτὸν) for us all.” The addi- 
tion, in Matt. xxvi. 45, of the words, “into 
the hands of sinners,” and our Lord’s utter- 
ance in Luke xxii, 53, “ ‘This is your hour, 
and the power of darkness,” help to illus- 
trate the exceedingly pregnant expression 
now before us, For our sins (ὑπέρ τῶν 
ἁμαρτιῶν ἡμῶν). This is the reading of the 
Textus Receptus, retained by the Revisers. 
On the other hand, L. T. Tr., for ὑπέρ, substi- 
tute περί. These two prepositions ὑπὲρ and 
περὶ are, in this relation as well as in some 
others, used indifferently. If we follow the 
reading of Ree. L. ‘I’. Tr. Rev. (for very often 
the manuscripts oscillate between the two), 
we have ὑπὲρ in 1 Cor. xv. 3, “ Died for our 
sins;” Heb. vii. 27, “ ΤῸ offer up sacrifices, 
first for his own sins, and then for the sing 
of the people ;” Heb. ix. 7, “ Blood, which 
he offereth for himself, and for the iguorances 
of the people.” On the other hand, we find 
in the same authorities περὶ in Rom. viii. 3, 
“Sending his own Son in the likeness of 
sinful flesh and for sin;” Heb. v. 8, “ As for 
the people, so also for himself, to offer for 
sins” (where, however, the Receptus has ὑπὲρ 
in the last clause, “for sins”); Heb. x. 6, 
“Whole burnt offerings, and sacrifices for 
sin;” Heb.x 18, “No more offering for sin ;” 
1 John ii. 2, 10, “ Propitiation for our sins;” 1 
Pet. iii. 18, “Died (or, ‘suffered’] for (περὶ) 
sins, the righteous for(imép) the unrighteous.” 
The last passage (1 Pet. iii. 18) suggests the 
remark that ὑπὲρ is the more appropriate 
word before persons, and περὶ before “ sins.” 
We find, however, that, in the Septuagint, in 
the Pentateuch περὶ is used also before persons 
as it is in Heb. v.3; thus: Lev. v. 18, “‘ The 
priest shall make atonement for (περὶ) him 
concerning (περὶ) his ignorance;” in both 
cases rendering the Hebrew ’al. So Lev. iv. 
20, 26, 31, 35; Numb. viii. 12. On the other 
hand, in Exod. xxxii. 30 we have “I will go 
up unto the Lord, that I may make atone- 
ment for (περί, bad) your sin.” The truth 
seems to be that ὑπέρ, which is more properly 
“on behalf of,” often denotes“ for,” equivalent 
to “ on account of; as 6.0. Ps. xxxix. 11, Sep- 
tuagint, “rebukes for sin ;” Eph. v. 20, “ Giv- 
ing thanks always for all things;” Rom. xv. 
9,“Glorify God forhismercy.” And this sense 
passes into “concerning,” “with reference 
to;” as 2 Cor. i. 8, “I would not have you 
ignorant concerning our afiliction;” 2 Cor. 
viii. 23, “ Whether any inquire about Titus.” 
On the other hand, περί, which more properly 
denotes “concerning,” “ with reference to,” 
acti into the sense of “on account of;” as 

uke xix. 37, “ Praise God for all the mighty 
works ;” John x. 33, “ For a good work we 
stone thee not, but for blasphemy;” 1 Cor. 
i. 4, “I thank my God ... concerning you ;” 1 


Thess. i. 2, “ We give thanks to God for you 
all;” Rom. i. 8, “1 thank my God for [Re- 
ceptus, ὑπὲρ] you all.”- The use of περὶ in 
the verse before us, and in the similar pas- 
sages above cited, no doubt followed its use 
in the phrase περὶ auaprias,which in the LXX. 
so commonly describes the “ sin offering” of 
tle Levitical institute. This phrase some- 
times represents what in the Hebrew text is 
the simple noun (chattdth) “sin,” put for “sin 
offering ;” as e.g. Lev. vii. 37, “This is the 
law of the burnt offering, of the meat offering, 
and of the sin offering (chattdth),” etc. (οὗτος 
ὃ νόμος τῶν ὁλοκαυτωμάτων, καὶ θυσίας, καὶ 
περὶ ἁμαρτίας, ete.). Sometimes it represents 
the same Hebrew noun preceded by the pre- 
position ’al, for: “For the sin of such or 
such a one (περὶ τῆς ἁμαρτίας τοῦ δεῖνα): 
as e.g. Lev. v. 35, where the LXX. has, “ The 
priest shall make atonement for him tor the 
sin which he hath sinned (ἐξιλάσεται περὶ 
αὐτοῦ ὃ ἱερεὺς περὶ τῆς ἁμαρτίας ἣν ἥμαρτε)." 
The precise force of περὶ in this phrase was 
probably “on account of sin,” or “having 
reference to sin;” senses of περὶ which, as 
has been seen, are borne by ὑπὲρ as well. 
This view of the force of these two preposi- 
tions, as employed in this relation, seems to 
the present writer more satisfactory than 
that which refers it to the notion of protec- 
tion, “on behalf of” or “for the good of” 
some one; though it must unquestionably 
be allowed that this is a notion which they 
both of them frequently convey. To this 
latter notion, indeed, we must in all proba- 
bility refer the use of ὑπὲρ in ch. ii. 20, 
“Gave himself up for me,” as well as in 
1 Pet. iii. 18, “ for the unrighteous ;” Luke 
xxii. 19, 20, “Given for you,” “ Poured out 
for you,” and the like; and also that of περὶ 
in Matt. xxvi. 28, “Shed for many; ” John 
xvii. 9, “I pray for them ;” Col. iv. 3, “Pray- 
ing for us.” The result of this inquiry into 
the usus loquendi with reference to these 
prepositions appears to be this: in what 
manner the death of Christ affected our 
condition in those respects in which that con- 
dition was antecedently qualified by our 
sins, neither ὑπὲρ nor περὶ as prefixed to the 
noun “sins” enables us precisely to deter- 
mine, further than as it recalls for illustra- 
tion the “sin offering” of the Law. For the 
more complete development of the idea in- 
tended to be conveyed, we must look to other 
references made in Scripture to the subject, 
such as 6.6. 2 Cor. v. 21; ch. iii. 18; 1 Pet. 
i. 19, Thus much, however, we may confi- 
dently assume: both ὑπὲρ snd περὶ as 50 
applied do alike warrant us in concluding, 
not only that it was because of our sins that 
Christ behoved to die, but also that his death 
is efficacious for the complete removal of 
those evils which accrue to us from our sins. 
That he might deliver us from this present 


on. 1. 1—24.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 7 


evil world (ὅπως ἐξέληται ἡμᾶς ἐκ τοῦ αἰῶνος 
τοῦ ἐνεστῶτος πονηροῦ. Such is the reading 
of L. T. Tr. Rev.; while the Textus Re- 
ceptus has ὅπως ἐξέληται ἡμᾶς ἐκ τοῦ ἐνεστῶτος 
αἰῶνος πονηροῦ); that he might deliver us out 
of the present world, evil that tt is. The verb 
ἐξαιρέομαι, originally “ take out,” renders the 
Hebrew hitztzil in 1 Sam. iv. 8 and Jer. i. 8 in 
the sense of “deliver;” it points to “ the 
present state” as one of helpless misery or 
danger. Compare the use of the verb, Acts 
vii. 10, 34; xii. 11; it is equivalent to 
ῥύεσθαι, as found in Col. i. 13 and Lukei. 74. 
The participle “ present” or “ subsisting,” 
éveords, is found in explicit contrast with 
the participle “to come,” μέλλων, Rom. viii. 
38, “ Nor things present nor things to come ; ” 
and 1 Oor. iii. 22. We are, therefore, natur- 
ally led to suppose that the apostle means to 
contrast the “ world” here referred to with 
a“ world to come;” which latter is men- 
tioned in Heb. vi. 5, and seems synonymous 
with the ‘ world [literally, ‘inhabited ea: th’) 
to come,” οἰκουμένη μέλλουσα, of Heb. ii. 5. 
Compare our Lord’s words in Matt. xii. 32, 
“Neither in this world nor in that which is 
to come,” and his contrast of “this world” 
with “that world” in Luke xx. 34, 35. The 
Greek word here employed, aién, likv kosmos, 
is used with varying shades of meaning. 
The two nouns, used interchangeably in 1 
Cor. iii. 18, 19 arc, however, not altogether 
equivalent. The former originally denotes 
a mode of time; the latter, a node of space. 
In particular, aién is never used in the Greek 
Testament to denote “mankind,” as kosmos 
not unfrequently is by all its writers. In 
the Syriac Version, ’olmo represents both aién 
and kosmos in all their senses, with a slight 
variation in its form to represent aidén in 
Eph. ii. 2, “The course (atén) of this world 
(kosmos),” as if it were “ The worldliness of 
this world.” Probably the same word ’olmo, 
in the Chaldean-Hebrew language current 
amongst the Palestinian Jews, was the term 
employed by them in all those connections 
in which either aién or kosmos would have 
been used by them if speaking in Hellenistic 
Greek; for it is to the Hellenistic dialect of 
the Greek language that both words as so 
employed belong. We never find atén at all 
in any of St. John’s writings, except in the 
phrases, εἰς τὸν αἰῶνα or εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας, de- 
noting “for ever.’ In other significations, 
when other writers of the New Testament 
might have used aién, St. John always puts 
kosmos. The word aién, denoting a cycle of 
time, is used also to signify a material world, 
as Heb, i. 2; and, in particular, the state of 
things found existing in that cycle of time; 
and this as viewed in various aspects. In 
Luke xx. 34, 35 “thie aién” contrasts the 
present state, as one of mortality and succes- 
sive reproduction, with “that adn,” viewed 


aa one of immortality, in which processes 
of reproduction are found no more. But in 
Luke xvi. 8 “ the children of this aién” are 
those who live after the world-loving, sinful 
fashion which characterizes mankind in 
general in contrast with “the children of 
light,” who have been enlightened to recog- 
nize their relation to a spiritual world. In 
St. Paul, “the present αἰὼν" denotes the 
entire moral aud spiritual state of mankind 
viewed:in the aspect in which he contem- 
plated it—a state wrapped in spiritual 
“darkness,” pervaded by ungodliness and 
general immorality, and dominated by Satan; 
as Bengel puts it, “tota caconomia peccati 
sub potestate Satan” (ph. ii. 2; iv. 18; 
2 Cor. iv, 4); ἃ state from which Christians 
ought to study to get wholly weaned in all 
their moral and spiritual habits (Rom. xii. 2; 
Eph. iv. 22—24). In St. John, the phrases, 
“the world (kosmos),” or “this world” are 
frequently employed to express the same 
idca; as eg. John xii. 31; xvi. 11; 1 John 
ii. 15,16; v.19. Out of this “ power, em- 
pire, of darkness,” in which by nature apart 
from Christ’s grace all men are hopelessly 
euthralled ; out of the grasp, inextricable by 
any etforts of their own, with which Satan 
holds them,—the apostle recognizes Christ 
as alone able to “rescue” us; and even him 
only able to “rescue” us by virtue of his 
atouing sacrifice of himself. Thus, in an 
eminently just application of the verb, he is 
said to “redeem” (λυτροῦσθαι) them from 
all iniquity, which expression includes, not 
only the idea of his paying down a ransom 
for their emancipation, but also the thought 
that, by the power of his grace, he makes the 
ransom effectual for the actual moral and 
spiritual deliverance, one by one, of those 
who believe in him: “ He purifies them a 
people of his very own, devoted to good 


‘works ” (Titus ii. 14). The position in the 


Greek of the epithet “evil,” standing in a 
peculiar manner without the article after 
“this present world” (rod αἰῶνος τοῦ éve- 
στῶτος πονηροῦ), is discussed both by Bishop 
Ellicott and by Bishop Lightfoot in their 
respective Commentaries on the Epistle ; the 
latter of whom takes it as equivalent to 
“with all its evils.” It seems to the present 
writer that the syntax of the clause groups 
it with Eph. ii. 11, “That which is called 
circumcision, in the flesh, made [or, ‘ done ’} 
with hands (τῆς λεγομένης περιτομῆς ἐν σαρκὶ" 
χειροποιητοῦ),᾽ where ἐν σαρκὶ χειροποιη- 
τοῦ has no article, because it is a logical ad- 
junct: the circumcision “which is made 
in the flesh with hands,” is of course no real 
circumcision (cf. Rom. ii. fin.), and there- 
fore is only one so “called.” So in the 
present passage the epithet “evil” is a 
logical adjunct: the state of the world being 
an “evil stats,” craved Christ’s redemption, 


8 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


(cw. 1. 1—24. 


and this fact should make that redemption 
welcome to us. Similarly, in 1 Pet. i. 18 the 
epithet“ hauded from your fathers (7arpowapa- 
dorod),” added after “ your vain manner of 
life,” is a logical adjunct: the fact that it 
was ancient and traditional gave it so strong 
a hold upon them as to crave the interven- 
tion of a no ordinary ransom to redeem them 
from it. With the turn of thought, which 
according to this view is indicated by the 
epithet πονηροῦ having been added to the 
noun without the article, agrees likewise 
the emphatic position of the verb ἐξέληται 
at the head of the sentence. Christ gave 
his own very self for this end, that he might 
deliver us out of this wretched state of things 
to which we belonged. But the reactionary 
movement now showing itself among the 
Galatians would inevitably, the apostle feels 
(see ch. v. 4), have the effect of making 
void this redeeming work of Christ, and 
of involving them afresh in their original 
misery. If we adhere to the reading in the 
Textus Receptus, τοῦ ἐνεστῶτος αἰῶνος πονη- 
pod, we had best, perhaps, accept Winer’s pro- 
posal (‘ Gram. N. T.,’ § 20, 1 a), and explain 
the absence of the article by supposing αἰὼν 
πονηριὸς a8 forming one notion, as in the 
case Of βρῶμα πνευματικὸν and πόμα πν. in 
the Textus Receptus of 1 Cor. x. 3, But 
this reading, though grammatically it runs 
more smoothly than the other, is on that 
very account the less likely to have been 
the original one, and seems greatly to blunt 
the significance of the adjective, May we 
not detect in this epithet “evil” the sound 
of a sigh, drawn from the apostle’s heart by 
this fresh worry and disappointment now 
cropping up for him and for all who cared 
for the succcss of the gospel? His feeling 
seems to be—Oh the weary evilness of this 
present state! When will it be brought to 
an end by the appearing of that blissful hope? 
(comp. 2 Cor. v. 4). According to the will 
of God and our Father (κατὰ τὸ θέλημα τοῦ 
Θεοῦ καὶ πατρὸς ἡμῶν); according to the will 
of our God and Father. It is, perhaps, of no 
great consequence whether we understand 
this clause as pointing to the whole preced- 
ing sentence, “ Who gave himself... world,” 
or to the last clause of it, “That he might 
deliver ... world.” But the former is 
the more probable construction: (1) there 
is no reason for restricting it to the last 
words; (2) it is in perfect accordance 
with the apostle’s usual reference of Christ’s 
coming into the world and dying for us 
to the Father’s appointment, that he 
sliould here too be understood as referring 
to this work of delivering grace also. 
The feeling apparently underlies these 
words of the apostle, that the Judaizing 
which he has now before his eyes was both 
setting itself in opposition to the supreme 


ordering of “our God”—and hés sovereign 
“will” who of us shall dare to contravene? 
—and also thwarting the operation of his 
fatherly loving-kindness. For the laek of 
filial confidence in God’s love to us, and 
the slavish ceremonialism which charac- 
terized Judaical legalism, were both of 
them adjuncts of the unspiritual mind still 
in bondage to “the flesh”’ (cf. Rom. vii. and 
viii.), and therefore part and parecl of “this 
present world.” omp. ch. ili, 3; iv. 3, 
8—10; and Col. ii. 20, “ Why, as living in the 
world, do ye subject yourselves to ordinances, 
Handle not,” etc.? As Professor Jowett 
observes, in this case as well as in the 
Epistle to the Romans, “ The salutation is 
the proem of the whole Epistle.” The ex- 
pression, “our God and Father,” is pathetic ; 
it is an outcome of the deep complacency 
with which the apostle cherishes the assur- 
ance of God’s fatherly love given us in the 
gospel—a sentiment of complacency stimu- 
lated into increased fervency by antagonism 
to the spiritual mischief confronting him. 
Of our God and Father. ὅδ Revised Ver- 
sion. ‘This rendering appears decidedly 
preferable to that given by the Authorized 
Version, “of God and our Father,” though 
grammatically this latter is confessedly net 
inadmissible. The like remark applies to 
all the other passages in the New Testa- 
ment in which Θεὸς καὶ Πατὴρ is found 
followed by a genitive; namely, by πάντων 
(Eph. iv. 6); by ἡμῶν as in the passage be- 
fore us (1 Thess. i. 3; iii, 11, 13; Phil. iv. 
20); by τοῦ Κυρίου ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ (Rom. 
χν. 6; Eph.i.3; Col.i.3; 2 Cor.i.3; 1 Pet. 
i. 8): by τοῦ Κυρίου Ἰησοῦ (2 Cor. xi. 31 
(L. T. Tr. Rev.; Receptus has τοῦ Kupiov 
ἡμῶν ᾿Ιησοῦ Χριστοῦ); aud by αὐτοῦ (Rev. 
i. 6). ἢ 
Ver. 5.—To whom be glory for ever and 
ever. Amen (ὦ ἡ δόξα cis τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν 
αἰώνων. ᾿Αμήν). This doxology is not intro- 
duced as merely a reverential closing up of 
the greeting, before the writer hastens on 
to the subsequent words of rebuke. It is 
rather an indignant tender of homage to the 
Most High, flashing forth from a loyal, filial 
heart; confronting and seeking, so far as it 
thus may, to redress the wrong done to “ our 
God and Father” by the Judaizing spirit 
uprearing itself among the Galatians. It 
is similar in tone to the indignant doxology 
in Rom. i 25. This view of its origin 
explains the fact that, as connected with 
@ greeting, such doxology is found only 
in this of all St. Paui’s Epistles. Theo 
indignation which pervades the tone of the 
whole passage favours the suppletion of ἔστω 
rather than of ἐστίν. Perhaps, indeed,Zorw 
is in general the more natural suppletion. 
In 1 Pet. iv. 11, where ἐστὶν is added by 
the writer, we have not so much a direct 


oH. 1, 1—24.] THE EPISTLE TO 


THE GALATIANS. 9 


escription of praise as an affirmation that 
to God belongs or is due the glory of our 
performing our several duties with reference 
to this end. In like manner in the (most 
probably interpolated) doxology at the close 
of the Lord’s prayer in Matt. vi. 13, “ For 
thine is the kingdom,” etc., the aseription of 
praise is not so much expressed as implied. 
Viewed in themselves, the words simply 
state the truth which constitutes the ground 
for our addressing to “our Father” our 
praises and our petitions. The article is 
most commonly prefixed to δόξα in such 
ascriptions of praise, whether δόξα stands 
alone, as Rom. xi. 36; xvi. 27; Eph. iii. 21; 
Phil. iv. 20; 2 Tim. iv. 18; Heb. xiii. 21; 
2 Pet. iii. 18; or in conjunction with other 
nouns, 88 1 Pet. iv. 11; Rev. i. 6; vii. 12. 
It is wanting in Luke ii. 14; xix. 38; 1 Tim. 
i. 17; Jude 25. When the urticle is added 
it marks the noun as expressing its notion 
viewed absolutely, in its entirety or uni- 
versality: g.d. “Whatever glory is to be 
ascribe@ anywhere, be it ascribed to him.” 
Thus ἡ δόξα is equivalent to “all glory.” 
For ever and ever ; literally, into the aiéns of 
the aiéns; apparently a form of expression 
adopted to denote intensification or superla- 
tiveness, like “holy of holies” (cf. Winer, 
‘Gram. N. T.,’ ὃ 36,2). It is used where 
especial intensity is wished to be added to 
the notion of long undetermined duration; 
as Rev. xiv. 11; xv. 7; xxii. 5, ete. The 
same notion is expressed, only with not the 
same passionate earnestness, by the phrase, 
“into the aiéns,” in Luke i. 33; Rom. i. 25; 
ix. 5; xi. 36, ete.; and by “into the aidn,” 
in Matt. xxi. 19; John vi. 51, 58, etc. Pos- 
sibly there is a reference of contrast to “ this 
present aién” of ver. 4. This, however, is 
doubtful; for in ver. 4 aién points to a 
particular condition of affairs subsisting in 
this aién, rather than to a mere mode of 
duration, which latter is alone in view here. 
The like observation applies to Eph. ii. 2 
compared with ver. 7. 

Ver. 6.—It is unnecessary again to remark 
‘an the disturbance of mind indicated by the 
abruptness with which the apostle plunges 
into the language of reproof. It cannot tail 
to strike every careful reader. I marvel 
(θαυμάζων; Ido marvel. The verb is used 
here with reference to something disap- 
pointing, something felt to be painful as 
well as strange. So Mark vi. 6 with re- 
ference to the unbelief of the Nazarenes. 
Tt is unjust to the apostle to take this “I 
do marvel” of his as 8 mere artifice of 
politic address: though unquestionably, 
as Chrysostom and Luther have well noted, 
it does soften his rebuke. The apostlo 
was genuinely surprised; for he had had so 
much reason for thinking well of them (comp. 
ch. iii, 1; iv. 14, 15; v. 7. How cou! 


converts, once #0 cordial and affectionate, 
have possibly been so misled? As he reflects 
on the case, whatever feeling of rosentment 
mingled with his surprise turns off upon 
the pseudo-evangelists misleading them; and 
accordingly it is upon these that his anathcma 
is pronounced, not upon them at all (cf. ch. v. 
9, 12). They, indeed, by listening to the 
false teaching, were in danger of falling from 
grace; but this he rather compassionates than 
angrily denounces. That ye are so soon re- 
moved (ὅτι οὕτω ταχέως μετατίθεσθε); that ye 
are so quickly falling away. This “quickly” 
has been taken by many as meaning “so soon 
after ye were called,” and as consequently 
furnishing some ground for determining the 
time of the writing of the Epistle. But 
the comparison of the use of the same 
adverb (ταχέως) in 2 Thess. ii. 2, “Be not 
quickly shaken ;” and in 1 Tim. ν. 22, “ Lay 
hands hastily on no man,” suggests rather 
the meaning, “so quickly upon being solicited 
thereto.” The verb μετατίθεσθαι, to transfer 
one’s self to a different course of thinking, 
acting, partisanship (cf. Liddell and Scott, 
‘Lexicon ἢ), is used both in an unfavourable 
and in a good sense. Thus 2 Mace. vii. 24, 
Μεταθέμενον ἀπὸ τῶν πατρίων νόμων: “If ba 
would give over following the laws of his 
country;” Appian, ‘ Bell. Mithr.,’ 41: “ Fall- 
ing away, going over, from (ἀπὸ) Archelaus to 
Sylla;” Jamblich, ‘Protrept,’ 17, “Change 
from (ἀπὸ) a restless and profligate mode of 
life to an orderly one.” The verb, being in 
the present tense, and not in the aorist or 
the perfect, suggests the idea of an action 
in its commencing stage, and not yet fully 
consummated; as Chrysostom observes : 
“That is, ‘I do not yet believe nor suppose 
that the delusion has got to be complete’— 
the language of one who will fain win them 
back.” From him that called you into the 
grace of Christ (ἀπὸ τοῦ καλέσαντος ὑμᾶς ἐν 
χάριτι Χριστοῦ); from him that called you to 
be in the grace of Christ. The phrase, “he 
that called you,” recites the personality of 
“our God and Father,” spoken of in vers. 
3,4. The calling of man into the kingdom 
of God is habitually ascribed by St. Paul to 
the First Person in the Trinity (cf. ver. 
15; Rom. viii. 30; ix. 24,25; 1 Cor. i. 9; 
vii. 15,17; 1 Thess. ii. 12; 2 Thess. ii. 14; 
2 Tim. i. 9). God’s name is omitted, as in 
ver. 15 (where it is wanting in the more 
recent texts), and ch. ii. 8, “For he that 
wrought for Peter.” The apostle impres- 
sively, even startlingly, describes their de- 
fection from the truth of the gospel as no 
other than a defection from God himself; 
similarly to the strain of language pursued 
in Heb. 111, 12—15. “The grace of Christ” 
recites the stute of acccptance with God into 
which Christians are brought by Christ 
through faith in him. So ch. v. 4, “ Fallen 


10 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


(ox. 1. 1—24 


away from grace;” Rom. v. 2, “ Through 
whom we lave also had our access by faith 
into this grace wherein we stand.” The 
genitive, “of Christ,” denotes the Author, as 
in “ the peace of God” (Phil. iv. 7); “right- 
eousness of God” (Rom. i. 17; iii. 21, etc.). 
There is a pathos in the word “ grace,” as re- 
ferring tothe sweet gentlenessof Christ’s yoke 
as contrasted with the yoke of ceremonial- 
ism which the Galatians were so foolishly 
hankering after. The construction, “ Called 
you in the grace of Christ,” is similar to 
“Called us in peace” (1 Cor. vii. 15); “ Ye 
were called in one hope of your calling” 
(Zph. iv. 4); “Called us... in sanctification” 
(1 Thess. iv. 7). The verb “call,” implying 
as it does the brining into a certain state, 
suggests the sense here given to the clause, 
in preference to our taking it as meaning 
“called you by the grace of Clirist.” Unto 
another gospel (εἰς ἕτερον εὐαγγέλιον) ; unto 
another (or, a new) sort of pea The ad- 
jective ἕτερον, as contrasted with ἄλλο used 
in the next verse, appears to intimate the 
changed quality of the object, its strange 
new-fangled character. The adjective does 
sometimes take this shade of meaning. 
Thus 1 Cor. xiv. 21, Ἐν ἑτερογλώσσοις καὶ 
ἐν χείλεσιν ἑτέροις, “By men of strange 
tongues, and by lips of strangers;” 2 Cor. xi. 4, 
Πνεῦμα ἕτερον... εὐαγγέλιον ἕτερον,“ Different 
spirit... different gospel; "1 Tim. i. 3, ‘Ere- 
οὐδιδασκαλεῖν, “Teach a different doctrine.” 
The reader will find a brief but instructive 
description of the difference at times observ- 
able between ἕτερος and ἄλλος in Bishop 
Lightfoot’s note on the passage; who cites the 
Septuagint rendering in Exod. i. 8 of the 
Hebrew “new king,” which it gives βασιλεὺς 
€repos: and 8 passage in Xenophon’s ‘Cyro- 
pedia,’ viii. 3, 8, “If you accuse me... 
another time when I serve you... you will 
find me (ἑτέρῳ διακόνῳ) another soit of at- 
tendant.”. The phrase, “another sort of 
gospel,” so far as giving the new form of 
doctrine the title of “gospel” at all, is 
paradoxical and sarcastic. The paradox is 
corrected in what follows. The substantive, 
“ gospel,” is borrowed, not without a tinge of 
irony, from the pretensions of the innovators; 
they, of course, would be ready to designate 
their mangled form of Christian doctrine as 
still “the gospel.” The epithet which the 
apostle adds gives his own view of ita cha- 
racter. 

Ver. 7.—Which is not another (ὃ οὐκ ἔστιν 
ἄλλο). Already, in these very words, the 
ee means to assert tat essential unalter- 
ableness of the gospel, which, with solemn 
emphasis, he in the two following verses 
more fully affirms. Thus much seems plain. 
But, owing probably to the impassioned 
eagerness of the moment, he here, as not 
unfrequently elsewhere from the like cause, 


expresses himself in language, the gram- 
matical analysis of which is obscure and 
in some degree uncertain. For (1) the 
relative “which ” may be taken as reciting 
the term “ gospel” only, that is, the gospel 
which is properly so called; in which case 
we may read the sentence thus: “ But the 
gospel is not [never can be] other ”—other, 
ὦ.6. than it is as already preached to you; 
(2) the relative may recite the “other (or, 
‘new”] sort of gospel” of ver. 6; and then we 
should have “ But this other-fashioned gos- 
pel is not another gospel really,” or, “is not 
the real gospel reappearing in anothcr form.” 
The former method presents undoubtedly, of 
the two, the harsher way of construing; but 
constructions as harsh do occasionully pre- 
sent themselves in the apostle’a style when 
writing under strong emotion. The exact 
analysis, however, is merely a matter of 
grammatical nicety; the substance of the 
thought is quite clear. But there be (εἰ μή 
... εἶσιν); only there are. This construction, 
of εἰ μὴ followed by a finite verb, is found 
also in Mark vi. 5, Ei uw}... ἐθεράπευσε, “Save 
that... he healed them.” The force of εἰ μή, 
“except,” in this passage as well as in some 
others, may be described 88 partially ex- 
ceptive; that is, it denotes an exception 
taken, not to the entire foregoing sentence, 
but to part of it only. Thus in Luke iv. 27, 
“There were many lepers in Israel... and 
none of them was cleansed, save Naaman 
the Syrian:” where the pronoun “them” 
recites the “lepers in Israel,” but the “save” 
refers to “lepers” only; Rev. ix. 4, “That 
they slould not hurt the grass, neither any 
green thing, neither any tree, save the 
men who,” etc.: where the “save” points 
back only to the words, “that they should 
not hurt;” so again Rev. xxi. 27, “Save they 
which are written in the Lamb’s book of 
life,” points back only to the words, “ there 
shall in no wise enter into it.’ In all such 
cases the rendering “only” or “ but only” 
would exhibit just the amouut of exception 
which appears intended. In the present 
instance the most probable explanation is 
this: the gospel can never be other than it 
is; except that among (#.e. only among) 
those who proclaim it (é.e. profess to pro- 
claim it) there are some who so misrepresent 
its import as to completely reverse its cha- 
racter. There be some that trouble you (τινές 
εἰσιν of ταράσσωοντες ὑμᾶς); there are certain 
who are disquieting you. The form of ex- 

ression ig the same as in Col. ii. 8, “ Take 

eed lest there shall be any one that maketh 
spoil of you.” The sentence as it stands 
differs from the supposable substitute, “cere 
tain persons are disquieting you,” by 
directing attention more to the persons 
referred to than merely to their action 
viewed in itself; it marks them out 88 


ex. 1. 1—24.] THE EPISTLE TO 


THE GALATIANS 11 


meriting strong censure, or (in Col., loc. cit.) 
as persons to be carefully guardel against. 
Who these troublers were and where they 
came from is uncertain (see note on ver. 2). 
The verb ταράσσειν frequently means “to 
alarm” or “ disquiet,” as Matt. ii. 3; xiv. 26; 
Luke i. 12; xxiv. 38; John xiv. 1; 1 Pet. 
iii, 14, And this is probably the sense in 
which it is used here and in the similar 
passages, ch. v.10; Acta xv. 24. It describes 
the action of those who came to believers 
reposing in a sense of acceptance with God 
through Christ; and filled their minds with 
uneasiness and apprehension, by telling them 
that they were not safe as they were, but must 
do something else if they wished to really 
possess the Divine favour. Others, however, 
connect the verb with the notion of civil 
disturbance, as in Acts xvii. 8, and thus 
with raising seditions and shaking men’s 
allegiance, in conformity with the metaphor 
of μετατίθεσθε in ver. 6. And would pervert 
the gospel of Christ (καὶ θέλοντες μεταστρέψαι 
τὸ εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Χριστοῦ); and would fain 
turn into its clean contrary the gospel of Christ. 
The verb μεταστρέφειν is an appropriate one 
to use with reference to such a misrepresen- 
tation of the gospel as the one now in the 
apostle’s view; for this converted it from a 
doctrine of emancipation into a doctrine of 
renswed bondage (comp. ch. v. 1—4). So 
the verb is used in the only other passages 
in which it is found in the New Testament, 
Acts ii. 20, “The sun shall be turned into 
darkness ;” Jas. iv. 9, “ Let your laughter be 
turned into mourning.” So in Sirach xi. 31, 
“Turning good things into evil.” Liddell 
and Scott (‘Lexicon’) cite μεταστρέψας = 
“contrariwise,” Plato, ‘Gorg.,’456, E; ‘Rep.,’ 
587, Ὁ. In the phrase τὸ εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ 
Χριστοῦ, the addition of the genitive, “of 
Christ,” with the twofold article, marks the 
words with a stately emphasis. It was no 
less than THE GOSPEL oF CuRisT that these 
men were tampering with. “The gospel of 
Christ” means here the gospel of which 
Christ is the Author, as in “the gospel of 
God ” (Rom. i. 1), and which he had sent 
forth his apostles to proclaim. The peculiar 
emphasis and the connection forbid our tak- 
ing the genitive as denoting merely the 
subject-matter. 

Ver. 8.—But though we (ἀλλὰ καὶ ἐὰν 
Sets); but even if we ourselves. This “but” 
(ἀλλὰ is strongly adversative. What those 
disturbers of the believer's peace would 
have been fain to do was a thing impossible. 
Heaven’s gospel could not be thus changed. 
And the attempt to thus change it, being in 
effect to fight against God, merited God’s 
curse. In the plural “we” the apostle in- 
tends principally his own self. A shrinking 
from unnecessary self-obtrusion, and tender 
respectful sympathy with his ministerial 


brethren, prompt him not unfrequently to 
veil his own individuality by associating in 
this way with himself those who were went 
to share more or less in his evangelistic 
labours and suffcrings, although in reality 
what he says may apply principally to him- 
self and only in ἃ very modified measure to 
them. A signal instance of this is furnished 
by that whole passage in his Second Epistle 
to the Corinthians, which begins with the 
fourth chapter and goes on down to the 
eleventh verse of the sixth. Nevertheless, 
we should in all such cases imperfectly 
represent the spirit of his words, if we were 
to substitute the singular pronoun “1.” In 
the present instance individuals of the evan- 
gelizing party which were wont to accompany 
him had, no doubt, been fellow-workers with 
him also in Galatia, and are therefore here 
inclusively referred to. Compare the plural 
and the singular verbs in the next verse 
The introduction of this reference to himself 
and his fellow-workers, as well as that to 
“an angel from heaven,” seems meant to 
make his readers feel that this was no ques- 
tion of distinguished personality, as if it 
mattered who it was that taught a different 
doctrine ; whether (suppose) it were a James 
or a Cephas, for those revered names were 
often used to cluak the designs of Judaizers ; 
or whether it was one of the Galatian 
Churchmen themselves especially looked up 
to (ef. ch. v.10 and note). An anathema 
was his due, whoever he might be. In the 
manner of its introduction we cannot fail to 
recognize an underlying consciousness on 
the writer’s part of tle highly distinguished 
position which he himself held ; but there is 
present the conscivusness too that he was 
nothing more than the mere organ or channel 
of Christ’s teaching; from that teaching he 
himself may not swerve without justly incur- 
ring the “woe” which he told the Corinthians 
he should have to fear in case he preached 
not the gospel (1 Cor. ix. 16). Or an angel 
from heaven preach any other gospel unto 
you than that which we have preached unto 
you (ἢ ἄγγελος ἐξ οὐρανοῦ εὐαγγελί(ηται ὑμῖν 
παρ᾽ ὃ εὐηγγελισάμεθα ὑμῖν); or if an angel 
from heaven should set himself to preach unto 
you a gospel other than that we preached unto 
you. The construction of the entire sentence 
displays in the Greek a broken character 
not quite so apparent in our Authorized 
Version, The verb “should preach a gospel ” 
is in the singular number (εὐαγγελίζηται); 
neglecting the “we,” it attaches itself to 
“an angel from heaven,” which latter, as 
being the higher, absorbs the previously 
named subject altogether, standing as sole 
subject, both in the hypothetical clause and 
in the concluding one, “let him be ana- 


thema.” It is, of course, apparent that, if 
the sentence of anathema would in the 


12 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


(cn. τ. 1—24, 


supposed case be the only proper one to 
pronounce upon “an angel from heaven,” 
it most certainly fastens upon any human 
being guilty of the same offence. The 
“angel from heaven” is like the “second 
man from heaven” in 1 Cor. xv. 47; the 
phrase, “from heaven,” denoting both coming 
down out of heaven and also the higher 
sphere of being to which the person spoken 
of appertains. Comp. also John iii. 31, ‘‘ He 
that is from earth... he that is from 
hcaver..” The force of the preposition παρὰ 
ix εὐαγγελίζηται παρ᾽ ὃ εὐηγγελισάμεθα may 
be illustrated by its use in 1 Cor. iii 11, 
“Qther foundation can no man lay than 
(παρὰ) that which is laid;” where it points 
to a new foundation, not to be by the side 
of, but to supersede, the former one. Taken 
thus, it would seem to follow up the before 
expressed notion of “ another gospel” super- 
seding, setting aside, the true gospel. This 
sense of the preposition readily passes on to 
tLat of “contiary to,” which is profusely 
illustrated by Liddell and Scott (¢ Lexicon,’ 
in. verb, παρά, ©. 1. i. 4, b), and which we have 
in Acts xviii. 13, “ Worship God contrary to 
the Law [οἵ Moses]};” Rom. xvi. 17, “ Causing 
the divisions . . . contrary to the doctrine 
which ye learned ; ” Rom. 1. 26, “use which is 
against nature.” It cannot be doubted that 
the apostle is here thinking of a (pretended) 
gospel which was incompatible with the- 
true one, and not of merely additional ele- 
ments of Christian doctrine which should 
take their place alongside of those which 
they had already received. Additional in- 
formation, we may be sure, was quite as 
necessary or desirable for the Galatians as 
it was for either the Corinthians or the 
“Hebrews; ” neither of whom lad as yet, 
as was intimated to them (1 Cor. iii. 2; 
Heb. v. 12; vi. 1), been fed with “ solid food,” 
but only with “ milk,” and whom it behoved 
to “go on to fuller maturity ” of knowledge. 
The point in the apostle’s view was this: 
what he had himself taught them was, so far, 
certainly true and to be depended upon, and 
could not without treason against Christ be 
set aside or superseded or essentially quali- 
ficd; whereas the teaching which was now 
being foisted upon their previous convictions 
did infringe upon what he had taught them, 
seriously and even fundamentally. The 
tenor of the whole Epistle shows what were 
the especial features of this gospel which 
were now in question. The present question 
concerned the “good news” that God, 
through the cross of Christ, had emancipated 
his servants from bondage to ceremonialism ; 
that God adopted them as simply believing 
in Christ to be his sons in full possession of 
his fatherly love; and that by the Holy 
Spirit he endued them with the conscious- 
ness of this adoption. There has been at 


times much discussion as to the bearing of the 

assage before us upon our controversy with 

omanists respecting tradition. If what 
has been above stated is just, it follows that 
these words of the apostle forbid our adding, 
on any ground whatever, to the dogma or 
Church practice sanctioned by Scripture, 
any such dogma or Church practice as would 
transform or essentially modify the former, 
but, on the other land, the addition of 
dogma or Church practice which is not out of 
harmony with that sanctioned by Scripture, 
these words do not forbid. Let him be ac- 
cursed (ἀνάθεμα ἔστων; let him be anathema, 
that is, a thing doomed to destruction. The 
word ἀνάθεμα is originally identical with 
ἀνάθημα (anathéma), a thing devoted, which 
in Luke xxi. 5 is rendered “offering;” but 
in Hellenistic Greek the former diverges 
from the latter by being ordinarily applied 
to “a thing devoted to destruction.” In all 
languages it sometimes occurs that a word, 
one and the same originally, diverges into 
two slightly diffcring forms, used severally 
to express different phases of the original 
notion, Archbishop Trench, in his ‘Study 
of Words,’ p. 156, referred to by Bishop 
Lightfoot in his note on this passage, in- 
stances “cant ”’ and “ chant,” “ human” and 
“humane,” and others. In the LXX. 
andthema is used to render the iebrew 
word cherem, which in our Authorized 
Version is translated “cursed” or “ac- 
eursed thing.” Living things that were 
cherem were to be put to death; inanimate 
objects that were cherem were to be de- 
stroyed. Thus in Deut. xiii. directions are 
given as to what was to be done in the case 
of an Israelite city which should have given 
itself to idolatry: the inhabitants and the 
cattle thereof were to be smitten with tle 
edge of the sword; and the spoil of the city 
was tobe brought together and bumed, and 
the city itself “to be a heap for ever, never 
to be built again.” And then (ver. 18), 
“There shall cleave nought of the cursed [or, 
‘devoted ᾽ thing (cherem, ἀνάθεμα) to thine 
hand.” Similarly, in Deut. vii. 26, of the 
idols and the silver or gold on them, of the 
Canaanites, “Thou shalt not take it unte 
thee, neither shalt thou bring an abomina- 
tion unto thine house, lest thou be a cursed 
thing [‘be cherem,’ or ‘be anathema,’ ἔσῃ 
ἀνάθεμα) like it; but thou shalt utterly 
detest it, and thou shalt utterly abhor it; 
for it is a cursed thing (ἀνάθεμά ἐστι)" See 
also ibid., vers, 23-25; Lev. xxvii. 28, 29; 
Josh. vi. 17, “The city shall be accursed (or, 
‘devoted ;’ cherem, ἀνάθεμα], and all that are 
therein ; only Rabab the harlot shall live; ” 
Josh. vii. 1, 12. In the New Testameut 
andthema occurs in four other passages. 1. 
1 Cor. xii. 3, “No man speaking in the 
Spirit of God saith, Jesus is anathema.” 


on. 1. 1—-24.] THE EPISTLE TO 


THE GALATIANS, 13 


Here the apostle, no doubt, refers to the 
manner in which the unbelieving Jews al- 
lowed themselves, already then, to speak 
of our Lord. Clearly they meant thereby 
more than merely “excommunicate,” which 
palliated sense some have endeavoured to 
give to “anathema;” they cannot be 
supposed to have intended less than an 
object which merited that utter extinction 
to which he who was cherem was under 
the Law doomcd: their blaspheming 
thought, no doubt, {aking into its view 
not this world only, but that also which is 
to come. 2. Rom. ix. 3, “I could pray 
that I myself were anathema from Christ 
for my brethren’s sake.” The reader natur- 
ally casts about to find some qualification 
to give to an utterance which seems at first 
sight to express a wish such as one who 
love Christ so ardently as Paul did could 
not possibly have entertained. Yet the 
words, “ anathema from Christ,” can mean 
nothing less than being separated from 
Christ By a curse consigning him to per- 
dition. The desiderated qualification must 
be sought in the phrase, “I could pray;” 
this renders an imperfect verb (ηὐχόμην), 
which expresses a turn of thought similar 
to that denoted in the (ἤθελον), “I could 
wish,” of ch. iv. 20, on which see note. In 
each case the tense betokens a mere glance 
(so to speak) of wish which is instantly 
withdrawn. 3. 1 Cor. xvi. 22, “If any man 
loveth not the Lord, let him be anathema.” 
Here, too, the notion of Church-excommuni- 
cation, whether by formal exclusion or by 
the withdrawal of brotherly recognition, 
is not satisfactory. The Israelite notion 
of being anathema, cherem, points to a no 
mere negation, but to a condition of posi- 
tive accursedness linked with exposure to 
utter destruction. Moreover the apostle 
refers to a man’s interior sentiments with 
respect to Christ—a matter not within the 
cognisance of human judgments. Who can 
in many cases, or perhaps in any, determine 
whether another loves Christ or not? It is 
in truth a warning againat a soul’s disloyalty 
to the Lord Jesus, clothing itself in the form 
of an execration—an execration which, it is 
true, is an iropetuous flashing forth of the 
apostle’s own flaming sense of what is due 
to Christ from every human being, but 
which is nowise chargeable with extrava- 
gance. Its perfect justness, as well as the 
verification which awaits it in the future 
judgment, is evinced, as by other considera- 
tions, so also by our Lord’s own words in 
Matt. xxv. 41—46. 4. Acts xxiii. 14, 
“We have bound ourselves under a great 
‘curse ;” literally, “ We have anathematized 
[or, ‘solemnly bound’) ourselves with ana- 
thema (ἀναθέματι ἀνεθεματίσαμεν éavrods).” 
They had said, no doubt, some such words 


as these: “ May we be anathema if we taste 
aught till we have killed Paull” with 
which we may conjoin Mark xiv. 71, “He 
began to pronounce a curse (ἀναθεματίζειν) 
and to swear ”—not, to be sure, pronouncing 
a curse upon Jesus, but wishing himself to 
be anathema if he knew that Man. There 
can be little doubt that the anathema in 
both these cases involved a reference to 
eternal perdition. That no less is intended 
by the term in the present verse and, there- 
fore, also in that next to it, is further proved 
by reference to the hypothetical “angel 
from heaven” who should be found preaching 
a ditferent gospel. Being anathema must 
involve for such @ one excision from the 
kingdom of light, together with whatever 
destruction properly attends thereupon. 
What, it will be asked, is the precise force 
of the “let him be,” both here and in 1 Cor. 
xvi. 22? It cannot denote less than a com- 
placent satisfied acquiescence. The apostle- 
prophet not only foresees that, at the final 
judgment, such will be the doom of the 
wilful perverter of the gospel, but foresees 
it with a mind at one with the Judge who 
shall pronoutce it; he can himself desire, 
he does desire, no other. It is his loyal 
sympathy with Christ as Saviour, as caring 
for the souls of men, that prompts him to 
proclaim aloud for the warning of the false 
teachers themselves as well as for the warn- 
ing of those inclined to hearken to their false 
teaching, his own solemn Amen to the terrible 
sentence awaiting them. Butif so, why not 
allow the imperative its full force, and 
understand the utterance as an imperative? 
It is granted that the apostle was apt at 
times to be carried away by the fervid im- 
petuosity of his feelings, even when writing, 
to the utterance of words which in calmer 
mood he would be ready to a certain extent 
to retract. We have a clear example of 
such retractation in 1 Cor. vi. 4, 5 (see note 
below on ch. v.12). But, in the case before 
us, that the vehemence of the apostle’s 
language is a deliberate vehemence, and 
no mere momentary outburst of cxcited 
feeling, is proved by the solemn measured 
iteration in the next verse. And if we 
suppose, what seems to be most probable, 
that that verse refers to a similar denunci- 
ation uttered among the Galatians a good 
while before, the proof is all the stronger 
that his language is no sudden exorbitancy 
of passionate emotion, but expresses an 
abiding sentiment. We are to remember that 
it is the very substance of the gospel which 
the apostle feels to be assailed. The gospel, . 
he knew, both by inspired insight and by 
his own experience, to be “the power of 
God unto salvation to every one that be- 
lieveth.” Of this gospel Christ had himself 


declared that “he that believed it should 


st 


14 THE EPISTLE TO 


THE GALATIANS. (cu. τ. 1-24. 


he saved, and he that dishelieved it should 
be condenmed” (Mark xvi. 16). Wherein 
docs “ being anathema” differ from “ being 
condemned”? And if the disbelieving 
“ shall be condemued,” can a less guiltiness 
be supposed to attach to one who not only 
disbelieved the gospel himself, but was also 
plucking it out of the hearts of others and 
palming off upon them instead a false gospel 
which waa no salvation? “But could St. 
Paul, being such a lover of souls as he was, 
imprecate a doom of perdition to fall upon 
uny soul of man?” Absolutely, we may 
say he could not; but conditionally, he 
might, and that in perfect consistency with 
his usual habits of feeling—conditionally, 
on the supposition, that is, that the sin was 
not repented of and forsaken. It was his 
very love of souls that would impel him thus 
to speak, not only on behalf of the souls 
which the bringer-in of a false doctrine 
might destroy, but on behalf of the deceiver’s 
own self. He pronounces the doom in order 
to deter and thus save. We have to remem- 
ber, too, that the apostle is not, at the dictate 
of his own passionate zeal for the truth, 
constituting either a new sin or a new 
measure of penalty. He simply, a8 prophet 
and aposile, utters forth the mind of him who 
is Lawgiver and Judge. This last cousider- 
ation sugysts the limits within which only 
can the apostle’s action in this matter be 
regarded as an example for imitation. It 
is lawful to us to recite, as the Church of 
England speaks in her Commination Office, 
“the general sentences of God’s cursing 
against impeuitent sinners gathered out of 
Scripture”’—and by “ general seutences” we 
are to understand sentences pronounced 
upon classes of offenders, not sentences upon 
individual persons, to whom wé may con- 
jecture them to be applicable. It is lawful 
also to us individually and right, that we 
should add to the uttcrance of cach sentence 
our hearty “ Amen,” and thus take part with 
God and his Law, not only against sins 
committed by our neighbours, but most 
especially und above all against wilful trans- 
gressions of our own. Lut beyond this, 
none who are not special organs of inspiration 
may venture to go, whether acting indi- 
vidually or in any corporate capacity. An 
anathema is a bolt of doom such as the 
Almighty alone can fashion or make opera- 
tive; and we are invading the Divine pre- 
rogative aud working mischief and peril for 
ourselves if, on the one hand, we venture 
to cnlarge and make more specific than he 
has done his “ general sentences of cursing,” 
or, on the other, dilute the force of these 
solemn warnings of his, and treat them 
with digregard. 

Ver. 9.—As we said before, so say I now 


again (ὡς προειρήκαμεν, καὶ ἄρτι πάλιν λέγω); 


as we have said before, now also (or, and as 
now) I am saying again. The complexion 
of the sentence, especially in the Greek, a 
good deal resembles that in 2 Cor. xiii, & “I 
have said beforehand, and I do say before- 
hand (προείρηκα καὶ προλέγω), a8 when I 
was present the second time, so now being 
absent.” In this latter pas-age, the perfect, 
“TI have said beforehand,” points to the 
time indicated in the words, “as when I was 
present the second time.” The resemblance 
between the two passages, notwithstanding 
the somewhat different senses in which the 
verb (προλέγειν) is used in them, suggesta 
the view that here likewise in the first 
clause the verb refers to some former ovca- 
sion on which the apostle was personally 
present with those he is writing to. The 
Greek verb (προλέγειν), “say before,” is 
sometimes equivalent to “ forewarn,” as 
1 Thess. iv. 6; ch. v. 213 and 2 Cor. xiii. 9 
(twice). Sometimes it means “say on a 
former occasion,” as 1 Cor. vii. 3, and most 
probably here. The first clause has by 
some been supposed to refer to the prceding 
verse. But recent critics generally agree in 
feeling that both the verb “we have said. 
before” and the adverb “now” suggest the 
sense of a wider interval of time. The use 
of the verb in 2 Cor. vii. 3 has been cited on 
behalf of the other view. But even if the 
somewhat doubtful idea be admitted that 
2 Cor. vii. 3 points back to the twelfth verse 
of the preceding chaptcr, it would still fail 
to furnish an adequate parallel. For not 
only is it parted from the carlier passage by 
the number of verses which intervene, but 
also by a succession of varying moods of 
feeling and diverse styles of addrvss, Ac- 
count has to be taken of the change of 
number between “we have said before” 
and “I am saying again.” The only 
probable explanation is that the “we” 
recites the same persons as in the words “ we 
preached” in ver. 8; whereas Paul, as now 
writing (probably) with his own hand, 
presents himsclf individually as reiterating 
that solemn affirmation. The words, “ now 
also I am saying again,” as marking a time 
contrasted with that earlier one referred to, 
contemplate the assevcration made in the 
eighth verse os well as in this. In the 
“now” the apostle indicates, not so much 
the moment of his writing, as the just then 
subsisting juncture of circumstances in 
Galatia, which called for the renewal of his 
commination. Its earlier utteranco referred 
to may have occwred either in the second 
visit to Galatia, mentioned in Acts xviii. 23, 
or in the first, mentioned in Acts xvi. 6. 
When taking leave of his disciples on 
either occasion he may have been led to thus 
emphatically insist upon the sacred, inviol- 
able character of the gospel, by his observa: 


68, 1, 124.) ΠῚ ἘΡΙΒΤΠ ἢ ΤῸ 


THE GALATIANS, 16 


tion on the one hand of the fickleness and 
impressionableness which characterized this 
people, and on the other by the frequency 
with which perversions of Christian doctrine 
were already seen to be infesting the 
Churches. Compare also the apostle’s 
warning to the Ephesians (Acts xx. 28—31). 
If any man preach any other gospel unto you 
than that ye have received, let him be acoursed 
(εἴ τις ὑμᾶς εὐαγγελίζεται wap’ ὃ παρελάβετε, 
ἀνάθεμα ἔστω); tf any man is preaching 
unto you a gospel other than that which ye 
received, let him be anathema. ‘The verbal 
variations in these words, as compared with 
those in ver. 8, are slight. One, however, 
deserves attention : “If any one és preaching” 
compared with “If...an angel should 
... preach.” By this change in the form 
of making the supposition, the denunciation 
seems to come down out of the region of 
bare hypothesis to that of, perhaps, present 
reality. If so, the thunder of the apostle’s 
anathema would be felt by his readers 
approaching nearer and nearer to the bead 
of some particular individual among them- 
aclves,- towards whom their eyes would at 
once be directed with the feeling that it 
was, perhaps, his doom that the apostle was 
now pronouncing. The construction in the 
Greek of the verb “preach the gospel” 
(εὐαγγελίζομαι), with the accusative of the 
person to whom the message is brought, 
is found also in Acts xiii. 32; xiv. 21. In 
sense there scems to be no appreciable 
difference between this construction of the 
verb and that with the dative as found in 
the preceding verse and often. 

Ver. 10.—For do I now (ἄρτι yap); for at 
this hour. This “for” points back either 
to the fact of the apostle’s having now 80 
solemnly pronounced afresh the awful 
anathema which at some former time he 
had uttered; or which, in effect, is nearly 
the same thing, to the tone of feeling which 
he in so doing evinced, and to his method 
of apostolic action which he therein exem- 

lified. The adverb ἄρτι, as used in the 
Raw Testament, is distinguished from the 


more common “ now” (νῦν), as denoting that’ 


space of time which is most closely present. 
This shade of meaning is conspicuous, e.g. 
in the “Suffer it to be so just now” of 
Matt. iii, 15, that is, during that brief, 
quickly vanishing moment in which the 
Messiah was by Divine appointment to 
appear subordinate in position to bis fore- 
runner. So Matt, xxvi. 53, “Thinkest thou 
that I cannot beseech my Father, and he 
shall (ἄρτι) at this very moment send me 
more than twelve legions of angels?” John 
xvi. 12, “Ye cannot bear them (ἄρτι) just 
now;” ina very short while they would be 
enabled to bear them. 1 Cor. xiii. 12, “ Just 
now (ἄρτι) we see in a mirror, darkly ;” worde 


written under a vivid sense of how brief the 
interval is which separates the present state 
of things from that of the life to come. 
1 Pet. i. 8, “On whom, though just now 
(ἄρτι) ye see him not”—another cutcome of 
the same feeling. Similarly, in 1 Cor. iv. 
13; viii. 7, ἔως ἄρτι means “until this very 
hour;” and, on the other side of the point 
of time indicated ἀπ’ ἄρτι is “from this 
very hour” in Matt. xxvi. 64; John i. 52. 
Many have supposed that the apostle is 
speaking of certain characteristics of hia 
present course of behaviour as a believer 
and a servant of Christ, viewed in contrast 
with the life which he had once lived when 
en ardent disciple of Judaism. But the 
narrowly restrictive form of the adverb 
resists this interpretation. He could hardly 
with thés reference in view have used the 
phrase “just now,” or “at this very hour,’ 
of a tenor of life which he lad been pursv- 
ing for now more than twenty years. Some 
eminent critics (Alford, Kllicutt, Lightfoot, 
Sanday) tuke this ἄρτι as pointing to the 
atyle of language which the apostle is “just 
now” adopting: ‘Now, when I use such 
uncompromising language;” or, “There! is 
that the language of a man-pleaser?. Now 
do I,” eto. It is an objection to this view 
that it gives the adverb a somewhat diverse 
sense to that which it bears in ver. 9; for 
whereas in ver. 9 ἄρτι points to the oircum- 
stances of the present hour as prompting 
the apostle to the utterance of his anathema, 
according to the view referred to it here 
points to the present hour as exhibiting the 
apostle himself in ἃ certain aspeot. It is 
more obvious, and indeed gives the present 
use of the adverb more furce, to take it in 
both verses with the like reference. In 
both the apostle refers to the present hour 
as ἃ juncture in which he felt that it had 
become necessary to depart from his cus- 
tomary manner of using a winning style of 
address. At other times he will persuade 
and please; just now he cannot. Persuade 
men, or God? or do I seek to please men? 
(ἀνθρώπους πείθω ἢ τὸν Θεόν; ἢ ζγτῶ ἀνθρώποις 
ἀρέσκειν;); do I persuade men or God? or 
do I seek to please men? Expositors have 
endeavoured to establish, as one sense of the 
Greek verb rendered “persuade,” that of 
“making So-and-so one’s friend.” No doubt 
it often means to prevail, or endeavour to 
prevail, upon others, by coaxing, persuasion, 
bribery, or anyhow, to go along with you in 
some particular course of tlinking or acting 
indicated by the context; but it can nowhere 
be shown to mean, when standing alone, “to 
win So-and-so’s friendship.” In Acts xii. 
20, “Having persuaded Blastus” meana 
“ Having got Blastus to concur with them.” 
Similarly, Matt, xxviii. 14, “We will persuade 
him,” and 2 Mace. iy. 45, “ With a view te 


« 


16 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


(cu. 1. 1—24. 


_persuade the king.” The verb is used here, 
as in 2 Cor. v. 11, “Knowing the fear of the 
Lord, we persuade men.” In that passage 
the apostle states it to be his practice to 
make use of all means of persuasion in 
order to induce men to accept the gospel 
message (comp. ibid., vi. 1, ‘ Working 
together with him, we intreat also that ye 
receive not the grace of God in vain”). He 
was not content with merely, as an ambassa- 
dor, delivering the message and there leaving 
the matter; but made it his anxious concern 
to gain fur the message acceptance, by the 
use of arguments addressed to the reason, 
and appeals addressed to the feelings, by 
putting himself, as it were, by the side of 
those he was addressing as one who sympa- 
thized toa large extent with their ways of 
thought, for the purpose of conducting them 
onward to concurrence with more perfect 
views, Among many examples which might 
be cited, illustrating his skill in persuasion, it 
will suffice to refer to the manner in which 
he dealt with the Athenians, with the Jews 
when speuking to them from the stairs, with 
King Agrippa (Acts xvii. 22—31; xxii. 
1—21; xxvi. 2, 3, 26, 27), and to his Epistle 
‘to Philemon. Another feuture, closely con- 
nected with the one now mentioned, and 
here likewise referred to, is the care which 
the apostle took to “please men;” such 8 
care as produced a manner towards his 
fellow-men far exceeding the courtesy and 
shows of respectful consideration which 
the law of charity ordinarily prescribes. 
For example, instead of thrusting forward 
into notice, as the spirit of unsympathetic 
pride naturally piompts us to do, the points 
on which he-dificred from others, and in 
reference to which he knew himself to be 
standing on higher ground than they, he 
chose rather to make prominent any points 
of agreement which he could find already 
subsisting, conciliating their candid interest 
by thus fraternally putting himself on a 
level with them. If this did not suffice for 
the purpose of enlisting their sympathies on 
behalf of himself and his views, he did not 
hesitate, in matters morally indifferent, to 
mortify and snub his own tastes, and forego 
the dissenting judgments of his own superior 
cnlightenment, “to buffet his body,” as he 
expresses himself in 1 Cor. ix. 27, “and 
bring it into bondage,” by following, how- 
ever distasteful to himself, such practices as 
should get those whose spiritual improve- 
ment he was seeking, to feel, so to speak, 
comfortably at home with himself. In 
writing to the Corinthians the apostle in 
one passage (1 Cor. ix. 19—23) dwells. at 
some length upon this feature of his minis- 
terial conduct, not ashamed of it, but mani- 
festly glorying in it as a triumph of Christ’s 
grace in his soul Presently after, at the 


close of the following chapter, he distinctly 
propounds himself, as in this respect a 
Christ-like pattern, for their imitation, “ ven 
[he writes] as I please all men in all things, 
not seeking mine own profit, but the profit 
of the many, that they may be saved: be 
yo imitators of me, even as I also am of 
Christ.” Both of these strongly marked 
features of his ministerial character were 
liable to be misunderstood, and by his 
detractors could be easily misconstrued as 
grave faults. THe was, in fact, accused of 
speciousness and insincerity, of double faced 
dealings, of simulation and dissimulation. 
We can easily understand how readily such 
accusations would be set on foot, and how 
eolourable they could be made tosappear. 
That they painfully affected the apostle’s 
mind is evidenced by the frequency of the 
teferences he makes to them, and by the 
earnestness and deep pathos of feeling 
which not seldom mark those references. 
It is to such sinister criticism that he 
alludes, when in 2 Cor. v. 11, cited above, 
after saying, “we persuade men,” he adds, 
“but we are become manifest unto God,” 
meaning that, though he did make a habit 
of laying himself out to persuade, yet 
the entire sincerity of his action, however 
misconstrued by men, was patent to the 
Divine eye (comp. 2 Cor. i. 12). Now, we 
have reason to believe that the apostle had 
been apprised, or at least that he suspected? 
that in Galatia also such misrepresentation 
of these characteristics of his ministry was 
rife. The Epistle supplies at ieast one 
token of such having probably been the 
case. We gather from ch. v. 11 that 
he had been said to be still “preaching 
circumcision.” They who said this did so 
apparently in the sense that his having 
hitherto kept back this point of his doctrine 
in preaching to them was only an artifice of 
“ persuasion ;” that, in order to prevail upon 
them to accept the Christian faith, he had 
thought it expedient not at first to press 
upon them the observances of Judaism, 
while nevertheless he knew them to be 
necessary and was prepured by-and-by to 
insist upon their being attended to. St. 
Paul is conscious, therefore, of the existence 
on the part of some of the Galatian Church- 
men of unfriendly suspicions with regard 
to his straightforwardness and uprightuess. 
It is this stinging consciousness that occa- 
sions both the substance and the sharp 
abrupt tone of what he here says. The 
substance of the verse may be paraphrased 
thus: “I have written decisively and sternly ; 
for at such a critical juncture as the present 
is it men that I can make it my business ta 
‘persuade,’ as they eneeringly but not un- 
truly say I love to do? or is it God that I 
care, so to speak, to persuade, to wit of my 


on. 1. 1—24.] THE EPISTLE TO 


THE GALATIANS. 17 


fidelity to the gospel which he has com- 
tilted to my trust? ‘hey scoffingly say I 
Jove to ‘please men;’ and I thank God I 
have been wont to ‘please men’ to the very 
utmost of my power for their good; but is 
it my work just now to be pleasing men by 
waya of sweet tenderness and forbearance ? 
If at this time I were still laying myself 
out to ‘please men,’ these men, to wit, who 
are making havoc of the gospel messuge, and 
you who are ignorantly listening to them, 
—then were I no true servant of Christ.” 
‘fhe interrogative form into.‘which tlhe 
apostle’s language suddenly breaks is 
apparently, here also as in 2 Cor. iii. 1, 
due to his that moment bethinking himself 
of those malicious censurers of him. We have 
here an example of the form of sentence 
which the grammarians call zeugma; that 
is to say, “God” is named in conjunction 
with “men,” as an object to the action of 
the verb “persuade,” whereas this verb, 
suitable enough with relation to men, can 
only by ἃ strain upon its proper sense be 
employed with relation to God. The 
sentence would possibly have expressed 
what appears to have been the apostle’s real 
meaning with less ruggedness, but certainly 
with less intensity, if its second clause had 
been (perhaps), ‘or commend myself to 
God’s approval? (ἢ συνιστάνω ἐμαυτὸν τῷ 
Θεῷ ;). (For other instances of zeugma, see 
Luke i. 64; 1 Cor. iii. 2.) The addition of 
the article before Θεόν, while it is wanting 
before ἀνθρώπους, gives the noun a more 
grandiose tone, as if it were, “ Do I persuade 
men or Gop?” For if I yet pleased men, I 
should not be the servant of Christ (εἰ ἔτι 
ἀνθρώποις ἤρεσκον, Χριστοῦ δοῦλος οὐκ ἄν 
ἤμην); if I still were pleasing men, I were no 
servant (Greek, bondservant) of Christ’s. 
The received text of the Greek has “For 
if I still (εἰ yap ἔτι); but the “for” in 
omitted by recent editors. It makes no 
difference in the sense whether we retain it 
or not, for, retaining the “ for,’ we should 
have to understand before it, “1 trow not,” 
or the like. The word “bondservant” here 
expresses the official relation of a Christian 
minister, one especially at his Divine Owner’s 
beck and call. So Rom. i. 1; Phil. i. 1; 
2 Tim. ii. 24; Titusi. 1; Jas.i.1; 2 Pet.i. 1. 
The apostle means, “I were no servant of 
Christ in spirit and reality, whatever I 
might call myself.” A good many expositors 
suppose the “still” to be said with reference 
to the time before the apostle’s conversion : 
“1 were no apostle or Christian at all.” 
But (1) there is no indication either in this 
passage or anywhere that the apostle re- 
garded his life before his conversion as 
characterized by the desire to please men; 
(2) with the sense thus given to it, the 
thought, as Meyer observes, scems exces- 


GALATIANS. 


sively tame; (3) as thus explained, it would 
not harmonize with the apostle’s explicit 
and repeated declaration that, in the dis- 
charge of his high office, he did make a 
point of pleasing men. 

Ver. 11.—But I certify you, brethren 
(γνωρίζω δὲ TL. A. γνωρίζω yap] ὑμῖν, ἀδελφοί); 
now (or, for) I make known unto you, 
brethren. The external evidence, as well as 
the judgment of critics, is so evenly divided 
between the two readings, γνωρίζω δὲ and 
γνωρίζω γάρ, that the decision as to which is 
to be preferred seems to 116 with exegesis 
rather than with diplomatic criticism. On 
the one hand, the fact that the gospel which 
tle apostle had delivered to the Galatians 
came to him by ὦ direct revelation from 
Christ, would be properly viewed as a reason 
for regarding it as sacred and inviolable. 
Viewed thus, the reading, “now I make 
known to you,” appears justified as introduc- 
ing a plea warranting the anathema of vers. 
8,9. On the other hand, there is a differ- 
euce of tone perceptible between the previous 
context, which is strongly marked, as we 
have seen, by intense excitement of fecling, 
and the passage which commences with this 
verse. The relaxation in the latter of the 
stern, indignant severity of the former is 
indicated (1) by the phrase, “I make 
known unto you,” which, as well as the 
equivalent phrase, “I would not have you 
ignorant (οὐ θέλω ὑμᾶς ἀγνοεῖν), is with the 
apostle a customary prelude to a context of 
deliberate and measured statement; (2) by 
the introduction of the word “brethren,” 
even though, perhaps, holding the position 
in the sentence which it does here, this 
compellation has not the same pathetic 
affectionateness as marks it when heading 
a sentence; and (3) by the strain of quiet 
narration which the apostle now enters upon. 
This change in the tone is somewhat adverse 
to the supposition that the two passages 
were, as originally written, linked together 
by the closely connective “for.” It suggests 
to the careful reader the feeling that, after 
the apostle had somewhat relieved his spirit 
of the indignant excitement with which he 
at first addressed himself to the writing of 
the letter, he laid down his pen at the end 
of the tenth verse, which had introduced a 
topic of thought that threatened to lead him 
aside from his present business; and, after 
pausing to reflect how he had best pro- 
6664, resumed his work with the purpose 
of calmly showing, from the very circum- 
stances of his personal history, that the 
gospel which the Galatians had received 

_from him had solely a Divine origin. This 
view of the passage likewise favours the 
reading, “ Now I make known to you.” For 
the conjunction δὲ has here that simply 


metabatie or transitionary sense which it 
σ 


18 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


ἴση. 1. 1—24 


often bears when the writer is passing on to 
a fresh section of disvourse. ‘hns, in par- 
ticular, the conjunction is found with “I 
make known (γνωρίζω), in 1 Cor. xv. 7; 2 
Cor. viii. 1; and with “I would not have 
you ignorant,” in Rom. i. 13; 1 Thess. iv. 
13; T Cor. xii. 1. In fact, the direct pur- 
pose of the succceding exposition woull 
secm to be, not precisely so much to make 
good the particular point that the gospel 
which the apostle taught was sacred and 
inviolable, as to show that it was certainly 
true, and on that ground not to be departed 
from. The verb γνωρίζω cunnot mean “draw 
attention to” or “remind you.” Its only 
suse is “make known.” Its employment 
here appears to indicate a feeling on the 
apostle’s part that the point rc ferred to had, 
perhaps, not as yet been made definitely 
clear to those, or at least to some of those, 
whom he was addressing. That the gospel 
which was preached of me (τὸ εὐαγγέλιον τὸ 
εὐαγγελισθὲν ὑπ᾽ ἐμοῦ, ὅτι); touching the gospel 
which was preached by me, that it. In the 
Greek, the noun “ the gospel” is the aecusa- 
tive governed by “ make known;” while in 
fact the object contemplated by the verb is, 
not the gcspel itself in general, but certain 
circumstances relating to it expresse:! and 
implied in the following clause: “that it is 
not after man’s fashion.” This kind of con- 
struction is of frequent occurrence in Greck 
authors, Analogous examples are found in 
ver. 13 of this chapter, and 1 Cor. iii. 20; 
xv. 15; xvi.15. The aorist tense of εὐαγγελ- 
ισθὲν points to the same time as was re- 
ferred tu in “ called you ” (ver. 6) and “we 
preached” (ver. 8), which are both in the 
same tense. Is not after man (οὐκ ἔστι 
κατὰ ἄνθρωπον); ts not after the fashion of 
man; that is, “is not to be estimated as a 
merely human thing.” The clause does not 
immediately describe the origin of the gospel, 
which point is distinctly brought out in the 
ext sentence; but rather the character 
which attaches to it in consequence of its 
origin. The sense of the phrase, “accord- 
ing to man,” is illustrated by its use in 1 
Cor. ix. 8, “ Do I speak these things after the 
manner of men (κατὰ ἄνθρωπον) 1.6. “uccord- 
ing tomercly human principles of action.” 1 
Cor. iii. 3, “ Walk alter the manner of men.” 
On the other hand, in 2 Cor. vii. 10, “ vodly 
sorrow,” literally, “the grief which is ac- 
cording to God,” is a grief such as God 
inspires and approves; and in Eph. iv. 24, 
“The new man, which after God [Literally, 
‘according to God’) hath been created,” is 
“ereated in conformity with God's model or 
approval.” The present tense “is” marks 
the permanent character attaching to Paul’s 
gospel; it was “ the faith once for all (ἅπαξ) 
delivered to the saints’’ (Jude 3). 

Ver. 12.--For I neither received it of 


man, neither was I taught it (οὐδὲ γὰρ ἐγὼ 
παρὰ ἀνθρώπου παρέλαβον αὐτό, οὔτε ἐδιδάχθην); 
for neither at the hand of man did I myself 
receive it or was taught tt. The “for” 
introduces a consideration fortifying the 
foregoing affirmation, that the apostle’s 
gospel was not in its characteristic com- 
plexion human; it was no wonder that it 
was not; for neither was it human χη its 
origin. The “neither” (οὐδὲ) points for- 
ward to the whole subsequent clause, “ ut 
the hand of men did I myself receive it.” 
In a similar manner does “for neither” 
(οὐδὲ γὰρ) point to the whole subsequent 
clause in Jolin v. 22; viii, 42; Acts iv. 84. 
The ἐγὼ (I myself”) is inserted in the 
Greek, as contrasting the preacher with 
those to whom the gospel had been preached 
(ver. 11), in the same way as it is inserted 
in 1 Cor. xi. 23, “I myself received (ἐγὼ 
παρέλαβον) of the Lord tliat which algo I 
delivered unto you.” Some expositors (as 
Meyer, Alford) connect the “fcr neither” 
with the pronoun “I myself” only; as if 
the meaning were, “For neither did I, any 
more than Cephas* or James, receive the 
gospel from men.” This restriction of the 
“neither” to the noun or pronoun only 
which follows, is grammatically, of course, 
not inadmissible (comp. John vii. 5). But 
there is nothing in the immediate context 
to suggest the idea that the writer is just 
now thinking of the other apostles, and the 
seutence is perfectly clear without our in- 
troducing it. It is quite clear that the 
apostle means in the words οὔτε ἐδιδάχθην 
to affirm that man did not teach him the 
gospel any more than deliver it to him. 
But the verb “ was taught,” taken by itself, 
does not convey the idea of merely human 
instruction, being used continually in the 
Gospels of our Lord’s teaching, and John 
xiv. 26 of the “ teaching ” of the Holy Spirit. 
We must, therefore, conclude that the pas- 
sive verb “I was taught it” is, in the 
writer’s intention, conjoined with the active 
verb “T received it,” as both alike depend- 
ing upon the first words in the sentence, “ at 
the hand of man.’ If so, we have here an- 
other instance of the use of the figure zeugma 
(sve above on ver. 10); for while the preposi- 
tion παρὰ is used in its proper sense, when, 
as here, it is connected with παρέλαβον, it is 
only in astrained, imp,oper sense that it could 
be employed, like ὑπό, with a passive verb, 
to simply denote the agent. Some difficulty 
is felf in determining in what way the 
writer regards the notion of “receiving the 
gospel” as distinguishable from that of 
“being taught it” It is possible that the 
latter is added merely, as Bishop Lightfoot 
supposes, to explain and enforce the former. 
But another view ia deserving of cunsidera- 
tion. We may suppose “the gospel” to be 


ΘᾺ. 2 1--241 THE EPISTLE ΤῸ 


THE GALATIANS, 19 


regarded, fn the one case, as a kind of 
objective creed or form of doctrine,“ received” 
by a man on its being put before him, in 
consideration of the authority with which it 
comes invested, as a whole and so to speak 
en bloc, before ever its details have been 
definitely grasped by him. But in adiition 
to this, and subsequently to this, this same 
gospel may be regarded as brought within 
the range of the recipient’s distinguishing 
consciousness, by means of a “teacher” 
from without, whether Divine or human, 
instilling into his mind successively the 
various several truths which compose it. 
Now, it was conceivable that the apostle 
may, in the sense ‘above supposed, have 
“received” the gospel direct from God or 
from Christ, while, however, man may to a 
large extent have been the “teaching” 
instrument, through which its truths were 
brought home to his understanding. But in 
the prescnt passage St. Paul affirms that 
in actual fact man had no more to do with 
his reception of the gospel in the latter 
sense than in the former. And this affirma- 
tion tallies closely with what we read in 
the sixteenth verse of this chapter, and again 
with the sixth verse of the next chapter, 
both of which passages were written, no 
doubt, with an eye to the very notion re- 
specting the source of his knowledge of the 
gospel which he is here concerned to nega- 
tive. Textual critics differ among them- 
selves whether οὔτε (“nor”) or οὐδὲ (“ nor 
yet’) should be read before ἐδιδάχθην. The 
only difference is that “nor yet” would of 
the two the more clearly mark a distinction 
subsisting between the notions expressed by 
the two preceding verbs. If we acquiesce 
in the reading of the received text, which is 
“nor,” then, since the negative has been 
already expressed, the idiom of our languaye 
would here suppress the negative in “nor,” 
and substitute the simple “or.” But (ἀλλά); 
but only. The strongly adversative sense 
which marks this form of “but” requires 
that in thought we supply after it the words, 
“1 received it and was taught it;” for 
which, in translating, we may put, as an 
adequate substitute, the word “ only.” 
Bishop Wordsworth translates this ἀλλὰ 
“except,” citing in justification Matt. 
xx. 23. But the grammatical construction 
of that passage is not sufficiently clear to 
justify us in giving to ἀλλὰ a sense which 
does not appear conformable with its ordi- 
nary usage. Tho apostle, then, affirms thet 
it was not from or by man that he had 
received the gospel or been taught it. From 
whom, then, does he mean that he had ree 
ceived and Ly whom been taughtit? Are we 
to say, God the Father? or, Jesus Christ? 
dust at present, it should seem, the apostle 
is not concerned delinitely or contradis- 


tinctively to present to view either one of 
these Divine personalities, As has been re. 
marked above with reference to the words in 
ver. 3, “from God the Father and the Lord 
Jesus Christ,” the two conceptions ‘appear 
blended together to the apostle’s view, when 
he thinks of the Source from which spiritual 
gilts accrue to us. His immediate purpose 
is to assert that his gospel was in its origin 
Divine, and not human. For this it is 
enough to say that it came to him “through 
the revelation of Jesus Christ.” But in 
preparation for the discussion of those words, 
it may be here remarked that the supreme 
agency of God the Father, as in all else, so 
also in particular in the communication to 
the world of the gospel, ia an idea very 
distinctly put forth in a great many passages 
of the New Testament, and ia in fact the 
dominant representation. As examples of 
this, we may refer to Col i. 26, 27; Kph. 
i. 9; 2 Cor. v. 18, 20; Ileb. 1. 2. “The 
words” which “the Son spake” were those 
which “he had heard of the Father,” as 
were also those which the promised Paraclete 
was to “speak.” ‘The first verse of the 
Book of the Revelation furnishes ἃ striking 
illustration of this truth. It ruvs thus: 
“The revelation of Jesus Christ, which God 
gave him to show unto his servants, even the 
things which must shortly come to pass: 
and he [{.6. Jesus Christ] sent and signified 
it by his angel unto his servant John.” Of 
course, the verse refers to that disclosure of 
future events which forms the subject- 
matter of the particular bovk which it 
prefaces. Nevertheless, what is written 
here is no exceptional statement, but one 
simply exemplary; it is true in this par- 
ticular reference, just because it is true also 
with reference to the whole of that disclosure 
of spiritual facts which through tke gospel 
is made known to the Church. By the reve- 
lation of Jesus Christ (δι᾿ ἀποκαλύψεως Ἰησοῦ 
Χριστοῦ); through the revelation of Jesus 
Christ. This genitive clause, “of Jesus 
Christ,” has by most interpreters been 
understvod subjectively ; that is,as denoting 
the subject or agent implied in the verbal 
noun “revelation;” in other words, they 
suppose St. Puul hercin presents Jesus 
Christ as having revealed to him the gospel. 
Tuis does indeed appear to be the meaning 
of the phrase, “the revelation of Jesus 
Christ” in Rev. i. 1, just now referred to. 
Taken thus, the words put before us ex- 
plicitly the agency of only Christ in the 
revelation spoken of, leaving the agency of 
God without specific reference. Nore the 
less, however, does even in this case the 
thought of God’s agency naturally recur to 
our minds as implicd in connection with 
the mention of Jesus Christ, even as in the 
first verse of the chapter where it is ex- 


20 THE EYISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


[cu. 1. 1—24, 


plicitly named therewith. But we have 
to observe that in every other passage in 
which the Apostle Paul uses a genitive 
with the noun “revelation” (ἀποκάλυψις), 
the genitive denotes the object which is 
revealed. These are Rom. ii. 5, “ Revelation 
of the righteous judgment of God; ” viii. 19, 
“ Revelation of the sous of God;” xvi. 25, 
“Revelation of the mystery; ” and the pas- 
sages in which he designates our Lord’s 
second coming as “his revelation; ” 1 Cor. 
i. 7; 2 Thess. i. 7; with which comp. 
1 Pet. i. 7,13; iv. 13. That in these five 
last passages the genitive is objective and 
not subjective, if it could otherwise be called 
in question, is indicated by the cireum- 
stance that in 1 Tim. vi, 14, 15, where the 
apostle usesthe word “appearing” (ἐπιφάνεια) 
instead of “ revelation,” he adds, “ which in 
its own times he shall show who is the 
blessed and only Potentate,” etc., manifestly 
meaning the Father. One other passage re- 
mains to be mentioned, namely, 2 Cor. xii. 1, 
“visious and revelations of the Lord,” 
which many critics take as meaning “ vouch- 
safed by the Lord,” and which in consequence 
is commonly referred to in support of a 
similar interpretation of the passage now 
before us. But it may be questioned 
whether the apostle does not there denote 
by “visions” (ὀπτασίας) a somewhat dif- 
ferent class of spiritual phenomena from 
those denoted by * revelations of the Lord ;” 
by the former intending such visions as 
those, e.g. in which he seemed to himself to 
be transported into Paradise, or into the 
third heaven; and by the latter, appearances 
vouchsafed to him of the Lord Jesus in 
personal presence. These latter, it is true, 
might be alsofitly styled “visions” (ὀπτάσιαι), 
as, in fact, the most important of them all 
is styled in the speech before Agrippa (Acts 
xxvi. 19); whilst on the other hand, the 
former may be justly supposed to be included 
under the term “ revelations,” as employed 
pres:ntly after in ver. 7. But the addition, 
“of the Lord,” has at least much more point, 
if we assume the above-stated discrimination 
to have been intended between the two 
classes of phenomena; if, indeed, it is not a 
quite superfluous adjunct on the other view ; 
tor the “ visions and revelations” referred 
to would be, of course, conceived of as 
coming trom “the Lord,” without the 
apostle’s saying so. Instead of being avail- 
able in support of the subjective view of the 
genitive before us, the passage 2 Cor. xii. 1 
rather favours the other interpretation. And 
this interpretation of the words, “ of Jcsus 
Christ,” as objective is favoured by the 
subsequent context. Tor comparing this 
twelfth verse with the five verses which 
follow, we observe that in this verse the 
apostle affirms that lis gospel was uvt 


human in its character, because that he had 
not received it from man nor been taught it 
by man, but only “through the revelation of 
Jesus Christ.” Then in the five verses 
which follow, to make this affirmation good, 
he states that up to the time of his con- 
version he had been wholly averse to the 
Christian doctiine and intensely devoted to 
Pharisean Judaism, and that when God, 
calling him by his grace, “revealed his Son 
in him that he might preach him among the 
Gentiles,’ he applied to no human being for 
mental direction, but kept himself aloof from 
even those who were apostles before him. 
Now, in setting the statement of ver. 12 
over against the professedly illustrative 
statement which follows, we observe tliat 
“the revelation of Jesus Christ” in the 
former occupies precisely the same position 
in the line of thought which in the latter is 
held by “ God’s revealing his Son in him;” 
for the apostle attributes his possession 
of the truth of the gospel in the one to “the 
revelation of Jesus Christ,” and in the other 
to God’s revealing his Son in him, and in 
each case to nothing else. Surely it follows 
“that the revelation of Jesus Christ” which 
gives him tne gospel in the one case, is 
identical with ‘‘God’s revealing his Son in 
him ” which gives him the gospel in the 
other. Thus both the sense in which the 
genitive is ordinarily found when joined with 
the word “revelation,” and the guidance 
of the context, concur in determining for 
the genitive in the present case the objective 
sense. This interpretation secms at first 
sight to labour under the inconvenience 


' that, so construed, the sentence lacks the 


clearly expressed antithethon to the fore- 
going noun “man,” which we might natur- 
ally expect to find. But in reality the 
required antithesis is quite distinctly though 
implicitly indicted in the very term ‘ reve- 
lation; ” for this essentially carries with it 
the notion of an agency not merely super- 
human, but Divine. It would be an alto- 
gether contracted und indeed erroneous view 
of this “revelation” to suppose that it 
Means no more than the manifestation to 
Saul’s bodily sensea cf the personal presenca 
and glory of Christ. Beyond question this 
was of itself sufficient to convince Saul of 
the (ruth that Jesus, though once crucified, 
was now both living and highly exalted in 
the supersensuous wold, and by conse- 
quence to furnish the necessary basis tor 
further discoveries of truth. But more was 
required than the mere bodily sight of the 
glorified Jesus. This might confound and 
crush down his antagonism, but would not 
of itself impart converting and healing faith. 
Men might “see” und yet “not believe” 
(John vi. 36). There was required also the 
true and just perception of the relation which 


cH. 1. 1—24.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 21 


this exalted Jesns bore to individual human 


souls, in particular to Saul’s own soul; and. 


further, of the relation which he bore to the 
dispensations of God as dealing with his 
people, and as dealing with mankind at 
large ;—a perception of these things which 
would then only be true and just when 
accompanied with a duly appreciative, satis- 
fying, adoring sense of the infinite excellency 
of what was thus disclosed to him, and of 
its perfect adaptation to the wants of man 
as sinful. In short, this “revelation” to 
Saul “of Jesus Christ” involved that spiri- 
tual transformation which, in 2 Cor. iv. 6, 
the apostle describes in the following words: 
“Tt is God, that said, Light shall shine out 
of darkness, who shined in our hearts, to 
give the light [or, illumination] of the 
knowledge of the glory of God in the face of 
Jesus Christ.” For in that passage, though 
in the form in which he clothes his thought 
he speaks as if conjoining others with him- 
self, it appears almost certain that he 18 
describing there, as further on in vers. 7—12, 
his own personal experiences (see beginning 
of note on ver. 8), and also that he is de- 
scribing that first introduction into his own 
understanding and heart of the truths of the 
gospel, which qualified him thenceforward 
to fulfil his mission to proclaim it. This 
appears confessedly to have been in a very 
marked degree a miracle—a moral and spiri- 
tual miracle. In truth, the new birth of a 
human soul into the kingdom of God (John 
iii. 8) must ever be such, coming we know 
not how. What, however, seems ‘to dis- 
tinguish this case from most others, even 
from that of those previously called to be 
apostles, is the rapidity with which was 
formed in Saul the mind of “an apostle of 
the Gentiles ”—a mind, that is, distinctly and 
unhaltingly conscious of the “mystery” 
which in Eph. iii. 3 he says “ was by reve- 
lation made known to him,” the hitherto 
kept back “secret ” of God’s love in Christ 
to all the world, Gentile and Jew alike; of 
God’s readiness and pur)ose to embrace 
and bless with all spiritual blessings, with- 
out any reference now to Mosaism, every 
human creature that simply repented and 
believed in Jesus Christ. As the proclama- 
tion to the world of this “ mystery” was to 
be his great and pre-eminently distinguish- 
ing function, so at the very first he became 
fitted and qualified for its discharge by its 
impartation to his soul, not throuzh slow 
processes of thought and reasoning, but by an 
inward manifestation of the Christ, the sud- 
denncss and vividness of which corresponded 
in no small degree to the suddenness and 
vividness of that outward manifestation of 
the Christ. which was simultaneously made 
to his corporeal sense. This presents itself 
to us as, 4a the moral and spiritual sphere 


of our being, a miracle; and as such the 
apostle himself manifestly regarded it. It 
is hard to believe but that he would have 
repudiated with high disdain (1 Cor. ii. 15) 
any attempt to solve the marvellousness 
of the phenomenon in the alemkic of rational 
explanation; any theory which should find 
the phenomenon to be satisfactorily ac- 
counted for by these or those conditions 
of lis foregoing psychological history. 
These last may have prepared a favour- 
able field of development; but he knew 
for a surety that the product itself was 
no natural offspring of any spontaneous 
operations of his own mind. The very 
phrase in the verse before us, “ the revelation 
of Jesus Christ,” as well as the comparison 
which in 2 Cor. iv. 6 he draws between his 
spiritual transformation and the supernatural 
operation of the Almighty’s fiat, “ Let there 
be light,” plainly shows that he would have 
refused to allow the cause discoverable any- 
where else save in the unexplainable opera- 
tious of sovereign, almighty grace. And in 
all prudence we sould be content to be 
hercin not wiser than he. 

Ver. 13.—For ye have heard (ἠκούσατε γάρ) 
This “for” introduccs the whole statement 
which follows down to the end of the chap- 
ter; for the entire section is written with 
the view of substantiating the assertion in 
ver. 12, that he lad not received the gospel 
which he preached from man, but solely 
through illumination imparted immediately 
from hexven, “ Ye have heard,” ἐ.6. have 
been told; as Acts xi. 1; John iv. 1, and 
often. “I am only stating what ye have 
already been apprised of, when I tell you 
of,” ete. That the aorist tense of the Greek 
word does not limit the expression to any 
one communication, such e.g. as one made 
by the apostle liimself, is shown by the use 
of this very aorist in Matt. v. 21, 33, ete. ; 
Luke iv. 23; John xii. 34; Eph. iii. 2; iv. 
21; 2 Tim. i. 13; Jas. v.11. The apostle 
appears to have been himself in the habit 
of frequently telling the wondrous story of 
what he once had been and of the change 
wrought upon him. We have instances of 
his doing this in full detail in his speech 
from the stairs, and in his defeuce before 
Agrippa (Acts xxii. 1—16; xxvi.), and with 
less fulness in Phil. iii. 4—8; 1 Cor. xv. 8, 9. 
It is therefore quite supposable that he had 
himself said as much also in Galatia. We 
observe, however, that the apostle does not 
say, “heard from me,” as he might have 
done if he had himself been their informant ; 
and, further, that the effect of the words, “ye 
have heard,” does not, in point of construc- 
tion at least, of necessity extend beyond 
the fourteenth verse. We are therefore at 
liberty to surmise that what he here refers 
to as having been told them relates simply 


88 {HE EPISTLE ΤῸ THE GALATIANS. 


fot. t. 1—24, 


to his life before his conversion; and that 
the accounts which they lad reccived of it 
had come through unfriendly informants. 
These may have been either unbeliev- 
ing Jews or Judaizing Christians, who 
wished by these statements to disparage the 
upostle’s character as one who, if he really 
was not dishonest, was at all events capable 
of passing from one extreme of sentiments 
to their direct opposite with the utmost 
suddenness and levity, and therefore was 
not a man entitled to be regarded with con- 
fidence. Of my conversation in time past in 
the Jews’ religion (τὴν ἐμὴν ἀναστροφήν ποτε 
ἐν τῷ ᾿Ιουδαϊσμῷ); of my manner of life 
formerly in Judaism. “The manner in 
which I once behaved myself as devoted to 
Judaism.” The ποτε belongs to the action 
denoted in the verbal noun ἀναστροφήν, like 
ἡ τῆς Τροίας ἅλωσις τὸ δεύτερον, cited by 
Meyer from Plato (‘Legg.? iii. 685, D). 
᾿Αναστροφή, conversutio, which occurs re- 
peatedly in the New Testament, is generally 
rendered “ conversation” in Authorized Ver- 
sion (ph. iv. 22; 1 Pet. 1. 18; iv. 12; Heb. 
xiii. 7). “Judaism” means “the religious life 
of a Jew,” which distinctively was Mosaism. 
It occurs in 2 Mace. ii. 21; xiv.38; 4 Mace. 
iv. 16. Ignatius (‘Ad Magn.,’ 8) speaks of 
“not living according to Judaism,” as in ibid., 
10, he uses the word “ Christianism.” St. 
Paul has the verb “ Judaize ” below, ch. ii. 
14. On the objective accusative ἀναστροφὴν 
as defined by the following clause, “ how 
that,” ete., sce note on εὐαγγέλιον in ver. 11. 
How that beyond measure I persecuted the 
Church of God (ὅτι καθ᾽ ὑπερβολὴν ἐδίωκον 
τὴν ἐκκλησίαν τοῦ Θεοῦγ; how that beyond 
measure I was persecuting the Church of God. 
The imperfect “ was persecuting,” as well as 
the following, “ was making havoc and was 
advancing,” points to what he was doing 
when God interposed in the manner de- 
scribed in vers. 15, 16. Compare the use of 
the aorist ἐδίωξα in 1 Cor. xv. 9, where no 
such simultaneity required to be indicated. 
“ Beyond measure” or “ superlatively ” (καθ᾽ 


favourite phrase with St. Paul. A less eager 
pen might have wrilten “exceedingly ” 
(σφόδρα). Cf. Rom. vii. 13; 1 Cor. xii. 31; 
2 Cor. i. 8; iv. 7, 17; xii. 7. “OF God.” 
This is added to “the Church ” with pathos 
of strong self-condemnation, as it is also in 
1 Oor. xv. 9. The apostle feels now that 
his violence against the Cliurch was a kind 
of sacrilege. The sentiment is an echo of 
Christ’s words to him, “ Why persecutest thou 
me?” And wasted it (καὶ ἐπόρθουν αὐτήν); 
and making havoc of tt. The Greek verb 
(πορθεῖν) used again in this relation below, 
ver. 23, is similarly employed also in Acts 
ix. 21, “made havoc of those who called 
upon this Name.” The verb properly denotes 


“devastate,” “harry;” and in classical 
Greek is used with reference to towns, 
countries, and the like, being applied to 
persons only in the poetical style (Liddell 
and Scott). In the New Testament it is 
used only in relation to Saul’s persecution, 
eppareutly marking its deadly effectiveness 
as well as Saul’s determination if possible to 
extirpate the faith and its adherents. Thé 
expugnabam of the Vulgate would seem a 
fair.equivalent. 

Ver. 14.—And profited in the Jews’ re- 
ligion (καὶ προέκοπτον ἐν τῷ "lovdaioug); and 
wis going forward in Judaism ; that is, was 
going on Jurther and further in Judaism. 
The Greek verb (προκόπτειν) “to make 
way,” “advance,” is found also Luke ii. 52; 
Rom. xiii. 12; 2 Tim. ii, 16; iii, 9, 18. 
“In Judaism,” ἐ.6. in the sentiments and 
practices of Judaism. ‘he particular kind 
of Judaism which he has in view was the 
Pharisean form of Mosaism, <A “* Pharisce 
and son of a Pharisee,” a high-caste “ He- 
brew sprung of Hebrews” (Acts xxiii. 6; 
Pbil. iii. 5), Sau had thrown himself upon 
the study and observance, not only of all 
the rites and ceremonies prescribed -in the 
written Law, but also of the doctrines, rites, 
and ceremonies which rabbinical teaching 
and tradition added thereto; outvying in 
strictiiess those who were the strictest; never 
satisfied without adopting whatever fresh 
observances the authority of a Phariscan 
rabbin might commend to his regard. Above 
many my equals in mine own nation (ὑπὲρ 
πόλλοὺς συνηλικιώτας ἐν τῷ γένει μου). 
“ Above,” beyond; the same Greek preposi- 
tion as in Acts xxvi. 13; Plilem. 16, 21; 
Heb. iv. 12. Συνηλικιώτης, synonymous with 
συνῆλιξ, used in the Septuagint of Dan. i. 10, 
is equivalent to ἡλικιώτης or ἧλιξ, the σύν 
being prefixed merely to make the notion 
of parity more emphatic. Saul was then 
“a young man” (Acts vii. 58), aud the 
reference which he here makes to “ coevals ” 
of his, as sharing in his Judaistio enthu- 


, siasm, but outstripped by him therein, seema 
ὑπερβολὴν) was, at least about this time, a ᾿ 


to point to the rising up at that time of a 
party, “a young Jewry,” as we might nowa- 
days style it, especially espoused by the 
more youthful “Hebrews,” which devoted 
itself to the revival and consolidation of 
Pharisein Judaism in its most advanced 
form. We may concvive of them as actuated 
by antagonism, alike to the Gentilizing 
apirit of the Herodians; to the rigid bare 
form of Mosaism cherished by the Sadiu- 
cecs which rejected that development of 
spiritual doctrine which for many genera- 
tions had been going on in many pious and 
thoughtful minds; and finally, aud perhaps 
most specially of all, to tle new but rapidly 
spreading sect of the “Nazarenes.” “In 
my nation.” The apostle says “my,” as 


ou. x, 1—24.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 23 


conscious of the presence of the Gentiles to 
whom he is writing. For the like reason 
he uses the singular possessive pronoun, 
“my pcople (τὸ ἔθνος μου)" in his address to 
Felix, and in his defeuce before Agrippa, 
this king sitting only as an assessor by 
compliment at the side of the heathen 
governor (Acts xxiv. 17; xxvi. 4). Klse- 
where also St. Paul uses the word (γένος) 
“nation” to’ denote the Jewish people 
(Pbil. iii. 5; 2 Cor. xi. 26), whence ulso he 
employe the phrase, “my kinsman” (avyyévns 
μου), when addressing Gentiles to denote a 
fellow-Jew in contrast to Gentiles (Rom. 
ix. 8; xvi. 7, 21), In the present passage, 
“among my countrymen” may be accepted 
as a near equivalent; only the classification 
which the word “countrymen” presupposes 
is founded on relation to country, wl.ereas 
γένος denotes a bluod connection, comprising 
Jews of whatever country. Being more 
exceedingly zealous of the traditions of my 
fathers (περισσυτέρως ζηλωτὴς ὑπάρχων τῶν 
πατρικῶν pov παραδόσεων). The strong 
adverb here used, “more excessively ” 
(περισιτοτέρω5), which frequently occurs 
in St. Paul’s ardent style, always retains 
its proper comparative sense; as eg. 2 
Cor. vii. 15; xi, 23; xii, 15. It means, 
therefore, “more excessively than they.” 
The word ζηλωτής, rendered “ zealous,” 
followed by the genitive “ of the traditions,” 
has much the same meaning as in the 
phrases, “zealous of spirits [or, spiritual 
vifts];” ‘zealous of good works;” ‘ zeal- 
ous of the Law” (1 Cor. xiv. 12; Titus ii. 
14; Acts xxi. 20); in all which passages 
it is rendered in the Authorized Version 
88 here. lts meaning is illustrated by the 
use of the verb from which it is derived in 
1 Oor. xiv. 1, “ Desire carnestly spiritual 
gifts,” and 1 Cor. xiv. 39, “ Desire earnestly 
to prophesy ;” denoting, as it should seem, 
“admire and long to possess;” ‘aspire 
after”? (see below, the notes on ch. iv. 17, 
18). Theclause may be paraplirased, “ With 
more excessive fervency than they, affecting 
[or, being devoted to] the traditions of 
my fathers.” The only remaining passage 
in the New Testament in which the Greek 
word occurs as an adjective is Acts xxii. 3 
((nrwrhs τοῦ Θεοῦ), “" zcvlous towards God ” 
(Authorized Version), “zealous for God” 
(Revised Version); where the sense is pro- 
bably still that of fervent devotion, but 
implying also a palliating reference to the in- 
tense zeal which the Jews were tlien showing 
in vindicating the honour of God agaiust 
a supposed insult, “Zeal towards” an 
object implies also a “zeal for it;” in other 
words, fervent attacliment and devotion has 
also au outward-looking aspect of reseut- 
ment aud resistance against any who are 
regarded ag disposed to assail what we love. 


And this latter element of thought, the vindl- 
catory, is frequently the more prominent of 
the two, in the use of the word “zeal” and 
its derivatives, in the Hellenistical Greek 
of both the LXX. and the New Testament; 
while in some eases it is not clear which for 
the moment is the most in the speaker’s 
mind. The latter, no doubt, forms the 
principal notion of the name “Zealot” as 
applied in the closing decades of the Jewish 
commonwealth to a fanatical party, who 
felt they had a special vocation to vindicate 
the honour of God and his service by deeds 
of rancorous violence; to which party 
probably at one time belonged the Simon 
who in Luke vi. 15 is styled “ Zclotes,” a 
word, no doubt, synonymous with the Chal- 
daio word “Cananean” found in Matt. 
x. 4and Mark iii. 18. In the plirase, “the 
traditions of my fathcrs,” the apostle has 
been supposed by some critics to allude 
to the circumstance that he was “the son 
of a Pharisee;” thus making it equivalent 
to “the traditions of my family.” But 
the context shows that he is thinking 
of traditions observed likewise by those 
“coevals” cf his to whom he refers; the 
“futhers,” therefore, are the forefathers of 
the nation, equivalent to the “elders,” in 
the phrase current among the Jews, “the 
tradition of the elders” (Matt. xv. 2). 
Comp. 1 Pet. i. 18, “Your vain manner of 
life (πατροπαραδότου) handed down froin 
your fathers.” In the possessive pronoun 
“my ” the apostle still speaks of himself as 
a born Jew, in contralistinction to Gentiles 
such as he was addressing. If he had been 
addressing Jews, he would probally have 
written “our,” or omitted the pronoun alto- 
gether, as in Acts xxii. 3; xxiv. 14; xxviii. 
17. There seems to be a tone of mimesis 
in the phrase: g.d. “ The traditions whi h I 
proudly and fondly cherished as those of 
my fathers.” The adjective rendered “of 
the fathers” marks them as those who liad 
transmitted (παρέδοσαν) those traditions 
(παραδόσεις), not merely those who had 
possessed them. It has been questioned 
whether this phrase, “ puternal traditions,” 
includes those transmitted religious maxims 
and observances which the Mosaic Law 
itself prescribed. Probably it does. The 
“customs which [the Jews said] Moses 
delivered (παρέδωκεν) to us” (Acts vi. 14), 
as they appertained to “the fathers” (πατρῷα, 
Acts xxviii. 17), might also be justly desig- 
nated as “ the traditions of our fathers.” At 
the same time, the apostle would hardly 
have written as he here has done, if he had 
had these alone in his view; he would 
rather have introduced the venerable uume 
of “ihe Law.” The expression appeara 
chosen as comprehending, together with the 
prescriptions of the original Law, those 


24 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


(ow. 1. 1-- 


transmitted maxims and usages also which 
are described in the Gospels (cf. Matt. v.; 
XV.; xxiii; Mark vii.) as things said “by” 
or “to” them of old time, or as “the tra- 
ditions of the elders;” the particular in- 
stances of such which are specified in the 
Gospels being only samples taken out of a 
a very large class (Mark vii. 4). Our Lord 
limsclf, it is true, made a distinction be- 
twecn these two classes of religious doctrines 
or observances, rebuking specifically many 
of the latter class, and discountenancing the 
whole class in general when enforced on 
men’s consciences as ἃ religious obligation ; 
in contrast with “the Word of God,” these, 
he insisted, were “commandments” or 
“ traditions of mcn” (Mark vii.7—13). But 
a Judaist would hardly have been disposed 
to make tle same distinction. Rather, it 
would be the habit of his mind to blend 
and confound the two together as forming 
one entire system of formal religion; re- 
garding those of the latter class simply as 
explanatory of the former, or as a fitting 
suppletion required to give to the former due 
coherency and entireness. He would be 
disposed to consider that portion of the 
whole tradition which in reality was of purely 
human device as invested with the like 
obligatoriness as that other portion which 
could truly plead the sanction of Divine 
authorization. It is plain that this was 
the case with those Judaists with whom, 
in the Gospels, our Lord is seen contending. 
And in all the references which St. Paul 
makes to Judaism, whether as part of his 
own former life, or as confronted by him in 
his apostolic agency, nowhere, either, is he 
found making any distinction between the 
two certainly distinguishable elements which 
composed it. There were, however, different 
schools of thought in Judaistic traditional- 
ism, some stricter, some more lax. We must, 
therefore, further define our view of the par- 
ticular branch of “ paternal traditions” which 
the apostle here refers to by remembering 
that, as he said in his speech from the stairs 
(Acts xxii. 3), he had been “instructed ac- 
cording to the strict manner of the Law of 
their fathers;” trained, that is, to construe 
the requirements of the Law as these were 
interpreted by the strictest of all the schools ; 
as he sail before Agrippa, “After tle 
straitest sect of our religion I lived a Phari- 
see” (Acts xxvi. 5). Here the inquiry 
presents its 1f—In what way does the sub- 
stance of these two verses (18, 14) help to 
bear out the apostle’s statement in ver. 12, 
that the gospel which he preached was 
altogether derived from God’s own imme- 
diate revelation to himself? The whole 
complexion of the passage shows that the 
point which the apostle is here concerned 
to indicate relates to the posture of his our 


spirit at the time of his first receiving the 
gospel. The Saul of thoso days, he says, 
was animated by the sentiment of bitter 
hostility to the faith; by a stern resolve— 
the dictate, as he thought, of conscience— if 
possible to extirpate the Church. Was it 
supposable that a mind possessed with such 
an abhorrence of the Nazarenes was never- 
theless accessible to voices and teachings 
coming to him out of their society? Again, 
an earnestly religious man according to hia 
lights, Saul’s spirit was absorbed by devotion 
to Judaism—to the eager carrying out in 
practice, and to the vindication, of those 
modcs of religious life which the revered 
and fondly cherished traditions of his people 
recommended to him. Was it credible that 
he could for a moment have given a favour- 
able hearing to statements, whether of 
matters of fact or of religious belief, which 
proceeded from a sect of latitudinarians 
such as these, whose teacher had notoriously 
been foremost both in trampling down the 
fences of Pharisaism in his own practice and 
in loudly denouncing alike its principles and 
its representatives? Why, anything which 
those men could have said would to his view 
be at once self-condemned because simply of 
the quarter from which it issued. It may 
be objected that words which he had heard, 
we may confidently believe, from the martyr 
Stephen, who, in the controversy between 
Judaism and Christianity, may be regarded 
as in a certain degree Paul’s own forerunner, 
and very supposably from many another cou- 
fessor of the faith of less enlightenment 
than St. Stephen, though at the time re- 
pelled from his acceptance through his all- 
absorbing Pharisaism, may neverthcless 
have deposited in his mind pregnant seeds 
of thought and instruction afterwards to 
be fully developed. ‘To this objection it 
appears a sufficient reply that the gospel 
of the grace of God to all mankind, untram- 
melled by any Judaical restriction what- 
ever, which was the gospel entrusted to 
St. Paul, and which at this present hour of 
conflict in Galatia he was more specifically 
concerned to maintain, had at the time 
of his conversion been as yet most imper- 
fectly disclosed even to the most advanced 
disciples of the faith. This more perfectly 
developed form of the gospel it was not 
possible that he should have heretofore 
heard from any Christian martyr or from 
any Christian teacher; for at that time it 
was still a mystery, not patent as yet to the 
eyes of even apostles themselves (see Eph. 
iii. 1—7). 

Ver. 15.—But when it pleased God (ὅτε 
δὲ εὐδόκησεν ὁ Θεός); and when it was the 
good pleasure of God. The Authorized 
Vorsion and the Revised Version have “but 
when.” To determine the exact force here 


on. 1. 1—24,] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 2 


of the conjunction δέ, we must consider how 
the sentence it introduces stands related 
to what precedes. The main underlying 
thought of vers. 13, 14 was that the 
habit of the apostle’s mind before his con- 
version was such as wholly to preclude the 
notion of his having known the gospel up to 
that hour. The main thought pervading 
versa. 15-—17, and indeed pursued to the 
end of the chapter, is that, after he had 
received fro God himself the knowledge of 
tne gospel, he had had no occasion to have 
recourse to any mortal man, apostle or other, 
for the purpose of further instruction therein. 
It. follows that the conjunction connecting 
the two sentences is not adversative, as it 
would, of course, be taken if God’s dealings 
with him, described in vers. 15, 16, were the 
main point of this new paragraph, but is 
simply the sign of the writer’s passing on to 
another thouvlt—not one contrasted with 
the preceding, but merely additional. As 
examples of the use of δὲ as continuative and 
not adversative, comp. Luke xii. 11,16; xiii. 
6, 10; xv. 11; Acts ix. 8, 10; xii. 10, 13; 
Rom. ii. 3; 1 Cor. xvi. 15,17. It may be 
represented in English by “and” or “and 
again.” In the reading of the Greek text 
it is not certain whether we ought not to 
omit the word “God” (ὁ Θεός). If it is 8 
gloss which has crept into the text, it is 
unquestionably a just gloss. Similar omis- 
sions of the Divine Name,as Bishop Lightfout 
observes, are frequeit in St. Paul (see ch. i. 
6; ii. 8; Rom. viii. 11; Phil. i. 6). The 
verb εὐδοκεῖν properly expresses complacency; 
as eg. Matt. iii. 17, “In whom I am well 
pleased ;” and ofien. And this notion may 
be commonly traced in its use even when 
followed, as here, by an infinitive. Thus in 
1 Thess. ii. 8, “It would have been a 
pleasure to us to impart,” etc.; in 1 Thess. 
iii. 1, “It was painful to us to be left alone, 
but under, the circumstances we gladly chose 
to be so.” When applied, as here, to God, 
the notion of the pleasure which he takes 
in acts of beneficence must not be lost sight 
of; “ Was graciously pleased ;” comp. Luke 
xii. 32, “It is your Father’s good pleasure 
to give you the kingdom.” In Eph. i. 5 
the noun “ good pleasure ” points to the act 
of “ predestination ” spoken of as (if we may 
venture so to speak of God) a volition of his 
heart and not of merely his regulative 
wisdom. The apostle seems led to use the 
word here by the complacency and joy which 
he himself felt in having been made the 
recipient of this “ revelation;” those senti- 
ments of his own bosom are, to his view, a 
reflection of the Divine complacency in im- 
parting it. At.the same time, the reader 
must be conscious of the deep sense, in fact 
the supremely prevailing sense, which the 
apostle has just here, that the imparting of 


the revelation spoken of was the fruit solely 
of a Divine volition triumphing over extreme 
wickedness and infutuation on his own part. 
Compare, in this respect also, the passage 
Eph. i. 5, just cited. It is this feeling which 
prompts the introduction of the deeply 
emotional parenthesis consisting of the two 
next clauses of the verse. Who separated 
me from my mother’s womb (ὁ ἀφορίσας pe 
ἐκ κοιλίας μητρός mov); who set me apart from 
my mother’s womb. The verb ἀφορίζω, set 
apart, separate, which is found used in 
other relations in Lev. xx. 26 (LXX.); Matt. 
xiii. 49; xxv. 32; Acts xix. 9; ch. ii. 12, is 
employed here with an implied reference to 
a specific office or work. Such a reference 
is explicitly added in Acts xiii. 2, “ Separate 
me Barnabas and Saul for the work where- 
unto I have called them;” and in Rom. i. 1, 
“ Separated unto the goxpel of God.” There 
is this distinction, however, between the 
“setting apart” of the present passage and 
that of Acts xiii. 2, that, whereas in the latter 
it was one actually realized, here it is in the 
Divine predestination only, which last seems 
to be nearly the sense of the words, “ where- 
unto I have called them,” in the Acts. In 
Rom. i. 1 the verb probably includes both 
senses, “From my mother’s womb” means 
“from the time that I was as yet unborn;” 
not perhaps exactly “ever since my birth,” 
as Judg. xvi. 17; Matt. xix. 12; Acts iii. 2; 
xiv. 8; comp. rather Luke i. 15, as illus- 
trated by ver. 41. The adilition of these 
words is designed to mark the purely arbi- 
trary character of this predestination. Comp. 
Rom. ix. 11, “The children being not yet 
born, neither having done anything good or 
bad, that the purpose of God accoriing to elec- 
tion might stand.” Viewed thus, the clause 
appears as an utterance of adoring humility 
on the prt of the apostle, combined, how- 
ever, with the strongest possible assertion of 
the Divine origin of his mission. A similar 
statement of God's arbitrary selection of a 
particular human being for a particular 
function is found in Isa. xlix. 1,“ The Lord 
hath called mc from the womb; from the 
bowels of my mother hath he made mention 
of my name; ” ibid., ver. 5, “ That formed me 
from the womb to be his servant;” and 
again, with yet more striking resemblance, 
in Jer. i. 5, “ Before I formed thee in the 
belly I knew thee; and before thou camest 
forth out of the womb I sanctified thee, and 
I ordained thee a prophet unto the nations 
(προφήτην εἰς ἔθνη). It is difficult not to 
believe that this conviction of the apostle 
concerning himself as an object of God’s pre- 
destinating purpose, and perhaps even the 
form of its expression—for compare the words 
in the next verse, “That I might preach 
him among the Gentiles (é@veo.v)”’—was very 
mainly derived from the Lord’s words te 


26 THE EPISTLE TO THE GAT.ATIANS. 


(ow. 1. 1—24, 


Jeremiah, applied by the Spirit to his own 
particular case (comp. Acts ix. 15). The 
apostle feels that all the while that he had 
been pursuing that career of persecuting 
impiety and passionate Pharisaism, the 
Almighty had kept his eye upon him as his 
predestiaed apostle, aud been waiting fur the 
fitting heur when to summon him forth to his 
work, And called me by his grace (καὶ καλέσας 
με διὰ τῆς χάριτος αὐτοῦ). As tle “setting 
apart” mentioned in the previous clause un- 
questionably was a “setting apart” for the 
apostolic office, it might seem convenient to 
understand the “calling” likewise as a 
calling to be an apostle. So most probably 
we are to take the words κλητὺς ἀπόστολος in 
Rom. 1. 1 as meaning “called to be an 
apostle; ” and in Heb. v. 4 the verb “called” 
is used of one called to be a priest. But the 
prevailing sense of “being callcd,” in St. 
Paul’s writings, refers to the bringing of the 
sonl to Christ and into his kingdom ; and 
in this definite reference the apostle uses 
the verb no less than twenty-four) times, 
three of them in this Epistle (i. 6; v. 8, 
13). And this, the regular use of the term, 
is quite in place here. It was quite natural 
that the writer, aftur so vividly portraying 
his former life when uuregenerate, should 
now distinctly advert to the moral transform- 
ation which by Divine grace he had been 
the subject of. The word “grace” denotes 
God’s frecly expanding unmcrited goodness, 
not as existing in hieself, but as energizing 
upon men. This is made clear by the in- 
troduction of the preposition (διὰ) “ through” 
or “by.” It is that “ grace ” whose “reign- 
iug” power the apostle so exultingly extols 
in Rom. v, 15—21 (comp. Eph. ii. 5, “ By 
grace have ye been saved”). The notion of 
mercy shown to the utterly undeserving is 
a prominent element of the word, connected 
as it is here with the description of the 
writer’s former wickedness (comp. the use 
of the verb “obtained mercy (ἠλεήθην) in 
1 Tim. i, 13, 16). This clause, together 
with the preceding one, is not to be taken 
as a part of the historical statement in con- 
junction with the next verse, as if tracing 
the successive steps of the transaction, but 
as a periphrastic designation of Almighty 
God adapted to the circumstances of the 
case. ‘The onearticle prefixed in the Greek 
to the two combined clauses shows this. We 
need not, therefore, perplex ourselves to de- 
termiue the rel.ition in point of time which 
the Divine acis here indicated bear to that 
described in the verse which follows. The 
tone of the verso is in a measure apologetic, 
rebutting the prejudice which, we may be 
sure, did in the view of many accrue to the 
writer from what he once had been. Thus: 
“ Nevertheless, God had all along, even from 
the dawn of his being, set him apart to be 


his apostle; God, by a marvellous exercise 
of goodness, had called him forth out of that 
evil state to be his own: unworthy, no 
doubt, he had proved himself to be of such 
mercy; but what God’s grace had made him, 
that he was; for who should dare to con- 
travene his hand (comp. 1 Cor. xv. 8—19)?” 
Ver. 16.—To reveal his Son in me (éroxa- 
λύψαι τὸν υἱὸν αὐτοῦ ἐν ἐμο. The ren- 
dering “in me,” te. “in my soul,” or, in tlie 
idiom of the New Testament, “in my heart,” 
is quite borne out by the use of the same 
preposition in numerous passages; eg. . 
John ii. 25, “Knew what was in man;” 
John iv. 14, “ Shall become in him a well ;” 
Col. 1. 27, “Christ in you the Hope of 
glory;” Rom. vii. 17, 20, “Sin whieh 
dwelleth in me; ” Rom. viii. 9, “ The Spirit 
of God dwelleth in you;” Rom. viii. 10, 
“Christ in you;” Phil. ii. 18, “God which - 
worketh in you” (comp. also Eph. iii. 20; 
Col. i. 29).. Chrysostom writes, “ But why 
does he say, ‘To reveal his Son in me,’ and 
not‘to me’? It is to signify that he had 
not only been ingtructed in the faith by 
words, but that he was richly endowed with 
the Spirit; that the revelation had enlight- 
ened his whole soul, and that he had Christ 
speaking within him ” (‘ Comment. in Gal.’). 
This exposition tallies remarkably with the 
description which the apostle in 2 Cor. iv. 6 
gives of the process by which he had received 
the “treasure” of the gospel: “Sceing it 
is God, that said, Light shall shine out of 
darkness, who shined in our hearts, to give 
the light (or, illumination] of the knowledge 
of theglory of God in the face of Jesus Christ.” 
The “veil” which, while he was yet in 
Judaism, “had becn upon his heart,” was 
tuken away; “with face unveiled” he was 
enabled to “behold, as in a mirror, the 
glory of the Lord” (2 Cor. iii. 15—18). 
‘this account of his spiritual illumination, 
written near about the same time as the 
passage before us, shows the manner in 
which at that time the transaction pre- 
sented itself to his mind. This revelation 
of God’s Son to him involved, we may feel 
certain, the revelation of him in the rela- 
tions which, as the once crucified and now 
exalted Christ, he bears to all mankind, 
Gentiles as well as Jews, and in the rela- 
tions which he bears to his Church. 
“Christ Jesus” was then (to use the 
apostle’s words in 1 Cor. i.30) “made unto 
him Wisdom from God, both Righteous- 
ness and Sanctification and Redemption; ” 
and what Christ was then of God made to 
be to Paul himself, that also, as the joyful 
recipient of the revelation at the same time 
learnt, Christ was through the recipient’s 
own preaching of the Word to be of God 
made to all who should receive his mes- 
sage. ‘I'he view of the passage above giver 


oun. 1. 1—24.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 21 


is required by the tenor of the context. If 
it is not admitted, there is nothing in the 
whole passage to make good the apostle’s 
affirmation, in ver. 12, that he had received 
the gospel, not from man, but by the reve- 
lation of Jesus Christ. If after the analogy 
of such passages as 1 Tim. i. 16, “That in 
me as chief might Jesus Christ show forth 
all his long-suffering ;”” Rom. ix. 17, “ That 
I might show in thee my power;” 1 Cor. 
iv. 6,“ That in us ye might learn;”—we 
were to take the present clause to mean 
“To reveal to men the wonderful grace of 
his Son by what he did tn my case,” the 
words would merely point to Christ’s mercy 
shown to him as a sinner; they would sup- 
ply no statement of the fact of the apostle’s 
having been furnished with the knowledge 
necessary in order that he might slow the 
glad tidings of him among the Gentiles. 
In other words, the clause would neither 
satisfy the requirement of ver. 12 nor that 
of the dependent clause which follows. If, 
again, after the analogy of the words, “ Ye 
seek a proof of Christ that speaketh in me,” 
in 2 Cor. xiii. 3, taking this to mean 
“Christ that speaketh by me;” or if the 
words in Acts xvii. 31, “ He will judge the 
world in righteousness by (Greek, ‘in’] 
the Man whom he hath ordained,” we pro- 
pose to understand the meaning to be 
“ Reveal his Son by me,” ἑ. 6. by my preach- 
ing, we are met by the objection that the 
clause would anticipate the thought ex- 
pressed by the following words: “That I 
might show the glad tidings of him among 
the Gentiles,” which, however, stand as 
expressing their dependent consequence. 
Here the important question arises how 
the reference which the apostle here makes 
to the revelation of Jesus Christ made “in 
him" stands related to the accounts repeat- 
edly given in the Acts of the personal 
sight of the Lord Jesus accorded to him at 
his conversion—accounts which are con~ 
firmed in the Epistles by the apostle’s own 
words in 1 Cor. ix. 1,“ Am I not au apostle? 
Have I not seen Jesus our Lord?” To 
harmonize the two some have been led to 
do violence to the phrase, “reveal in me,” 
so as to make it in some way or other to 
mean “reveal to me,” and thus render it 
possible to make the words refer to that 
personal manifestation made to Saul’s bodily 
senses. Others have had recourse to the 
yet more violent and indeed utterly destruc- 
tive expedient of inferring from this phrase 
that the revelation of Christ made to the 
apostle at his conversion was altogether and 
exclusively spiritual; and that the spiritual 
sight of our Lord had been go realizing and 
vivid a8 tu have been even mistaken by the 
apostle himself for a manifestation actually 
made to his senses. We are relieved of 


the necessity of adopting either of these 
methods of criticism by the consideration 
that, in the course of the argument which 
the apostle is now pursuing, there is nothing 
to lead him to speak at all of the outward 
circumstances accompanying his conversion. 
All that he now has occasion to refer to is 
the fact that at that time God Almighty 
did himself give to his soul ao clear a view 
of bis Son as qualified him at once to preach 
the gospel to the Gentiles; so clear that, 
not needing further illumination, he had in 
fact sought none of any mortal man. This 
is all that the line of argument requires the 
apostle now to refer to.- A reference to the 
actual personal sight which he then had of 
the Lord Jesus would in no way have served 
his purpose. Such reference would not 
have even involved by inference, much less 
have definitely stated, the point which he 
now is concerned to state. This point is, 
plainly, the communication to hia soul of 
the full knowledge of the gospel, and 
nothing else; and accordingly it is this 
alone that he now makes mention of. It 
has been questioned at what precise junc- 
ture in the narrative of the ninth chapter of 
the Acts the revelation here spoken of 
should be supposed to have taken place. 
Our Lord’s personal manifestation of himself 
to Saul on his road to Damascus, involving 
asit did the complete instantaneous over- 
throw of all his previous views, relative 
alike to “Jesus of Nazareth” and to the 
idea of the expected “ Messiah,” must have 
been an all-important preparation for that 
full disclosure of the truth to his soul which 
is here indicated; but there is no sufficient 
reason for identifying the one with the 
other. The history of the Acts (xxii. 18) 
and the Epistles (1 Cor. xi. 23; 2 Cor. xii. 
1, 8) make mention of several occasions on 
which our Lord appears to have shown him- 
self to St. Paul and made important com- 
munications to him; and the incidental 
manner in which these have come to be 
mentioned suggests the belief that they 
may have been only τ few out of many 
similar instances, others of which have lain 
unmentioned. There may very supposably 
have heen such taking placo (we will say) 
presently after Saul’s baptism, and pointed 
forward to by our Lord in his words to 
Ananias, “I will show him how m ny things 
he must suffer for my Name’s sake” (Acts 
ix. 16). It is very possible that we do not 
commonly bear enough in mind how little, 
in fact, it is that the record tells us of this 
most interesting event; and, in particular, 
that we do not adequately realize the fre- 
quency and the intimate character of the 
communications to which this “choice in- 
atrument (σκεῦος ἐκλογῆς)" of Divino teach- 
ing would seem to bave been admitted iy 


28 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 


[cu. 1, 1—44, 


his Master. And who (we may further ask) 
may venture to determine what part the 
Lord Jesus took personally, that is, by per- 
sonal intercourse, in the process of illumi- 
nation of which the apostle here declares 
himself to have been the subject, or how 
much of it was effected by the agency of 
the Third Person of the holy Trinity, co- 
operating with the intense action of Saul’s 
own earnest, questioning, light-imploring 
mind, especially during those three days 
spoken of in Acts ix.9? “For, behold, he 
prayeth !” (Acts ix. 11,12). It seems only 
reasonable to believe that therevelation of his 
Son which (the apostle says) God vouchsafed 
to him, preceded his very first public appear- 
ance in the synagogues of Damascus as an 
evangelist, and that this revelation was not 
deferred, as some imagine it was, until after 
his withdrawal into Arabia. Indeed, that 
it did precede it appears to be conclusivcly 
established by the statement of the verse 
now before us and the next following; for 
the course of action described by the writer, 
both negatively and affirmatively, in the 
words beginning with, “I consulted not,” 
is represented as ensuing “immediately ” 
upon the “revelation in him of God’s Son.” 
That the locality where this revelation was 
made was Damascus or its vicinity is indi- 
cated by the words, “I returned to Damas- 
cus,” in ver. 17. This circumstance be- 
tokens the consciousness in the writer’s 
mind that the story of his conversion was 
not unknown to his readers. That I might 
preach him among the heathen (ἵνα εὐαγγελί- 
ζωμαι αὐτὸν ἐν τοῖς ἔθνεσιν); that I might 
show the glad tidings of him among the Gen- 
tiles. In this instance, as well as perhaps 
in some others, the Authorized Version 
falls somewhat short of representing the 
exact force of the verb εὐαγγελίζεσθαι by 
rendering it ‘ preach,” which more nearly 
answers to κηρύσσω. In Luke viii. 1, where 
in the Greek we have the two verbs to- 
gether (κηρύσσων καὶ εὐαγγελιζόμενος), OUF 
translators were compelled to use another 
term; and accordingly they render εὐαγγελ- 
i(uevos, “showing [Revised Version, 
‘bringing’] the glad tidings of [the king- 
dom of God];” which shade of thought was 
what the evangelist intended to suggest. 
The verb surely always retains some tinge 
of its original element of “glad tidings,” 
though this may often have been more or 
less attenuated, as in the case of the word 
εὐαγγέλιον, gospel, itself, by its becoming 
a set term. In the present instance, the 
apostle’s posture of feeling at the time when 
the “joyful tidings” were first brought home 
to his own heart seems to suggest a return, 
at least here, to the original import of the 
word. The present tense of the Greek verb 
(εὐαγγελίζωμαι) points to the continuous 


character of the service; as if it were, “ That 
I should be a shower-forth of the glad 
tidings.” The aorist would have recited the 
entire service os one whole. “ Among the 
Gentiles.” Dean Howson very justly ob- 
serves, “ We should mark how emphatio 
in all accounts of the conversion is the refer- 
ence to his work among the Gentiles. 
Thus,‘ The Gentiles, unto whom now I send 
thee, to open their eyes and to turn them 
from darkness to light,’ are named by 
Christ himself in the first communication 
from heaven (Acts xxvi. 17, 18). To Ana- 
nias the direction is given, ‘Go thy way: 
for he is a chosen vessel unto me, to bear 
my Name before the Gentiles [and kings, 
and the children of Israel].’. . . To which 
we may properly add what was said to him 
at Jerusalem, when he first went thither 
from Damascus, ‘ Depart; for I will send 
thee far off to the Gentiles’ (Acts xxii. 
21)” (‘Speaker’s Commentary,’ in loc.). 
Immediately (εὐθέως). The construction of 
the sentence imperatively requires us to 
connect this adverb with the two affirma- 
tive clauses which the writer adds to the 
two negative ones which he first interposes, 
and not with these two negative clauses 
alone, while, however, its import is felt to 
attach itself to these also. The turn of 
thought seems to be this: “I felt at once 
that I needed not to advise with any mortal 
man; no, not even with the older apostles; 
and accordingly I abstained from doing so ; 
I immediately went away into Arabia, and 
then forthwith came back to Damascus.” 
I conferred not (οὐ προσανεθέμην); I con- 
sulted not. The use of the Greek verb 
constructed with « dative as meaning “ad- 
vise with,” “seek counsel in personal inter- 
course with,” is well illustrated by several 
passages cited by the critics: Diod. Sic., 
xvii. 116, “ Consulting the soothsayers con- 
cerning the sign;” Lucian, ‘ Jup. Trag., 
§ 1, “Consult with me; take me as your 
adviser in business;” Chrysippus (ap. in 
Suidas, sub verb. νεοττός), “Consulting a 
dream-interpreter.” Bengel takes the pre- 
position πρὸς in the compound verb as 
meaning “further, te. the Divine revela- 
tion was enough forme.’ But the instances 
just cited of the use of the verb render this 
doubtful. On this point, see Ellicott’s 
‘Commentary,’ in loc. In ch. ii. 6 the verb 
requires to be taken differently (see note). 
With flesh and blood (σαρκὶ καὶ αἵματι). The 
phrase, “flesh ond blood,” occurs ix four 
other places in the New Testament: (1) 1 
Cor. xv. 50, “ Flesh and blood cannot inherit 
the kingdom of God, neither doth corruption 
inherit incorruption;” (2) Heb. ii. 14, 
“Since the children are sharers in flesh and 
blood [the Revised Greek text reads ‘ blood 
and flesh ’], he also himself in like manaes 


on. 1. 1—24.] THE EPISTLE TO 


THE GALATIANS. 20 


partook of the same;” (3) Eph. vi. 12, 
“Our wrestling is not against flesh and 
blood, but against... the spiritual hosts 
of wickedness in the heavenly places ;” (4) 
Matt. xvi. 17, “Flesh and blood hath not 
revealed it unto thee, but my Father which 
is in heaven.” In the first two of these 
passages the phrase denotes the bodily 
nature of men viewed as subject to mor- 
tality ; which is the turn of thought also in 
Eeclus. xiv. 18, where the human race is 
styled a “generation of flesh and blood.” 
In the other two it denotes human beings 
themselves, described by their material na- 
ture, but with reference to their compara- 
tive inefficiency as viewed alongside, in (3) 
with purely spiritual agents; in (4) with 
God. In precisely the same way as in the 
last-cited passage, the apostle uses the 
phrase here. Knowing that God had him- 
self revealed in him his Son, in order that 
he should proclaim him among the Gentiles, 
he at that crisis of action felt any reference 
for teaching or practical direction to mere 
men to be in his case altogether unneces- 
sary. As the next clause specifies tle older 
apostles, who are mentioned as being at that 
time at Jerusalem, it may be that the 
phrase, “ flesh and blood,” in its most imme- 
diate scope, contemplates believers or elders 
(for probably there already were Christian 
elders there) of Damascus. Ananias is the 
only Damascene believer named in the his- 
tory, though it speaks of others (Acts ix. 
19); he was a man of remarkably high 
estimation even amongst the unbelieving 
Jews (Acts xxii. 12), and he had been 
honoured by Christ with « special vision, 
and sent by Christ on a special mission to 
Saul. If Saul had felt it to be incumbent 
upon him to advise with any servant of 
Christ, whether as to what he should be- 
lieve or as to what he should do, surely to 
Ananias he would naturally have looked. 
But not even to an Ananias would Saul 
refer for guidance at this juncture. The 
sense which has frequently been given to 
the phrase, “ flesh and blood,” as meaning 
“the dictates of one’s own fleshly nature,” 
is neither favoured by its use in any other 
passage (although “the flesh,” standing 
alone, might have admitted of such an in- 
terpretation), nor is it in any way suggested 
hy the tenor of the context. The apostle is 
here dealing solely with his relations to 
other men, 

Ver. 17.—Neither went I up to Jerusalem 
(οὐδὲ ἀνῆλθον [L. A. ἀπῆλθον] εἰς Ἱεροσόλυμα); 
neither went Iup (οΥ, away). This “neither” 
negatives one particular instance of the 
general notion of “consulting flesh and 
blood,” in reference to which an exception 
might else have not unnaturally been sup- 
posed likely. ΤῈ forma 8. sort of climax to 


the negative. So Rom. ix. 16, “Not of him 
that willeth, neither of him that runneth.” 
It is uncertain whether “went up” or 
“went away” is the true reading of the 
Greek text. If the latter, the verb is re- 
peated after the following “ but” (ἀλλά), 
as Rom. viii. 15, “ Ye have received; ” Heb. 
xii. 18, 22,“ Ye are come.” To them which 
were apostles before me (πρὸς τοὺς mpd ἐμοῦ 
ἀποστόλους). For this “before me,” comp. 
Rom. xvi. 7. Every reader must feel the 
consciousness of official parity with tho 
twelve which transpires in this expression 
of St. Paul’s. The like consciousness is 
apparent in 1 Cor. xv.5—11, strongly as the 
writer there expresses his sense of compara- 
tive personal unworthiness, Why, it may be 
asked, does the apostle thus particularly refer 
to the ‘apostles before him”? The probable 
answer seems to be, for the purpose of more 
forcibly illustrating the assured conviction, 
which from the very. first he entertained, of 
the sufficiency and Divine authority of the 
gospel which he had already received. But 
I went into Arabia (ἀλλ᾽ ἀπῆλθον eis ’Apa- 
βίων); but I went away into Arabia. It is 
impossible to determine what was the pre- 
cise locality to which St. Paul then went. 
“ Arabia” was in those days a geographical 
term of very wide significance. Damascus it- 
self appertained to Arabia; so Justin Martyr 
writes (‘ Dial. 6. Tryph.,’ 305, A) “that Da- 
mascus was of the Arabian country (τῆς ᾿Αρα- 
βικῆς γῆ), and is, even though now [probably, 
Bishop Lightfoot suggests, by Hadrian’s 
arrangement of those provinces] it has been 
assigned to whatis called the Syrophenician 
country, none even of you are able to deny.” 
So Tertullian, ‘Adv. Mare,’ iii. 13; * Adv. 
Judeos,’ 9. At the time of St. Paul’s abode 
at Damascus the city was subject to an 
“ethnarch of Aretas ” (2 Cor. xi. 32); and 
“ Aretas,” the King of Petra, is in the case 
of several successive princes, styled “the 
King of the Arabians” (2 Mace. v.8; Jose- 
phus, ‘ Ant.,’ xiv. 1,4; ‘Bell. Jud.,’ i. 6, 2; 
* Ant.,’ xvi. 10, 8,9). The apostle’s words 
may, therefore, describe a withdrawal into 
some district, whether inhabited or unin- 
habited, not far distant from Damascus. 
On the other hand, in ch. iv. 25, the apostle 
refers to “ Arabia ” in connection with Mount 
Sinai; so that Arabia Petresa may possibly 
have been the country visited. And here 
the imagination is tempted by recollections 
of Moses and the giving of the Law, and 


| of Elijah, to indulge in speculations with 


reference to the especial appropriateness of 
that vicinity for being Saul’s place of sojourn 
at this crisis of spiritual illumination and 
call to apostleship. But all this is con- 
jectural ; there is no solid ground whatever 
for our believing that it was thither that his 
steps were at this season directed. And we 


Ὄ THE EPISTLE TO 


THE GALATIANS. (cx. 1, 1—24. 


cannot but recollect, with reference to the 
ord Jesus, that when, after his baptism, 
“the Spirit drove him forth into the wilder 
ness,” with a view, as we may in all 
reverence believe, to his preparing himself 
or his high ministry as the Christ, no one 
magines that it was into the wilderness of 
sinai that he was led. And this suggests 
the remark that, at this particular juncture 
in especial, Saul’s movements were directed 
by heavenly guidance. This we seem 
warranted to infer from our Lord’s words 
to him, “ Rise, and enter into the city, and 
it shall be told thee what thou must do” 
(Acts ix. 6). At such a season, indeed, the 
unceasing ory of his whole soul—a cry 
surely not unresponded to—must have been, 
“Lord, what wilt thou have me to do?” 
For further description of the geographical 
question, see Conybeare and Howson, ch. iii.; 
‘Dictionary of the Bible,’ articles “ Arabia” 
and “ Aretas;” Lightfoot’s ‘Galatians: Ex- 
cursus,’ pp. 87—92, 6th edit, And returned 
again unto Damascus (καὶ πάλιν ὑπέστρεψα εἰς 
Δαμασκόν). That is, “without going else- 
where or to any place where I could mect 
with men who could be my instructors in the 
gospel.” This must be supposed to be 
implied; otherwise the narrative would 
be illusive. As above stated, the “‘imme- 
diately’ appears intended to qualify this 
clause 88 well as the preceding. ‘The evi- 
dential value of this reference to Damascus, 
by implication indicated as the scene of his 
previously mentioned conversion, is strik- 
ingly illustrated by Paley- in his ‘Horw 
Pauling’ (Galatians), cited by Dean Howson, 
aloo, “ A casual expression at the end, and 
an expression brought in for a different 
purpose, alone fixes it to have been at Da- 
mascus, Nothing can be more like sim- 
plicity and undesignedness than this.” At 
the risk of repeating some remarks already 
made, I venture to propose the following as 
w just paraphase of the whole passage, be- 
ginning with ver. 12, “My gospel which 
ye are swerving from I did not in any degree 
reccive from men, but solely through the 
revelation of Jesus Clirist which God him- 
self made to me. It is evident that before 
I knew Ohrist, during the time that I was 
persecuting God’s own Church with fanatical 
fury, my whole heart and soul devoted to 
the strictest Judaism of the Pharisces, I 
was removed poles asunder from all possible 
sympathetic contact with this doctrine. 
That Gud’ love was ready to embrace 
every believer in Christ, whether obeying 
Moses’ Law or not obeying it,—this was a 
truth that in those days could not possibly 
have gained access to my mind, And after 
this, when Gud graciously illuminated my 
soul with the sight of his Son, in order 
that I might become the joyful herald ef 


his grace to the Gentiles, to no mortal man, 
whether at Damascus or elsewhere, didLapply 
for further light; neither did I even repair 
to Jerusalem to scek instruction from Christ’s 
own {former apostles: I at once departed in 
a direction which took me whcre I was still 
far away [or, perhaps, ‘which took me 
further and further away ’] from Jerusalem, 
into Arabia: and who should teach me this 
doctrine in Arabia? And then, forthwith, 
I came back straight to Damascus, Dumase 
cus being my first appointed sphere of 
labour.” 

Ver. 18.—Then after three years (ἔπειτα 
μετὰ τρία ἔτη). ‘The apostle’s object is to 
illustrate the independent source of his 
doctrine as not derived from men. This he 
does here by indicating how long an in- 
terval elapsed after he first was made 
acquainted with it before he ever got to 
even know Peter. By this he gives his 
readers to feel how strongly assured from 
the very first was his conviction of the 
sufficiency and certain truth of those views 
of the “gospel” which had been divinely 
communicated to him. The obvious in- 
ference from this view of the writer’s pre- 
sent purpose is that, in his reckoning of 
time, the terminus a quo in this verse is the 
era of “God's revealing his Son in him,” 
which in effect was that of his conversion. 
There are two modes of computing time em- 
ployed inthe New Testament—the inclusive 
and the non-inclusive. According to the 
former, just as “after three days” in Matt. 
xxvii. 63 and Mark viii. 31, means in fact “on 
the next day alter but one; ” so in the present 
instance, “after three years” may denote a 
not greater interval than “in the next year 
after but one.” Compare the “ by the space 
of three years” (τριετίαν) of Acts xx. 31, 
taken in conjunction with “ for the space of 
two years” of Acts xix. 10. On the other 
hand, according to the -non-inclusive way 
exemplified in the “ after six days” of Matt. 
xvii. 1; Mark ix. 2 (compared with the 
“about eight daya” of Luke ix. 28), the 
interval denoted may have been no less 
than three whole years. Since it is te the 
interest of the apostle’s argument to mark 
the interval at its greatest, the reader will 
prey be of opinion that, if St. Paul had 

ad in his mind a space of time which was 
not in reality less than three years, he 
would have used a form of expression more 
clearly marking this, and not one which 
might be casily taken as meaning less; and 
therefore that the phrase, “after three 
years,” means in reality no more than “in 
the year after the next, not before.” I went 
upeto Jerusalem (ἀνῆλθον cis Ἱεροσόλυμα). 
The apostle writes “ went up” with a Jew's 
instinctive feeling of Jerusalem being the 
capital and centre of his nation and its 


6H. 1. 1--- 7 


THE EPISTLE To THE GALATIANS. $i 


religion; a feeling which would be all the 
stronger through the consciousness that it 
was as yet the capital and centre also of 
Christendom itself. To see Peter (ἱστορῆσαι 
Κηφᾶν (Receptus, Πέτρο») ; to acquaint my- 
self with Cephas. As the Greek verb here 
used—which is found nowhere else in the 
New Testament, and not found at all in the 
Septuagint—has been often misunderstood, 
it seems desirable to give a somewhat full 
account of the manner in which it is em- 
ployed in other writers. The verb ἱστορεῖν, 
derived, through ἵστωρ or ἴστωρ, knowing, 
learned, from the conjectural root εἴδω, 
in the older Greek most commonly means 
“inquire of some one about some person or 
thing,” and is constructed like ἐπερωτᾷν and 
other verbs of questioning. Thus, Kurip., 
*Phaon.,’ 621, Ὡς τί μ᾽ ἱστορεῖς τόδε; “Ask me 
this question;” Soph., ‘Cid. Tyr.,’ 1156, 
"Ὃν οὗτος ἱστορεῖ, * Whom this man ia inquir- 
ing about.” So in Herod., ii. 19. But 
sometimes, still in the older Greek, it mcans 
simply “knowing” or “ personally knowing,” 
with no associated notion of asking ques- 
tions; as 6.0. Ausch., ‘ Pers.,’ 454, Κακῶς τὸ 
μέλλον ἱστορῶν, “ Ill apprised of the future; ἢ 
‘Eum..,’ 455, Πατέρα δ᾽ ἱστορεῖς καλῶς, “My 
father thou knowest well.” In the later 
Greek it frequently denotes personally 
acquainting one’s self with some object, 
whether a person or a thing. Here again, 
as in its use just exemplified from Aschylus, 
the notion of asking questions is altogether 
absent. Thus, Josephus, ‘Bell Jud.,’ vi. 1, 
8; ᾿Ανήρ, dv ἐγὼ κατ᾽ ἐκεῖνον ἱστόρησα τὸν 
πόλεμον, “ When I got personally to know ;” 
* Ant.,’ viii. 2,5, Ἰστόρησα γάρ τινα ᾿Ελεάζαρον, 
“1 have in person seen Eleazar, releasing 
demoniacs,” etc.; ‘ Ant.,’ i, 11, 4, Ἱστόρηκα 
δ᾽ αὐτήν, “I have myself been and seen it 
(i.e, the pillar of salt);” Plutarch, ‘ Thes.,’ 
30, Τὴν χώραν ἱστορῆσαι, “See, inspect the 
country ;” ‘Pomp.,’ 40, Ἱστορῆσαι τὴν πόλιν, 
“See, or inspect the city.” The result of 
this evidence is that, in all probability, the 
apostle means that he went up to Jerusalem 
to acquaint himself with-Cephas. That 
in the present instance the verb was not at 
all meant to suggest the notion of question- 
ing, either directly or by implication, though 
no doubt in the older form of the language 
it often means questioning, appeara from 
two considerations: (1) The words,“I went 
to question Cephas,” with no indication 
added, either specific or general, of tho 
matters to be inquired about, would present 
a very bald and imperfect sentence; (2) it 
would seem strangely incongruous that the 
apostle, just when concerned to give point 
to his affirmation that he received not his 
gospel from men, but fully and completely 
from God, should tell his readers that two 
or three years after his conversion he went 


up to Jerusalem to make inquiries of 
Cephas. Neither would the general use of 
the verb warrant us in understanding St. 
Paul to say that his object in making this 
journey was to “see Cephas” in that sense 
in which we sometimes employ the English 
verb, to denote a friendly visit; nor again 
would it justify us in interpreting it to 
mean “to put myself on a footing of ac- 
quaintanceship and friendship with him.” 
No instance has been adduced in which the 
word has either of these two turns of mean- 
ing. .Its import in the present instance 
appears to be this: St. Paul was hearing 
continually in all quarters a variety of 
statements respecting Cvphas, the leader of 
the apostles, Cephas’s doctrine, Cephas’s 
manner of conduct both personal and minis- 
terial,—statements, we may be sure, not 
always agrecing togcther. He knew the 
great importance of Cephas’s position in 
the Church, not only with reference to the 
Jewish section of it with which that 
apostle was the most immediately asso- 
ciated, but also with reference to Gentile 
believers, he having been first of all the 
apostles divinely commissioned to open the 
door to the Gentiles. For the prudent 
shaping, then, of his own course in the 
prosecution of his ministry as apostle, it was 
of deep moment for St. Paul that he should 
have a more exact understanding of Cephas’s 
personality, and of Cephas’s privcipies of 
conduct in dealing both with Jews and 
Gentiles, than he could possibly gain from 
mere hearsay. He therefore resolved, most 
assuredly under Divine guidance, himself to 
repair to Jerusalem, to apprise himself by 
personal observation and intercourse of the 
true character of this most highly gifted and 
most influential leader of Jewish Christen- 
dom. Thus much, and so for os I can per- 
eeive no more than this, does the usage of 
the verb in the Greek of the time warrant 
us in finding in St. Paul’s use of it in the 
present passage. And this view of it is con- 
firmed by its singular appropriateness, when 
thus understood, to the connection in which 
it stands. No term could have more signi- 
ficuntly implied the feeling which the writer 
entertained of the independence of his own 
position us a messenger of Christ to the 
world. Cephas’s own self, he intimates, was 
the object which he sought by that journey 
to get to know. That is, there is not the 
faintest suggestion in the phrase employed 
of his having felt his own knowledge of the 
gospel to be imperfect, and that he wished 
to confer with Peter for the purpose of in- 
tegrating his views. While, however, with 
the apostle the ruling motive in taking that 
journey may be supposed to have been as now 
stated, we are still at liberty to surmise that 
there were other accessory inducements, If 


32 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


fott. 1. 1—24, 


St. Paul felt that it was urgently needful for 
him, in the prosecution of his great mission, 
tc know Cephas well, he could not but have 
also felt that it was of importance for the 
success of the great cause tliat Cephas 
should by personal intercourse be enabled 
to appreciate more certainly and distinctly 
than was otlierwise possible what manner 
of man Saul himself now was, and should 
begin to recognize the gifts and calling 
which their common Lord had conferred 
upon him. Further, it is impossible not to 
believe that Saul would welcome with joy 
the opportunity which this visit would afford 
him of obtaining, from the lips of one who 
was a very principal eye-witness and minis- 
ter in the matter discoursed on, more precise 
and more reliable accounts than it is pro- 
bable he had as yet received, of many par- 
ticulars appertaining to Christ’s sojourn 
upon earth. And what a story Cephas had 
to tell him! With what ravishment of 
listening attention would Saul drink in at 
his lips the marvels of that Divine life and 
death, which it had been his privilege so 
closely to observe! And, on the other side, 
what joy on earth had the elder apostle 
grcater than that of pouring into a truly 
sympathetic bosom those precious treasures 
of reminiscence. His two Epistles, wrilten 
long after, evince olearly the profound, 
swect complacency with which lis mind 


more might not Cephas feel thus in trans- 
mitting to his attentive auditor those leaves 
of the tree of life which are for the healing 
of the nations! Nor can we doubt that 
Cephas would rchearse to him the par- 
ticulars of the Lord’s dealings with his own 
individual spirit: his own first interview 
with its then mysterious word, “Thou shalt 
be ealled Cephas!” tle summons, “ Follow 
me;” the restoration to health of his fever- 
stricken wife’s mother; the miraculous 
draught of fishes, with the outery, “ Depart 
from me, for I am a sinful man!” and the 
gracious response, “Fear not; from hence- 
forth thou shalt catch men;” the walking 
on the sea, with its “Lord, save me!” the 
confession of his faith, “ Thou art the Christ, 
the Son of the living God,” with the presently 
evusuing shrinking from the predicted cross, 
and the merited rebuke, “Get thee behind 
me, Satan!” the beatifying sight of the 
Transfiguration; the confident “Though 


all should deny thee, yet will I never 
deny thee,” so soon rebuked by the triple 
denial, and the Lord’s glance of reproving 
love; the appearing of the risen Christ to 
him individually on Easter Day; the morn- 
ing scene by the margin of the Sea of 
Tiberias, with its triple confession of love 
and its triple charge; the closing scene on 
Mount Olivet; his wondrously blessed dis- 
course on the day of Pentecost; his great 
work again with Cornelius, so full uf in- 
terest for the newly constituted apostle of 
the Gentiles now hearing it. The story, 
told, we may be sure, with quivering lips, 
with streaming eyes, with features kindling 
with ἃ rapture of holy, heavenly joy, un- 
folued a marvellous record of the redeem- 
ing Master’s love and wisdom and power in” 
dealing with that human soul; a Saviour’s 
work, such as might even in some respects 
match that which Saul had limself to re- 
cord. And this no doubt mutual inter- 
change of spiritual experience would reveal 
each to the other, so as they never could 
else have been revealed. Saul had come 
thither for the purpose of acquainting him- 
self with Ceplias’s personality; he went 
away knowing something of the weaknesses 
of his temperament, as well as able to lova 
end admire his loyalty of soul and straight- 
forwardness in action, his zeal, the warmth, 
the impetuosity even, of his affections, his 
tender entire devotion to his Lord. It is 
interesting in this relation to remark that 
when, in writing to the Corinthians, St. 
Paul recites historical proofs of Christ’s 
resurrection, the five appearances of the 
risen Christ specified by him which were 
antecedent to the one vouchsafed to him- 
self, are those which he was likely to have 
been told of on the occasion of this visit, 
when, as he states, he saw, together with 
Cephas, also James the Lord’s brother. 
Of those five appearances, that to “ James” 
the Lord’s brother in all probability ia not 
mentioned in the Gospels at all; that to St. 
Peter only in the way of most cursory allu- 
sion by the Pauline evangelist St. Luke. It 
would seem as if thus early was stamped on 
St. Paul’s mind a form of historical recital 
available for customary use evcr after. The 
certain truth of these appearances he then 
got to be assured of through personal testi- 
mony borne to himself by Peter and by 
James. And abode with him fifteen days 
(καὶ ἐπέμεινα πρὸς αὐτὸν ἡμέρας δεκαπέντε); 
and I tarried with him fifteen days. Theuse 
of the preposition here rendered “ with” ia 
illustrated by 1 Cor. xvi. 6, 7; Matt. xiii. 
56; John i. 1; 1 Thess. iii. 4; 2 Thess. 
ii. 5. Since in the midst of a populous city 
the propinquity and (probably) association 
expressed by the preposition is referred to 
the one individual Cephas, the phrase, “I 


é.11-24) THE EPISTLH ΤῸ 


THE GALATIANS, 33 


tarried with him,” is with the greatest proba- 
bility taken to indicate a sojourn at St.Peter’s 
house. Else, why did not St. Paul write, 
“T tarried in Jerusalem”? And this cir- 
cumstance the apostle, as it should seem, 
indicates, with a latent reference to its signi- 
ficance. The fact was significant in various 
ways. It testified most openly and emphatic- 
ally to 8 wondrous transformation in the 
mutual sentiments with which the two men 
regarded one another. It was but a short 
while ago, only some two or three years more 
or less, that Saul was viewed by St. Peter 
with repugnance and dread, as the bitter and 
influential persecutor of that flock of Christ 
which the Lord had so pointedly committed 
especially to his affectionate tendence. Even 
personally on his own behalf Peter “must 
have feared him, perhaps even have hidden 
himself from him, when he forced his way 
into Christian homes” (Dr. Farrar, ‘ Life of 
St. Paul,’ vol. i. p. 231). Only quite lately had 
the scattered members of the Church ceased 
to fear fresh onslaughts of the persecution 
which Saul had so eagerly pressed forward, 
and begun ouce more to openly assemble at 
Jerusalem. Yet now there were here to be 
seen, on the one side Cephas, forgivingly, 
affectionately welcoming Saul to his house ; 
and on the other, the late scornful and hostile 
Pharisee submitting to be beholden to 
Cephas for hospitality ! to Cephas for public 
recognition as a brother in Christ! ‘That 
it was with a lively recollection of that new- 
born mutual brotherliness that the apostle 
penned this brief record of his visit to 
Cephas, dry and colourless matter-vf-fact 
as it at first seems, we cannot doubt when 
we look back upon the higlily coloured 
picture of his previous animosity agaiust 
the Church of God, and his intense Pharisa- 
ism, and also observe that immediately after 
he brings directly into view the sentiments 
of wonder and adoring gratitude to God 
with which the Churches of Judea beheld 
the change which had taken place in him. 
His mind is too intent upon the pressing 
business of the hour to allow itself in melt- 
ing mood to loiter upon mere reminiscences 
of the past; it takes in, nevertheless, with 
however rapid a glance, the remembrance of 
those days; how strange, and withal how 
affecting, his position had then been felt to 
be! We are not, however, to suppose that 
St. Paul devoted this most noteworthy fort- 
night altogether, or perhaps even princi- 
pally, to fraternal intercourse with Cephas 
and James and the other newly found 
brethren in Christ residing in the capital. 
We learn from the history of the Acts that, 
after the misgiving, which not unnaturally 
had been at first felt by even the leaders 
of the Christian community, as to the reality 
of his conversion to the faith, had been 


GALATIANS. 


overcome through the interposition of the 
generous-hearted Barnabas, his ardent zeal 
thrust him forth without delay upon giving 
public proof of his consecration to the cause 
of Christ. He owed it to that cause that, in 
the place where he had so grievously and 
publicly sinned against it, he should try 
what he could to undo, if only he might, 
the mischief which when last at Jerusalem 
he had but too well succeeded in effecting. 
For this end he addressed himself to that 
very portion of the population amongst 
whom in those days of sin his hostility had 
been so conspicuously shown. He sought 
out the Hellenist Jews, whom he had then 
been so active in hounding on to their 
assault upon the holy Stephen, eagerly 
striving now by exhortation and argument 
to win them to believe. The endeavour 
was, however, fruitless. Tho evil which he 
had wrought in the past it was not given 
him in this field to repair. Christ himself, 
appearing in vision, warned him to desi&t. 
Earnestly he entreated to be permitted thus 
to plead for him; but his Master peremp- 
torily commanded him to leave the city. 
“Depart quickly: they will not receive of 
thee testimony concerning me” (Acts xxii. 
18. The wish was natural, and to his 
honour; but it was not for this that his 
steps had been directed to Jerusalem. He 
should work for Christ extensively else- 
where, and not ineffectually; but here he 
was forbidden to stay. ‘The eager, and for 
himself fearless, champion obeys, curbing 
his resolute spirit to compliance with the 
arrangements which the brethren at Jeru- 
salem made for his safe transmission to 
Ceesarea, from whence he sailed for Tarsus 
(Acts ix.). 

Ver. 19,—But other of the apostles saw I 
none, save James the Lord’s brother (ἔτερον 
δὲ τῶν ἀποστόλων οὐκ εἶδον, εἰ μὴ ᾿Ιάκωβον τὸν 
ἀδελφὸν τοῦ Κυρίου); but no one besides of 
the apostles saw I, unless it were James the 
Lord’s brother. The words, “ unless it were,” 
are here proposed as a rendering of εἰ μή, as 
betokening a certain degree of hesitaney on 
the apostle’s part as to the perfect justness 
of the exception which he makes. The 
teason of this will appear if we consider 
that “James the Lord’s brother” was not 
really one of the apostles; but nevertheless, 
through the position which he held in the 
Church of Jerusalem, and through various 
circumstances attaching to him, stood in 
general estimation so near to the revered 
twelve, that St. Paul felt he was required, 
in connection with his present statement, to 
make this reference to him, when affirming 
so solemnly that Cephas was the only 
apostle that he then saw. For a fuller 
discussion of the personality of ‘James 


the Lord’s brother,” the reader is referred 
a 


ρα 


ve 


Shae, 


34 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


fon τ. 1-84 


to the additional note at the end of this 
chapter. ΠΟΥ͂ it came ahout that St. Peter 
was the only one of the twelve that St. 
Paul then saw, there are no certain grounds 
for determining. The intimation in Acts 
viii. 1 that, in the persecution which ensued 
upon the martyrdom of Stephen, the apostles 
still remained at Jerusalem when they 
of the Church there were all scattered 
abroad throughout the regions of Juda and 
Samaria, relates to a period two or three 
years previous. The state of things was no 
doubt now quite different; the Church 
had come together avain; but the apostles 
may for the most part have been absent in 
the country, engaged in their apostolic 
labours, as St. Peter himself is soon after 
described as being (ef. Acts ix. 31,32). The 
surmise that this was the cause appears more 
probable than the view which supposes them 
to have continued distrustful, now that the 
two great leaders, Cephas and James, had 
been won over to frankly and publicly recog- 
nize the newconvert. A difficulty has been 
thought to result from a comparison of these 
words of St. Paul with St. Luke’s statement 
in Acts ix. 15, 16, that Barnabas took and 
brought him to “the apostles,” and that he 
“ was with them” going in and out at Jerusa- 
lem. That he was not with them for long was 
a fact not unknown to St. Luke, as we may 
gather from what we read in Acts xxii. 18. 
There is, therefore, no discrepancy in that 
respect between the two representations. 
But is there no discrepancy between St. 
Luke’s mention of “the apostles” as then 
admitting Paul into partnership with them 
in public work, and St. Paul’s so emphatic- 
ally affirming that it was Cephas alone of 
the apostles that he saw? We must acknow- 
ledge that there is—the same kind and the 
same amount of discrepancy as e.g. obtains 
between St. Matthew saying that those who 
were crucified with Jesus reviled him, and 
St. Luke specifying that one did so, but that 
the other rebuked him. In all such cases, the 
more vayvue and general statement must in 
all fairness be accepted, but with the modi- 
fication supplied by tlie one which is the 
more particular and definite. It seems to 
the present writer that there is a way of 
quite naturally accounting for the form in 
which St. Luke states the circumstances. 
It is as follows. St. Paul had been two 
years in imprisonment at Rome when St. 
Luke compiled the Acts; that is, St. Luke 
wrote the book about a.p. 63 or 64, twenty- 
two or twenty-three years after St. Paul made 
this first visit of his to Jerusalem. Barnabas 
appears in the story as a disciple (Acts iv., 
jin.) some years apparently before even the 
conversion of Saul. Considering, therefore, 
the lapse of time, it would seem a not at all 
improbable supposition that, when the Acts 


was written, he was no longer alive. And 
the tone in which he is spoken of in the 
book, whose author, as we know, was in 
close association with St. Paul, and no 
doubt both drew from the apostle’s inspira- 
tion many of the particulars he relates and 
reflected his feelings, is generally so kindly 
and respectful as to accord well with tho 
supposition of Barnabas’s decease, and even 
of his then recent decease. The peusive, 
touching reference to his character in xi. 
24, introduced in the narrative in se wn- 
wonted a mauner as it is, betokens this. 
Carefully does the historian indicate that 
Barnabas was the new convert’s sponsor 
with the at first distrustful brethren at 
Jerusalem; also that it was he that went 
and fetched Saul from his distant retirement 
at Tarsus to co-operate with him at Antioch ; 
also that he linked him to himself in the 
eleemosynary journey to Jerusalem, and 
again under Divine dircction in their great 
evangelistic tour in Asia Minor,—in both of 
which expeditions Barnabas at the first ap- 
pears as the leading figure of the two; after 
whichcomesthe mourn(ul disruption recorded 
at the close of the fifteenth chapter, the 
last reference to Barnabas in the Acts.' That, 
however, this interruption of their brotherly 
attachment did not last long is shown by 
the respectful and sympathetic manner in 
which St. Paul, in writing to the Corinthians 
(ix.), six or seven years after, speaks of 
the oneness in sentiment subsisting between 
Barnabas and himself in labouring fer 
the gospel at their own charges. Since the 
time that St. Panl sent that letter to the 
Corinthians as well as this to the Galatians, 
some five years had elapsed when St. Luke 
wrote the Book of the Acts. All these con- 
siderations tuken together agree perfectly 
well with the conception that Luke had 
heard his master, perhaps repeatedly, make 
pensive reference to his old relations with 
Barnabas now gone to his rest. ‘‘ When the 
apostles at Jerusalem,” he might say, “looked 
upon me coldly and distrustingly, he it was 
that took me by the hand (the reader will 
note the pathosin theexpression, ἐπιλαβόμενος 
αὐτὸν ἤγαγε] and led me into their presence, 


‘In respect to this particular incident, 
we perhaps may consider that St. Paul, in 
accotdance with his customary self-abne- 
gation, is willing himself to seem in his 
disciple’s narrative to have shared the charge 
of “sharp contention” with the older dis- 
ciple, though the latter, being clearly in the 
wrong as to the main question, may not un- 
reasonably, in view of the entire position, be 
supposed to have been the one to whom in 
reality the censure of bitterness in the con- 
duct of the dispute, principally at least, if 
not even entirely, attached. 


oH, t. 1—24.} THE EPISTLE ΤῸ 


THE GALATIANS 85 


and told them what the Lord had done with 
mel” What more natural than that Luke 
had heard Paul speaking thus, Barnabas’s 
dear venerated form looming in the far past 
before the apostle’s view as the principal 
object just then of reminiscence, the sur- 
rounding figures in the scene more indefi- 
nitely realized! But when, years before 
this, the apostle, Barnabas being still alive, 
had been writing to the Galatians, and with 
solemn carefulness as speaking in the sight 
of God, had set himself agonistically to state 
the facts in their very exactness, of course 
there would result ἃ precision which in those 
tender reminiscences uttered to his bosom 
associate was not to be looked for. 

Ver. 20.—Now the things which I write 
unto you (ἃ δὲ γράφω ὑμῖν); now as to the 
things which I am writing to you. The 
looseness in the Greck of the connection of 
this clause with the words which follow 18 
similar to what we find in the case of the 
clause, ταῦτα ἃ θεωρεῖτε, in Luke xxi.6. The 
particular things meant are those which are 
affirmed in vers. 15—19 and to the end of 
the chapter; points which the Galatians 
would hardly have become a) prised of except 
upon the apostle’s own testimony. What 
preceded in vers. 13, 14 they had become 
acquainted with before, on the testimony of 
others (“ Ye have heard,” ver. 13). Behold, 
before God, I lie not (ἰδού, ἐνώπιον τοῦ Θεοῦ, 
ὅτι οὐ ψεύδομαι); behold, before God, verily I 
We not. The use here of ὅτι, which in 
“verily ” is paraphrascd rather than trans- 
lated, in this as well as in several other 
passages of sulema asseveration (2 Cor. i. 
18; xi. 10; possibly Rom. ix. 2), savours 
strongly of Hebraism, being very probably 
identical with its use for. "3, the Hebrew 
“that,” in the Septuagint, e.g. in Isa. xlix. 
18, Ζῶ ἐγώ, λέγει Κύριος, ὅτι πάντας αὐτοὺς 
ὡς κόσμον ἐνδύσῃ. So in St. Paul’s inexact 
citation in Rom. xiv.11. Onthis use of the 
Hebrew conjunction, see Gesenius, ‘Thes.,’ 
p. 678, B, 1, a, who observes that in such 
cases there ia an evident ellipsis of some 
such verb as “I protest,” “I swear.” The 
apostle was frequently led by the gainsaying 
of adversaries vitally affecting bis official 
or personal character, to have recourse to 
forms of the most solemn asseveration. In 
addition to the passages cited above, see 2 
Cor. i, 23; xi. 31; Rom. i. 9; Phil. i. 8; 
1 Thess. ii. 5; 1 Tim. ii. 7. If, as Alford 
in effect observes, ἃ report had been spread 
among the Galatians that, after his conver- 
sion, he had spent years at Jerusalem, ro- 
ceiving instruction in the fuith at the hands 
of the apostles, the facts which he has now 
stated would have seemed to his readers so 
astoundingly in contradiction to the impres- 
sion which they had received, as to require 
a strong confirmatory assevcration. “ In the 


present case,” as Professor Jowett remarks, 
“it isa matter of life and death to the apostle 
to prove his independence of the twelve.” 
And his independence of them is strongly 
evinced by the fact that, for several years of 
his Christian life, during all which he was 
preaching the same gospel as he now 
preached, he had not even seen any of them 
except Peter and James the Lord’s brother 
(if James could be reckoned as an apostle), 
and these only during 8 short visit of a 
fortnight at Jerusalem some three years after 
his conversion. 

Ver. 21.—Afterwards I came into the 
regions of Syria and Cilicia (ἔπειτα ἦλθον εἰς 
τὰ κλίματα τῆς Συρίας καὶ τῆς Κιλικίας); then 
I came into the regions of Syria and Cilicia. 
St. Luke tells us (Acts ix. 80) that “the 
bretbren brought him down to Caesarea, and 
sent him forth to Tarsus.” The verb “brought 
down” of itsclf indicates that the Casarea 
here mentioned was Cesarea Stratonis, the 
seaport of Jerusalem, and not Cesarea 
Philippi towards Damascus (see Bishop 
Lightfoot on Gal. i. 21). When, later, Bar- 
nabas ‘required Saul’s help at Antioch, it 
was to Tarsus that he went to seek him. 
It is, therefore, probable that, in mention- 
ing “Syria” with “ Cilicia” as containing 
“regions” (cf. Rom. xv. 23; 2 Cor. xi. 10) in 
which, after this departure from Jerusalem, 
he was actively engaged in ministerial work, 
he is thinking of the northern part of Syria, 
as in “ Cilicia” he is thinking of the eastern 
portion of Cilicia about Tarsus; northern 
Syria and eastern Cilicia having a great 
geographical affinity (see Conybeare and 
Howson, vol. i. pp. 26, 130). It thus ap- 
pears that the Epistle is in perfect harmony ἡ 
with the Acts. To the apostle’s labours 
during this period that he was making 
Tarsus his head-quarters, was most probably 
due in no small measure the founding of the 
Churches in Syria, and especially in Cilicia, 
which are referred to in Acts xv. 23, 41. 

Vers, 22—24.—It is somewhat difficult 
to determine, and when determined to make 
evident in translation, the precise flexure in 
the intonation (so to speak) of these verses. 
So far as the present writer can see, it is 
this: the δὲ in ver. 22 is slightly adversa- 
tive to the foregoing sentence ; as if it were, 
“ During that time the people of Syria and 
Cilicia saw a great deal’ of me, but the 
Churches of Judwa did not see me at all.” 
The δὲ in ver. 23 introduces a contrast to 
the foregoing “ unknown by face;” as if it 
were, “They knew me not by face, but only 
by report.” The rendering to be now given 
will endeavour to represent this view of the 
whole passage. 

Ver. 22.—And was unknown by face (ἤμην 


δὲ ἀγνοούμενος τῷ προσώπῳ); but I wae all 
the while unknown by face. The dative 


88 THE EPISTLE TO TH GALATIANS, 


fom. 1. 1—24, 


τῷ προσώπῳ, “by face,’ or “in person,” 
marks (see Winer, ‘Gram. N.T.,’ 8 31, 6, a) 
the sphere to which a wider term is re- 
stricted, as ταῖς φρεσίν (1 Cor. xiv. 20). Its 
addition prepares the reader for the subse- 
quent intimation that, though unknown by 
personal presentmcnt, he was not unknown 
by repute (comp. 1 Thess. ii. 17, Προσώπῳ ov 
καρδίᾳ). The widened form of the verb, ἥμην 
ἀγνοούμενος, instead of ἠγνουύμην, intimates 
the long-continued period, represented by 
the words “all the while” in our rendering, 
for which the statement held good; which 
observation applies also to the ἀκούοντες 
ἦσαν of ver. 23. The word “still,” intro- 
duced in the Revised Version, imports, as 
I humbly venture to think, an idea not 
actually expressed in the Greek. The 
apostle stutes no more than that the 
Churches of Judwa had at that time no 
opportunity of coming to know him per- 
sonally. There is no ἔτι. They had, that 
is (for this is what seems intended), no 
opportunity of knowing him in his new 
character as a disciple of Christ. Whether 
or not they had known him in the terrible 
aspect of an unrelenting persecutor, is a 
matter which for the present lies out of the 
field of view. The period to which the 
apostle means this remark of his to apply 
may be assumed to be the whole time be- 
tween his conversion and the close of this 
stay of his in “Syria and Cilicia.” This, 
as we learn from the Acts, terminated with 
Barnabas’s fetching him to join him in his 
work at Antioch. After this he did be- 
come known to the disciples of Juda. 
Unto the Churches of Judea which were in 
Christ (ταῖς ἐκκλησίαις τῆς ᾿Ιουδαίας ταῖς ἐν 
Χριστῷ). This honorific form of designa- 
tion, “which were in Christ,” breathes a 
feeling on the part of the apostle’ of reve- 
rential respect for those Churches, us already 
organized communities vitally united to 
Christ, while he was as yet only beginning 
his Christian life (comp. Rom. xvi. 7, “Who 
were also in Christ before me”). This 
eeremonious respectfulness is the more in 
place, inasmuch as the apostle lad reason 
to know that the doctrinal position which 
he felt himself set to defend, in reference to 
obedience to the Mosaic Law, was generally 
distasteful to Jewish believers. Grateful is 
it, however, to his own feclings to recollect, 
and now thus publicly to recoznize, the 
kindness and devout thankfulness which in 
those early days of his Christian career they 
had evinced with reference to him (sce 
note on ver. 24). At the same time, his 
entire independence of the whole Jewish 
community when first beginning to preach 
is plainly indicated. It was from no 
Judgwan Church any more than from Jeru- 
salem and its apostles and elders that he 


derived the gospel which he had then and 
ever since been proclaiming. If we take 
the bearing of the clause, “ which were in 
Christ,” as above proposed, we have no need 
of GEcumenius’s remark, endorsed by various 
critics, including Alford and even Bishop 
Lightfoot, that it was added to distinguish 
the ἐκκλήσιαι of Christians from synagogues 
of non-Christian Jews. Indeed, the re- 
mark is itself open to grave exception. 
It is true that ἐκκλησία in the singular 
number is used of the whole Israelite com- 
munity antecedently to the Christian dis- 
pensation ; but it is never found either ἴῃ 
the New Testament or in the Septuagint to 
denote, as συναγωγὴ does, xn organized col- 
lection of Israelites as such, dwelling in a 
particular neighbourhood, in the way that 
it is applied to an organized collection of 
Christians in a neighbourhood; neither is 
the noun ever applied to Israelites as such 
in the plural number. ‘The term ἐκκλήσιαι 
would, of course, be taken to mean Christian 
Churches and no other. 

Ver. 23.—But they had heard only (μόνον 
δὲ ἀκούοντες ἦσαν); and they only from time to 
time heard say. They did not see him in 
person, but only heard about him. The 
dilated imperfect, ἀκούοντες ἦσαν, applying 
to the whole space of time here referred to, 
suggests the insertion in the translation 
of the words, “from time to time.” The 
ὅτι is inserted after the Greck idiom in in- 
troducing the very words spoken in oratio 
directa, as in Matt. vii. 23; Mark ii, 1; 
John i. 40; iv. 1, ete. That he which per- 
secuted us in times past (it: ὕ διώκων ἡμᾶς 
wore); he that once was persecuting us. 
The διώκων is in the preter-imperfect parti- 
ciple, of which we have examples in Τυφλὺς 
ὥν, ἄρτι βλέπω, Jobn ix. 25; Of ποτε ὄντες 
Eph. ii. 18; Τὸ πρότερον ὅντα βλάσφημον, 
1 Tim. i. 13. Now preacheth the faith 
which once he destroyed (νῦν εὐαγγελίζεται 
τὴν πίστιν ἥν ποτε ἐπόρθει); now preacheth 
the faith which once he was making havoc of. 
The use of the term “ faith” is the same as 
in Acts vi. 7, “ Were obedient to the faith,” 
which is equivalent to the “obeying the 
gospel” mentioned Rom. x. 16. The object 
to the verb εὐαγγελίζομαι is always some- 
thing which is announced, never a thing 
which is required (cf. e.g. Luke ii. 10; Acta 
v. 42; x. 86; Eph. ii. 17; iii, 8); so that 
“faith ” here cannot mean the faith which 
men are to render to Jesus, but the doctrine 
which they are to believe, to wit, that Jesus 
is Christ the Saviour. We have here the 
early beginnings of that objective sense in 
which afterwards the word got to be so 
commonly used in the Church to denote the 
Christian doctrine (see Bishop Lightfoot’s 
essay ‘Galatians,’ pp, 154—158). In the 
second clause, “which he was sometime 


‘ 


om. 1, 1-845 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


δ᾽ 


making havoo of,” the “ faith” ia identified 
with the Church which held it (comp. ver. 
13). We may heartily accept Estius’s com- 
ment, cited by Meyer, “ Quia Christi fidelibus 
fidem extorquere nitebatur,”’ while we still 
think it intolerably harsh to understand 
“ faith,” as Meyer does, in a subjective sense. 

Ver. 24.—And they glorified God in me 
(καὶ ἐδόξαζον ἐν ἐμοὶ τὸν Θεόν); and they were 
glorifying God in me; that is, for what they 
recognized as God’s work in me and through 
me; in my own conversion, and in my 
effective ministering of the gospel to others. 
The ἐν denotes the sphere in which they 
found occasion for praising God. Instances 
of a somewhat similar use of the preposition 
are 1 Cor. iv. 2, Ζητεῖται ἐν τοῖς οἰκονόμοις : 
ver. 6, Ἵνα ἐν ἡμῖν μάθητε: ix. 15, Ἵνα 
αὕτω γένηται ἐν ἐμοί. The sentence is not 
essential to the line of thought in vers. 21— 
23. The apostle was probably prompted to 
ald it by the complacency which he felt in 
the int: rest and sympathy which in those 
days the Jewish Churches showed towards 
him—sentiments which afterwards faded 
too much away into those of suspicion and 
alienation (comp. Acts xxi.21). He rejoices 
to remember, and he will have the Galatian 
Churchmen know, that once the believers of 
the circumcision were proud of him, and 
were satisfied that he was preaching the true 
gospel of Christ. And his preaching was 
the same now as it had been then. 


AppiTIonaAL ΝΌΤΕΒ. 


Ver. 17.—The purpose of St. Paul’s journey 
into Arabia. The paraphrase given above 
in the Exposition explains why it is that the 
apostle mentions his going into Arabia. It 
is because, at that juncture, he left Damascus 
to go nowhere else, and because this was a 
country where there was no man to teach 
him the gospel. It explains, I say, why 
St. Paul mentions the journey into Arabia; 
the journey itself it does not cxplain. But 
this is a point which now claims considera- 
tion. 1. By ancient commentators it was 
generally supposed that the apostle hastened 
into Arabia in order at once to begin 
“preaching the Son of God among Gen- 
tiles,” in conformity with the Divine pur- 
pose in calling him to be an apostle, stated 
in ver.16. To this view there are three ob- 
jections. (1) If this had been his object in 
taking that journey, the apostle mizht have 
been expected to have added to tho state- 
ment, “ I went away into Arabia,” some hint 
of such evangclizing work, e.g. “ preaching 
the Lord Jesus,” or the like. Such an 
addition would have told most forcibly for 
his argument, as showing, by his proceed- 
ing at once to preach the gospel which he 
had received from God, that he had con- 


sidered himself as already then equipped 
with the requisite knowledge. (2) The 
apostle had no occasion to hasten away into 
Arabia to find Gentiles to evangelize. Da- 
mascus itself was a Gentile city, in which 
Jows, though forming so numerous a scttle- 
ment there as to have more than one syna- 
gogue (Acts ix. 2), were, however, only 
alien dwellers. (3) It appears doubtful 
whether it was the Divine will that St. Paul 
should exercise his ministry among Gentiles 
immediately and in the first instance. In 
narrations of his ministerial work, especially 
in its earlier stages, whether as related by 
St. Luke or as sketched by St. Paul himself 
(see Acts ix. 20—22; xxvi. 20), the apostle 
is exhibited as addressing himself in the 
first instance to Jews and to those Gentiles 
who were found attaching themselves to the 
Jewish worship, and only subsequently 
turning to the uncircumcision. 2. A differ- 
ent vicw has found acceptance with most 
recent expositors, namely, that he went 
away into Arabia with the view of with- 
drawing himself from all human eociety; 
alike breaking himself off from his old 
Pharisean associates among the non-believ- 
ing Jews, and detaching himself even from 
those Christian Jews who had been con 
strained to own him as “ brother” (Acts ix 
17); in order that, by uninterrupted devo- 
tion to prayer, by meditation and study of 
the Holy Scriptures unbiassed by any ex- 
traneous human influences, and, above all, 
by laying. himself open to supernatural 
communications from the Lord Jesus, and 
to the informing operation upon his soul of 
the Holy Spirit, he might win his way into 
more perfect at-oneness with the facts, 
principles, and schemes of life, all hitherto 
so strange to him, which had been just now 
presented to his soul. It will readily occur 
to the readcr’s mind how analogous such a 
feature in St. Paul’s history would appear 
to that six weeks’ retirement of the Lord 
Jesus himself which intervened between his 
baptism and his entrance upon his public 
ministry, to which reference was made 
above. If, in the case of the guiltless and 
holy One, such a period of devout seclusion 
was deemcd meet, how much more was it 
meet, and even above all things necessary, 
in the case of one both in nature weak and 
sinful, and with habits of thought and feel- 
ing up to that hour so alien to the work 
to which he was now being summoned! 
The apostle’s statement would doubtless 
have been more clearly suggestive of this 
view if he had written, “I went away into 
the wildernesses of Arabia.” But if the 
paraphrase above offered interprets his tenor 
of thought justly, it did not lie within his 
present scope that he should indicate the 
purpose of his journey at all; it sufficed 


38 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


fou. τ. 124 


that he should specify the locality as being 
one which withdrew him away from all 
who might have been supposed his pos- 
sible instructors in the gospel. Moreover, 
this view furnishes the most satisfactor 
explanation of any that has been affered, 
of the omission of this particular in St. 
Luke’s history. Such a retreat from the 
world needs not to be supposed to have been 
long protracted. The wonderful vivacity 
and quick versatility which characterized 
both the intellect and the feelings of the 
apostle rendered him capablo under the 
Divine grace of a spiritual transformation 
vastly more rapid than with most men 
would have been possible. A period of 
(say) forty days, such as that during which 
Moses, Elijah, and the Lord Jesus were 
severally withdrawn from human associa- 
tion, in order to be brought into closer com- 
munication with the spiritual world, may 
perhaps have sufficed in this case also. 
And as the word “immediately” shows 
that the departure into Arabia was the first 
course of proceeding adopted by the apostle 
after his illumination, it is a hi¢hly probable 
supposition that it took place directly after 
his baptism, mentioned Acts ix. 19. Upon 
returning to Damascus, he would naturally 
at once attach himself, in the way that St. 
Luke in the verse just cited makes mention 
of, to the society of the “disciples” among 
the Jews, and proceed without delay in the 
synagogues to “proclaim Jesus, that he is 
the Son of God” (Acts ix.20). Such being 
the conditions of the case, it is quite sup- 
posable that St. Luke, though perhaps 
aware of this journey into Arabia, migit 
not have felt that there was any occasion 
for referring to it; not only because it occu- 
pied so brief a space of time, but also because 
it formed no part of that public life of St. 
Paul which was the historian’s proper 
concern. He was not likely to have never 
known of it, seeing that it had been stated 
in this Epistle, 

Ver. 19.—“ James the Lord’s brother.” 
This verse has been the subject of much 
discussion. Many have considered the turn 
of expression used by the apostle to imply 
that the James here spoken of ,was himself 
one of the'original apostolic body to which 
Cephas belonged. And from this it has 
further been inferred that the passage 
favours the notion that “James the Lord’s 
brother” wna identical with ‘James the 


ron of Alphrus”—the word “brother” 


being interpreted to mean “ near kinsman,” 
and taken in the present case to describe 
one conceived to have been in reality a first 
cousin, But there are so many serious diffi- 
culties and precarious assumptions attach- 


ing to this theory, that students of the’ 


sacred history have of late shown an un- 


willingness to acquiesco in the above-men- 
tioned identification. They are struck by 
observing that, so far as has been shown, 
the notion that “ James the Lord’s brother” 
was in reality only his cousin was never 
heard of in the Church till it was broached 
by Jerome very near the end of the fourth 
century (A.D. 392); and further, that in the 
New Testament the term “ brothers,” when 
used to describe family relationship, is 
always used in its usual and obvious sense 
of persons who were regarded as being chil- 
dren of the same father or of the same 
mother. When mention is made of James 
(the son of Zebedee) being the brother of 
John, or of Andrew being the brother of 
Simon Peter, the reader never stops to con- 
sider whether they might not have been 
cousins, but at once assumes that they were 
brothers in the ordinary acceptation of the 
term. In reference to the case now before 
us, some in ancient times, as for example 
Helvidius—against whom Jerome wrote tle 
controversial treatise in which the theory of 
cousinship is first found stated and argued 
for—and some also quite recently, have sup- 
posed “the Lord’s brothers” to have been 
later children of his mother Mary, born of 
her union with Joseph. But, apart from 
any repugnance that has been felt to this 
view which has its origin in sentiments of 
pious reverence, not to speak of mariolatrous 
fanaticism, there is another hypothesis 
which scems to fit much better in with all 
the circumstances, namely, that which re- 
gards our “Lord’s brothers” as children of 
his adoptive father Joseph, whom everybody 
regarded as his father—children born to 
Joseph in a former marriage. This view 
has been proved to have been, with only 
doubtful exceptions,' the one generally ac- 
cepted in the early Church for more than 
three centuries (see Bishop Lightfoot, 
* Galatians,’ Dissertation ii., “ The Brethren 
of the Lord”). This is scarcely the place 
for discussing at length the details of the 
critical controversy. I cannot, however, for- 
bear drawing attention to one aspect of the 
question, which, so far as I am aware, 
has not been sufficiently considered. For 
the purpose of the present Commentary it 
has the recommendation of involving no 
subtleties of disputable interpretation, but 
of making its appeal at once to the common 
instincts of human feeling. We have the 


1 Bishop Lightfoot is inclined to concede 
Tertullian to tle supporters of the Helvidian 
hypothesis. The present writer, however, 
ventures to demur to even this exception. 
Tertullian’s words do not seem to him toe 
require the interpretation thus put upon 
them (see Georgi’s ‘Tertullianus Redi- 
vivus,’ vol. 111, pp. 427—429), 


ou. 1, 1—24,] THE EPISTLE TO 


THE GALATIANS. 39 


express testimony of St. John (vii. 5) 
that, down to within a few months of our 
Lord’s death, * his brothers did not believe 
on him.” In the history of the Acts, in- 
deed, immediately after the Ascension, we 
find them associated with that innermost 
circle of believers who, with the eleven, 
were devoutly wailing for “the Promise of 
the Father.” But on the eve of the Feast 
of Tabernacles in the previous autumn, they 
had not as yet professed themselves to be 
Jesus’ disciples. This statement of St. 
John’s is made of them as a body. No hint 
is given of any exception, either by St. Juhn 
or by the Synoptists (Matt. xii. 46; Mark 
iii, 21, 831; Luke viii, 19). Ingenious com- 
binations of various extremely questionable 
premisses would fain interpolate into the 
evangelist’s statement at least one excep- 
tion; but none presents itself upon the face 
of the story. There the brethren of the 
Lord stand before us as unitedly holding 
aloof, and as even inclined to treat his claims 
with derision (John vii. 3, 4, 8; comp. 
Mark iii. 21). Which of those two hypo- 
theses which we are now comparing with 
each other, as to the nature of their brother- 
ship to our Lord, is the one which the better 
agrees with this unquestionable fact? Let 
us first consider the one which supposes his 
brothers and his sisters to have formed an 
elder branch of Joseph’s family born of a 
former marriage. There must have been at 
least six in number living at the time of 
our Lord’s ministry (Mark vi. 3), and there 
may have been more than six then; and 
there may, again, have well been some 
others besides, then deceased. It is there- 
fore probable that some of them—James, for 
example, the eldest apparently of the bro~ 
thers—were adolescent, or even quite grown 
up at the time of their father’s second mar- 
riage. Judging from the ordinary experi- 
ence of human households, what would seem 
likely to have been the attitude of feeling 
animating this whole group of brothers and 
sisters, and in particular animating James — 
who would, of course, take the place of their 
representative and domestio champion, and 
who is shown in the Acts and by his own 
Epistle to have been a person of singularly 
grave, taciturn, aud magisterial tempera- 
ment—both towards their probably youthful 
stepmother from the time of her marriage 
with their father, and towards the Lord 
Jesus himself during the period of his boy- 
hood, youth, and early manhood? May it 
not be probably assumed that it was apt to 
be at least unsympathetic—reserved? We 
know from the “Fear not” of the Divine 
message recorded Matt, i. 20, that the cir- 
cumstances attending on our adorable Lord’s 
incarnation well-nigh proved ἃ stumbling- 
block even to the just-minded, pious, 


Heaven-directed Joseph. Is it conceivable 
that, in sosmall a town as Nazareth, mis- 
judging gossip did not make itself during 
those mouths only too busy with a theme, 
the real character of which men could not 
possibly understand, and which yet was so 
sure to attract attention—distressfully busy, 
both for the holy, Virgin herself and for her 
affianced- husband? And would none of 
that malign whispering percolate to the ears 
of the older members of Joseph’s family, 
depositing in their minds almost ineradio- 
able seeds of prejudice against their utep- 
mother and against her offspring? Shame 
and sorrow invested our Redeemer’sa de- 
cease from the world; shame and sorrow 
overclouded alav even his entrance into it; 
by the necessity of the case, all, whether 
old or young, who after the flesh were then 
brought into close connection with him, 
were also brought into fires of temptation, 
out of which only much especial interposing 
grace could rescue them unscathed. At 
all events, the new brother whom Joseph’s 
already numerous family were called upon 
to accept must have been to their feeling 
no own brother of theirs; hia mother was 
not their mother. This was a super-en- 
grafted scion, half alien to the original 
stock to which they belonged. In ordinary 
domestic experience is not this usually of 
itself a source of jealousy and estrangement ? 
We can well believe that, in course of time, 
the beauty of their stepmother’s character 
would be certain to win their esteem and 
their confidence. And that it really did so 
seems betukened by what we read in the 
evangelical history some thirty years after 
their father’s union with Mary, when he 
had himself, for some while apparently, de- 
parted this life; the mother and the brethren 
of Jesus, though not as yet knit together 
by mutual faith in him, are, however, seen 
acting in unison, as if swayed by their 
mutual feeling of family connection (see 
Jolin ii, 12; Mark iii. 31), It is, however, 
questionable whether the stainless purity 
and the exalted moral excellence which 
characterized their stepmother’s Son would 
in an equal degree draw their hearts to him. 
Of old, Joseph the son of the patriarch 
Jacob was isolated from his elder half-bro- 
thers by the very virtues which exalted 
lim. They hated him, if in part for certain 
other causes of offence, yet no doubt mainly 
for this, that they felt that in moral quality 
he was not of them. But the contrast 
which obtained between the moral being of 
the Lord Jesus and his adoptive half-bro- 
thers must have been incomparably greater 
than that which made Joseph the “sepa- 
rated from his brethren.” He was alto- 
gether “holy and harmless,” end therefore 


altogether “separate from sinnera.” True, 


40 THE EPISTLE TO TIE GALATIANS. 


[σπ. τ. 1—24, 


his human nature and his human life 
touche! theirs in a thousand ways; but 
none the less must they have been conscious 
that, in moral and spiritual temperament, he 
was not one of themselves. Must not this 
consciousness have been a source of inward 
annoyance?—of an annoyance all the more 
fretting because they would,.of course, be so 
wholly unable to understand how it was 
that such w difference obtained? Would 
not they too be not seldom “moved with 
envy ” against this new Joseph? In intel- 
lectual gifts, and especially in the faculty of 
moral judgment and spiritual intuition, the 
. youthful Jesus was, in the judgment of all 
around, and doubtless to his brethren’s own 
consciousness, incomparably their superior. 
Could such superiority have been acquiesced 
in by them easily and patiently in the case 
of one so much their junior, who in fact was 
at the best only half their brother? His 
views and conceptions of religious truth 
when he was twelve years old were such as 
astonished the doctors of the Law at Jeru- 
salem; we therefore cannot but feel sure 
that, even in those earlier years of his life, 
his thoughts and reasonings were wont to 
move amongst the intensely loved revela- 
tions of God’s Word with a freedom wholly 
alien to their habits of mind; neither 
shackled by Judaical legalism, nor regardful 
of rabbinical hair-splitting, nor disposed to 
respect the traditions and dicta of the elders. 
To the James and the Jude, whose natural 
mental physiognomy, though in its now 
renewed Christianized aspect, is conspicuous 
to us in their Epistles, the strain of reli- 
gious thinking and utterance which we may 
reverently believe to have been familiar 
with the youthful Redeemer must in the 
days of their as yet carnal and unripened 
religiousness have seemed alike repugnant 
and unintelligible. Granted, however, that 
they could neither appreciate nor compre- 
hend, yet, as being so much older in years, 
they may well have deemed themselves 
authorized, by virtue of their domestic 
relation, to censure and rebuke. And sup- 
posing that they did undertake by argu- 
ment to gainsay words of his which more 
especially offended them, how could it have 
been possible for them to stand their ground 
in encounter with One who in after years 
was seen in the supreme arena of the nation, 
confuting and putting to silence, and sternly 
rebuking, the most powerful reasoners in 
Jerusalem itself? Had he no occasion in 
those youthful days to employ against them 
similar implements of both intellectual aud 
moral correction? And since they would 
not submit to be taught by him, would they 
not perforee resent their defeat? Under con- 
ditions such as these, is it not quite easy to 
imagine that, when the hour came for Jesus 


to be manifested to Israel, it found James 
and his brothers altogether unprepared to 
attacl: themsclvca to him as disciples; thmt 
they would be much more ready to stand 
aloof from him as at least an enthusiast— 
nay, by-and-by to openly pronounce, as in 
fact they did, that he must have gone clean 
out of his mind? This commends itself to 
our acceptance as a perfectly self-coherent 
hypothesis. Let us next turo our attention 
to the other interpretation of the relation, 
namely, that the brethren of the Lord were 
his own uterine brothers, A moment’s 
reflection shows how different the conditions 
would have been. On the supposition that 
they were his younger brothers, sons of his 
mother, then we may consider that, from 
their earliest years, they liad been trained, 
and would naturally be disposed, to regard 
him with the profound defcrence which 
in a Jewish household was instinctively 
accorded to the firstborn. This natural 
sentiment of deference we must in all reason 
believe to have been intensified by their 
consciousness of his extraordinary mental 
gifts, both intellectual and moral, as well 
as by the estimation conceded to him by all 
around; while this sentiment would be 
sweetened in its tone by their sense of the 
fairness and the affectionateness with which 
he had always treated them, even when, as 
elder brother, and especially after their 
father’s death, he may have had occasion to 
control or reprove them. The high estima- 
tion with which their neighbours as well ag 
their common mother regarded him would, 
tn this case, have been no occasion of offence 
or jealousy; he being in blood-relationship 
one of their very selves, their representative, 
respect shown to him would have becn 
rather a cause for pride: who (they would 
fel) should be so loved and honoured as 
their dear Jeshua? With such habits of 
willing affectionate deference, might it not 
be reasonably expected that, when he issued 
forth as the religious Teacher of his country- 
men, his brethren would be found among 
his most cordial adherents? In that lower 
sense in which we are wont to employ the 
expression with reference to one anothcr, 
they had always believed in him; they 
knew and therefore loved him too well not 
to do so: would it not have seemed strange 
if this constant attitude of their minds 
towards him had not now at least helped 
them forwards towards that higher faith 
which the evangelist denotes by the term! 
But they, one and all, did not believe in 
him! The moral probability, that is, the 
probability founded upon the consideration 
of the natural effect of environing cirovm- 
stances upon human character and action, 
affords an argument in favour of the former 
hypothesis which, to the present writer, 


cH. 1. I—24,] THE EPISTLE TO 


THE GALATIANS. ΑἹ 


appears of exceeding great weight, and in 
fact decisive. James must have been a son 
of our Lord’s adoptive father. But if the 
person here cited by the name of James was 
our Lord’s brothcr in the sense now given, 
he could not have been one of the twelve. 
How, then, are we to account for his being 
wentioned in this passage in a way which 
certainly does, prima facie, favour the sup- 
position that he was an apostle? A solution 
nas been sought in the consideration that, 
iu various places in the New Testament, the 
designation of “apostle” is applied to 
others besides those who were apostles in 
the highest sense. There were in truth 
apostles in a secondary sense; in that sense 
of ecclesiastical delegates which the reader 
will find discussed in the dissertation on 
the subject of “Apostles,” in the Introduc- 
tion. But this will not help us here. For 
(1) James the Lord’s brother cannot beshown 
to have been an apostlein this secondary sense. 
(2) On the other hand, Barnabas both was 
such and is so designated (see p. xxxi., seqq.). 
And Barnabas not only was at Jerusalem 
at the time here referred to by St. Paul, but 
was the very person that introduced Saul to 
“the apostles” as a true convert (Acts ix. 
27). The following seems to the present 
writer a more satisfactory explanation :— 
From the time of the Ascension, the “ bre- 
thren of the Lord” held, in the general 
estimation of bclievers, ἃ position peculiar 
to themselves. ‘This is evidenced by the 
manner in which, in Acts i. 14, St. Luke 
refers to them. After enumerating the 
eleven apostles by their names, he con- 
nects with them, as forming with them an 
interior circle of disciples, ‘‘ women” — 
wives, we may suppose, or near relatives 
of apostles, perhaps also some other most 
zealous female associates with the sacred 
body—“ and Mary the mother of Jesus, and 
his brethren.” Further on in the history, 
in the account given in the fifteenth chapter 
of the conference of “the apostles and 
elders,” the manner in which James, the 
eldest of those brothers, is presented to the 
reader when assuming the initiative in pro- 
posing the final decision, gives the im- 
pression, which has been almost universally 
acquiesced in, that he spoke as a presiding 
officer would speak who felt it his place 
authoritatively to state the judgment which 
he anticipated the meeting would adopt. 
This impression tallies perfectly with the 
tradition of Church history—a_ tradition 
which there is nothing in the New Testa- 
ment to discountenance, but much to con- 
firm—that James was the presiding elder or 
bishop of the Church of Jerusalem. That 
he should by general consent have been 
called to occupy this position was very 
natural. He was distinguished by venerable 


family connection, being not only through 
his father a descendant of David's royal 
lineage, but also the eldest “brother” of 
the Lord Christ. He had been especially 
honoured by Christ’s appearing to him 
singly after his resurrection. In personal 
character he is shown by his Epistle, as well 
as otherwise, as a man singularly remark- 
able for gravity, for habita of devotion, for 
intense single-minded earnestness, for magis- 
terial prophet-like decisiveness of intellect ; 
while, lastly, he was fitted by strictness of 
Mosaistic observance to be eminently ac- 
ceptable to the Israelitish sentiments of the 
members of this particular Church. Alto- 
gether, it seems perfectly natural that he 
should have been called to preside in it; to 
be, at least in effect, “Bishop of Jerusalem,” 
whether this particular title of “bishop,” 
as afterwards currently understood; was in 
his lifetime accorded to him or not. At all 
events, it had then come to pass, and pro 
bably in the way now described had come 
to pass, that “ James and Cephas and John” 
were recognized as being “pillars” of 
Christendom. The conference just referred 
to took place, it is true, some eleven years 
after that first visit of St. Paul’s to Jeru- 
salem which he ia here speaking of. In the 
account, however, given in the twelfth 
chapter of the Acts, of events occurring six 
or eight years before the conference (the 
precise dates of these events are assigned 
differently by different chronologers), and 
only three or four years, possibly less, after 
this visit, we have an indication afforded 
us that James held this leading represen- 
tative position even then. We are told 
that St. Peter, on the night of his mira- 
culous release from prison, in view of him- 
self withdrawing for a time from the neigh- 
bourhood, bade the believers whom he 
found assembled at the house of John 
Mark’s mother, to “announce these tidings 
to James and the brethren.” This putting 
forward of his name, couple with what we 
read further on, gives us a glimpse of James 
the Lord’s brother as even then a foremost 
figure in the rulership of the believers of 
Jerusalem—the very foremost figure, it 
should secm, among Christians next to the 
august twelve. Such being James’s posi- 
tion, we can understand how it was tliat 
St. Paul felt that, though his having seen 
James was not precisely the same thing aa 
seeing another apostle, yet it was tanta- 
mount thereto in its bearing upon the auto- 
biographical statement which he is now 
making, and that therefore it was a fact that 
as much required to be taken account of as 
if he had actually been an apostle. If he 
had said, “ Other than Cephas saw I of the 
apostles none,” without mentioning James, 
the statement, though in etrict literelnoss 


12 THE EPISTLE TO 


THE GALATIANS. [ux 1. 1—24, 


true, would none the less have conveyed a 
false impression, aud been ag an argument 
illusive. He therefore, as ἃ sort of after- 
thought—for the sentence without the addi- 
tion is grammatically already compl-te— 
adds the words, “ unless it were James the 
Lord’s brother.” Attention was drawn 
above, in the note on ver. 7, to the occa- 
sional use of εἰ μὴ as “ partially exceptive.” 
It is in this way only that St. James is here 
by implication grouped with the apostles. 
He shared certain qualities attaching to 
them which were 80 relative to the matter 
in hand that the writer could not in this 
reference pass him by without mention. It 
is in a somewhat similar way that “the 
brethren of the Lord” are grouped with 
apostles in 1 Cor. ix. 5. One remark more 
on the words, “the Lord’s brother.” ‘They 
have been commonly supposed to have been 
added for the purpose simply of making it 
clear what particular individual among 
several bearing the name of “James” the 
writer is referring to. This view of their 
bearing seems open toquestion, There was 
only one man whom the recital of the name 
“James” would naturally and of course at 


once recall to the minds of St. Paul’s Gentile 
readers—the prominent leading figure in the 
Israelite Church at Jerusalem. Accordingly 
we find that when elsewhere St. Paul has 
occasion to refer to him, he feels no need of 
appending a defining description, but simply 
gives the name. So ch. ii, 9, 12; 1 Cor. 
xv. 7. Similarly, St. Luke, when referring 
to plainly the same person, not once in the 
Acts thinks it necessary to explain what 
James it is that he is apeaking of (see Acts 
xii. 17; xv. 13; xxi.18). He adds a further 
description of the individual intended, only 
when it is not the Lord’s brother, as in 
Acts xii. 2. Similarly also Jude, in his 
Epistle, when marking his own personality 
and therewith his claim to attention, desig« 
nates himself as “Jude the brother of 
James,” taking it for granted that his 
readers would understand what James was 
meant. St. Paul’s purpose in adding the 
words seems rather to be this: he wishes to 
indicate why this James, not being an 
apostle, yet needs to be here brought forward 
at all. Viewed in this light, the clause 
tells against the supposition of his being 
one of the twelve rather than in its favour. 


HOMILETICS. 


Ver. 1.—The inspired authority of the apostle. The first line of the Epistle is 
designed to settle the question of his authority and independence as a teacher of the 
Church. The truth of the gospel, as he phrases it (ch. ii. 5), was iavolved in this 
merely personal question. 

J. THE NECESSITY FOR VINDICATING HIS AUTHORITY. Emissaries of the Judaistic 
party, who had obtained access to the Galatian Churches, sought to undermine his 
doctrine by denying or minimizing his apostleship. They limited the term “apostle” 
almost exclusively to the twelve, and were thus enabled to assert (1) that he was not 
an apostle in the highest sense, as he was not a personal disciple of Jesus Christ, and 
therefore could not claim the inspiration of those on whom he breathed the Holy Ghost 
(John xx, 22); (2) that, in any case, he stood in official subordination to the twelve, 
and was not, therefore, to be followed where he diverged from their teaching ; and (3) 
that the proceedings at Antioch (Acts xiii. 1, 2) necessarily implied that he received 
alike his commission and his gospel from man. 

II. His commission AT ONCE ORIGINAL AND Diving. “ An apostle, not from men, 
neither by man, but by Jesus Christ and God the Father, who raised him from the dead.” 
1. He was wtrue apostle. He emphatically asserts his independent apostleship, placing his 
official title in the very forefront of his Epistle. He affirms that he was an apostle before 
he had any intercourse with the twelve (ch. i. 17, 18), and that on three different occasions 
the apostles recognized his full apostolic standing (ch. i. 18, 19; ii. 9, 10; ii, 11—21). 
He was, therefore, no delegate of the twelve, and had no secondary or intermediate place 
of authority under them. He was, as he described himself to the Corinthians, “a 
called apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God.” 2. His commission was not “from 
(ἀπὸ) men, nor by (διὰ) man.” ‘The false teachers might have suggested that the pro- 
ceedings at Antioch implied a purely human commission. But he had been called to 
the apostleship long before his designation at Antioch to a special missionary work 
(Acts xxvi. 16—20). His calling was neither that of Matthias nor of Barnabas. He 
was called neither by a ‘body of men nor by an individual representing the authority of 
such a budy. 3. His commission was entirely Divine. “ By Jesus Christ, and God the 
Father, who raised him from the dead,” (1) It was by Jesus Christ ; for his commission 


cu. 1. 1—24.] THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 43 


dated from the day of his conversion on the road to Damascus. “The Gentiles, unto 
whom now I send thee” (Acts xxvi. 17). He speaks elsewhere of his having seen the 
Lord, as a token of his apostleship (1 Cor. ix. 1). He was directly and immediately 
called by Jesus Christ. (2) It was by“ God the Father, who raised him from the dead” 
—acting in and threngh Christ; the reference to the resurrection making it plain that 
Jesus could call him, though he had not called him when he called the twelve, and that 
the apostleship was one of the gracious gifts conferred upon the Church by the ascended 
Redeemer (léph. iv. 11). Thus the apostle was not self-called to his high office, and 
does not even now refer to the source of his calling from vanity or self-assertion, but 
from a supreme regard to the welfare of his converts. 


Ver. 2.— The aposile’s companions in the gospel, ‘ And all the brethren which are 
with me.” It was alter his manner to assvciate brethren with him in the inscriptions 
of his Epistles. ᾿ 

I. WHo WERE THESE BRETHREN? 1, They were not the Christian people among whom 
he resided ; for it was his habit to distinguish between ‘‘the brethren which are with 
me” and “ the saints” (Phil. iv. 21, 22). Besides, in that case he would rather have 
spoken of the brethren as the persons with whom he was, 2. They were his colleugues 
in gospel work and gospel travel, including probably Timothy and Titus, who had 
accompanied him in his first visit to Galatia, and who had rejoined him there (Acts 
xviii, 5), and perhaps Erastus, Trophimus, and others. 3. They were very numerous. 
If the Epistle was written during the apostle’s three months’ visit to Corinth, toward 
the close of a.p. 57, he was now accompanied by a larger number of brethren than at 
almost any other time. 

11. WuY DOES HE IDENTIFY THESE BRETHREN WITH HIMSELF IN THR ΕἸΡΙΒΤΊΕ ὃ 
1. The concurrence of such brethren as Timothy and Silas, with whom the Galatians 
were personally acquainted, might have the effect of conciliating their affection and 
abating the bitterness of their opposition. 2. His emphatic reference to “ all the brethren” 
seems to show that there was no singularity in his views ; that he was supported by the 
beet and the wisest of the Church’s leaders, and that the Galatians, by repudiating 
Yauline teaching, were really severing themselves from the recognized guides of visible 
Christianity. ; 


Ver. 2.—The Churches of Galatia. Probably in the towns of Ancyra, Pessinus, and 
Tavium. It is interesting to mark that we have not in the New Testament a single 
name of a place or person, scarcely a single incident of -any kind, connected with the 
apostle’s preaching in Galatia. He had paid two visits to Galatia before this time. 

I, THe MeMBeRSHIP OF THE GALATIAN CuurcHES. The members belonved, as their 
name sixnities, to the Celtic race, and differed in character and habits lrom all the 
other nations to whom Epistles were addressed. “It is the Celtic blood which gives a 
distinctive colour to the Galatian character.” We hardly needed the authority of Cusar 
to know that instability of character was the chief difficulty in dealing with tne 
Galatians, and that they were pane to all sorts of ritualistic observances, Thus they 
received the apostle with true Celtic heartiness at his first visit; they “received himas 
an angel of God, even as Christ.” The Church was mainly Gentile, but gathered round 
a nucleus of Jewish converts. The fact that this Epistle was addressed to Churches 
over 80 extensive a tract of country would imply the wide prevalence of the Judaistic 
heresy. Yet the apostasy was as yet only in its incipient stage. It is a characteristic 
fact that false teachers never appear except in Churches already established. They 
scldom attempt the conversion of cither Jew or Geritile, thus carefully avoiding perse- 
cution; but wherever they scent a work of grace from afar, they gather in eager 
haste to pervert the gospel of Christ. 

IL, THoueuH THE GALATIAN CHURCHES WERE IN ERROR, THEY WERE STU TRUE 
Cuorcues or Curist. They were not guilty of idolatry or of total apostasy, but they 
were stained by serious doctrinal corruptions and grave moral disorders. Yet the apostle 
owns them as true Churches of Christ. The lesson is a rebuke to the unchurching spirit 
so often manifest in Christian history. 

III. THE APOSTLE’S ADDRESS TO THEM WAS CHARACTERISTIC. He addresses them 
simply aa “Churches of Galatia,” without one word of commendation or familiar 


44 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. (ox. 1. 1--24, 


greeting or kindly remembrance, such as we find in his addresses to other Churches. 
He does not address them as *‘ faithful brethren,” as “ the saintsin Christ Jesus.” There 
is something suggestive in this method of prefacing the Epistle. He ends it with a 
perceptible softening of tone, his last word being “ brethren.” 


Ver. 3.—The apostolic benediction. ‘ Grace to you and peace from God the Father, 
and from our Lord Jesus Christ.” This benediction is a proof of the hearty love of the 
apostle, as well as a mark of his unswerving loyalty to the doctrine of salvation by 
Christ only. 

J. THE BLESSINGS WISHED For. “Grace and peace.” Nearly twenty times in 
Scripture are these two graces linked togetner, but never so significantly as at present, 
when the Galatians manifested a disposition to return to the Law with its terrors and 
disquietudes. 1. Grace is free, undeserved love manifesting itself in a free gift. (Rom. 
v.15.) It is the foundation of our redem) tion. It is also an operation of that free love 
in our hearts—vrace, quickening, sanctifying, comforting, strenythening. It is the first 
blessing the apostle asks for; it is what we all need; it is but the beginning of blessings 
innumerable. 2. Peace is not peace with God (Rom. v. 1), but the peace that springs 
from it, The true order of blessing and experience is not peace and grace, but grace 
and peace. Grace is the root of peace; peace is the inner comfort that sprinys from 
grace. The apostle desires that the Galatians may not only share in Divine grac2, but 
possess the assurance of it. Without peace, thousands are unhappy, and the desire of 
it causes many a pagan to bear labour and pain in the vain effurt to enjoy it. The 
worldly man longs for peace without grace. But the two are inseparably linked. 
Without it there is no progress in religion, and no real test of the value of a man’s 
religion, Luther says, “Grace releaseth sin, and peace maketh the conscience quiet. 
The two fiends that torment us are sin and conscience.” Another says, “ If ycu have 
peace, you are rich without money ; if you have it not, you are poor with millions.* 

11. THE suURCE OF THESE BLEssINGs. “ From God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus 
Christ ’—from God the Father as Fountain, and Jesus Christ as the Channel of convey- 
ance tous. The highest blessings of the gospel, as well as the appointment to apostolic 
office, spring alike from Father and Son. ‘hey are here both associated as objects of 
Divine worship, and as the sources of spiritual blessing. This proves Christ’s Deity. 
“The living fuuntain of grace which ever flowed and never ebbed in the besom of our 
God has been gloriously opened to a thirsty worlc in the bleeding side of Christ.” 


Vers. 4, 5.—The sum and substance of the Epistle. He here declares the true ground 
of acceptance with God which the Galatians practically ignored by their system of 
legalism. 

I, Mark THE SELF-OBLATION oF Curist. “Who gave himself for our sins.” Our 
Redeemer was not killed by the hand of violence, though ‘“‘ by lawless hands” he was 
crucified and slain; he spontaneously offered himself, and his offering was not the 
impulse of mere excited feeling, The expression, “ gave himself,” always points to the 
free surrender of his life (1 Tim. ii. 6; Titus i. 14; Matt. xx. 28). It accords with his 
own language, “I lay down my life of myself” (John x. 17); “ How am I straitened 
till it be accomplished!” The Father is elsewhere described as providing the sacrifice, 
and delivering him up for us all (Rom. viii. 82), but the text describes his own priestly 
act in accordance “ with the Father's will.” It is needless to say that the phrase doves 
not point to his incarnation, but to his death. 

II. THE RELATION BETWEEN HIS DEATH AND OUR SINS. “ Who gave himself for our 
sins,” Some divines connect Christ’s death, not with the pardon of sin, but with our 
deliverance from its power. They regard sin as a disease rather than as an offence, a 
calamity rather than a crime against God; they represent the difficulty as not on God’s 
side, but on man’s, so that forgiveness is sure to follow upon spiritual recovery. In 
other words, they place life first and pardon next, basing our acceptance, not upon 
Christ’s death, but upon the possession of the Divine life, The Bible sense is that “his 
blood was shed for the remission of sins.” The life is regarded as the effect or reward 
of the Crucifixion. There is a direct causal-connection between Christ’s death and the 
p»rdon of our sins. The reason why he gave himsclt is here assigned. Our sins were 
the procuring cause of his death. isis the plain teaching of 188. 1if, 8; Rom. iv. 25; 


cH, 1, 1—24.] THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 45 


1 Cor. xv. 3; 1 Pet. iii. 18. Besides, it would be tautology for the apostle to refer here 
to mere human improvement, since the design of the sacrifice is to accomplish this very 
improvement, as we see by the terminating clause. It would be absurd to confound the 
means and the end, the cause with the effect. 

II, Tue eriicaL RESULT OF THE sacrirics. “That he might deliver us from this 
present evil world.” This shows the truly sanctifying result of Christ’s death. This 
marks out the gospel as an instrument of emancipation from a state of bondage. It 
strikes the key-note of the Epistle. As the oblation is perfect, so the deliverance 
secured hy it is perfect; there is, therefore, no compatibility between obedience to the 
Mosaic Law and faith in Jesus Christ. The deliverance is from “this present evil 
world ;” not from the Jewish dispensation, which is nowhere called evil in itself, though 
it became so through a grave misapplication of its principles—besides, the Gentiles had 
not by Christianity been delivered from it; nor is it deliverance in the sense of ap 
abandonment of our place and duty in the world; but it is the world as it is, without 
religion, under curse, transitory, corrupt, and doomed. It was deliverance from the 
corrupt course of this world which was under bondage to gods (2 Cor. iv. 4), from that 
world which was crucified to Paul and he to it (ch. vi. 14). It is deliverance from 
the power of that world which has its thieefold seductiveness “in the lust οἵ the flesh, 
the lust of the eye, and the pride of life.” Thus provision is made in the atonemeut 
for the sanctification as well as the justification of sinners. Christ is become to us 
“Sanctification ” as well as “ Righ'ecusness,” 

IV. THe ORIGIN OF THE WHOLE work oF CuristT. “ By the will of God the Father.” 
It was the Father’s appointed work. It was an act of obedience on Christ’s part lo 
his Father’s will. ‘ For this cause came I into the world, that I might do the will of 
my Father.” Christ’s sacrifice was thus in no sense a human plan, nor dependent upon 
man’s obedience; it was the effect of the commanded will of our Father wishing to wip 
back his lost children. Therefore let us not attempt to overturn or neutraiize tLe 
system of grace by our leval obedience. 

V. THE poxotocy. “ ‘To whom be the glory for ever and ever. Amen.” 1. The 
glory of salvation being due, not to man, but God, for its initiation, for its execution, 
for its bestowal, it becomes our duty to give him glory in all our worship and in all 
our duties (1 Cor. x. 31), 2. The doxology is an implied repruof of the Galatians for 
attempting to divide the work of salvation between God and man. 3. The praises of 
the redeemed, though besun on earth, will continue through all cternity. 


Ver. 6.—The sad defection of the Galatians. The apostle enters at once upon the 
business in hand, and calls them to account for their incipient apostasy, 

I, Mark THE APOSTLE’S SORROWFUL SURPRISE, “I marvel that ye are so quickly 
turning away from him who called you in the grace of Christ unto a different gospel.” 
The Celtic heartiness with which they received him at the first, “ as an angel of God, 
even as Christ,” might well excite his wonder at their rapid defection. He understood 
human nature, but there was something in their conduct which baffled ordinary cal- 
culations. His surprise is tinged with sorrow, disappointment, perliaps the least touch 
of anger, and has, unhappily, to occupy the place usually assigned in his Epistles to 
thanksgivings for the gifts and graces of his converts, Yet there is a tender and cau- 
tious tone in the rebuke, as if to imply that his indignation was directed rather against 
their seducers than against themselves. It does not exclude the idea that they might 
yet be recovered from their error. 

11. Tue RAPIDITY OF THE DEFECTION. “Ye are so quickly turning away.” So soon 
after their conversion, or so soon after their hearty reception of him (ch. iv. 14, 15). 
How fickle and changeable the Celtic temper! Ceasar says, “ The Gauls for the most 
part affect new things.” ‘“Giddy-headed hearers have religionem ephemeram, are 
whirled about by every wind of doctrine, being “ constant only in their inconstancy ” 
(Trappe). “They had itching ears; they had heaped to themselves teachers accord- 
ing to their own lusts” (2 ‘lim. iv. 3); that is, they liked to taste the humour 
of teachers who would not disturb them in their sinful ways, and used “ feigned 
words (πλαστοῖς Aoyois),” rather, words fashioned so as to suit the humour of their 
disciples. ‘There are men who “by good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of 
the simple” (Rom. xvi. 18). And the devil is always at hand to corrupt from the 


46 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, [ex. 1. 1—24, 


simplicity that is in Christ (2 Cor. xi. 8). The Galatians had begun to grow weary 
of sound doctrinc—perhaps from the rooted ennsity of the carnal mind to spiritual 
things, and error once reccived into a mind that has departed from the freshuess ot 
first love, takes firmer root than truth, because it is more in affinity with our lower 
moods, Besides, there is something in error to recommend it to the curiosity, or pride, 
or superstition of unstable natures. 

ILL. ΠΕ SERIOUS ASPECT OF THE DEFECTION. It was not only inits incipiency, as the 
apostle signities, but it was in real process of development. It had a double aspect. 1. 
It was defection from a person. _‘ From him whocalled you.” ‘This was not the apostle 
himself, for he dves not usually give prominence to his own labours, but rather 
ascribes the successes of the gospel to the grace and Spirit of God. It was a defection 
fron: God the Father, to whom the calling is uniformly ascribed (Rom. viii. 80; ix. 24; 
1 Cor. i. 9) As such, the apostasy had all the character of ingratitude. But this 
apostasy, in its completed aspect, is a crucifying of Christ afresh, a fresh immolation of 
the Redeeiner. 2. It was difection from the system of grace. ‘They were called “ into the 
grace of Christ.” They had their standing in the dispensation of grace: for the call of God 
works only in that sphere (Rom. v.15), and the Judaist emissaries sinned by attempting 
to draw them off from their true standing-ground (Rom. v. 2). Thus the Galatians 
made a double mistake, pregnant with the worst results—they forgot that conversion 
is God’s work, not man’s, and that the covenant under which the blessing is realized is 
not of works, but of grace. 

IV, Tux “TERMINUS AD QUEM” OF THE DEFECTION. “To a different gospel.” The 
apostle does not concede that the Jewish teachers taught the gospel, even in a per- 
verted form, though it might be called a gospel by its teachers. Luther says, “ No 
heretic ever cometh under the title of errors or of the devil.” The apostle’s phrase, 
ἕτερον, points to a difference in kind which is not involved in ἀλλὸ, ‘The gospel, in fact, 
lost its true character by the perverting additions of the Judaists, 

V. THE pancerR or apostasy. The forcible language of the apostle implies the 
fearfui risks involved in the perversions of the false teachers. Of all falls those of 
apostates are the most melancholy. ‘They fall from a great height of privilece ‘They 
luse all their past pains and sacrifices in the canse of religion. ‘They deliberately part 
with all the hopes of mercy and glory in the world tu come. 


Ver. 7.—The true character of the perverters. The apostle says that the “ different 
gospel ” to which they were verging was really not another (4Ad)—not a second gospel. 
He abruptly corrects his phrasevlogy so as to forbid the idea of the possibility of another 
gospel. ‘There is only one gospel—“ the gospel of Christ.”. The gospel of the Judaists, 
though it formally accepted Christianity, revealed a different way of justification. If 
it is a gospel at all, it is only in this sense, that it is an attempt to pervert the gospel 
of Christ. ‘The passage suggests— 

I, TusT THE PERVERTERS WERE WELL-KNOWN PERSONS. “Certain persons.” The 
allusion is not to their fewness or their insignificance. He speaks of them in this 
manner without conferring any celebrity upon them, or exciting personal animosity 
avainst them. ‘They may well rest in oblivion. 

IL. Iv suacEsts TWO CHARACTERISTIO QUALITIES IN THEIR CAREER. 1, Their 
unsettling influence. “They trouble you.” ‘They disturbed the minds of quiet and 
honest Christians by uvhinging doubts. They disturbed the peace of Churches by the 
cleavage of new doctrines. They created schisms and rivalries that led to the weakening 
of Christian love, and ultimately made way for Christians “biting and devouring one 
another” (ch.v. 15). 2. Uheir downright perversions of the gospel. “ They would 
pervert the gospel of Christ. So far as the Galatians were concerned, it had not become 
a case of actual perversion. But there could be no doubt about the tendency of the 
Judaist teaching. It was a reversal of the gospel, not merely by mingling law and 
gospel, but by practically neutralizing all the merit of Christ which is the great cha- 
racteristic fact of the gospel. 


Vers. 8, 9.—Zhe apostie’s anathemas. The severity of these sentences is directed 
against the Judaizing tcachers, not against the Galatians, whom he evidently regards 
as influenced by others. There is great mildness in his method of reproving the Gala- 


ch. τ, 1—24,) THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 4° 


tians. The apostle first puts a hypothetical case, applicable to himself and his col- 
lcagues in the gospel, even to angelsin heaven, and then he deals with an assumption οἱ 
fact—fact that had actually occurred and was now occurring—that a vospel had been 
preached different from that they had already received, and, in both cases, he ends with 
an anathema. 

I, Huresy 18 A VERY SERIOUS THING. It has power to damn the soul. It is a sin 
against Gud, against the soul, against the truth, against the Church, against the world. 
Τὸ is the habit of modern times to regard error in religious matters as in no way ondan- 
gering the salvation of man. A flippant infidelity denies that a man is responsible for 
his beliefs, There is a spirit abroad that leads men to think that everybody is right, 
that nobody is wrong, that nothing but an evil life will bring retribution hereafter. 
By men of this spirit the apostle would be regarded as cruelly illiberal and narrow. 
Yet we must hold that there are fundamental doctrines in religion which are essential 
to salvation, ‘The apostle regarded heresy as a serious thing when he attached a curse 
to it. And if the anathema would fall upon an apostle like himself, or upon an angel 
from heaven, it would be much more likely to fall upon men neither apostles nor angels. 

II. Tne Caurci HAs No POWEK TO ADD DOCTRINES TO THE GOSPEL oF Crist. It 
is bound to discover the whole truth contained in the gospel, to exhibit it in all its 
relations, and to adapt it to the various exigencies of human speculation and the various 
needs of men. But it has no power or authority to invent a new doctrine. ‘Ihus the 
apostle condemns the Church of Rome in decreeing new articles of faith, not only not 
found in Scripture, but altogether inconsistent with it. The gospel wiil tolerate no 
tival; it will allow no alien elements; it will admit no additions that would under- 
mine its essential principles. All things necessary to salvation are to be found in the 
Word of God. P 

III. APosTLES ARE NOT ALOVE THE GosPEL. The false teachers may have sheltered 
themselves under the authority of great names, probably the apostlesat Jerusalem. But 
not even an apostle may publish anything contrary to the truth of the gospel. Even 
an angel in heaven, representing the highest created authority,dare not uppose the 
gospel. There is a disposition sometimes to excuse the heresies of zealous teachers on 
the ground of their great zeal or their pretension to godliness. But the truth is not 
to be measured by any standard of mere human excellence. We must always remember 
that Satan can at times transform himself into an angel of light. Think of the fearfui 
responsibility of a teacher! We must hold hard by the truth of the gospel if we would 
not imperil the souls of men or diminish the comforts of believers. 

IV. Tue apostiy’s ANATHEMA. It is not to be traced to personal annoyance at men 
who slighted or denied his authority as an apostle; for he was willing to iuvolve himself 
in the curse if he taught anything wrong. This anathema was not excommunication ; 
for an angel could not be affected by such a thing; but the very curse of the living God. 
Whence, then, did the apostle derive the authority to pronounce it? God only can 
inflict it. The apostle did it by the same authority that sent him to preach the gospel 
—the authority of that Lord who has the keys of hell and death. 


Ver. 10.— The apostle’s explanation of his severity. ‘For do I now conciliate men, or 
God? or do I seek to please men?” Let them judge after his anathemas whether he 
would make concessions to please or conciliate the Judaists. 

I. Ir 1s WRONG TO BE MEN-PLEASERS, Perhaps the apostle had been charged by his 
enemies with a too accommodating spirit in being a Gentile to Gentiles and a Jew to 
Jews, He says, “I please all’men in all things” (1 Cor. x. 33); but this referred to 
circumstances in which he sought “the profit of men that they might be saved,” and in 
which there was no principle involved. The true principle is, ‘“ Let every one please 
his neighbour for his good to edification ; for even Christ pleased not himself.” But 
corrupt men-pleasing is that sinful complaisance to the humours and prejudices of men 
which sacrifices truth, righteousness, and honour. This sentence of the apostle is a 
rebuke to time-serving ministers who attenuate the claims of the gospel or conccal its 
doctrines to avert the displeasure or catch the applause of their hearers. 

11. THe seRvice or CHRIST DEMANDS A COMPLETE INDEPENDENCE, “Εν if I yet 
pleased men,I should not be the servant of Christ.” The friendship of men would be 
dearly bought at the cost of the Lord’s friendship. “No man can serve two masters.” 


43 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. ἴση. 1. 1—24 


To Christ he owes obedience, reverence, diligence, faithfulness; for he bore the “ brands 
of his slavery.” Therefore his subjection to him implied the rejection of all humap 
authority in matters of faith. Yet it was not inconsistent with his being “a Jew te 
Jews,” and “all things to all men,” so long as he refused to compromise the truth of the 
gospel. The teacher who gives evidence that he pleases God rather than men, gives 
evidence likewise that his teaching is just and pure. 


Vers. 11, 12.—The true origin of the apostle’s gospel. Here he begins the apologetic 
portion of his Epistle, vindicating his independent, apostolic authority. ‘Ihe phrase with 
which he prefaccs his statement, “I declare unto you, brethren,” is at once solemr 
and emphatic, as if he could allow of no misunderstanding affecting “the truth of the 
gospel,” and is a sign that, in spite of their aberrations, the Galatians are still dear to 
him. 116 calls them “ brethren” after his first grave censure, as if he indulged the hope 
of winning them back to the truth. 

I. His GosPEL ΑΒ NOT HUMAN IN ITS CHARACTER. “ The gospel which was preached 
of me is not alter man.” He refers here, not to its origin, but to its character. 1. Jt ἐξ 
not discoverable by man. Human reasoning or human intuition could not have dis- 
covered its facts, its truths, its blessings. 2, It is not constructed on the principles or 
idvas of human wisdom, which is carnal in its instincts, and therefore it is a “ foolishness 
to the Greeks” of speculative thought. 8, Jt ts unchangeable in tts great principles ; 
unlike the systems of men, which are constantly varying with the spirit of each age. 

II. His GosPEL was NOT HUMAN ΙΝ 118 ΟΒΙΟΙΝ. “ For I neither received it of man, 
neither was I taught it.” 1. He did not receive it from man, any more than the twelve. 
Men receive most of their knowledge from one another, yet he was no more man-taught 
than Peter, or James, or John., He received exactly what they received—he by apoca- 
lyptic confnunications,-they by personal communications in the days of Christ’s life. 
2. He was not taught the gospel by man, much less by any apostle. In that case the fact 
of his agreement with the other apostles proved that his knowledge of Divine truth 
was in no sense derivative. It might be urged that Ananias gave the apostle full 
instructions at his baptism. But there is no evidence tbat Ananias gave him any 
instructions; his errand was that Saul should receive his sight and receive the Holy 
Ghost. Saul had, in fact, befure this time, received his instructions on the way to 
Damascus (Acts xxvi. 15—18). 3. In matters of religious moment especially affecting 
the fotndation of a sinner’s hopes, human teaching, human traditions, and human 
authority, are of slight importance. 

III. His GosreL caME ΤῸ HIM BY DIVINE REVELATION. His gospel was not human, 
but Divine, for he received it by revelation of the Lord Jesus Christ. It had, therefore, 
a Christly origin. The revelation is not to be identified with the visions of 2 Cor. xii., 
nor with the appearance of the Lord to him in Acts xxii. 18, nor with the period of the 
sojourn in Arabia; but with the appearance of Christ, as the Son of Ged, on the way to 
Damascus, as “the fundamental central illumination,” which was followed by a 
progressive development. The apostle might, therefore, well describe his gospel as not 
of man. We know nothing of tle mode of the Divine communications; the actual 
results are contained in the writings of the apostle. ‘Thus it was that he spoke of “ his 
gospel,” which exhibited, as no other inspired writer did, “the mystery hid from 
generations,” which forms the distinguishing glory of the Ephesian and Colossian 
Epistles, He sees in the gospel a Divine plan of salvation, whose centre is Christ, and 
whose end is the revelation of God’s glorious perfection (Rom. xi, 86), The revelation 
from Christ was thus a revelation of Christ. He was ῦ once the Source and Subject 
of it. 


Vers, 13, 14.—A retrospect of his career as a Jew, This would be the best proof that 
he had not received his gospel from man. - 

I, His ENMITY TO THY CHRISTIAN RELIGION. “1 was beyond measure persecuting 
the Church of God, and destroying it.” His past carcer was notorious. ‘“ He persecuted 
unto death” (Acts xxii. 4), “beyond measure ”—by no feeble or spasmodic effort, 
limited to one spot, but by a persistent scheme of violence wrought with a fierce energy 
that knew no weariness. He could not then have been learning the gospel of the very 
saints he was hunting to death; there could be no possible association between the 


cH. 1. 1—24.) THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 49 


persecutor and his victims that would allow of his learning the gospel. On the 
contrary, at this time he cherished the strongest prejudices and the fiercest hatred 
against Christianity. 

II, His INTENSE ZEAL FOR THE JEWISH RELIGION. He could appeal to the Galatians 
themselves as having once heard “ of his conversation in time past in Judaism,” and 
how he “ was making progress in Judaism above many of his contemporaries in his own 
nation, being more exceedingly zealous of the traditions of his fathers.” 1. His zeal was 
manifest in his earnest study of Judaism. He studied it under Gamaliel, with the best 
advantages of instruction, and he excelled many of the young Pharisees of his own age 
in the ardour and in the results of his studies. He could not have made progress 
without study. 2. Jt was still more manifest in his extraordinary devotion to the 
traditions of his fathers. This was the natural token of an enthusiastic Pharisaism. 
“Fle was a Pharisee, and the son of a Pharisee” (Acts xxiii. 6), (1) The traditions in 
question were not the Mosaic Law, but the interpretations of that Law, which found 
their true place afterwards in the Mishna. They were, in a word, “the traditions of 
the elders,” which our Lord so severely condemned. ‘Ihey were traditions, strong in the 
letter, weak in the spirit, strict in-trifles, lax in weighty matters. They made void 
the Law on some of the plainest questions of duty. So is it with Roman Catholics in the 
matter of their tradilions, which are either opposed to Scripture or unnecessary additions 
to it. (2) It is not unnatural to find unconverted men very zealous for ancestral 
traditions ; more concerned, in fact, that they should be found to come from the Fathers 
than from God. Zcal of this sort is often strong in proportion to its ignorance of the 
truth, The zeal of his countrymen the apostle readily concedes, but charges it with 
being “a zeal not according to knowledge” (Rom. x. 2). It is in such an atmosphere 
that the persecutor is bred. (3) Zeal is not religion. Good intentions will never make 
anything really good with God. Zeal can never make the false true, nor justify any in 
persecuting the truth. Christians ought to imitate the zeal of false teachers, and to 
manifest its pureness by jealousy for God’s honour, by abundance of labours, and by 
ardent love to Christ. 

III. A BELIEVER OUGIIT NOT TO BE ASHAMED ΤῸ coNrrss ΗΒ sins. The apostle 
makes an almost remorseful confession of his crimes against the Church of Gud 
Once and again the dark recollection of his mad violence against the saints comes 
np in the midst of his grateful remembrances of God’s forgiving mercy. But all tha 
wild persecution only too clearly proved how little he was indebted to apostle or sai .t 
for the gospel he gave to the Galatians, 


Vers. 15, 16.— After his conversion he took no counsel with men as to his doctrine or 
career, ‘The apostle is most emphatic in asserting his independence of man. Mark— 

I. His HIGH DESTINATION FRoM BIRTH. “ Who separated me from my mother’s 
womb,” Here is an instance of prevenient grace. From his very birth, and therefore 
before he could have any impulses or ideas of his own, God destined him to apostleship, 
no matter how wayward or inconsistent may have been the career of his youth. 
Looking back now upon his full history, we can see the marks of that momentous 
“ separation.” We see the working of prevenient, formative, restraining, preparatory 
grace. We see it: 1, In the splendid intellect with which he was enduwed. God did 
verily prepare this large brain to be touched in his own time with heavenly fire. 
2. In his education. He was a pure Jew, not half Greek, half Jew, but thoroughly 
versed in all the traditions of the Jews, and so trained in rabbinical traditions that he 
could afterwards thoroughly understand and confront the Judaist spirit everywhere, 
while he was led through inward struggles and fightings out of the darkness of Judaism 
izto the full light of the gospel. 3. In his thoroughness of character, He could be 
nothing by halves; as a sinner, he was the very chief of sinners, Conversion made no 
change in his temperament and in the force of his chargcter. 

II. His ΑΙ, TO GRACE AND AposTLEsHIP. “ And called me by his grace.” In 
evident allusion to the scene on the way to Damascus, The call of the Redeemer wae 
in the same momenc a ca! to conversion and to apostleship (Rom. i. 5). That call was 
not on the ground of his Pharisaic strictness and fastings and prayers, much less en the 
ground of his mad violence as ἃ persecutor. It had sts origin wholly in grace. It wae 
of grace, not of works, 

@ALATIANS, a 


60 THE EPISTLE TO THR GALATIANS. fom. 1. 1—24, 


III, THe REVELATION oF Gop’s Sox In THE APosTLE. “It pleased God to reveal 
his Son in me.” 1, Revelation is here opposed to the method of patient and pivlonged 
study. 2. The gospel isa revelition of the Son in his person, life, death, resurrection, 
and asccnsion. It reveals him to poor sinners as “‘ \Wisdum, Righteousness, Sanctifica- 
tion, and Redemption.” 3. Jt is α revelation in individual lives. “In me.” God 
revealed his Son to Paul and in Paul as “ the Hope of glory,” showed him what is “the 
tiches of the glory of this mystery.” It was a wouderful thing that the apostle should 
have all his fixed ideas unhinged in a moment, all his deeply rooted prejudices destroyed, 
and the most comprehensive views of a singularly glorious system established in his 
soul, not by a process of gradual inquiry or slow conviction, but instantaneously by the 
revelation of the Sonin him, It was this revelation which enabled him ever afterwards 
to hold forth the Son as the one transcendently glorious and loving Redeemer, 

IV. Tur pEsIaN OF THIS REVELATION. “That I might preach him among the 
Gentiles.” 1, Lé was not for his own individual salvation, but that he might be able 
to make known to others what had been so graciously conveyed to himself. 2. Jt was 
the Son who was to be preached to the Gentiles, not the Law, or circumcision, or holy days ; 
not the rightcousness of works, but “the righteousness of faith.’ This was the true 
scope of his apostleship. 

V. Tuk MOVING CAUSE ALIKE OF CALL AND REVELATION—THE GOOD PLEASURE OF 
Gop. “It pleased God.”- We see in his career, first and last, the sole agency of God, 
and therefore there could be no dependence upon man or self for either call or 
apostleship. 

VI. ‘luz PROMPTNESS AND INDEPENDENT ACTION OF THE APOSTLE AFTER HIS CALI. 
“Tmmediately I conferred not with flesh and blood.” He took no counsel with mortal 
man; he did not take the usual methods of men in determining their conduct in critical 
cases ; therefore there was no reason for the Judaists to affirm that, after he had received 
his revelation, it underwent modification at the hands of men. ‘There are times for 
thonghtful and even prolonged consideration, but where God’s will is perfectly clear 
there is no need to consult man. Our first duty to Christ is a prompt obedience. 


Vers, 17—24.— Proofs of his entirely ind-pendent course after conversion. ‘The 
apostle adduces three or four separate facts to prove his independence of the apostles and 
οἱ Judaic influence, 

I, His First JOURNEY AFTER HIS CONVERSION WAS NoT TO JERUSALEM. “ Neither 
weit I up to Jcrusalem to them which were apostles before me.” It was very necessary 

τ for him to show that he received no instructions from the apostles at the commeucement 
of his ministry, for the Judaists were saying to the Galatians, “ Ye are the disciples of the 
apostles ; so is Paul; therefore he has no superiority over us.” But he did not go to 
Jerusalem to rehearse his experience or to receive either instruction or authority from 
them. When he did go, it was not by command of the apostles, but entirely of his own 
accord, In his reference to them he sets himself strictly by their side, conceding to 
them no superiority except upon this one point of priority of calling—they were 
“apostles before me.” 

11. His FIRST ACT AFTER CONVERSION WAS HI8 WITHDRAWAL INTO ARaBia. “But 
I went into Arabia.” 1. This fact showed that he had at once placed himself completely 
beyond the reach of human influence. It was a proof of his statement that he did not 
confer with flesh and blood, 2. His retirement to Arabia—that is, to the Sinaitic 
γη eninsula—was evidently for the pur) ose of solitary communion with God. There 
would bea natural yearning, after such a scene as broke his life into two widely sundered 
parts, to be for a time alone with God, that he might receive in his heart the bealing of 
those wounds which the hand of Divine mercy had inflicted, as well as to learn by 
revelation the glories of the gospel which was entrusted to him for promulgation among 
the Gentiles, 3. This mysterious pause at the beginning of his career lasted a consider- 
able time. It is not possible to say whether it was the whole of three years; for the 
text merely asserts it was three years from the date of his conversion till bis first visit 
to Jerusalem, and we know that after his conversion he stayed a few days (ἡμέρας τινάς) 
with the disciples at Damascus, and returned again from Aralia to Damascus, Yet it 
is probable that he was the most part of three years in Arabia, as a sort of substitute, 
we may suppose, for the three years’ personal training of the other apostles under Christ, 


on. τ. 1—24,) THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, δ 


This period of lonely thought and meiitation was as prolific of mighty results as the 
year’s solitude of Luther in the Wartburg, or as the imprisonment of Huss in the castle 
on the Rhine, 

III. His FIRST APPEARANCE IN PUBLIO LIFE AFTER THE ARABIAN SECLUSION WAS 
Nor aT JERUSALEM, BUT AT Damascus. “I went imto Arabia, and returned again 
unto Damascus.” It was natural that his career as an apostle should begin at the 
scene of his gracious call, and nowhere else. That ancient city, with its unbroken 
history of four thousand years, standing on the great road of communication between 
Eastern and Western Asia, was a fitting starting-point for the carcer of one who was to 
embrace both East and West in the amplitude of his apostolic labours. 

IV. His First visir ΤῸ JERUSALEM AFTER HIS conversion. “Then after three 
years I went up to Jerusalem to sce Peter, and abode with him fifteen days.” For 
three years, at least, his course was perfectly independent; but his stay was so excecd- 
ingly short that there were few opportunities for his receiving instruction from the 
apostles, He did not see the twelve apostles, only Peter, and James the Lord’s brother. 
The other apostles were probably absent at the time. He naturally sought the 
acquaintance of Peter, because he was the oldest and most distinguished of the apostles 
—one, in fact, of “ the pillars” (ch. ii. 9); but the language of Paul does not imply that 
he went to consult him or to receive instruction or authority in regard to his work, but 
rather, we may suppose, that the two apostles might come to an understanding with 
reyvard to the future spheres of their apostolic labour. Peter could influence him but 
slightly in the matter of Gentile liberty, for he was not himself very clear or decided on 
the subject. In fact, Peter was not at this time (Acts ix. 29) very clear about a 
commission to the Gentiles at all, The apostle’s interview with James, who was 
supposed to represent a strongly Judaic tendency, could not be supposed to bias him in 
favour of Gentile liberty. ‘The fortnight’s sojourn in Jerusalem was long enough tv 
enable Peter to know Paul and to ascertain the true character of his gospel. But the 
visit was abruptly ended by a plot against the apostle’s life (Acts ix. 29) and by a 
vision from heaven (Acts xxii, 17—21). 

V. His NEXT MOVEMENT OARRIED HIM FAR FROM Jenusatem. ‘ Afterwarda I came 
into the regions of Syria and Cilicia.” This shows how he left Palestine altogether aud 
passed beyond the reach of Judaan influence. There were Vhurches in these Ciliciar 
and Syrian regions at a subsequent period; probably founded by the apostle at this 
very time (Acts xv. 23, 41). 

VI. He was PERSONALLY UNKNOWN TO THE JUDH#AN CHURCHES, AND ONLY KNOWN 
BY FAME AS A CONVERTED PeRsecuToR. “And was unknown by face unto the Churches 
of Juda which were in Christ. But they had heard only, That he which persecuted 
us in times past now preacheth the faith which he was once destroying. And they 
glorified God in me.” 1. He wus a stranger to the Judean Churches; for, in travelling 
from Damascus to Jerusalem, after his Arabian seclusion, he visited none of the Churches 
by the way, but went straight to the metropolis. Then he was so suddenly hurried 
away from the city that he had no time to become known to the Judzan Churches, 
while, in any case, he may have thought that, as the destined apostle of the Gentiles, 
his way did not lie through the Churches of the Jews. He must have become well 
known to them if he had stood in very intimate relations with the apostles, 2. Yet he 
was not a stranger by character and repute; for the Judean Churches had already heard 
of his conversion with joy. (1) The conversion of Saul the persecutor was a widely 
known event. “ΒΟΥ kept hearing.” Christian love made it impossible that they 
should be indifferent to anything that concerned so remarkable a man, (2) It is the 
duty of Christians, not only to receive a converted persecutor, but to glorify God “in 
him ;” (a) because his talents were no longer perverted to evil; (b) because they were 
now employed to build up the faith he was once trying to extinguish in blood; 
(c) because nothing but God’s grace could change the career of one who was pre- 
eminently “a blasphemer, and persecutor, and injurious.” (8) The conversion of Paul 
—what an event to the world, to the Church, to theology! (4) The grateful Joy of 
the Judean Churclies over such a conversion was a rebuke to Judaists who aimed to 
destroy his influence and undermine his authority. 

VII. Mark THE SOLEMN ASSEVERATION OF THE APOSTLE ΑΒ TO THESE FACTS, 
“ But as to what I write unto you, behold, before God, I lie not.” 1. The necessity for 


52 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. [σΗ. 1. 1—24. 


such a strong declaration shows how unscrupulous were the calumnies of his Judaist 
enemies. As there could be no witness to most of the facts hereinbefore recited, he can 
only appeal direct to God. 2. The passaye shows that swearing is not forbidden in 
Matt. v. 81, Jas. v.12. 3. As there are exigencies in life to justify a direct appeul 
to God, it is well that we should be able truthfully to call God to witness upon our 
conduct.—T. Ὁ, 


HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 


Vers. 1—5.— The gospel of self-sacrifice. In sending an Epistle to an apostate peopic, 
Paul does not indulge in wnmeaning compliments. These Celts in Asia had been 
showing some of their proverbial fickleness, and going back from the doctrine of 
justification by faith to a ritualism whose development must be self-righteousness. 
It is needful for their recovery from apostasy that the authority of the apostle and the 
truth of the gospel should be put before them in unmistakable terms. Hence we find 
Paul plunging at once into“the needful expositions of his own apostleship and of the 
gospel of Christ with which as an apostle he was charged. In this salutation we have 
the following lessons distinctly tauglit :— 

I. PavL’s APOSTLESHIP WAS RECEIVED DIRECTLY FROM JEsuSs Curist. (Ver. 1.) 
Doubtless he had merely human hands laid upon his head at Antioch (Acts xiii. 3), 
but the imposition of the hands of the brethren was not the conveyance of authority, 
but simply the recognition of authority as already conveyed. The “ordination” 
at Antioch was the recognition by the Church of authority and mission already 
conveyed by tle Lord to the apostle. Accordingly in this instance before us Paul 
claims an apostleship directly from the hands of Christ. He was an apostle “not from 
men, neither through man, but through Jesus Christ, and God the Father, who raised 
hiro from the dead” (Revised Version). No intermediate hands conveyed the authority 
tu him; he was conscious of having received it directly from the fountain-head. This 
gave him confidence consequently in dealing with the Judaizing teachers. It mattered 
not to him what parade of authority these teachers made; he stood as a rock upon his 
own commission with all its hallowed associations. And should this not instruct every 
true teacher as to the source of his authority? It isa mistake to imagine that men 
can do more than recognize God-given authority. It is from Christ directly we must 
each receive our office. Church officers, in putting their ¢émprimatur upon any of us, 
merely recognize a Divine work which they believe on due evidence to be already 
there. 

II. THe DESIRE OF THE APOSTLE FOR THE GALATIANS’ WELFARE. (Vers. 2, 3.) 
The deep lonzing of Paul and those assoc.ated with him in his captivity for these 
apostate (ialatians was that grace and peace from God the Father and from Christ 
might be theirs. “Grace,” the gratuitous, undeserved favour which wells forth from 
the Divine heart, when it is received into the sinner’s soul, produces “ peace which 
passeth all wuderstanding.” It was this blessed experience Paul desired for the 
Galatians. They may have traduced his office and his character, but this did not 
prevent him entertaining the deep desire that into “ paths of peace” they, like himself, 
should be led. And indeed we cannot wish people better than that grace and peace 
from heaven should be theirs. ‘lo live in the felt favour of God, to realize that it is 
at the rag time quite undeserved, produces a peace and a humility of spirit beyond 
all price 

i. Te GosPEL PAUL PREACHED WAS THAT OF THE SELF-SACRIFICE ov CHRIST. 
(Ver. 4.) Jesus, ne asserts, “ gave himself for our sins.” The foundation of the gospel 
is self-sacrifice. But we must always remember that self-sacrifice, if for the merest 
trifle, may be moral madnesa In self-sacrifice as such there is no necessary virtue. 
A man may lose his live ia au vetorly unworthy cause. Hence tho necessity for the 
self-sacrifice of Christ must be made out before its real virtue is establishea, Ts} 
necessity appears when we consider that it was “ for our sins” he gave himseaaf. rw 
if our sins had been removed at some meaner cost than the blood of the Son of Ue, 
we should be disposed to say that sin is after alla light thing in God’s sight, ν me 
bagatelle to him. But inasmuch as it required such a sacrifice to take away sa, Ἢ 


OH, 1. 1—24,] THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 53 


enormity is made manifest to all. Christ laid down his life, then, in a noble cause. 
Surely to take away sin, to remove from human hearts their heavy burdens, to bestow 
on mes peace and deliverance from all fear, was a worthy object in self-sacrifice. We 
stand before the cross, therefore, believing that the sacrifice upon it is of infinite value 
and efficacy. He was no martyr by mistake as he died upon the tree, but the most 
glorious of all heroes. 

IV. Curist’s AIM IN SELF-SACRIFICE WAS OUR DELIVERANCE FROM THIS PRESENT 
EVIL WORLD. (Ver. 4.) The world is the totality of tendencies which op)ose them- 
selves to God. To love such a world is incompatible with love to God the Father 
(1 John ii. 15). It is, moreover, made up of “ the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the 
eyes, and the pride of life” (1 John ii. 16). Now, it is to this world that the ritualist falls 
a prey. This was the danger of the Galatians. The revival of rites and ceremonies, 
which had been fulfilled and therefore done away in Christ, pandered to the lust of the 
eyes and to the pride of life. Hcnce Paul proclaims at the outset that one purpose 
of the gnspel of self-sacrifice is to deliver its recipients from the power of this present 
evil world which is constantly trying to bring us into bondage. The religion of Christ 
is freedom. He means to deliver us from bondage. Iteis our own fault if we are not 
delivered, 

V. THE FINAL END OF THE GOSPEL ΙΒ ALWAYS TIE GLORY oF THE Farumn. 
(Ver. 5.) Hence the doxolegy with which the ayostolic desire Closes. It is with 
doxologies that the dispensation of grace must end. Heaven itself is the concentration 
of the doxologies which have been gathcring upon earth; the full concert after the 
terrestrial rehearsals, And it is here that the salety of the whole dispensation may be 
seen; for if the glory of some imperfect being were contemplated, his desizns would 
of necessity run contrary in many cases to the real good of others. But God the 
Father is so perfect that his glory always consists with the real good of all his creatures. 
Doubtless some of his creatures will not believe this, and will insist on suspecting and 
hating his designs. In consequence they must be exposed to his righteous indignation. 
But this is quite compatible with the fact that the Divine glory and the real good of all 
are meant to harmonize. Happy will it be for us if we join in the rehearsals of his 
glory here, and are promoted to the chorus full-orbed and like the sound of many 
waters above. But even shonld we insist on discord, our own discomfort alone shall 
be sccured; discords can, we know, be so wedded to harmony as to swell and not 
diminish the effect of the full orchestra, And God will secure his glory even in our 
poor despite.—R. M. E. 


Vers. 6—10.—Paul’s intolerance of any other gospel. After the usual apostolic 
ereeting, Paul proceeds, not to congratulate or compliment the Galatians in any way, 
but to reprimand them for turning away from the gospel to ritualism. ‘Their idea 
of salvation through becoming Jews was subversive of the gospel of grace, and so the 
apostle shows himself intolerant of the false doctrine which was so mischievous. Se 
sure is he of his position that he does not hesitate to denounce with the curse of God 
any, be they men or angels, who would preach a different gospel from that gospel of 
Christ’s self-sacrifice which he preached. Moreover, if they imagined that to be popular 
he would trifle with principle, he gave them to understand that he would never, to pro- 
pitiate public opinion, violate in the least degree his obligation as the slave of Christ. 

I. Iv 18 MARVELLOUS HOW ATTRACTIVE RITUALISM IS TO FICKLE MINDS. (Ver. 6.) 
Now, by ritualism we mean a plan of salvation by rites and ceremonies. ‘The principle 
is the same whether the rites and ceremonies are Jewish or medieval. It is a substitute 
for the gospel of grace. Now, Paul marvelled that these Celts in Asia so speedily 
turned away from the gospel of grace to a gospel of ritual. He -wondered at their 
fickleness, And yet, when we consider the sensutionalism which underlies every 
ritualistic system, we can understand the hold it has upon those constitutionally fickle. 
Whatever is showy, palpable, and helpful to self-esteem and pride secures the homage 
of shallow minds, But the sad aspect of this tendency is that it removes souls from 
God. Every rite and ceremony which is interposed as essential between man and God 
creates a sense of distance between those whom the gospel would bring nigh. Instead 
of ritualism tending to intensify communion with God, it can only intensify the 
superstitious feeling which puts souls at a distance from him, 


δι THE EPISTLE ΤῸ THE GALATIANS. for. 1. 12a. 


11. RrrvanisM 18 A PERVERSION OF THE GosprL. (Ver. 7.) For Paul would not 
admit that the ritualism imported by the Judaizers into Galatia was another gospel; 
in his view it was no gospel, but a perversion of it. For if Iam told I can be saved 
only by becoming a Jew, by being circumcised, and keeping the Old Testament ritual, 
and that I cannot be saved by faith alone, Iam deprived of the glad tidings which 
Christ’s gospel gives, and projected upon a path of real self-righteousness. It is the 
same with modern ritualism., Salvation by ceremonies is the antithesis of salvation 
by grace. It is 8 perversion of God’s good news to man and must result in 
disappointment. 

Ill. We ouant, LIKE PAUL, TO BE SO SURE OF THE GOSPEL WE PROCLAIM AS TO 8K 
INTOLERANT OF ANY OTHER. (Ver. 8.) Paul had got such a grasp of the gospel of 
grace, the self-sacrifice of Christ was so sure and so sufficient a foundation for man’s 
hope, that he could not tolerate any other message. Even should he himself change 
his views in the course of years and come to Galatia with another gospel, or should an 
angel from heaven with an aureole of light proclaim another gospel than the one Paul 
had at first proclaimed, then is the apostle ready to call down upon his perverted self 
or the perverted angel the @urse of God. Now, this intolerant side of truth really 
springs from the sure grasp we have of it. It is inseparable from intense conviction. 
Of course, it is quite distinct from the intolerance which dictates persecution. Paul 
would not persecute; but he would leave the perverts in the hands of God that he 
might deal with them. Persecution is devoting men to the curse of men; the true 
intolerance contents itself with leaving the offenders in the hands of a holy and just 
God. 

ΙΝ. THE BEING WHO MISLEADS HIS FELLOWS ABOUT SALVATION DESERVES THE 
CURSE OF Gop, (Ver. 9.) Paul has not been rashly betrayed into intolerance of spirit. 
He had expressed himself to the same effect on a previous occasion, probably during his 
second visit to Galatia (Acts xviii. 23). He is now prepared to stick to his anathema. 
He feels in his heart of hearts that the person who trifles with the eternal interests of 
others and proclaims a false method of salvation deserves the Divine curse. The 
gospel Paul had preached was the gospel of free grace. No simpler terms of pardon 
and acceptance can be imagined than are offered in the gospel ; it is only devil’s work 
which those persons manage to perform who complicate salvation with rites and 
ciremonies, making it less easy than God intends. Having regard, then, to the eternal 
interests at stake, it must be admitted that the deceiver of souls deserves the curse of 
Heaven. How solemn a responsibility it is to guide men to God! How clear and 
unmistakable should the plan of salvation be made! How deep the guilt and how dire 
the doom of those who pervert the gospel ! 

V. THE SLAVE OF CHRIST WILL NOT BE THE SLAVE OF PUBLIC OPINION. (Ver. 10.) 
Paul was undoubtedly a man of great breadth of view and sympathy. It was a 
principle with him to please his neighbour for his good to edification (Rom. xv. 2). He 
was ready to become all things to all men in the hope of saving some (1 Cor. ix. 22; 
x. 88). And the Judaizers thought that this pleasing of men on Paul’s part would 
lead him to accept of their ritualism and give up his gospel if their policy was once 
thoroughly popular. In short, their notion was that Paul was so enamoured of popu- 
larity that he would bow to public opinion at all hazards. Now, this is what he repu- 
diates in this last verse. “Do I now,” he asks, “ win over to myself men or God? 
Or am I secking to be an object of man’s good will? No; and there is a decisive 
reason against any such efforts. If I were still pleasing men, if I had not resigned the 
hope of human favour and of human approval, I should not be the slave of Christ.” 
This leads us into the wide subject of our attitude towards public opinion. Now, our 
danger undoubtedly is in over-estimating it. Our safety lies in being slaves to Christ. 
His opinion is to be our one simple concern, and public opinion may coincide with or 
differ from his, but we must hold firmly by our obligations to the one Master, and all 
other things will range themselves rightly around us, The uncompromising slave of 
Christ will be found to be after all the most considerate servant of men.—R. M. E. 


Vers. 11—24,—Paul’s personal grasp of the gospel. Paul, as we have seen, is 80 
certain of the gospel of grace being the only gospel for sinful men, that he is prepared 
to pronounce an anathema on all who preach any other gospel. Lest it might be 


on. 1. 1— 24.) THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 65 


supposed that he took up this intolerant position rashly, he now proceeds to give us a 
short autobiography, in which he shows how he had received the gospel, and what a 
hold it had upon him. Let us notice the salient points in this narrative. 

1. His wirg as a Jew. (Vers. 18,14.) Paul, before his conversion, was the most 
zealous persecutor of Christianity. A strict Pharisee, he added to his self-rightcousness 
an uncommon zeal for the old religion, and hesitated not to persecute to the death 
those who had embraced the new. He was zealous, but not according to knowledge. 

II. THE REVELATION OF JESUS TO HIM AND IN HIM. (Vers. 11, 12, 15, 16.) It was 
Jesus himself who undertook Saul’s conversion. There was no intermediate instrument. 
On the way to Damascus Jesus appeared to him in dazzling, overwhelming radiance, 
acd compelled the persecutor to recognize, not only his existence, but his sovereign 
authority. That manifestation of Jesus to him révolutionized his life. Henceforth he 
could have no doubt regarding the reign of Jesus Christ. This was the revelation of 
Jesus to him—the historic interview which made Paul’s career so different and so 
glorious. But next there was the revelation of Jesus in Paul. This was by the Holy 
Spirit entering into him and giving him Christ’s mind, Christ’s heart, Christ’s com- 
passions, so that Paul became a revelation of Christ to other men. Henceforward he 
was a “ Christophor,” carrying Christ in him, not only as his Hope of glory, but as his 
animating, regulating, ruling power. Paul was from that hour “ possessed,” but it was 
by the Spirit of Christ. His personality became a new centre of spiritual forea and 
power. 

III. Tavs possesseD BY JESUS, HE BECAME INDEPENDENT OF MEN. (Vers. 16, 17.) 
Now, this independence of Paul had two sides. 1. He became independent of popular 
opinion. “ Immediately 1 conferred not with flesh and blood.” Now, it must have been 
very trying to surrender all his hopes as a Jew. The fact is, he was the foremost man 
of his nation just when Jesus converted him. The nation would gladly have followed 
his leadership. There was no man who had so much weight and force of character as 
Saul. To renounce all these hopes, and the friendships of his early years, and to face 
the world a lonely man was trying. Yet he was enabled by God’s grace to do 80. 
He made no truce with flesh and blood, but renounced all for Christ. 2. He felt 
independent of apostolic recognition. He never thought of hurrying off to Jerusalem 
to stand an examination at the hands of the apostles, and receive their émprimatur. 
He dealt at first hand with the Fountain of authority. Hence he passed to Arabia soon 
after his conversion, and in the solitudes of the desert, in the places associated with 
such master spirits as Moses, Elijah, and Christ, he communed with Christ, and pondered 
and laid the foundations of his theology. Hecalled no man master; he felt that he had 
but one Master, and he was Christ. Now, this independence of character is what we 
should all seek. It can only be secured when we have renounced self-confidence and 
betaken ourselves to the feet of our Lord. ‘lhere at the fountain of life and power we 
can rise up our own masters and his faithful servants, prepared to do battle, if ueed be, 
against the world. 

IV. Pauw’s INTERVIEW AT JERUSALEM WITH CEPHAS AND James. (Vers. 18, 19.) 
While Paul was properly independent in spirit, this does not imply that he was in any 
way morose or unsocial. His internment in Arabia, his earnest study of the whole 

lan of the gospel, only made him long for an interview with Cephas, the recognized 

eader at Jerusalem. Hence he passed from solitude to society, and had an interview 
of fifteen days with the apostle of the circumcision. James, who had ministerial over- 
sight of the Jerusalem Church, shared his society too, It must have been a blessed 
meeting between the two mighty apostles. The meeting of two generals before some 
important campaign was never so momentous in its consequences as the meeting of 
these two humble men, Saul and Cephas. ‘hey were sct upon the conquest for Christ 

- of the world. Now, we have every reason to believe that the interview was simply one 
for conference. [Ὁ was not that Saul might receive any authority from the hands either 
of Cephas or of James, He had his authority directly from Christ. 

V. His EVANGELISTIO worK. (Vers. 20—24.) Perhaps through mutual agreement 
with Peter, Paul leaves Jerusalem and Judwa and confines himself to the districts 
beyond. Syria and Cilicia, territories beyond the bounds of Palestine proper, where the 
apostles were operating, were selected by the apostle to the Gentiles for his first 
evangelistic efforts. He did not seek the acquaintance of the Churches in Judea. He 


s 


56 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. (cu. 1. 1—2 


kept to his own province. They heard gladly that the arch-persecutor had become a 
chief preacher of the once despised faith. They accordingly praised God for the monu- 
ment of his mercy he had raised up in Paul. But his knowledge of the gospel and his 
authority in proclaiming it were not, he wishes these Galatians to understand, derived 
from men. We should surely learn from this autobiography of Paul the secret of 
personal independence and power. It consists in going to the sources themselves. If 
we refuse to depend upon men and depend on the Lord only, we shall secure a grasp 
of his holy gospel and an efficiency in proclaiming it which are impossible otherwise. 
What the wor'd needs now is what it needed then—men pervaded like Paul by the 
Spirit of Christ, and so radiating the true ideas about Christ all around.—R. M. E, 


Vers. 1—5.—JIntroduction. The tone of this Epistle is decidedly controversial. In 
the first and second chapters the writer establishes against Judaistic assailants his 
apostolic authority. This, however, is only subsidiary to his main desi:n, which is in 
the third and fourth chapters, as an accredited servant of God, to establish the gospel 
of Christ, or justification by faith against Judaism (a different gospel), or justification 
by the works of the Law. ‘fhe fifth and sixth chapters may be said to contain the 
application, There is thus the same central thought in this Epistle that there is in 
the Epistle to the Romans. Here there is the thought as it flashed out against Judaism 
as it threatened the very existence of Christianity in a very interesting circle of Churches, 
and while the wiiter’s feelings were still keen. In the later Epistle there is the thought 
as it shaped itself avainst Judaism, when there was time to look at it calmly and in 
its widest aspects. It is worthy of being remembered that an Aistorical interest attaches 
to this Epistle. The Romanism with which Luther was confronted bore a striking 
resemblance to Judaism. On that account he was led to make a special study of this 
Epistle. “The Epistle to the Galatians,” he said, “is my Epistle. I have betrothed 
myself to it; it is my wife. ’ 

1. Apprrss, 1, The writer, “ Paul, an apostle (not from men, neither through man, 
but through Jesus Christ, and God the Father, who raised him from the dead).” Paul’s 
apostleship was not without relation to men. It was directed to men, and intended 
for their benefit. His appointment to office was announced to him by a man (Ananias). 
But the authority under which the appointinent was made was not derived from men. 
Nor was it through man as the medium that it was communicated. It was communi- 
cated through Jesus Christ. The Lord said by Ananias, “ He is a chosen vessel unto me, 
to bear my Name before the Gentiles and kings, and the children of Israel.” When 
afterwards he cssayed to preach the gospel at Jerusalem, he was overruled. While 
praying in the temple he fell into a trance, and saw Jesus, who said unto him, “ Depart; 
for I will send thee forth far hence unto the Gentiles.” ‘The authority under which Paul 
acted as apostle was ultimately derived from God. That is not the form in which 
it is put here. For the same preposition is used in connection with God as with Christ, 
as if God were in himself both the Mediwm and the Source of authority. And, in 
kecping with that view, one of the forms in which Ananias announced to Paul his 
appointment to apostleship was this: “ The God of our fathers hath appointed thee to 
kvow his will, and to see the Righteous One, and to hear a voice from his mouth.” 
Authority was communicated to Paul only through God as the Father, i.e. as acting 
thiough his Son Jesus Christ. This great Agent the Father raised from the dead. In 
the corresponding place in Romans the raising of Christ is also introduced: “ Declared 
to be the Son of God with power, according to the spirit of holiness by the resurrection 
of the dead; even Jesus Christ our Lord, through whom we received grace and apostle- 
ship.” The thought there is that, as divinely attested in his resurrection, he could 
appoint to apostleship. The further thought is suggested here that, as raised, he could 
appoint him to apostleship. He was not among those who received appointment from’ 
Christ when he was in flesh; but the risen Christ had appeared to him, and, without 
any elective body of men coming between, without any action of the Church as in the 
election of Matthias, had ¢mmediately appointed him toapostleship, 2. Those associated 
with him. “ And all the brethren which are with me.” However high ground Paul 
took as te his apostleship, that did not separate him from his brethren. He even 
courted their Christian sympathy and support. He was open with his companions in 
travel, and divulged to them his thoughts, read to them his letters. On this occamur 


ca. 1, 1—24.] THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 57 


he could say that they were at one with him. In the whole of his warm remonstrance 
against giving way to Judaism, there was not one expression which they wished him te 
tone down. 3. Zhe Churches addressed. ‘‘ Unto the Churches of Galatta.” At the 
dawn of history the home of the Celtic race, known to the Greeks as Galatians, and to 
the Romans as Gauls, was the continent west of the Rhine, with these adjoining islands, 
In their migrations hordes of Celts poured into Italy. They also followed the course 
of the Danube, turning southward into Greece. ‘Three tribes of them, crossing the 
Hellespont, after wide devastations, were confined in the heart of Asia Minor. The 
tract of country which they occupied, about two hundred miles in length, and watered 
by the Halys, was called after them Galatia (land of the Celts), The head towns of 
the three tribes were Tavium, Pessinus, and Ancyra. The original inhabitants were 
Phrygians, and in later times there were additions of Romans and of Greeks and also 
of Jews. But the predominant element was Celtic, and the Celtic lancuage was spoken 
along with Greek. To peoples, then, with more or less of a Celtic origin this Epistle to 
the Celts is invested with special interest. Paul came into contact with this new race 
in his second missionary tour. There is a singular meagreness of information regarding 
his visit. All that is recorded is that, being overruled as to his intended route, he 
passed through the region of Phrygia and Galatia. As meayrely it is said, in con- 
nection with his third missionary tour, that he passed through the same region in order, 
stablishing all the disciples: The result of his evangelizing was the formation of 
several Churches. They are(as was pointed out by Chrysostom) addressed here without 
title. What there is of characterization is thrown into the salutation. 

II. Saturation. Notwithstanding what he refuses to them at the present juncture, 
he heartily wishes them well. 1. Blessing invoked. “Grace to you and peace.” He 
invokes grace on them, or the bestowment of the Divine favour, not because of merit in 
them, but because of merit obtained for them, As the result of grace, he invokes 
peace, or the absence of inward misgiving, and as far as possible the absence also of 
disturbing influences from without, Judaism included. 2. Fi om whom invoked. “ From 
God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ.” He first invokes blessing from God the 
Father. 116 goes to the very fountain-head. The fatherhood of God is the ultimate 
reason for our being blessed. Itis impossible to go hiyher than that. Where is there 
hope for the child who disobeys his father’s command? The hope lies in what the 
father is. He naturally pities his child, and desires to bless him. So where is there 
hope for us in our state of disobedience? The hope lies in what God is. He is the 
Fountain of all fatherly fecling. As the Father, he was moved with compassion toward 
us, and desired to bless us notwithstanding all our unworthiness, It was the fatherly 
feeling that’ moved to redemption. It is the fatherly feeling that moves to bless in 
connection with redemption. This, then, is the height to which we must lift up 
our eyes, from whence cometh help. He also invokes blessing from our Lord Jesus 
Christ, As the Father was formerly bound with Christ by the preposition “ through,” 
so now Christ is bound with the Father by the preposition “from.” Such freedom 
is significant. He who is the Channel is also the Source of blessing. He is Jesus, 
the higher Joshua, who saves his people from their sins. It was through him that 
effect was given to the fatherly feeling in God, and that the Father approaches 
man with blessing. He is the Christ who was anointed of God for this end. He is 
our Lord, as the successful Accomplisher of salvation placed over the house of God, to 
whom it belongs to dispense blessing. It is to him, then, 58 sovereign Dispenser of 
blessing that we must look. Central truth made prominent by being thrown into the 
salutation. “ Who gave himself for our sins, that he might deliver us out of this pre- 
sent evil world, according to the will of our God and Father.” The language has evi- 
dently a sacrificial colouring. The worshipper came with his sins befure God, The 
oblation he presented to God was an animal. With his sins taken over, the animal 
paid the penalty in its death. So the oblation which Christ presented to God was 
. himself. ith our sins taken over, he really and fully suffered the desert of them in 
his death, especially in the hiding of the Father’s countenance. What gave this sel/- 
oblation infinite value was the dignity of the Sufferer; and also his perfect trust in God, 
and all-absorbing love for men, and never-failiny hope for their salvation in the 
mysterious forsaking which made trial of him. The object with which Christ gave 
himself was, not avly that he might deliver us from the guilt of sin, but also that he 


’ 


ane καὶ, τ, 


58 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. (on. 1. 1—24 


might deliver us from the manifestation of sin in this present evil world. This world is 
thought of, not as it might have been, but as it actually is. It might have been a good 
world; it is instead an evil world. Its evil character consists, not only in its opposing 
itself in its opinions and practices to men’s good, but especially in its opposing itself to 
God. It is a world that,in its wickedness, foryets God, casts off God. “The Lord shall 
not see;” “ What is the Almighty, that we should serve him?” Now, Christ died that 
we might be delivered from this tyrannous world, and introduced into the liberty, 
if not at once of a perfect form of society, yet of a personal condition, and Church 
condition too,in which God has something of the place to which he is entitled. 
And all this is to be thought of as according to the will of our God and Father. The 
Father has the primacy throughout, It was in his will that salvation originated. 
It was his will that was carried out by Christ. “Then said I, Lo, I come: in the 
volume of the book it is written of me, I delight to do thy will, O my God: yea, thy 
Law is within my heart.” ‘The outcome is the doing of the Father’s will by man as it 
is by the angels. 

III. Doxotoay. “Τὸ whom be the glory for ever and ever, Amen.” The foun- 
dation of the ascription of glory to God is the glory displayed by God in salvation. 
There was a glorious display of wisdom in the planning of salvation. There was a 
glorious display of justice in the satisfaction made for sin. There was a glorious 
display of power in the overcoming of sin. There was especially a glorious display of 
love in its overflowing on sinners. In view of such a display it becomes us to 
ascribe glory to God. We cannot take it to ourselves. Our language must ever be, 
“Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us.” In what God has done for our salvation 
there will be found subject for our doxologies to the ages of ages. To every ascription 
of glory it becomes us to add our “Amen.” May ow “ Amen” become ever deeper, 
and may the cirele of such “ Amens” evermore increase.—h. I, 


Vera. 6—10.— Occasion of the Epistle. 1. THe aposrLE EXPRESSES AMAZEMENT 
AT THE CHANGED BEARING OF THE GALATIANS TOWARDS THE GOSPEL. “I marvel 
that ye are so quickly removing from him that called you in the grace of Christ unto 
a different gospel; which is not another gospel: only there are some that trouble you, 
and would pervert the gospel of Christ.” Only in this Epistle are wanting prefatory 
words of acknowledgment. In the case of the Corinthians he has words of warm 
acknowledgment, because, notwithstanding irregularities, they were in the main 
attached to the gospel. But all of attachment to the gospel that the apostle had 
formerly been thankful for in the Galatians was now so endangered that he can only 
approach them with a feeling of utter amazement. 1. The fundamental nature of the 
change. They were removing from him that called them in the grace of Christ unto 
a different gospel. If this was a different gospel, then we have a description of the 
gospel of Christ going before. It is the grace of Christ. It is the good offer of pardon 
and salvation, not on the ground of our merits, but purely on the ground of the 
sacrifice and merits of Christ. ‘That gospel had been preached in Galatia, and in and 
by it God had called them unto himsel!, unto fellowship with himself, unto holiness 
and happiness. But now they were moving away from him that called them in that 
gospel unto a different gospel. The difference was that it was no more the pure grace 
of Christ, but # mixture of grace and works, Their departure from the gospel was 
not completed, the process was still going on; but it was so fundamental a departure 
that the apostle marvels at their guilt. 2. The suddenness of the change. They were 
removing so quickly from him that called them in the gospel unto a different gospel. 
From the point of their being called up to the present point, their Christian career bad 
certainly been short. But that does not seem sufficient by itself to account for the 
abruptness with which the apostle breaks in here. God had called them in the gospel, 
and they lad continued in the gospel up toa certain point. From the experience of 
his second visit, and from information received, he was thinking hopefully of them; 
when all at once he is informed of apostasy in rapid progress. They were acting with 
characteristic Gallic mobility. Fickleness is the name applied to it, when the form 
is evil. A Gallic tribe might be to all appearance contented and prosperous, when, 
suddenly impelled by the love of change, it would move away to another locality. 
“ Almost all the Gauls,” says Ceesar, in his account of his Gallic wars, “are given te 


cu. 1. 1—24,] ‘THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 59 


change.” The Galatians themselves were a striking example of this love of change. 
This characteristic would be in favour of their reception of the gospel at the first. 
But would they not as easily move away from the gospel? In view of Gallic mobility, 
the apostle of Christ needed to be as vigorous as the Roman captain was. 3. The 
unsatisfactoriness of the change. He had said “different gospel” with a certain 
accommodation. It professed to be a gospel, and he objected to it that it was another 
kind of gospel. That, however, might seem to contain an admission by him, which 
ho does not wish to make, of there being many gospels, among which a selection might 
be made. So he hastens to deny that this other kind is a second gospel. He lets it be 
known that there is only one gospel of Christ. What was being palmed upon them 
was only misnamel gospel. It was not improving the gospel to add circumcision to it. 
It was only perverting it, making it no more the gospel of Christ, And this per- 
version was being palined upon them by men who had not their real good at heart, 
whose real character was that of troublers, harassers. They would put upon them 
a yoke which Christians did not need to bear, And they were men who followed in 
the track of the preachers of the gospel to break the unity of the Christian 
communities. 

Il. THe APOSTLE PRONOUNCES AN ANATHEMA ON PERVERTERS OF THE GOSPEL. 
“But though we, or an angel from heaven, should preach unto you any gospel other 
than that which we preached unto you, let him be anathema.” Anathema is a thing 
devoted to destruction, or on which a curse is laid. An animal laid on the altar was 
anathema, 7,6. doomed to death. Christ was anathema for us, ze. given over, aud the 
curse of God fell on him. 716 suposes two cases: it is implied that they are not 
actual. he first is the case of a genuine preacher of the gospel—himself or any of 
his associates. He (others assisting) had preached the gospel among the Galatians. 
He had been the instrument of God in their conversion and in forming them into 
Churcles. He had given them many proofs of his earnestness. If he—which God 
forbid !—should be so far left to himself as to turn his back on his previous history 
ag a Christian teacher, if he should profess to have got new light, if he should say that 
they could be saved on any other ground than the grace of Christ,—then (protecting 
their liberty even avainst himself, and protecting the interests of Christ) his feeling 
with regard to himself, acting in the way supposed, would be, “ Let him be anathema.” 
The second és the case of an angel from heaven. This calls up an image of 
extruordinary saintliness, greater than that of any of the best men, who are all 
compassed about with infirmity. What an influence is here supposed to back up 
a message! If an angel should come among them, fresh from the presence of God, 
with the atmosphere of heaven around him; if by the saintliness of his life he should 
succeed in Ἀπ Ὁ himself beyond all parallel in their affection and confidence; 
if in this position he should teach that they could be saved on any other ground than 
the vrace of Christ;—then (protecting their liberty, and protecting the intvrests of Christ) 
he would say, “Let him be accursed.” It might secm that this is asseveration made 
strong as strong can be; but its strength is yet added to. Jteafirmation of a former 
anathema, “As we have said before, so say I now again, If any man preacheth unto 
you any gospel other than that which ye received, let him be anathema.” At a former 
time (it may have been on the occasion of his second visit) others had joined with him 
in pronouncing an anathema which only differs from the foregoing in three minor 
particulars. 1. It is put in the most general form. “If any man.” 2. An actual 
case is supposed, “If any man preacheth.” Wherever they had the opportunity, 
Judaizing teachers were doing what is denounced. 3. They had affiwed their seal to the 
gospel. It had not only been preached to them, but also received by them. ‘They had 
from their own experience of it known what it was. The anathema in this form the 
apostle for himself reaffirms. Being substantially the same as the foregoing, it is thus 
brought about that a threcfold anathema is uttered against perverters of the gospel. 
Nor is there anything in this inconsistent with good feeling. Let us suppose that one 
man has in his power the lives of a thousand persons. By applying a match he may 
be able to throw away all these valuable lives. Better far that he himself should 
perish than that by his wickedness a thousand persons should perish. It was not 
dissimilar in the case of the Galatians. A good work had been going on among thein. 
By the preaching of the gospel many had been brought to the Saviour. If the gvod 


60 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. (cu. 1 1—24, 


work went on, many more, from time to time, would be added to their number. But 
if these perverters of the gospel succecded, then all that good work would be spoiled. 
Better far that they themselves should be wrecked in their interests than that by them 
hundreds should be wrecked in their interests. There isa solemn warning here to all 
perverters of the gospel, of whom there are not a few in our day. The curse of God 
rests on the man who would displace the grace of Christ as the sole ground of a sinner’s 
salvation. 

ΠΙ. THe APosTLE TURNS HIS USE OF STRONG LANGUAGE INTO AN ARGUMENT 
AGAINST HIS BEING A MAN-PLEASER. ‘For am I now persuading men, or God? or 
am 1 seeking to please men? if I were still pleasing men, I should not be a servant 
of Christ.” His opponents warned men against his persuasive powers. He could make 
the Jews believe one thing and the Gentiles another. He could prove that circumcision 
was right and that circumcision was wrong, as it suited him. Against this charge he 
here, by the way, points the Galatians to the strong langnage which he has just used, 
and has not used for the first time. Could it be said in view of that language that he 
was making it his highest object to persuade men, i.e. without reference to truth, 
without reference to Divine ends? Was he not rather making it his highsst object to 
persuade God, i.e. 80 to speak to men as to have the Divine judgment in his favour? 
His opponents said more widely that he was a man-pleaser, that he sought by unworthy 
methods to inyratiate himself into men’s favour. The strong language he bad used 
could not be construed into man-pleasing. He had got beyond human gond will in 
becoming a servant of Christ. And as a servant of Christ he had known not a little of 
what it is to want the good opinion and good will of men.—R. F. 


Vers. 11—24.—Position, “For I make known to you, brethren, as touching the 
gosnel which was preached by me.” ‘To the remarkable outburst of feeling with which 
the apostle “approaches the Galatians, succeeds affectionate, calm statement. He 
addresses them now as brethren. His object in writing to them is not to excommu- 
nicate them, but to bring them back from their error. Against the misrepresentations 
of the Judaists he wishes to make known to them as his brethren his exact position, 
touching the gospel which was preached by him. The gospel points to a system of 
ideas by which men are to be enlightened. It also points to a number of institutions 
by which men are to be moulded. It principally points to a method by which men are 
to be saved. Paul was not simply an utterer of thou-hts, nor asetter-up of institutions, 
but he was in the first place a proclaimer of the way of salvation. He preached with 
a view to his hearers taking action in a matter of infinite moment. Yhreefold 
exclusion of man from connection with the gospel as preached by the apostle. 1. He 
did not preach ὦ man-made gospel. “That it is not after man.” If a division of the 
realm is disaffected, measures must be adopted to cope with the disaffection. Such 
measures may be described as after man; they are the result of human counsels. 
There cannot be claimed for them perfection. The gospel is not after man; it has 
not been devised by ἃ man or by a body of men. It is free from imperfections that 
attach to human methods. 2. The gospel was not delivered to him any more than to 
the other apostles by man. “ Neither did I receive it from man.” There is not par- 
ticularized the supposition of it being his own invention. We may conclude, therefore, 
against that being the form which the representation against him took. Qn the 
supposition of it not being a human invention, this exclusion relates to the mode of 
delivery. The Tis emphatic. He did not reccive it, any more than the other apostles 
received it from man. ὃ. He was no puptl of the apostles. “ΝΟΥ was I tanght it.” 
On the supposition of it being no human invention he did not receive it in a particular 
form, which may therefore be concluded to be the form which the representation 
against him took. He was not taught it,—by whom is left indefinite. As it is 
unqualified, part of the idea must be that he was not taught it by the apostles. ‘The 
exclusion then comes to this in the end, that he was no pupil of the apostles. What is 
included tn the gospel as preached by the apostle. ‘“ But it came to me through 
revelation of Jesus Christ.” On this too the former language, by its indefiniteness, has’ 
a bearing. The twelve enjoyed three years of teaching under Christ on earth. It was 
true that he was not taught in that way. The substitute for such teaching, apart from 
euhsequent ‘meditation, was that he was supernaturally furnished by Jesus Christ 


cH. ¥. I—24.] THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 61 


bier ue contents of the gospel. Historical proof to show that he was no pupil of the 

I. Tae Jupaistic PERIOD oF HIs Lire. “ For ye have heard of my manner of life in 
time past in the Jews’ religion.” He recalls the fact that they had heard, viz. from his 
own mouth, when he was with them, of his manner of life in Judaism, This Judaism 
was a good thing in its right conception and time. There were human adjuncts of it 
which were not good. It was intended that Judaism should be carried up into Christi- 
anity. To adhere to it, then, after Christianity had come, was to go against the 
Divine intention. This was what Paul did. 1. Outstanding feature of his Judaism 
“ How that beyond measure I persecuted the Church of God, and made havoe of it.” 
The Church of Christ is named, from his later point of view, the Church of God. He 
now realizes it as the painful element in his guilt, that he persecuted the Church of God. 
He was beyond measure a persecutor. It would appear, from the language which is used 
in one place, that at his instance Christians were put to death: “ He persecuted this Way 
unto the death.” As a consequence, he made havoc of the Church. He had put the 
Church at Jerusalem into confusion, and he was on his way to exterminate, if he could, 
the Church at Damascus. 2. Spirit by which he wus animated in Judaism. ‘ And I 
advanced in the Jews’ religion beyond many of mine own age among my countrymen, 
being more exceedingly zealous for the traditions of my fathers.” He was brought up in 
a Hebrew home in ‘l'arsus. Amid Gentile influences he would feel free in the world of 
Hebrew memories and hopes. We can think of him as showing forwardness beyond 
many of his own age while yet at the Hebrew school. The strong impression of his for- 
wardness may have led to his being seut on to Jerusalem for wider opportunity. In the 
city of his fathers there was everything that was fitted to excite his youthful imagination, 
to fire his youthful enthusiasm. At the feet of Gamaliel he would come to a more 
intelligent appreciation of the traditions of his futhers, i.e. of the Law, with its historical 
accompaniments, and especially with its traditional interpretations. Here, too, we can 
think of him as showing forwardness beyond many of those who were receiving 
instruction along with him. While yet a young man he seems to have become a 
member of the Sanhedrim, or assembly of elders. For it is recorded of him that he 
gave his vote for the death of Steynen. Where he was during our Lord’s ministry we 
have not the means of knowing. But in the subsequent development of events he very 
soon appears as a chief actor. It was here that he showed forwardness in Judaism 
beyond many of his own age among his countrymen, being more exceedingly zealous 
for the traditions of his fathers. He was zealous beyond his own master, Gamaliel, 
who, against manifestations of zeal, advised that, if Christianity were not of God, it 
would come to nought. There was this to be said for Paul, that he had a keen 
perception of the situation. He saw that Judaism, which he mistakenly but fondly 
cherished, was threatened at vital points by the forces which were at work in Christi- 
anity. He saw that, with its doctrine of a Messiah in heaven and the Holy Spirit from 
heaven, with the patient bearing of its adherents, and with the progress it was making, 
it was formidable. Either Judaism must destroy it or it would destroy Judaism. 
Therefore he was exceedingly zealous beyond many for Judaism, 

11. THe crisis oF ΗΙΒ Lire. 1. His predestination to apostleship. “ But when it was 
the good pleasure of God, who separated me, even from my mother’s womb.” This is 
the only mention that Paul makes of his mother. We can believe that the kind of 
mother he had was connectvd with his separation to apostleship. He was separated 
from his birth. Being separated so early, there is precluded the supposition of human 
agency, his own or that of others. The separation was the act of God. 2. His call ta 
apostleship. ‘“ And called me through his grace.” This was on the road to Damascus. 
It was through no meritorious doing of his own, but evidently through Divine grace. 
He was engaged at the time in the persecution of Jesus. He had a vivid impression of 
a Jesus who was dead and buried, whom his disciples spoke of as alive, who was so 
strongly moving their hearts as to make him fear for Judaism. But now, by a super- 
natural intervention, he got a vivid impression of Jesus as the Messiah. In the actual 
appearance of Jesus the fact was given him in a way which, notwithstanding all his 
prejudices against it, he could not deny that he was risen and living, And. making a 
total surrender, from that moment the authority of Christ was laid on him, 3. His 
qualification for apostleship, “To reveal his Son in me, that J might preach him among 


62 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. [ou. τ, 1—24. 


the Gentiles.” In connection with his call there was given the fact of the Messiahship 
of Jesus, but there was also necded the expansion of its meaning. So it was the good 
pleasure of God, not only to give him an outward appearance, but an inward revelation. 
The revelation of God’s Son here is to be identified with the revelation of Jesus Christ 
in the twelfth verse. It probably succeeded, as it was based on, the appearance ot 
Jesus. It was not a natural excogitation, but a supernatural communication to h:s 
mind of the great truths about Christ. It was this, that he might be fitted for preaching 
Christ among the Gentiles. 

IIL. THE PERIOD FOLLOWING THE CRISIS OF HIS LIFE. “ Immediately I conferred not 
with flesh and bluod: neither went I up to Jerusalem to them which were apostles 
before me: but I went away into Arabia; and again I returned unto Damascus.” So 
sutisfying were the communications made to him by God that he needed nothing from 
man, Immediately (made emphatic by position) he conferred not with flesh and 
blood ; neither went he up to Jerusalem to them which were apostles (as though he 
needed to get authority or instruction from them); but he went away into Arabia. 
‘The retirement is mentioned to show that, during a most important period, he kept 
away from Jerusalem. His first attempts at Damascus seem to have couvinced him 
of the need of lengthened preparation for his work. In silent communion with God 
he souvht what the other apostles got in a three years’ course of training under Christ. 
He had to adjust himself to the new situation ; he had to recast his thoughts. The 
contents of the gospel, which had been supernaturally communicated to him, had in a 
natural way to be examined and inwrought with his own thoughts. The facts con- 
nected with the earthly manifestation of Christ had to be gone over and assigned their 
place in his thoughts. If we are to suppose him drawn to the scene of the giving of 
the Law (as is suggested in the fourth chapter), he would be helped thereby to read 
the old in the light of the new. He had withal to brace his own soul in the new truth 
against all contingencies connected with his work. After his retirement he returned 
to the Christian circle at Damascus, only, however, to be compelled to leave it after a 
brief experience of preaching. 

IV. THE PERIOD OF HIS FIRST VISIT TO JERUSALEM. Four facts to which he attached 
importance as showing that his independence was not compromised by this visit were 
these. 1. He did not visit Jerusulem till three years after his conversion. “Then alter 
three years I went up to Jerusalem.” He was converted at the age of thirty. At that 
time his powers had been matured. He had been accustomed to look closely into the 
nature, drift, causes, worth of things. Three years of Ais application would suftice to 
achieve his independence as a Christian thinker, so that it could not be disturbed even 
by Peter. 2. He visited Jerusalem then to make the acquaintance of Peter. “To visit 
Cephas.” It was not of purpose that he kept away from Jerusalem. It was simply 
that, in the satisfying call and communications, he felt no need to draw to the senior 
apostles. He freely recognized the work done by Peter, and, when the opportunity 
offered, he was moved to pay him a brotherly visit. Beyond that his visit had not 
significance. 3. Lis visit extended over no more than fifteen days. “ And tarried with 
him filteen days.” As his object was to visit Peter, he stayed with him. He recalls 
the precise length of his stay. He had not set that as the limit beforehand. But he 
bad to make a hurried escape from Jerusalem. And he recalls it now as a singular 
providence, inasmuch as it took away the appearance of his being a pupil of the Apostle 
Peter. 4. His visit brought him into contact only with one man of note besides Peter. 
“But other of the apostles saw I none, save James the Lord’s brother.” James was 
labouring with Peter in Jerusalem ; the other apostles were labouring elsewhere. This 
James was not of the number of the twelve. The reason for mentioning him is that, 
though not an apostle (in the strict sense which is necessary for the argument here), he 
was the Lord’s brother. He was brother in the sense of having the same mother as 
our Lord, The perpetual virginity of Mary is not to be thought of. Our feelings are 
no more shocked in thinking of Jamesas her son than in thinking of her as the wife of 
Joseph, The difficulty is that our Lord at the last committed his mother to the care of the 
Apostle John. But the difficulty to a large extent remains on the supposition of James 
being only her stepson. Why pass over one who in that relation (whatever he was 
at the time) had the making of such a man in him? The conclusion to be come to is, 
not that James was no son of Mary, but that we are left in ignorance of the reason of 


On. 1. 1-24.) THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 68 


his being passed over. Aftestation of the foregoing facts. ‘ Now touching the things 
which I write unto you, behold, before God, I lie not.” The language aj:proaches tc 
oath-taking. The facts were so important, as affecting his independence as an apostle, 
that he gives them his.most solemn attestation. 

V. THE PERIOD FOLLOWING HIS FIRST VISIT To Jmnusatem. 1. Unknown by face 
unto the Churches of Judea, “Then I came unto the revions of Syria and Cilicia. 
And I was still unknown by face unto the Churches of Judea which were in Christ.” 
So far from being sent out by the twelve, the sphere of his labour during this period 
was far away in Syria and Cilicia. If we are to understand the Churches of Judea as 
distinguished from the Church of Jerusalem, it does not exclude visits by Paul to 
Jerusalem during the period in question. And it appears that there was one visit by 
Paul during this period, viz. with contributions for the relief of the brethren in Judaea. 
The reason for it not being mentioned here is that it was aside from his purpose. It 
was a visit connected with his work in Syria and Cilicia. It did not affect his relations 
to the twelve; for it was during a time of persecution, when he only came into contact 
with the elders, and would have to make a speedy departure. It was still true that he 
was unknown by fave unto the Christian communities of Judwa, 2. What they heard 
say. “ But they only heard say, He that once persecuted us now preacheth the faith 
of which he once made havoc; and they glorified God in me.” It was only in this 
way that they had knowledge of Paul. he great condition of salvation is used as an 
equivalent for the relizion of Ubrist. It shows how largely faith bulked in Paul’s 
preaching. The Churches of Judea (and they were under the influence of the Cburch 
of Jerusalem) ascribed glory to God on account of the marvellous transformation 
wrought on Paul. It showed the good feeling of the twelve towards Paul, so different 
from the feeling of the Judaists. And it showed also how these Churches rose above 
Paul to God.—R. F. 


Ver. 1.—Apostolic authority. St. Paul opens the Epistle to the Galatians with an 
unusual assertion of his own authority. Generally he describes himself as “the bond- 
servant ” of Jesus Christ, and addresses his converts with affectionate gentleness. Bus 
something almost stern marks the beginning of this Eyistle, and indeed characterizes 
the whole of it; and the writer at the outset sets forth the highest claims of apostolic 
rank, ‘his was necessary because disloyalty to the authority of St. Paul had been 
used as one of the strongest encouragements for unfaithfulness to the fundamental 
principles of Christianity. It is very difficult to know when self-assertion is a duty, 
and more difficult to perform the duty with modesty. Yet there are occasions—four 
most of us rare occasious—when the cause of truth and righteousness requires the firm, 
dignified claim of one’s lawful position. This is perfectly consistent with unselfishness 
and humility if the motive is some interest outside ourselves. Herein is the important 
point, namely, that the self-assertion is not to be for our own honour, but for the glory 
of God, or the good of man, or the maintenance of right. 

I. THE APOSTOLIO AUTHORITY 18 CONFERRED. It docs not originate in the man who 
possesses it. He is “one sent,” a messenger, a missionary, an ambassador. As the 
prophet is the man who “speaks for” God, the Divine spokesman, so the aposile is lie 
who is sent by his Lord, the messenger of Christ. Thus the apostolic authority is very 
different from that of the philosopher which depends entirely on his own intellectual 
powers, and that of the religious founder which grows out of the man’s own spiritual 
ideas, and‘all purely personal authority. It is derived from the authority of Christ. 
Natural gifts can no more make a man an apostle than they can give a tree-lance the 
right to command a national army. 

Il. Tum APOSTOLIC AUTHORITY IS INDEPENDENT OF HUMAN INFLUENCES. 1. It is not 
derived from a human origin. It is not “of men.” No man and no body of men can 
create au apostle. “Ὁ attempt such a creation is to put forth forged credentials; it is 
like toe act of a man who engraves his own notes and passes them in currency as 
though they had been issued bya bank. 2. It isnot derived through a human medium. 
It is not “through man.” Matthias was thought to be appointed by God since he was 
chosen by lot after prayer for Divine guidance ; but he certainly received his apostleship, 
such as it was, through men, for the election of him was arranged by the Church (Acts 
1. 23—26). This was not the case with St. Paul. The highest authority is independent 
of aii ecclesiastical arrangements and of all official management, 


64 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. [σπ. «. 1—24. 


1Π. Tum ΑΡΟΒΤΟΙΙΟ AUTHORITY COMES DIRECT FROM CuRistT ΑΝῸ Gop. Tha 
sovereign commissions his own ministers. The oflice derives its high influence from 
this origin. 1. It is from God. Therefore the apostle is divinely inspired. The 
Church order that he establishes and the doctrinal truth that he preaches have both 
claims upon our reverence, because they come through him from God. 2. It is also 
from Christ. It is “ throngh” Christ as being received immediately from him, but it 
is also “through” God, for no distinction is here to be made. Christ, hewever, is 
personally concerned. The apostle is a Christian officer. His work is not to serve the 
general religion of faith in God and providence and natural revelation, but to promote 
the special faith of the gospel. 

IV. THE APOSTOLIC AUTHORITY IS DEPENDENT ON THE RESURRECTION OF CunisT. 
God is named as “ the Father, who raised him from the dead.” St. Paul alone of all 
the apostles received his commission in the first instance from the risen Christ. But 
the other apostles were also especially endowed and sent forth by Christ after the 
resurrection (Matt. xxviii. 16—20). Apart from the importance that attaches itself in 
many ways to the resurrection of Christ as the proof of his victory, the assurance of 
our future, etc., there is this particular point here of significance that Christ still lives, 
that the apostle is not merely faithful to ἃ memory, but serves a living Lord, that he is 
not the successor of Christ, but the servant who carries out the fresh mandates of the 
living and reigning King.—W. FF. A. 


Vers. 3, 4.—Christ’s sacrifice for our deliverance. The salutation is more than a 
kindly expression of good will; it is a true benediction based on the grand assurance of 
grace and peace that grows out of a right understanding of the sacrifice of Christ. St. 
Paul describes the bearings of that wonderful sacrifice in order to give support to his 
benediction. But it is clear that he does this with great fulness and distinctness for a 
further purpose. He wishes at the outset to set forth the fundamental principles of that 
gospel which the Galatians are forsaking for “a different gospel, which is not another 
gospel.” We have here, then, St. Paul’s compendium of the gospel which, for foree and 
terseness, will even bear comparison with St. John’s—the most perfect of all com- 
pendinms of the gospel (John iii. 16). The two do not cover exactly the same ground, 
for the gospel is so large that no sentence can comprehend even its leading truths, and 
so many-sied that no two minds can see it in the same light, Consider the main points 
of the one now before us. 

1. CHRIst VOLUNTARILY SACRIFICED HIMSELF, In the passage just referred to St, 
John tells us how God gave his only begotten Son on our behalf. Now St. Paul 
reminds us that Christ also freely gave himself. It was of his own will, subject also 
to the will of his Father, that he lived a life of humiliation. He could have escaped 
the cross by abandoning his mission. He went right on to death clearly knowing what 
was before him, able to deliver himself at the last by calling legions of angels to his 
aid (Matt. xxvi. 53), yet willingly submitting to death. ‘he sell-sacrifice of Christ 
was distinct from suicide in the fact that he did not seek death, and only met it in the 
course necessary for the carrying out of his life’s mission. It is important to bear in 
mind that the essence of the sacrifice of Christ lies in this conscious, willing surrender 
of himself. It is not the mere tortures he suffered, nor the bare fact of his death that 
gives a value to his endurance. If he had died of a natural disease after bearing worse 
pain he could have made no atonement thereby. The willing “obedience unto death” 
gires a sacrilicial value to his death. 1. This only could be ἃ “ satisfaction” to God. 
2. This only could be ἃ claim upon our faith and love. 

II. Tue ocoasioN OF THE SACRIFICE WAS OUR sins. We cannot say that God 
would not have become incarnate if man had not fallen. But if the happy event at 
Bethlehem would still have taken place, the awful tragedy at Calvary would have been 
spared, It is not only that the sin of the world directly caused the rejection and 
killing of Christ; his submission to death was occasioned by sin; it was to save us 
from the power and curse of sin. 1. Sin alienated us from God and occasioned the 
need of a reconciling sacrifice, 2, Sin cast us into bondage and created the necessity 
for a redeeming ransom. 

III. Tae ogsJEcT OF THE SACRIFICE WAS TO DELIVER US FROM THE PRESENT EVIL 
WORLD, 1, It was not to deliver us from God, as false notions of the atonement have 


σῆς 1, 1—24.] THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 65 


almost} suggested but the very opposite, ¢.e. to deliver us from that which is most 
oppovéd to God. 2. It was not primarily to deliver us from the future evil world, from 
the pains and penalties of sin there to be endured. A most degrading view of redemp- 
tion is that which regards it as having little effect on our life now—as chiefly a means 
of escape from future suffering. 3. It was essentially deliverance from the dominion of 
the evil present, of our own bad habits, of the corrupt customs of the age. 

IV, THE DELIVERANCE THUS EFFECTED WAS IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE WILL oF 
Gop. 1. The object was in accordance with the will of God. He was the first to 
desire the deliverance of his poor lost childrea. When they are delivered they are 
brought out of conflict into harmony with his will. 2. The method of the deliverance 
was also in agreement with God’s will. It was God’s will to send his Son. What 
Christ did was accepted by God as well-pleasing in his sight. The whole sacrifice of 
Christ was an obedience and submission to God’s will. Herein lay its value (Heb. x. 
9,10). The fact is here declared by St. Paul. He offers no theory to account for it. 
Theories of the atonement are after-growths of theology, and valuable as some of them 
may be, they are not of essential importance. The fact is the one ground for our 
faith.—W. F. A. 


Ver. 8.— The duty of intolerance. The frightful excesses of unchristian intolerance 
that disgrace the history of the Church have led to a revulsion of feeling in which 
indifference is honoured with the name of charity. The advocate of any kind of 
intolerance is regarded with aversion as a bigot and a persecutor. But the duty of 
intolerance at the right and necessary time needs to be more clearly discerned. 

1. THE GROUNDS OF THE DUTY OF INTOLERANCE. 1. The exclusive claims of the 
gospel. ‘There is but one gospel; a rival is a counterfeit. There is room for but one; 
a rival isa usurper. For: (1) The gospel of Christ is a declaration of facts, and facts 
once accomplished cannot vary; it is a revelation of truth, and truth is intolerant of 
error; the highest truth, too,isone. (2) The gospel of Christ is the most perfect satis- 
faction of our needs. Another gospel could not be a better one, for this is all we want. 
Nothing can be better than forgiveness and eternal life through faith in Christ. (8) The 
gospel of Christ is the only possible gospel. God would not sacrifice his Son to death 
if redemption were to be obtained at a less cost. The gospel is the expression of the 
love and will of God. As such it is the eternal voice of an immutable Being. 2. The 
honour of Christ. He who proposes another gospel than that of Christ crucified and 
Christ risen, directly insults the Name of our Lord. Loyalty to Christ compels intoler- 
ance for all enmity to him, hat is no true Christian charity which has no regard for 
the rights of the Lord, who should have the first claim upon our love. 3, The good of 
men. The gospel offers the highest blessings to men in the greatest need. It is the 
one anchor of hope to the despairing, the one comfort to the miserable, the one salvation 
for the lost. If it be true, we cannot permit so precious a boon to be lost throuzh the 
usurpation of a false gospel. The charity that would do this is like that which would 
allow multitudes of sick people to perish through the maltreatment of a quack, rather 
than be so unkind to him as to sbow the least intolerance of his delusions. 

If. THE LIMITS OF THE DUTY OF INTOLERANCE, 1. The rights of the gospel, not 
the claims of the preacher. St. Paul has just been asserting his claims. Herv, however, 
he entirely subordinates them to his message. Intolerance commonly springs from 
personal jealousy or party spirit, and therefore it is generally so evil a thing. We are 
not to be intolerant for ourselves, only for the truth. The truth is infinitely more 
important than the teacher. The rank, the character, the ability of the man should 
count for nothing if he is unfaithful to the Christian truth. 2. The gospel itself, not 
minor accessories. (1) Great liberty must be left in regard to details, both because 
these often lie on debatable ground and because they are less important than charity. 
There is a point beyond which more harm will be done in disturbing the peace of the 
Church and wounding our fellow-Christians than good in establishing minor truths 
against all opposition. (2) Account also must be taken of varying views of the gospel. 
Even the apostles did not state it in the same words; Peter and Paul, J ohn and James 
thus vary, though with unbroken loyalty to the central truth as ‘it is in J esus. 
Language, habits of thought, aspects of truth from different standpoints necessarily 
present great variety. Let us see that we do not condemn a man for his clothes, 

GALATIANS, ᾿ 


66 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. (on. 1. 1—24 


3. Spiritual intolerance, not physical persecution. St. Paul pronounces a curse on the 
enemy of the gospel. But he does not draw the sword upon bim. He leaves him with 
God. There if he have erred, he will be rightly judged. We have no excuse, then, for 
the exercise of violence azainst those whom we regard as the encmies of Christ, but 
only for bold testimony against their errors—leaving all else in the hands of God. 

Tn conclusion, see that (1) we receive the one true gospel, and (2) faithfully declare 
it, and (8) firmly resist manifest perversions of it—W. F. A. 


Vers. 15, 16.—The destiny, call, and mission of St. Paul. I. Tae pestiny. St. 
Paul feels that from his birth he was set apart for the great apostolic work of his later 
years, 1. There zs a destiny in every life. (tod has his purpose of calling us into being. 
2. This destiny is determined for us, not by us. We do not chovse the circumstances 
in which we are born, nor our own gifts and dispositions, We can with difficulty escape 
from our surroundings, and wé can never escape from ourselves, Whether a man will 
see the light as a prince in a palace, or as a beggar under a hedge, is entirely beyond 
his control, and it is equally impossible for him to determine whether he will have the 
genius of Newton or the inanity of an idiot. Yet how largely do these differences 
effect a man’s necessary future! 3. We may be long unconscious of our destiny. St. 
Paul never dreamed of his while he sat at the feet of Gamaliel nor while he was 
harrying the Christians. It is a secret of providence gradually revealed. 4. It is our 
duty to work out our destiny by voluntary obedience to the will of God revealed in it 
when once it is revealed to us. To resist it is to kick against the pricks. We can do 
this, for, though set apart for a work, we may refuse to follow it by our free-will, but 
at our great cost. 

I. Tue oauu. In the Acts of the Apostles the external details of the call of St. 
Paul are described ; here he gives us only the internal experience. He only could give 
this, and this was the really important thing. The flashing light, the arrested journey, 
the andible voice, the blindness, were all accessories. The one important thing was the 
inward voice that brought conviction to the heart of the man. Every apostle needed 
a call from Christ to constitute him such. But every Christian hae some Divine call. 
We have not the miracle to convey the call, and we do not want it. By the manifest 
claims that present themselves to us, by the discovery of our own powers and oppur- 
tunities of service, by the promptings of our conscience, Christ calls us to our life’s 
work. To see a work for Christ needing to be done, and to be able to do it, is a 
providential call to undertake it. It is a disastrous superstition that keeps us back 
while we wait for a more articulate voice. God’s will is manifest in the indication of 
what is rizht. To know God’s will is to be called to his service. 

JI. ‘luw misston. 1. Its object. The revelation of Christ. St. Paul was to make Christ 
known. He was not to spread his own religious notions, but only to reveal Christ. 
He was not to teach a doctrinal Christianity so much as to show Christ himself. This 
was to be done, not only by his words, but also by his life. He was so to live Christ 
that men should see Christ in him. Thus Christ was to be revealed in him. Before 
he could preach Christ in words he must have the revelation of Christ in his own 
person. If we do not reveal Christ by our lives, all our words will count for little, being 
belied by our glaringly inconsistent conduct. If we act like Christ, the silent influence 
of our living will be the most clear and powerful setting fourth of Christ. 2. The scope 
of the mission. St. Paul was to preach Christ among the Gentiles. His own special 
gospel was the message that God’s grace in Christ extended to the whole world. It was 
not for his own sake nor even for the glory of Christ alone that he was called to his 

reat mission. The highest missions are unselfish and beneficent. We are all called 
in some way to minister to others, We can do it in no way better tlan by revealing 
Christ to them in our actions as well as in our words.—W. F. A. 


Ver, 24.—God glorified in man. 1. Tat CHURCH SHOULD HEARTILY WELCOME KEW 
CONVERTS. St. Paul proves conclusively that he obtained neither his Ohristian faith 
nor his apostleship from the Church at Jerusalem. But in doing so he gives little 
ground for the view of those who hold that he was in direct antagonism to that Church. 
On the contrary, he distinctly asserts that the Jewish Christians welcomed him and 
praised God for his conversion, This was an act of large-hearted confidence. 1, It 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 67 


oH. τ, 1—21.] 


shows a genuine Christian spirit to honour ungrudgingly a spiritual work in which we 
have taken no part. ‘There is always a témptation to slight such work and to regard 
the fruits of it with suspicion. 2. ‘I'he beauty of Christian charity is also seen in the 
warm welcome of one who had been an enemy. The persecutor preaches what he had 
opposed. That is enough for the Church at Jerusalem. If we had more faith in such 
conversions we should encourage them more readily. 3. The breadth of this charity is 
still further noticeable in readiness to welcome asa brother a man whose views and 
habits differ from our own. From the first St. Paul’s Christianity must have borne a 
different colour from that of St. James. But the common faith in Christ united them. 

II. THE eLory or CHRISTIAN GRACES I8 DUE TO Gop. They are “graces” and 
gifts, not attainments which a man acquires for himself. The wonderful change of the 
zealous persecutor of Christianity mu the equally zealous preacher is wholly attributed 
to God. It is not St. Paul who is glorified by the Church at Jerusalem. We make 
the mistake of unduly praising the character of a saint without recognizing sufficiently 
the source of his saintliness, or we make the equally foolish error of honouring the 
pene for the fruit of teaching which would never have been reaped but for the 

ivine power of which the man was only the conductor. 

ΠῚ. Gop’s q@uory I8 NOWHERE sHOWN MORE RICHLY THAN IN THE WORK OF 
CHRISTIAN GRAcE. It flashes from the face of nature, glowing in the broad heavens, 
smiling on the beautiful earth. It breaks out through the course of history in grand 
indications of providential justice and mercy. It gleams in wonderful truths revealed 
to the eyes of seers who speak it forth in articulate prophecy. Above all, it shines 
most brightly in the life and person of Christ. But as Christ is full of grace and truth, 
every Christian has some measure of the same blessings, and according to his measure 
manifests the glory of them. God may be glorified ina man. Man often dishonours 
God. He may also reveal God’s glory. Just as the brightness of the sun is not seen 
in its beauty till it is reflected from earth, or sea, or sky, the glory of God must be 
shown on some object. Shining on the face of a Christian, it is revealed. It is well 
to recognize this. Our religion is too selfish, and therefore it is too gloomy. We often 
pray when we should be praising. We seek good things for ourselves unceasingiy when 
we should be losing ourselves in the contemplation of the glory of God. We cannot 
add to that glory; yet we may and should glorify God by joyonsly deciaring the worke 
of his grace.—W. F. A, 


EXPOSITION, 


CHAPTER II. 

In the preceding chapter, St. Paul has 
been concerned to make clear the position 
that neither the gospel which he preached 
nor the commission which he held was de- 
rived from the older apostles: the history 
of the first years of his ministry showed 
this. The apostle is now addressing him- 
self to a different subject; he wishes to 
show that his gospel, though not derived 
from the older apostles, had, however, while 
recognized as standing on an independent 
footing, received the sanction of their ap- 
proval. This being-his object, he had no 
occasion to refer in any way to visits which 
he may have made to Jerusalem. between 
the one mentioned in ch. i. 18 and the one 
here referred to. The tenor of his argu- 


ment, therefore, 80 far, does not of itself 


eo Bias) 


determine whether this visit was either the 
one mentioned in Acts xi. 30; xii. 25, or 
the one described in Acts xv., or possibly 
some other not recorded. That, however, it 
was in reality that of Acts xv. rathor than 
that of Acts xi, xii, hardly admits of a 
doubt, if we compare the circumstances 
here related with those which marked the 
condition of Church affairs at Jerusalem on 
the two ovcasions severally as described by 
St. Luke. ‘The imprisonment of St. Peter 
and the whole state of distress presented to 
us in Acts xii. make it well-nigh incon- 
ceivable that any such incidents should 
have then occurred as St. Paul here speaks 
of; while, on the other hand, the quer- 
tion agitated on the occasion described in 
Acts xv. corresponds precisely in character 
with the mutual relations here described 
as subsisting between St. Paul and the be 


68 THE EPISTLE TO 


THE GALATIANS. (cw. τι. 1-- 21. 


lievers of the circumcision with their leaders. 
What St. Paul here relates fits in very 
naturally into the circumstances related in 
Acts xv., though the situation is looked at, 
from different points of view. “I went up 
again,” he says; not, “I went up a second 
time.” (For a more complete discussion of 
this question, see Conybeare and Howson, 
vol. i, appendix on ‘The Chronology of 
Gal. ii.;’ Bishop Lightfoot, additional notes 
after Gal. 11. 10; and Dean Howson in 
‘Speaker’s Commentary, New Testament, 
vol. iii. p. 510.) 

The chapter falls into two sections. Of 
these, viewed in their leading purport, the 
first (vers. 1—10) exhibits the recognition 
formally accorded to St. Paul’s gospel and 
work by the highest authorities of the 
Church of the circumcision; the second 
(vers. 11—21) displays in a very stiiking 
light the independence and co-ordinateness 
of his position when standing face to face 
with the very chicfest of the apostles. 
But while these seem to be their leading 
objects, we find the apostle weaving in, after 
his manner, trenchant references to other 
matters relevant to the main purpose of the 
Epistle, and even enlarging upon them. 

Ver. 1.—Then fourteen years after (ἔπειτα 
διὰ δεκατεσσάρων ἐτῶν); then after a space 
of fourteen years. Reckoned from when ἢ 
Many think from the visit mentioned in 
ch. i. 18; others, from the time of his con- 
version. At first sight, the former seems 
the more obvious view; but fuller con- 
sideration determines for the latter. The 
apostle lays stress upon the interval being 
so long; as if it were, “It was not less 
than fourteen ycsrs after, that a conference 
took place between me and the older 
apostles relative to the gospel which I 
preach; during all which time I was 
preaching it on a fvoting independent of 
them.” There appears no other motive 
than this for his specifying the number of 
years. This being so, the specification would 
vaturally at once include the whole period 
during which he had, been so engaged, and 
not leave it to the reader to add the two 
or three years which had elapsed before the 
visit mentioned ch. i. 18. I went up again 
to Jerusalem with Barnabas (πάλιν ἀνέβην 
cis Ἱεροσόλυμα μετὰ Βαρνάβα). It is ques- 
tionable whether this “again” covers the 
clause “with Barnabas,” or not. We assume 
with confidence that this visit to Jerusalem 
1s the one described in Acts xv. We know, 
therefore, that there had been at least one 
journey to Jerusalem previously taken by 


St. Paul in conjunction with Barnabas, viz. 
‘that of Acts xi, xiii We kuow also that 
he had been in close association with Bar- 
nabas in that first visit to Jerusalem men- 
tioned above in ch. i. 18 (comp. Acts ix. 27); 
it is very possible that they had then come 
up in company. Now, so affecting was the 
interest for St. Paul with which both these 
visits were fraught, the one on his own 
account, the other on account of the distress 
then suffered by the Church, that we may 
feel certain that, in the careful review he is 
now taking ef the past, both of them would 
most vividly recur to his recollection; eo 
vividly that it is quite conceivable that he 
was writing to the Galatians of his “ going 
again to Jerusalem with Barnabas,” with 
allusion to those two former visits, though 
he has not before named Barnabas’s name 
in connection with that one which alone he 
has spoken of. If this view is not admitted, 
we must suppose a comma present after 
“Jerusalem.” And took Titus with me 
also; or rather, perhaps, and took. in our 
company also Titus (συμπαραλαβὼν ταὶ Τίτον). 
The σὺν in συμπαραλαβὼν seems to ullude to 
the others whom Paul and Barnabas, as 
mentioned in Acts xv. 2, took with them 
on that journey. So also in Acts xii. 25 
and xv. 37; for in these two passages we 
are not to suppose that John Mark is named 
as being their sole companion, but rather 
that he is specified only in preparation for 
what has afterwards to be told concerning 
him. In Acts xv. 39 παραλαβόντα without 
the σὺν simply indicates that Mark was 
with Barnabas, without reference to others 
who may or may not have been with them. 
The singular number of the participle, 
συμπαραλαβών, appears to indicate a certain 
footing of independent action which St. 
Paul had by this time gained for himself, 
even when viewed in relation to Barnabas: 
Paul himself attached Titus to the company. 
At any rate, it needs to be noted that St. 
Paul speaks of himself as simply “ going 
up with Barnabas,” not as “taking Barnabas 
with him;” fur it would be a misconception 
alike of the import of the words before us, 
and of the relative position as yet outwardly 
obtaining in public action between the two 
men, to think of Paul as the leader and 
chief organizer of the accompanying party 
and of Barnabas as subordinate to him. 
The higher apostolate of Paul was at that 
time only in process of manifestation, not 
as yet fully realized in the Church (see 
Introduction, Dissertation II.). Nothing is 
known of the antecedents of Titus, save that 
he was a “ Greek ” (ver. 3), both his parents 
apparently being Gentiles, and that St. 
Paul, in designating him in the Epistle 
addressed to him (i. 4), as his “ true 
child” (γνήσιον τέκνον), seems to mark him 


: 


on, τι. 1—21.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


69 


cut as a convert of his own; while the 
moinner in which he is here named to the 
Galatians suggests the surmise that he was 
no stranger to themselves. The apostle 
may be supposed to have secured his being 
appointed by the Antiochian Church to be 
one of the deputation to Jerusalem, both 
that he might be a representative of the 
Church of the uncircumcision, and on 
account of his great moral fitness to take 
tek in the delicate and critical business 
hen on foot. About the time the apostle 
wrote this letter to the Galatians, he was 
much employed by him, being entrusted 
with missions, which, like that earlier one, 
required especial firmness and diser. tion 
‘empered with truly Christian sentiment 
(ef. 2 Cor. ii. 13; vii. 6, 13—15; viii. 16, 22; 
xii. 18. See Mr. Phillott’s article on “Titus” 
w Smith’s ‘ Dictionary of the Bible’). 

Ver. 2.—And I went up by revelation; or, 
und I went up in accordance with a revela- 
Yon (ἀνέβην δὲ κατὰ ἀποκάλυψιν). The form of 
sentence in the Greek is similar to that (e.g.) 
in John xxi. 1; Rom. iii. 22; Jas. i. 6: 8 
word of the preceding context is taken up 
afresh for the purpose of being qualified or 
explained. Revelations were frequently 
made to the apostle, both to communicate 
important triths (Eph. iii. 3) and to direct 
or encourage his proceedings. They appear 
to have been made in different ways: as, 
through dreams or visions (Acts xvi. 9, 10; 
xviii. 9; xxii, 18—21; xxvii. 23); through 
prophets (Acts xiii. 2; xxi. 11); often, no 
doubt, through a strong impulse borne in 
upon his spirit, prompting him to, or de- 
barring him from, some particular line of 
conduct (Acts xvi. 6,7). The journey now 
in question being that recorded by St. Luke 
(Acts xv., init.), we have to observe that St. 
Luke ascribes his gong to ὦ decision come 
to by the brethren at Antioch (Acts xv. 2). 
But there is no discrepancy here. It is an 
obvious supposition, that the apostle, taking 
into consideration, perhaps, the prejudice 
entertained against him at Jerusalem, not 
only, as Christ had himself intimated to Lim, 
by the unbelieving Jews (Acts xxii. 18), 
but, as James later on confessed, by even 
the members of the Church itself (Acts 
xxi. 21; comp. on both points, Rom. xvi. 31), 
felt at first some hesitation in accepting the 
commission; was he by going likely to for- 
ward their viewa?—but that his hesitation 
was overruled by Christ himself, who in 
gome way revealed to him that it was his 
will that he should go. Similarly, when 
visiting Jerusalem for the first time after 
his conversion, his hasty departure from the 
city is attributed by St. Luke to the care of 
the disciples for his safety (Acts ix. 25); 
whereas St. Paul, in his speech from the 
stairs, ascribes it to a “ trance,” in which the 


Lord appearing to him bade h‘m to depart 
thence without delay (Acts xxii. 17, 21). 
The two accounts in each instauce are 
mutually supplementary, the one viewing 
the case historically from the outsidle, the 
other as an autobiographical reminiscence 
from within. The apostle’s reason for thus 
pointedly mentioning the especial direction 
under which he took this journey, had 
evidently reference to its being the design 
of Christ, that thereby, together with other 
objects to be subserved by it, the doctrine 
and ministerial work of Paul should be 
sealed with the recognition of his first 
apustles and of his earliest Chureh—a result 
of prime necessity for the prosperous de- 
velopment of the whole Church; more impor- 
tant, perhaps, than even its more ostensible 
result as described by St. Luke. And com- 
municated unto them (καὶ ἀνεθέμην αὐτοῖς); 
and I laid before them. ‘Lhe verb occurs in 
the New Testament besides only in Acts 
xxv. 14, where it means simply giving the 
king an account of Paul’s case with the view 
apparently of getting his opinion upon it. 
In the present case St. Paul stated his 
doctrine to the persons referred to, with the 
view likewise of seeing what they would 
say; but certainly not with any intention of 
having it modified by their suggestions 
(cf. the use of ἀνέθετο in 2 Mace. iii. 9, 
which presents a curiously similar conjunc- 
tion of particulars). By them, i.e. those there, 
are obviously meant, not the inhabitants in 
general, but the Christians of tle place, 
though not immediately before mentioned. 
We have the like use of the pronoun in 
Acts xx. 2; 2 Cor. ii. 13. That gospel which 
I preach (τὸ ἐὐαγγέλιον ὃ κηρύσσω). The 
prescnt tense of the verb points to the whole 
period of his ministry up to the time at 
which he was writing. It is implied that 
his tcaching had been the same all along. 
Elsewhere he styles it “my gospel” (Rom. 
ii. 16; xvi. 25; 2 Tim. ii. 8). Among the 
Gentiles (ἐν τοῖς ἔθνεσι); alluding to the 
complexion of hia doctrine as bearing upon 
the acceptance of Gentiles before God simply 
upon their faith in Christ (cf. Eph. iii. 1, 
6, 8). But privately (κατ᾽ ἰδίαν δέ). The 
phrase, κατ᾽ ἰδίαν, occurs sixteen times besides 
in the New Testament, always in the sense 
of privately, apart (cf. e.g. Mark iv. 34; vi. 
81, 32; vil. 33; ix. 2, 28). To them which 
were of reputation (τοῖς δοκοῦσι); them who 
were of repute; men eminent in repute and 
position. The phrase, οἱ δοκοῦντε5, was used 
in this sense both in classical Greek and in 
the later “ common dialect ” (Eurip., ‘ Hec.,’ 
294; ‘ Heracl.,’ 897; ‘Troad.,’ 617; " Hero- 
dian,’ vi. 1), There is no reason to suppose 
that there is any tone of disparagement in 
the phrase, as if the persons spoken of 
“seemed ” to be more than they really were. 


τὸ THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


fon. m. 1—21. 


The apostle repeats this participle thrice in 
the following context—once (ver. 6), as here, 
absolutely; and twice (vers. 6, 9) with an 
infinitive. This harping upon δοκοῦντες 
suggests a surmise that St. Paul’s gain- 
sayers in Galatia had been fond of using 
the expression to designate the persons re- 
ferred to in disparagement of himself as a 
man comparatively of no mark. Compare 
the almost mocking reiteration of “ super- 
latively chief apostles,” in 2 Cor. xi. 5 and 
xii. 11, referring to “ pseudo-apostles.” In 
order to determine who were the persons the 
apostle thus distinguishes, we naturally refer 
to St. Luke’s account of the circumstances. 
St. Luke, then, seems to speak of three 
several meetings held on this occasion. The 
first (in ver. 4) when Paul and Barnabas, 
with their fellow-deputies, were “ received 
by the Church and the apostles and the 
elders;” when “ they [Paul and Barnabas] 
declared what great things God had done in 
co-operation with them.” It cannot have 
been then that St. Paul gave this exposition 
of his gospel. But certain of the Pharisees 
who had joined the Church began loudly to 
insist upon the necessity of Gentile converts 
being circumcised and conforming to the 
Law. Whether it was at this first meeting 
itself that this took place, or subsequently, 
at all events “the apostles and the elders ” 
judged it to be undesirable that the matter 
should be further discussed in so large an 
assemblage of the circumcision, before, in the 
calmer atmosphere of a private conference, 
they had themselves considered what course 
it would be best to adopt. Accordingly, St. 
Luke tells us (ver. 6), “ the apostles and the 
elders came together to see about this 
matter.” “ After much discussior: had taken 
place,” which upon a question so closely 
touching tke Jew’s national sensibilities 
must even in this more select body have 
been fraught with no ordinary excitement, 
the rising passions of controversy were 
stilled by Peter; he recalled the story of 
Cornelius, and founding thereupon, he 
warned his hearers, that by imposing, as 
many perhaps even of those then present 
were wishful to do, the intolerable yoke of 
Mosaism upon the neck of the Gentile dis- 
ciples, they ran the risk of contravening and 
provoking God ; for after all (he significantly 
reminded them), their own hope of salvation, 
as well as the hope of Gentile believers, was 
that they would be saved through the grace 
of the Lord Jesus. Thereupon the “ whole 
company” (πλῆθος, in ver. 12, is used by 
St. Luke in the same way as in his Gospel 
(xxiii. 1) when speaking of the Sanhedrin; 
the eldership of the very large Church of 
Jerusalem must of itself, without the doubt- 
ful addition of elders from Judwan towns, 
have formed a considerable body) listened 


with hushed and respectful attention to Paul 
and Barnabas, while they gave a detailed 
account of what great signs and wonders 
God had wrought amongst the Gentiles 
through them. After this, upon James’s 
proposition, “the apostles and the elders” 
came to the resolution that, in conjunction 
with the whole Church, they would choose 
and depute certain members of their com- 
munity to convey to the Gentile brethren a 
certain letter, which very probably (cf. as to 
diction, vers. 17, 23, with Jas. ii. 7; i. 1) 
James himself, as presiding in their meeting, 
with the concurrence of the apostles and the 
elders, drew up. The words,“ with the whole 
Church,” coming in here for the first time 
since ver. 4, indicate a third meeting, in 
which the general body of believers was 
prevailed upon to concur in the measures 
before agrecd upon in the second more 
private meeting. According to the more 
approved reading of ver. 23 (omitting the καὶ 
before ἀδελφοί), the letter issues from “ the 
apostles and the elder brethren” alone, as 
these also were the persons with whom 
(ver. 2) the deputation from Antioch had 
been sent to confer. Now, upon the review 
of all the circumstances as now stated, the 
second of these three meetings would seem 
to have presented just such an opportunity 
as would cuit the design which St. Paul had 
formed, of expounding his teaching to the 
lcading spirits in Jerusalem. When he and 
Barnabas were relating those signs and 
wonders by which the seal of Divine sanction 
had been put upon their ministry among 
the Gentiles, it was natural that Paul, here 
no doubt, as gencrally “the chief speaker,” 
should tell their hearers with the utmost 
distinctness what that teaching was which 
Heaven had thus ratified; most especially 
that part of it which was so directly relevant 
to the practical question which was then in 
debate, and which is so emphatically sct 
forth in the Epistles to the Galatians and 
the Romans—to wit, that all who believe ir 
Christ are justified and have full peace and 
sonship with God without any works of 
Mosaical ceremonialism. This was precisely 
“the gospel” which here (ver. 2) he speaks 
of.as “preached by him among the Gentiles.” 
“The apostles und the elders” answer per- 
fectly to the description of of δοκοῦντες. For 
there is no reason for supposing that the οἱ 
δοκοῦντες of vers. 2 and 6, or the of δοκοῦντες 
εἶναί τι of ver. 6, represent exactly the same 
persons as the of δυκυῦντες στύλοι εἶναι of 
ver. 9. These last are to be conceived of 
rather as representative of those larger 
bodies of men recited in tho former three 
referenccs— James” representing the elders 
(for the present writer makes no question 
but that this James ‘the Lord’s brother” 
was the presiding officer or Bishop of the 


ou, τι. 1—21.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 71 


Church of Jerusalem, and not one of the 
twelve apostles), and “ Cephas and John” 
representing the twelve, who may be be- 
lieved to have been all of them at Jerusalem 
at this time, though these two, certainly the 
leadifg ones, are the only oncs whose names 
there happened to be occasion for specifying. 
Lest by any means I should run, or had run, 
in vain (uj πως εἰς κενὸν τρέχω ἢ ἔδραμον). 
The comparison of 1 Thess. iii. ὅ (μή πως 
ἐπείρασεν ὑμᾶς ὃ πειράζων, καὶ εἰς κενὸν γένηται 
6 κόπος ἡμῶν) shows that τρέχω is the sub- 
junetive. The present tense, lest I should be 
running, points to the time of which he is 
writing and the time onward therefrom. In 
classical Greek it would have been τρέχοιμι. 
The use of the verb τρέχω, “run,” “rush 
on,” a favourite word with the apostle, well 
characterizes the zealous forward speeding 
manner of his activity. “In vain;” to an 
empty result; for no good. He intimates 
that there had been a danger lest the fruits 
of his earnest work among the Gentiles, mivht 
through some cause get wrecked. That 
this is what he means is clear from 1 Thess. 
iii. 5 just cited ; and not that there had been 
any fear lest he might himself havo been 
somehow mistaking his way ; most especially, 
not lest he had been at all mistaken in the 
doctrine which he taught, a thing which he 
does not for one moment imagine. His 
work would have been in danger of being 
spoilt if the Gentile Churches as planted by 
himself had been disowned or discounten- 
anced by the mother Church, or if they had 
got split up into factious ‘parties by the 
intervention, eg. of persons coming “from 
James,” telling them that they were not in 
a state of salvation. To guard against this 
danger, he was led by Christ himself to seck 
a formal recognition of his doctrine by the 
apostles and the elders of the Jerusalemite 
Church, and through them by that Church 
itself. As the rank-and-file of the Jewish 
believers at Jerusalem were even bigotedly 
attached to the Mosaic Law, and also re- 
garded St. Paul himself with great suspicion, 
he might very easily have failed of gaining 
the recognition he required, if he had at 
once brought the matter before the gencral 
body. If their spiritual leaders had not first 
come forward in the cause of truth, it was 
but too probable that some fanatical Mosaists 
would have gained the ear of the multitude, 
and hurried them away in a course of head- 
long opposition to Paul and his tcaching, 
from which it might have been very difficult 
afterwards to recall them. 

Ver. 3.—But (ἀλλ᾽); and yet. “Though I 
explicitly stated to the lcading men in the 
Church of Jerusalem what I taught respect- 
ing the relation of Geutile converts to cir- 


eumcision and the Mosaic Law, yet in the 


end they, by their support, enabled us to 


withstand the pressure which was for a 
while applied for getting Titus circum- 
cised.” Neither Titus, who was with me, 
being a Greek, was compelled to be circum- 
cised (οὐδὲ Tiros 6 σὺν ἐμοί, “Ἕλλην dv ἤναγκ- 
do0n περιτμηθῆναι) ; not even was Titus who 
was with me, being a Greek, compelled to 
be circumcised. This, St. Paul intimates, 
was @ crucial case. Titus was a Gentile 
pure ; not (like Timothy) having one parent 
of Jewish extraction and therefore capable 
of being identified with the Jewish people, 
but Gentile-born of both parents. The 
clause, “who was with me,” after ver. 1, 
was quite unnecessary for mere definition ; 
in fact, it is not added for definition, but to 
mark the close associatiuu with an uncir- 
cumcised Gentile which the apostle openly 
displayed at Jerusalem. He tovk bim with 
him, we may suppose, when he came before 
the Church at its public assemblies; when 
he appeared before the select meeting of tho 
apostles and elders; when he joined the 
brethren in the agape and the Lord’s 
Supper—occasions of fraternal communion, 
in which the presence of a “dog,” “an 
uncircumcised Greek,” would be tenfold 
obuoxious. We cannot, by the way, but 
marvel at St. Paul’s great courage in thus 
acting. Not only was this paraded fellow- 
ship with Titus sure to give deep offence 
to the vast majority of his Christian brethren, 
but it might also well expose him to serious 
personal risks among the highly inflammable 
populace of the city. At Jerusalem his 
“soul was among lions.” The two clauses, 
“who was with me, being a Greek,” illus- 
trate the “not even.” Openly displayed as 
was Titus’s companionship with St. Paul 
before the eyes of all the Jews, both believers 
and unbelievers,and Gentile as he was known 
to be, yet not even in his case was circumcision 
persistently insisted upon. The aorist tense 
of ἠναγκάσθη is significant of the ultimate 
result; it implies that an altempt was made 
to get Titus to submit to the rite, but failed. 
We must observe that St. Paul does not 
write, “I was not compelled to circumcise 
Titus,” but “ Titus was not compelled to be 
circumcised.” This appears to make a 
material difference. By putting it as he 
has done, the apostle intimates that it was 
to Titus himself that the pressure was 
applied. Titus was plied, we may suppose, 
with theological argument, with appeals to 
his brotherly sympathies, with appeals to 
his prudent care for public peace, with 
threats of social and religious excommuni- 
cation, and with stern, indignant remon- 
strance. But sustained, as he all through 
knew himself to be, by at least St. Paul, 
if not also by his fellow-deputies, he through 
it all muintained his firm stand upon hiv 
liberty. The “‘ we” of the εἴξαμεν im ver. 5, 


72 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS., 


jou. τι. 1—21. 


no doubt, includes at least Titus. The 
question, however, arises—Who were they 
that for a while endeavoured to force e.r- 
cumcision upon Titus? ‘lhe converts from 
the sect of the Pharisees, mentioned by St. 
Luke (Acts xv. 5), are naturally the first to 
occur to our minds. But the moulding of 
the sentence in the next verse discoun- 
tenanecs this solution. We cannot help 
identifying the “false -brethren” there 
spoken of with just those very Pharisean 
converts—men who had simply thrown the 
cloak of professed Christian discipleship 
over the old Pharisean legalism still 
wholly clung to. But if we suppose this, 
we cannot imagine that the writer would 
have said that ‘litus was not compelled to 
be circumcised “by reason of those false 
brethren,” if these had been the very 
persons alluded to as having tried to compel 
him. 1t is more probable that the persons 
alluded to were certain influential members 
of the Jewish Church, with a strong body, 


perhaps, of the elders of that Church, having © 


possibly the concurrence even of James and 
of Cephas. James and the elders, on a 
later occasion (Acts xxi. 18—26), urged Paul 
himself to undertake the performance of 
certain Mosaical observances, with the view 
of conciliating the believers of Jerusalem. 
It is, therefore, quite supposable, at this 
earlier and as yet immature stage in the 
development of the practical application of 
the evangelical doctrine, that Titus was 
now being dealt with in a somewhat similar 
manncr. But whoever they were that were 
doing it, it is plain that, in effect, they were 
working towards the same practical result 
as the most eacer of the Mosaist legalists, 
only by a different mode of approach. 
Titus in particular was fastened upon for 
this assault, apparcutly becuuse St. Paul 
had brought him with him as a crucial 
instance whereupon to try the general 
question. 

Ver. 4.—And that because of false bre- 
thren unawares brought in (διὰ δὲ τοὺς 
παρεισάκτους WevdadéApous) ; and that because 
of the false brethren without warrant brought 
in. The conjunction δὲ often is not adver- 
sative, but only introduces a fresh thought 
of a qualifying or explanatory character 
(comp. ἀνέβην δὲ and κατ᾽ ἰδίαν δὲ of ver. 2). 
The rendering of our English Version repre- 
sents the connection with the preceding 
sentence quite correctly. The designation, 
“false brethren,” after the analogy of ‘ false 
apostles,” “ false prophets” (ψευδαπύστολοι, 
ψευδοπροφῆται, 2 Cor. xi. 13; 2 Pet. 11. 1), 
were tliose who were uot really brethren in 
Christ, but lad superinduced the profes- 
sion of such over a state of mind radically 
incompatible with it; not “children of God 
through faith in Christ Jesus,” but only 


simulating faith in Christ; outwardly “ bap- 
tized into Christ,” but not inwardly, and 
therefore not really. Tho loud demand 
which those false brethren were making, 
that all Gentile converts should be circum- 
cised, was distinctly rested by them upon 
the principle that otherwise those converts 
were not qualified for sonship in God’s 
family or for admission to Chureh fellowship 
with, at any rate, the believing circuin- 
cision. This demand of theirs, made upou 
this pernicious principle, it was that had 
raised the present controversy, and had 
brought Paul and his fellow-deputies to 
Jerusalem. If, under such circumstances, 
Titus, with St. Paul’s concurrence, had con- 
sented to be circumcised, then, whatever 
the motive of his consenting, it would have 
seemed to those false brethren, and not to 
them only, but indeed to the Church at 
large, thit all had agreed in recognizing 
the sonndness of tbat principle of theirs 
that circumcision was indispensable for per- 
fect Divine acceptance. ‘This consideration, 
we may believe, Titus and St. Paul now 
urged upon those who, not themselves 
alleging that principle, nor even allowing it 
to be true, yet, on other grounds, were 
recommending and pressing for Titus’s cir- 
cumcision. And the arzument prevailed 
with them. They withdrew that pressure 
of theirs, and consente! to leave Titus 
to stand there before the Church and the 
world, a claimant of full admission to al. 
Christiau fellowship while still in uncir- 
cumcision. It was those false brethren 
themselves, then, that made it impossible at 
the present juncture that those who held 
fast to the truth of the gospel should accept 
counsels of compromise or conciliation. In 
matters of indifference (ἀδιάφορα) there is 
w time for conciliation—this no one could 
ever be more ready to see and act upon than 
St. Paul; but there is also a time for 
the unbending assertion of truth, and 
the clamours of the false brethren made the 
present to be one of the latter kind. In 
that particular juncture of Church develop- 
ment, the doctrine itself of the absolute 
justification of men through faith in Christ 
was at stake. If Titus was not qualified 
for Christian fellowship by simply his faith 
in Christ, then neither was he quulified for 
acceptance with God by simply his faith. 
Without warrant brought in. In the com- 
pound verbal παρεισάκτους, the preposition 
παρὰ appears to point, not so much to the 
manner in which they had been brought 
in, as e.g. stealthily, craftily, as to the cir- 
cumstance that they had no business to be 
brought in at all; they were au alien brood. 
The Greek glossologists, Hesychius, Photius, 
and Suidas, render it ἀλλότριος, ἐ.6. alien. 
In 2 Pet. i. 1, παρεισάξουσιν αἱρέσεις ἀπωλείας 


en, m. 1—21.] THE EPISTLE TO 


THE GALATIANS. 73 


reference is made to the alien character of 
the teaching spoken of. The apostle’s feel- 
ing is that men who do not accept the 
truth that through faith in Christ we are 
justified, and through faith only, have no 
proper place in'the Church of Christ (comp. 
ch. v. 4, 5). If the question be asked—Who 
brought them in? the parable of the tares 
suggests the answer—The devil (comp. 
2 Cor. xi. 15; ii. 11). Who came in privily 
(olrwes παρεισῆλθον) ; @ set of men who with- 
out twoarrant came in. The preposition παρὰ 
in the verb has the same force as it has in 
παρεισάκτους. So also in raperoeducay(Jule4), 
To apy out our liberty which we have in 
Christ Jesus (κατασκοπῆσαι τὴν ἐλευθερίαν 
ἡμῶν ἣν ἔχομεν ἐν Χριστῷ ᾿Ιησοῦ); to spy out 
that liberty of ours which, ete. These men 
had come into the Church prepared to detect 
end to regard with the keenest dislike any- 
thing, either in doctrine or in Church action, 
which would infringe upon their own 
legalism, and to waye war upon it. For 
this notion of hostile intent is strongly sug- 
gested Ly the verb “to spy out” (cf. 2 Kings 
x. 3; 1 Chron. xix. 3; and κατασκοπεῦσαι in 
Josh. ii, 2). The infinitive (of purpose), 
viewed in reference to the men themselves, 
can be understood only of their disposed- 
ness to make this use of their membership; 
for they can hardly be supposed to have en- 
tered into the Church for that definite object ; 
but the apostle views them as emissaries 
of the great enemy; Satan’s design thus to 
wage war with our gospel liberty (comp. 
2 Cor. xi. 13, 15) is by a bold figure ascribed 
in this infinitive to his instruments. This 
liberty means the whole spirit of freedom 
which faith in Christ imparts to the Chris- 
tian, including, for one thing, his emanci- 
pation from the yoke of ceremonialism, but 
containing also more. That they might 
bring us into bondage (ia ἡμᾶς καταδου- 
λώσουσιν [Receptus, καταδουλώσωνται]). The 
reading of six of the uncial manuscripts 
is καταδουλώσουσιν ; of three, -cwow ; of one, 
ἰσωνται. The variation in the mood of the 
verb ia immaterial; for the construction of 
ἵνα (of purpose) with an indicative, though 
strange to the eye of the student of classical 
Greek, ig not foreign to the writers of the 
New Testament; but the variation in the 
voice affects the sense. Καταδουλώσωνται 
would mean “ bring into bondage to them- 
selves,” which most probably is not the 
writers meaning; he apparently means 
rather, “deprive us of our liberty by enslav- 
ing us to the Law” (ef. ch. iv. 25; v. 1). 
The simple verb δουλόω, occurs repeatedly; 
the compound καταδουλόω here and in 
2 Cor. xi. 20, intensifies the sense: degrade 
us into slavery. 

Ver. 5.—To whom we gave place by sub- 
jection, no, not for an hour (ais οὐδὲ πρὸς 


ὥραν ettapev). To whom; ‘Le. to the false 
brethren; not the persons immediately re- 
ferred to in ver. 3 as sec king to compel 
Titus to be circuncised. These last used 
advice and persuasion; the false brethren 
demanded with clamour (δεῖ, Acts xv. 5). 
The phrase rendered for an hour occurs 
also John v. 35; 2 Cor. vii. 8; Philem. 15. 
There seems to be an underlying allusion to 
those occasions on which the apostle did, as 
he says, “to the Jews becomo as a Jew, to 
the weak, weak” (1 Cor. ix. 20, 22); but 
this he would not do when dealing with 
false brethren, whose aim was in effect to 
turn gospel freedom into legal slavery. We; 
I, Barnabas, Titus. The words οἷς οὐδὲ 
most certainly belong to the original text. 
Not merely does only one uncial manuscript 
omit them, but their omission would leave 
behind a sentence self-convicted of absur- 
dity. For it would run thus: “But be- 
cause of the false brethren without warrané 
brought in, a set of men who without warrant 
came in to spy out our liberty, that they 
might degrade us into slavery, we yielded 
for a season with subjection, that the truth 
of the gospel might lastingly abide with 
you ;”—yielded, 7.6. by circumcising Titus; 
for this is what this reading most probably 
supposes St. Paul to have done. In this 
sentence the vituperative description of the 
false brethren, so extended and so intensely 
emphatic, instead of being an implied arge- 
ment in favour of the course of action 
which the ap-stle states ho adoptea, namely, 
concession to those men, both lacks all 
motive for its introduction here, and works 
wholly in favour of the opposite course, of 
resistance to their wishes. The only suit- 
able and logical description of those for 
whose sake the concession would have been 
made would have been that they were 
brethren meaning well, but weak in the 
faith, who should, by concession fora season, 
be won over to more perfect accord with the 
gospel. (On this reading, see Alford, and the 
fuller discussion of it in Bishop Lightfoot, pp. 
121—123.) By subjection (τῇ ὑποταγῇ): in 
the way of subjection. As trotayh in the 
other passages in which it occurs means the 
habit or spirit of subjection, and never an 
act of submission (ef. 2 Cor. ix. 13; 1 
Tim. ii. 11; iii. 4), it probably denotes 
here subjection of spirit to those who were 
so authoritatively laying upon us their 
injunctions. He might give way in a point 
of this kind in a spirit of brotherly con- 
cession; but he would bow to no man’s 
imperative injunction. The article before 
ὑποταγῇ is the article before an abstract 
noun, a8 in τῆς ἀγάπης (ch. v. 13); τῇ ἐλα- 
φρίᾳ (2 Cor.i.17), That the truth of the 
gospel (va ἡ ἀλήθεια τοῦ edayyeAlov), The 
truth, the sure vnadulterated doctrine 


74 THE EPISTLE TO TIE GALATIANS, 


lon. π, 1—21 


which is embodied in the gospel, and is its 
very hinge and substance. ‘lhe same phrase 
is found in Col. i. 5. The “truth” is that 
erunciated in ver. 16, and that it isthe very 
essence of the gospel is declared Rom. i. 17. 
The refusal of Church fellowship to a be- 
liever of this gospel except he were circum- 
cised, by just inference vitiated and, indecd, 
nullified the truth that faith in Christ is 
the sole and sufficient ground of justifica- 
tion. Might continue with you (διαμείνῃ 
πρὸς tus). Might never cease to have its 
home with you, to be believingly enter- 
tained by you. Διαμένω is an intensified 
form of μένω. The preposition πρὸς is used 
asin ch. i. 18, where see note. It is pos- 
sible thet, as Alford observes, the Galatians 
may not sp ciully have been in St. Paul’s 
mind at tliat time, but only the Gentile 
Churches in gencral; and tliat for greater 
impressiveress he applies to the particular 
what was ouly shared by it in the general. 
It is, however, supposable that the cases of 
the several Churches which he had then 
lately founded with Barnabas were much 
in his thoughts at that time; for, as is 
shown by his numcrous references to his 
specific interce-sory prayer, his spirit was 
incessantly conversant with “all the 
Churches” (2 Cor. xi. 28); and he was 
anxiously cognizant of efforts made from 
the very first by legalizing Ohristians to 
pervert their faith. It is not certain that 
Acts xvi. 6 records the first occasion of his 
visiting the ‘‘Galatic country;” he may 
have been there and founded “the Churches 
of Galatia” before the occurrences described 
in Acts xv.; and the opinion is even held 
by many that Iconium and Derbe, belong- 
ing to the Roman province of Galatia, were 
two of “the Churches of Galatiu” (see 
Introduction, p. 2). 

Ver. 6.— But of these who seemed to ba 
somewhat (ἀπὸ δὲ τῶν δοκούντων εἶναί τι); 
now from those who were reputed to be some- 
what. The conjunction δὲ does not seem 
to be adversative here, but simply intro- 
ductory of a now particular. The writer is 
about to introduce, which he does in the 
next five verses (6—10), ἃ fresh iliustration 
of the independent position, which in point 
both of doctrine and of ministerial footin 
he held in relition to the first apostles an 
to the heads of the Jerusalemite Church, 
and at the same time of the full recognition 
which in both respects these had accorded 
to him. The construction of this sentence, 
as it proceeds, is interrupted and changed. 
When St. Paul wrote, from those who were 
reputed to be somerchut, le would seem to 
have meant to add, “I received nothing 
fresh either in knowledge of the gospel or in 
authority as Christ’s minister,” or some- 
thing to that effect; but in his indignant 


parenthesis asserting his independence witk 
respect to those whom his gainsayers in 
Galatia would seem to havé pronounced his 
superiors, both in knowledge and in office, 
he loses sight of the beginning of the 
sentence, and beging it afresh in another 
form with the words (ἐμοὶ γὰρ of δοκοῦντες), 
for they who were of repute, etc. Reputed 
to be somewhat ; that is, thought highly of. 
The phrase is of frequent occurrence, both 
in Greek and in Latin authors, It is ob- 
vious that he refers to the twelve and the 
leaders of the mother Church of Jerusalem. 
‘Whatsoever they were, it maketh no matter 
to me (ὅποϊυί ποτε ἦσαν, οὐδέν μοι διαφέρει) ; 
of what sort they at any time were maketh na 
matter tome. The ὁποῖοι (of what sort) is sug- 
gested by the preceding τι (somewhat), and 
the ἦσαν (they were) by the δοκούντων (re- 
puted); from those reputed to be somewhat 
whatever they really were. The comparison 
of the usage of ὁποῖος in other passages 
(Acts xxvi. 29; 1 Cor. iii. 18; 1 Thess. i. 9; 
Jas. 1. 24) hardly favours the specific inter- 
pretation, “low great.” In respect to the 
ποτέ, ἴῃ a classical author,as Bishop Lightfoot 
observes, we should have no hesitation in 
taking it as equivalent to cunque. But the 
word occurs in the New Testament in thirty- 
one other places, and in not one ia it cunque, 
but always the adverb of time, either 
“sometime,” “in time past,” as above, ch. i. 
13, 23; John ix. 13; or ‘‘any time,” as 
1 Cor. ix. 7; 1 Thess. ii. 5. The latter 
shade of meaning seems the more appro- 
priate here. The any time, though not to 
be limited to, would, however, cover tle 
time when the twelve were in personal 
attendance upon our Lord—a circumstance 
which St. Paul’s Qetractors were no doubt 
wont to hold up as a mark of distinction not 
possessed by him. It seems Lest to take of 
what sort as dependent upon the following 
words, maketh no matter to me. This last 
clause is not exactly equivalent to “I care 
not,” as if it were an almost supercilions 
waving aside of the consideration; it is 
rather a grave assertion of a matter of fact. 
Wi.atever were the gifts of knowledge and 
spiritual insight which the twelve or-other 
heads of the Jerusalemite Church possessed, 
or whatever their ministerial privileges οἱ 
authority, whether derived from personal 
intercourse with the Lord Jesus when upon 
earth or in any other way, Paul’s kuow- 
ledge of the gospel and Paul’s apostolic 
authority were neither of them at all 
affected by them. Now, at the time that 
he is writing this Epistle, he was just the 
same in respect to the possession of the 
essential truth of the gospel and to his apo- 
stolic authority as if he had had no inter- 
course with the spiritual rulers of the Jewish 
Churcn. God accepteth no man’s persou 


au. τι. 1—21,] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 15 


(πρόσωπον Θεὺς ἀνθρώπου οὗ λαμβάνε). The 
order of the words in the Greek throws 
especial emphasis upon “person :” person of 
man God accepteth not; that is, it is never 
on account of his person that God accepteth 
aman. This phrase, “accept a man’s per- 
eon,” is of frequent occurrence in the Bible. 
In the New Testament it is always used in a 
bad sense, which in the Old is by no means 
the case. ‘This difference is due, as Bishop 
Lightfoot observes, to the secondary sense 
of actor’s mask attaching to the Greek noun, 
the actor on the Greek stage, as also on the 
Roman, being wont to wear a mask suited 
to the character in which he appeared; 
whence also πρόσωπον got to signify this 
character itself. The corresponding tech- 
nical term among the Romans was persona, 
a word never used of the natural face, as 
πρόσωπον was. This explains the adoption 
of this last term in its Anglicized form by 
our English translators in the phrase now 
before us. With the like metaphorical up- 
plication of the idea as that which was so 
common among the Romans, the word “ per- 
son” seemed well fitted to denote the part, 
or certain accessories of the part, which a 
man plays on the stage, so to speak, of 
human life, in contradistinction to his more 
interior and essential character. The phrase 
denotes accepting τὸ man, for example, for 
his worldly rank or position, for his office, 
for his nationality, even for his Church 
status (seo Jas. ii. 1,9; Acts x. 34; 1 Pet. 
i. 17). The special adjuncts of a man’s 
person referred to in the present passage 
are those of the outward call aforetime to be 
apostles and personal attendants upon the 
Tord Jesus while upon earth, and, in the 
case of St. James the Lord’s brother, per- 
sonal relationship to him. And St. Pau 
means to intimate that his knowledge of 
Divine truth and his ministerial fidelity and 
efficiency might be as real and as great, if 
God’s wiil were so, as the knowledge and 
ministerial fidelity and efficiency of the 
twelve and St. James, whoin his gainsayers 
were honouring so far above him merely for 
their person’a sake. God made no such 
difference between him and them, but 
wrought with him just as much. For they 
who seemed to be somewhat in conference 
added nothing to mo (ἐμοὶ γὰρ of δοκοῦντες 
οὐδὲν προσανέθεντο); for to me they who were 
of repute in conference added nothing. The 
vérb προσανέθεντο, a8 it stands here, appears 
related to the ἀνεθέμην of ver. 2. I laid 
before them my gospel; they imparted to 
me nothing fresh (πρό). Thus Chrysostom 
and Theodoret. In ch. i. 16, where the 
game verb occurs (see note), there is no- 
thing to accentuate the πρός, as there is here. 
The “ for” appears related to the foregoing 
slause, That God does not respect man 


for his person was evidenced by the fact 
that Paul’s knowledge of the gospel was 
already so complete and his work was so 
honoured by God, that those whose person 
seemed to many so markedly superior to 
his, found that all thoy had to do was to 
frankly recognize his teaching as already 
adequate and complete, and his work as 
standing on ἃ perfectly equal footing with 
their own. 

Ver. 7.—But contrariwise (ἀλλὰ τοὐναν- 
τίον); as 2 Cor. ii. 7; 1 Pet. iii. 9. This 
“contrariwise” is illustrated by the fore- 
going note. When they saw (ἰδόντες); when 
they got to see. This implies that the fact 
was new to them. A few of them, no doubt, 
were apprised of it previously, Cephas in 
particular (see ch. i. 18 and note); but the 
majority of that assemblage of apostles and 
elders knew Paul chiefly by hearsay, and 
hearsay not always the most friendly to 
him. The three named in the next verse 
are to be conceived of as acting as they did 
in order to give expression to this newly 
awakened fecling of the general body, and 
not merely to their own individual judg- 
ment. That the gospel of the unciroumcision 
was committed unto me, as the gospel of the 


| circumcision was unto Peter (ὅτι πεπίστευμαι 


τὸ εὐαγγέλιον τῆς ἀκρυϑυστίας, καθὼς Πέτρος 
τῆς περιτομῆς); that I had been put in trust 
of the gospel ... as Peter of that of, etc. 
The perfect present πεπίστευμαι, viewed 
from the time of their seeing it. So the 
present ὀρθοποδοῦσιν in ver. 14, and μένει 
in John i. 40. The perfect is used and 
not the aorist (cf. Rom. iii, 2), as marking 
the then still continuing holding of the 
trust, and also perhaps, as implying the con- 
tinuing identity of the doctrine preached, 
(For the construction of the accusative eday- 
γέλιον after πεπίστευμαι, comp. 1 Thess. ii. 
4; 1 Tim.i.11.) Gospel of the uncireumcision, 
The word “gospel” is frequently used by 
St. Paul to denote, not so much the sub- 
stance of its doctrine as the business of pro- 
claiming it (comp. Rom. i. 1, 9; xv. 19; 
1 Cor. ix. 14, 18; 2 Cor. ii. 12); and thus 
the gospel of the uncircumeision does not 
indicate any diversity in the doctrine com- 
municated to the uncircumcision from that 
communicated to the Jews, but simply a 
diversity in the sphere of its proclamation. 
᾿Ακροβυστία denotes the class of the uncir- 
cumcised in contrast to περιτομή, that of 
the ciroumcised, as in Rom. fii. 30. As 
Peter of that of the circumcision. This dis- 
tinction between the spheres of work en- 
trusted severally to the two apostles held 
good of them only as viewed in the main in 
either case; for as St. Peter was, in fact, the 
first whe opened the gospel to the Gentiles, 
and afterwards, towards the close of hia 
work, cared for the welfare of Gentile Ohris- 


76 THE EPISTLE TO 


THE GALATIANS. (on. τι. 1—21. 


tians by writing his two Epistles to them, 
so also St. Paul everywhere in his minis- 
terial work addressed himself in the first 
instance to the Jews. Nevertheless, in the 
main, Peter was the head of the Church of 
the circumcised, Paul of that of the uncir- 
cumcised. But how completely the sub- 
stance of Peter's doctrine was one with that 
of Paul’s is strikingly evinced by his two 
Epistles (sce 1 Pet. v.12). 10 is difficult to 
feel that St. Paul could have written as he 
here does, if he was aware that St. Peter 
had been constituted by the Lord Jesus to 
be his own vicar upon earth, supreme over 
the whole Church and all its ministers. 
Ver. 8.—For he that wrought effectually 
in Peter to the apostleship of the circum- 
cision (6 yap ἐνεργήσας Πέτρῳ εἰς ἀποστολὴν 
τῆς περιτομῆ5); he that had wrought on Peter's 
behalf for apostleship of the circumcision. In 
form, the sentence is an absolute statement 
of fact; but its bearing in the context would 
be fairly represented by rendering it rela- 
tively, “for that he who,” etc.; for it was 
the perception of the fact here stated which 
led that assembly to the conviction that 
Paul had been entrusted with the apostle- 
ship of the uncircumcision. The dative 
Πέτρῳ can scarcely be governed, as the 
Authorized Version presupposes, by the 
preposition in ἐνεργήσας, this verb not being 
a separable compound; it is rather the 
dativus commodi, as in Prov. xxxi. 12, Ἐνεργεῖ 
τῷ ἀνδρὶ εἰς ἀγαθά, When operation in a 
subject is meant, the preposition ἐν is added, 
as Eph. i. 20; ii. 2; ch. ili. 5. The worker 
is God, not Christ (comp. 1 Cor. xii. 6; Phil. 
ii. 13). God wrought on Peter’s behalf for 
apostleship of the circumcision; that is, 
towards, in furtherance of, his work as their 
apostle, by constituting him their apostle, 
by making his ministry effectual in turning 
their hearts to Christ, and by miracles 
wrought by his hands, including the impar- 
tation through him of miraculous gifts to 
his converts; for such were “the signs of 
the aposile” (2 Cor. xii. 12). The same was 
mighty in me toward the Gentiles (ἐνήργησε 
καὶ ἐμοὶ εἰς τὰ ἔθνη); had wrought also on my 
behalf towards the Gentiles. Comp. Acts 
xv. 12, “ They hearkened unto Barnabas and 
Paul rehearsing what signs and wonders God 
had wrought (ἐποίησεν) among the Gentilcs 
by them;” where likewise, as here, the 
aorist tense is used of action they were then 
looking back upon as past. The absence 
of Barnabas’s name in this verse, though 
mentioned in the next, is significant. Bar- 
nabas was not an apostle in that highest 
sense of the term in which Paul was an 
apostle, and which alone he is now thinkt-g 
of; although he was associated with Faul, 
both in ministerial work and in that lower 
furm of apostleship which both had received 


from men (comp. Acts xiv. 4, 14; and Dis. 
sertation I. in the Introduction). 

Ver. 9.—And when James, Cephas, and 
John, who seemed to be pillars, perceived the 
grace that was given unto me (καὶ γνόντες 
Thy χάριν Thy δοθεῖσάν μοι ᾿Ιάκωβος καὶ Knpas 
καὶ ᾿Ιωάννης, οἱ δοκοῦντες στύλοι εἶναι); απᾶ 
perceiving of α certainty the grace that waa 
given unto me, James und Cephas and John, 
those reputed to be pillars (gave). Thisis the 
order in which the words stand in the Greek, 
in which the participle γνόντες (“ perceiving 
of a certainty”) stands co-ordinate with the 
participle ἰδόντες (“‘ when they saw ”) of ver. 
7, so that this latter participle has “ James, 
Cephas, and John” for its subject equally 
with the former, and vers. 7 and 9 appear 
as forming one sentence. The expression, 
“the grace that was given unto me,” occurs 
also 1 Cor. iii. 10; Rom. xii. 3; xv. 15; in 
which passages, as well as here, it is used 
with a definite reference to the office of 
apostle having been conferred upon him 
together with the qualification and aid for 
its efficient discharge. This definite refer- 
ence to a heavenly gift connected with his 
official character is prominent in theapostle’s 
use of the word “grace,” also in Rom. i. 5; 
1 Cor. xv.10; 2 Cor. xii. 9. The “grace that 
was given unto him,” therefore, sums up the 
facts of his having been put in trust of the 
gospel of the uncircumcision, and of God’s 
having wrought on his behalf in his dis- 
charge of that trust, which are presented in 
the two preceding verses. There is not 
much difference in the meaning of the par- 
ticiple γνόντες in this verse as compared 
with the participle ἰδόντες in ver. 7; for 88 
we find the verb “seeing” used with refer- 
ence to objects not discernible by the bodily 
sense but perceived only through the 
medium of evidencing facts, as in ver. 14 of 
this chapter, and in Luke ix. 47; xvii. 14; 
Matt. ix. 2; Acts xi. 23; xiv. 9; xvi.19; so 
also the verb ἔγνων is sometimes used of 
perceiving, becoming apprised of, some fact, 
as Mark vi. 38; viii. 17; Luke ix. 11; Jobn 
xii. 9, when there is no clear intention of 
emphasizing the idea of certain knowledge. 
Sometimes, however, it seems as if the 
writer had such intention, a8 in Mark viii. 
17; xv. 45; Luke viii. 46; Phil. ii. 19; and 
probably it was in this more emphatic sense 
that the apostle here substituted “knowing” 
for the foregoing “seeing.” “James, wud 
“lephas, and John.” ‘This James is, no 
doubt, the same James as appears in Acts 
xv. holding so prominent and apparently 
presidential a position in the great meeting 
of vers. 6—21. The “James” of the old 
triumvirate of the Gospels, “ Peter, James, 
and John,” was now no more. This James, 
whose personality has been discussed abova 
in note on ch. i. 19, is named first, before even 


oH. m1, 1—21.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. ττ 


Cephas and John, though not an apostle, as 
being the leading “elder” (bishop, aa such 
a functionary soon got to be designated) of 
the Church of Jerusalem; for in the classifi- 
cation of the component members of that 
meeting i Acts xv. 6, “the apostles and the 
elders,” James must be assigned to the laiter 
catevory. The twelve had no distinctive 
official connection with this particular 
Church more than with other Churches; 
and, therefore, in meetings held at Jerusalem, 
the presidential position would uaturally be 
conceded, not to any one of the apostles, but 
to the man who was statedly recognized as 
the superior “elder” of this particular 
community. St. John’s name is not men- 
tioned in Acts xv.; but in other places in 
St. Luke’s history “Peter and John” are 
found acting in conjunction, and this in such 
a manner as to betoken their holding a very 
prominent place among the apostles (Acts 
111. 1; iv. 13; viii. 14). The reason why 
these three are named, and none but these, 
is probably that on the occasion refeired to 
these three alone—James as on behalf of the 
Church of Jerusalem, and Peter and John 
as on behalf of the twelve—stepped forward 
at the general request before the meeting, 
and formally all three clasped hands with 
Paul and Barnabas in token of their recog- 
nizing and ratifying their doctrine and 
ministry. In reference to the name “ Cephas,” 
it may be observed that St. Paul finds 
occasion to name tlis apostle nine times; in 
seven of these he writes, according to the best 
manuscripts, “ Cephas” (1 Cor. i. 12; iii. 22; 
ix.5;xv.5; ch.i. 18; ii.9,14); in two, “Peter” 
(ch. ii. 7, 8). The Judaizers in the Church, 
whether at Corinth or in Galatia, in their 
morbid hankering. after whatever was dis- 
tinctively Jewish, were sure to affect the use 
of the Hebraie form; on which account, 
probably, St. Paul, in dealing with these 
men, is seen so frequently using this form 
himself. Those reputed to be pillars. The 
apostle’s object in adding this clause is 
apparently, to indicate why tlese three, 
aather than any others, represented the rest 
in this act of formal procceding, and at the 
same time to intimate to his Galatian readers 
the supreme character of the attestation thus 
afforded, both to that gospel of his which 
certain among the Galatians were now 
tampering with, aud to his official character 
which those same persons were beginning to 
disparage. “Pillars.” The apostle, years 
after, in writing to Timothy, speaks of its 
being the proper function of “the Church 
of the living God” that she should be “a 
pillar and settled basis (é5palwua) of the 
truth,” te. upholding the truth (1 Tim. iii. 
15). This suggests to us his meaning in 
using the same figure here. ‘Those three 
men were by general consent looked up to 


as especially steadfast upholders of the truth 
of the gospel or of the Christian cause. In 
Rev. iii. 12 the “ pillar” seems thought of, 
not so much as upholding a superstructure 
as of something itself stationary, and also, 
perhaps, beautiful and glorious. Clement 
of Rome, in his Epistle to the Corinthians 
(§ 5), borrows the phrase with a more ex- 
tensive application. ‘The idea couched in 
the word “ Cephas,” rock, is so nearly iden- 
tical with tl.at of “settled basis,” that the 
like affinity of ideas as led the apostle to 
connect “pillar” with the latter term in 
1 Tim. iii. 15 may be supposed to have led 
him now to connect “ pillar” with “ Cephas” 
and his two illustrious brethren. They gave 
to me and Barnabas the right hands of 
fellowship (δεξίας ἔδωκαν ἐμοὶ καὶ BapydBa 
κοινωνία); they each of them clasped each 
of us by the right hand, in token that they 
both did then, and would thereafter continue 
to, regard us, and we also them, as partners 
with one another in a common work. We 
meet with the phrases, “ give right hands,” 
“receive right hands,” in 1 Mace. xi. 50, 52; 
xiii. 50, with reference, apparently, to the 
victor conceding, and the vanquished accept- 
ing, terms of peace to be ratified by the 
mutual clasp of right hands. This, however, 
is not precisely what is meant in the present 
case; there is no room here for the notion of 
reconciliation. Neither seems there intended 
a siguification of love, such as the “kiss of 
love” would have afforded. This hand-clasp 
simply ratified by a palpable gesture the 
formal assurance between the two parties 
that they regarded each other as friendly 
partners in a common undertaking. That 
the use of this gesture in ratifying compact 
has been very common in all ages, is shown 
by the instances in Liddell and Scott's 
* Lexicon’ (Acéia), and in Facciolati (““Dex- 
tra”), as well as by Bishop Lightfoot’s note on 
the present passage. Its use among the Jews 
is attested, not only by the very phrase em- 
ployed here and in the Maccabees, but by 
the phrases, “ strike hands” and “ give one’s 
hand,” in Job xvii. 3; Prov. vi. 1; Ezek. 
xvii. 18, Josephus’s remark in ‘ Ant.,’ xviii. 
ix. 3, on the unique inviolability which the 
Persians, Parthians, and other Oriental 
nations felt to attach to engagements thus 
ratified, by no mcans precludes the supposi- 
tion that Jews used tiis gesture of guarantee, 
but only shows that it was not with them 
the most sacred of all forms of covenanting: 
they would, of course, regard an oath by the 
Name of God as affording a higher sanction. 
In the case now under consideration there 
was no “strife” between James, Cephas, 
and John, and Paul and Barnabas, which 
needed to be “ended” by “an oath:” the 
solemn and cordial mutual pressure of the 
right hand seems just the kind and measure 


78 THE EPISTLE TO 


THE GALATIANS, (on. π΄. 1—21. 


of form appropriate to the circumstances. 
That we should go unto the heathen, and 
they unto the circumcision (ἵνα ἡμεῖς cis τὰ 
ἔθνη, αὐτοὶ δὲ εἰς τὴν περιτομήν) ; literally, 
that we unto (or, for) the Gentiles, and them- 
selves unto (or, for) the circumcision, without 
any verb. We have a very similar ellipsis of 
the verb in a carefully balanced antithesis, 
and before the same preposition εἰς, in Rum. 
v. 16 (comp. also 2 Cor. viii. 14). We may 
read it either thus, “should go unto,” as in 
both the Authorized and the Revised Ver- 
sions; or, “should be ministers for,” taking the 
eis with the like shade of meaning, as in ver. 
8. This distribution of the several provinces 
of work is shown by the subsequent practice 
on both sides (see note on ver. 7, sub fin.) to 
have been intended to be geographical rather 
than national; which understanding is also 
indicated by the mention in the next verse 
of “the poor” whom Paul and Barnabas 
were, notwithstanding this distribution, to 
bear in mind; they were the poor in Judzxa, 
the province of James, Cephas, and Jolin. 
Ver. 10.—Only they would that we 
should remember the poor (μόνον τῶν πτωχῶν 
ἵνα μνημονεύωμεν) ; only, that we should be 
mindful of the poor, or perhaps, their poor ; 
for the clause must be understood subjec- 
tively, as referred to the standpoint of those 
who “ vave us the right hands of fellowship.” 
(For the order of the words in the Greek, 
comp. 2 Cor. ii. 4; John xiii. 29.) If there 
is the ellipsis of any participle at all which 
needs to be supplied, which many critics sup- 
pose, though Meyer not unplausibly thinks 
otherwise, perhaps “stipulating” presents 
itsclf more readily than either “willing” or 
“ requesting; ” for this ἵνα depends as much 
upon the detlas ἔδωκαν as the preceding 
ἵνα docs, and therefore seems to introduce 
something as much as that a part of the 
compact. What the apostle means is this: 
“In one respect only did this mutual com- 
pact of cqual brotherly partnership leave 
us who were ministers of the Gentiles 
unfree in relation to the circumcision and 
their ministers ; we consented to allow our- 
selves bound to be mindful of the duty of 
helping their poor. In all other respects, 
w2 were to still pursue the same plan of 
evangelization as we had been pursuing, 
with no modification of either our doctrine 
or Church practice; with no such modifica- 
tion, for example, as these false brethren 
were clamouring for.” St. Paul’s methods of 
work thus received the full sanction of the 
“pillars,” being recugnized by them as 
standing on the same level of truth and 
heavenly guidance as their own. The same 
which I also was forward to do (ὃ καὶ 
ἐσπούδασα αὐτὺ τοῦτο ποιῆσαι); the very thing 
this which I was even of myself zealous to do. 
The καὶ makes prominent the notion of 


intense earnestness, which St. Paul is wont 
to express in the use of σπουδάζω, as well 
as of σπουδὴ and σπουδαῖος. He did not 
merely consent to bear in mind the poor of 
Judea; apart from such stipulation, apart 
from regard to any request of James, 
Cephas, and John, it was a matter which 
of himself he regarded as one of very great 
importance, demanding his most earnest 
attention, The especial force of this verb 
ἐσπούδασα is evinced by Eph. iv. 3; 
1 Thess. ii.17; 2 Tim. ii.15; and especially 
by 2 Cor. viii. 16, 17, in which the frame of 
mind it expresses is distinguished, as here, - 
from that of mere willingness to consent 
to another person’s request. ‘The principal 
reason for making this matter so prominent 
lay, no doubt, in the great distress prevail- 
ing amongst the poor in Judea, justifying 
the application of the principle stated in 
2 Oor. viii. 14, 15 (ee Stanley’s note on 
1 Cor. xvi. 1). But we can hardly err in 
supposing that, as a subsidiary motive, 
both the leaders of the Jewish Church and 
St. Paul himself were greatly influenced by 
the consideration that such practical mani- 
festation of Christian sympathy would both 
evince, and help to cement, the unity with 
each other of the Jewish and Gentile 
Churches. It was this organic unity which 
constituted the obligation of rendering such 
assistance (comp. Rom. xv. 27 with Rom. xi. 
17, 18). How perseveringly and how ear- 
nestly the apostle strove to aid the poor of 
the Jewish Churches both before and after 
the conference here spoken of, is seen in 
Acts xi. 29, 30; 1 Cor. xvi. 1 (where re- 
ference is made to collections in Galatia) ; 
2 Cor. viii, ix.; Rom. xv. 25—27; Acts 
xxiv. 17. Since in this last cited passage 
it is only incidentally that St. Luke is led 
to mention the collection which St. Paul 
brought with him in that journey of his 
to Jerusalem recorded in Acts xxi. 17, it is 
quite supposable that he brought collections 
with him also in that former visit merely 
glanced at in Acts xviii. 23. We may 
surmise that St. Paul has a special purpose 
in mentioning to the Galatians this par- 
ticular item of that important compact. In 
his First Epistle to the Corinthians, writzen 
at no long interval whether before or after 
the sending of this letter, he tells them 
(xvi. 1) that he had given order to the 
Churches of Galatia respecting the manner 
in which they should collect for this object. 
It seems the more probable supposition that 
those directions were not given until this 
letter had had the happy effect of restoring 
better relations between himself and them 
than he was able at present to reckon upon. 
Meanwhile, however, this historical reference 
would serve to prepare them in some measure 
for the appeal, when he should think i¢ 


Of. 12. 1—21.) THE EPISTLE TO 


THE GALATIANB, 79 


prudent to make it (of. Introduction, pp. 
xvi.—xviii.). 

It is well to observe, in reference to this 
whole passage (vers. 6—10), the extent to 
which the apostle goes in identifying Bar- 
nabas’s position with his own. Barnabas 
had laboured with himself as evangelizing 
“apostle” sent forth with himself from the 
Antiochian Church, and both before and 
after that missionary journey in the neigh. 
bourhood of Antioch itself. Accordingly 
he tells his readers that the “pillars” had 
without qualification recognized the work 
of them both and had fraternally greeted 
their further prosecution of it. But it is of 
himself alone that he speaks when he con- 
trasts Cephas’s apostleship of the circum- 
cision with his own apostleship (for this ia 
implied) to the Gentiles. The reason for 
this is that Barnabas was not an apostle in 
that other higher sense of the term in which 
Cephas and himself were (see Introduction, 
Dissertation I). Again, when mentioning 
the stipulation which the “ pillars” made, 
that we should be mindful of their poor, he 
does not add, “the very thing this which 
we were of ourselves resolved to do,” but 
makes the observation with reference to 
himself only. This is explained by the 
unhappy rupture which St. Luke tells of 
as so soon after occurring between them— 
which account of St. Luke’s finds thus here 
8 latent confirmation. What we otherwise 
know of Barnabas’s character leaves no 
room to doubt but that he too zealously set 
himself to carry out the stipulation in that 
separate aphere of work among Gentiles 
which, after the rupture, he engaged in. 
But this is no longer St. Paul’s business, 
while relating facts falling under his own 
cognizance. And this consideration throws 
light upon the time of the action expressed 
by the aorist ἐσπούδασα: it does not mean, 
“T had already before been forward to do 
s0;” for then he would not have left out 
Barnabas; but, “thenceforward in my whole 
subsequent career I zealously made it my 
business,” the aorist embracing the whole 
in one view. 

Further, our attention is arrested by 
the extreme importance and the pregnant 
significance of the incident here related. 
Here was one who, neither directly nor 
indirectly, owed to those who had been 
previously sent forth by Heaven as teachers 
of the gospel, either his conversion, or his 
knowledge of the Christian doctrine, or 
his mission to preach; but had nevertheless 

one forth proclaiming what he affirmed to 
ἔς Christ’s gospel communicated to him by 
Divine revelation, gathering disciples to be 
baptized into Christ, and combining such 
disciples into Churches. In what relation 
‘lid this doctrine of Paul and the Church 


organizations which he was setting on foot 
in the Gentile world stand to the doctrine 
of the twelve and to the Church organiza- 
tions framed by them in connection there- 
with at Jerusalem and in Judwa? These 
last were assumed to be from heaven; were 
those more recent phenomena, of doctrines 
taught and societies formed by Paul, in 
harmony with the previous ones? Unques- 
tionably and glaringly there were important 
differences between the <extcrnal religious 
life of the twelve and the Jewish believers, 
and the external religious life which Paul 
taught the Gentile Churches to adopt. The 
twelve and the Jewish Christians in general 
still practised in their daily life the usages 
of Mosaism, blending the use of such out- 
ward forms and ceremonies as appertained 
to Christian discipleship with those older 
habits of life preserved intact; in the 
Gentile Church as moulded by Paul the 
usages of Mosaism were altogether wanting. 
Was the seal of Heaven to be recognized 
as affixed to the Pauline doctrine and the 
Pauline Church life, as certainly as it was 
seen to be affixed to the doctrine of the 
twelve and the Judeo-Christian Church 
life? Yes. The verdict of the great 
leaders of the Jewish Church decided for 
the full recognition of the Pauline doctrine 
and the Pauline Church life as in root and 
essence identical with their own, and ns 
equally with their own derived from heaven. 
It was a decision come ‘to in the teeth of 
intense and deeply ingrained prejudices 
prompting to the adoption of a different 
conclusion; and must have. been due to 
overpowering evidence leaving them no 
alternative, seconded we may believe by the 
secret swaying of their souls by the Holy 
Ghost. We cannot help reflecting (1) how 
disastrous the effects would have been of 
ἃ decision of another kind; (2) how re- 
markably is here illustrated the essential 
oneness of the*Ohristian life amidst most 
extreme diversity in its outward mani- 
festation; and (3) what a strong attestation 
is afforded to the certain truth of the 
gospel, revealed to the world through two 
wholly distinct channels of communication, 
which yet concurred in delivering what was 
in reality one and the same message. 

Ver. 11.—In the narrative which the 
apostle next proceeds to give, several points, 
we may suppose, were definitely meant by 
him to be intimated to his readers. Thus 
to those Gentile Galatians who were waver- 
ing in their attachment to himself and to 
the gospel which he had preached to them, 
he shows his claim to their firm affectionate 
adherence, on the ground of the steadfast- 
ness with which, as before at Jerusalem 86 
now afresh in Antioch, he had ieee k 
asserted their sights and their equal stand- 


80 THE EPISTLE TO 


THE GALATIANS. (on. mt. 1—21. 


ing with Jewish believers, when these were 
assailed by “certain come from James.” In 
contrast with his own unflinching champion- 
ship of their cause, were here seen vacillation 
and inconsistency on the part of “ Cephas;” 
were, then, any justified in exalting those 
“pillars, James and Cephas,” as certain 
were disposed to do, for the sake of dis- 
paraging him? This experience at Antioch 
should lead them to regard with suspicion 
Jewish or Philo-Judaic brethren, who were 
setting themselves to tamper with the truth 
of the gospel. Crooked conduct was sure 
to accompany such darkening of the truth, 
as on that occasion was most palpably 
evinced in the case of even Barnabas, and 
was in open encounter before the whole 
Church exposed and rebuked. And, espe- 
cially, there was the grand principle that 
the Law of Moses was for the Christian 
believer annihilated through the crucifixion 
of Christ; which principle he had then 
held aloft in the view of the Church, and 
here takes occasion to enlarge upon, because 
it wns so directly relevant and helpful in 
respect to the trouble now springing up 
in Galatia. But when Peter was come to 
Antioch (ὅτε δὲ ἦλθε Κηφᾶς [Receptus, Πέτρος] 
εἰς ᾿Αντιόχειαν); but when Cephas came to 
Antioch. The reading Κηφᾶς for Πέτρος is 
generally accepted. The time at which this 
incident took piace is in a measure deter- 
mined, on the one side, by its being to 
all appearance after the visit to Jerusalem 
which has been previously spoken of, and, 
on the other, by the reference to Barnabas 
in ver. 13; that is, we are naturally led 
to assign it to that time of Paul’s, and 
Barnabas’s united labours at Antioch which 
is briefly indicated in Acts xv. 35. It can 
hardly have occurred subsequently to the 
rupture between them which St. Luke im- 
mediately after describes. The manner in 
which St. Peter’s coming to Antioch ia 
introduced seems to betoken that his coming 
thither was not felt to have becn at all an 
extraordinary circumstance. It is open to 
us, and indeed obvious, to conjecture that 
the visit was made in the course of one of 
those journeyings of St. Peter “ throughout 
all parts,” of which another, taking place 
fourteen years or more previously, is men- 
tioned in Acts ix. 33. As the “apostle of 
the circumcision,” he was, we may reason- 
ably suppose, in the habit of traversing, 
in company often with his wife (1 Cor. ix. 5), 
the whole of those districts of Palestine 
which were largely inhabited by Jews, and 
extending as far as Antioch itself, in the 
exercise of apostolic supervision over the 
Jewish converts. Quite supposably, this 
was not his first visit to this city. The 
lengthened continuance of his stay, which 
may be inferred from ver. 12, is thus 


΄ 


explained. It may be assumed that it was 
this exercise of apostolic superintendence 
that gave rise to the tradition, which gained 
early acceptance in the Church (Eusebius, 
‘ Hist. Eccl.,’ iii. 36), that Peter was the first 
Bishop of Antioch. His presence there 
now, while St. Paul was also there, found, 
probably, its analogy, twelve or fourteen 
years later, in the simultaneous presence of 
St. Peter and St. Paul at Rome; St. Peter 
being there also, we may suppose, in the 
discharge of his office as apostle of the cir- 
cumcision. I withstood him to the face 
(κατὰ πρόσωπον αὐτῷ ἀντέστην). 1 seized an 
opportunity at a meeting of the brethren 
(ver. 14) of publicly confronting him as an 
adversary. It seems almost suggested that 
their spheres of work at Antioch, which 
was a very large city, were so far not iden- 
tical thut they were not commonly to be 
seen together. The verb ἀντέστην, “ set 
myself to oppose him,” expressing deter- 
mined oppugnancy (2 Tim. iii.8; Jas. iv. 7; 
1 Pet. v. 9), strikes us the more, as coming 
so soon after the “ gave us the right hands 
of fellowship” of ver. 7. His adopting 
this mode of recalling his straying brother 
instead of dealing with him in a more 
private manner, is indicated with an evi- 
dently intended pointedness. His course of 
proceeding was both justified and required 
by the public nature of St. Peter’s offence, 
and by the necessity of promptly exposing 
and beating back the aggressions which 
Israelitish bigotry was always so ready to 
make upon the perfectly equal footing pos- 
sessed by all believers, by virtue simply of 
their relation to Christ. Because he was to 
be blamed (ὅτι κατεγνωσμένος ἦν); because 
he stood condemned. The perfect passive 
verb is commonly felt to point, not so much 
to the censures of bystanders, as to the 
glaring wrongness of his conduct viewed 
in itself (comp. John iii. 18; Rom. xiv. 23). 
The rendering to be blamed, correct so far as 
it reaches, is inadequate in expressing the 
sense which St. Paul had of the gravity of 
St. Peter’s offence. It is interesting to note 
the clear reference to this verse made in the 
second century by the Ebionite author of the 
‘Clementine Homilies, who (Bishop Light- 
foot observes, ‘Galatians,’ p. 61), writing in 
a spirit of bitter hostility to St. Paul, who 
is covertly attacked ‘in the person of Simon 
Magus, represents St. Peter as addressing 
Simon thus: “Thou hast confronted and 
withstood me (ἐναντίος ἀνθέστηκάς μοι). If 
thou hadst not been an adversary, thou 
wouldest not have calumniated and reviled 
my preaching. ... If thou callest me con- 
demned (κατεγνωσμένον), thou accusest God 
who revealed Christ tome” (‘Hom.,’ xvii. 19). 
Not only is this a testimony to the authen- 


ticity of the Epistle; it betokens 8180 the 


cH. π. 1—21.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 81 


sore feeling which this narrative of St. 
Paul’s and the manner of its diction left 
behind in the minds of a certain section of 
Jewish Christians. 

Ver. 12.—For before that certain came from 
James (πρὸ τοῦ γὰρ ἐλθεῖν τινὰς ἀπὸ laxdBov). 
Since the apostle writes “from James,” and 
not “from Judxa” (as Acts xv. 1) or “from 
Jerusalem,” the surmise suggests itself that 
these men had a mission from St. James. 
Alford’s view appears probable, that St. 
James, while holding that the Gentile con- 
verts were not to have the observance of the 
Law forced upon them, did nevertheless 
consider that the Jewish believers were still 
bound to keep it. Possibly he had sent 
them to Antioch to remind the Jewish Chris- 
tians of the city of their obligations in thia 
respect. This would be in no way incon- 
sistent with Acts xv. 19, where the emphatic 
words, “them which from the Gentiles turn 
to God,” tacitly imply that the obligations 
of Jewish believers continued the same as 
before (comp. Acts xxi. 18—25). He did 
eat with the Gentiles (μετὰ τῶν ἐθνῶν συνή- 
σθιεν). The Greek expression is no doubt 
equivalent to τοῖς ἔθνεσι συνήσθιεν (comp. 
Acts xi. 3; sce Matt. xvii. 3 compared with 
Mark ix. 4). There appears to be no ground 
for restricting this “cating with” them to 
uniting with them at the agape or at the 
Lord’s Supper. The words in Acts xi. 3, 
spoken some ten years before this, “Thou 
wentest in (εἰσῆλθες) to men still in their 
uncircumcision, and didst eat with them,” 
pointed to a social participation of food 
rather than to one merely religious; though, 
it must be confessed, these two things were 
not as yet so sharply distinguished from 
each cther as it was afterwards found neces- 
sary ‘hat they should be (1 Cor. xi. 34). 
While thus eating with Gentiles, St. Peter 
may well have fortified his mind with 
the thought, that the Lord Jesus had been 
wont to hold, not merely teaching converse, 
but social intercourse also, with persons 
whom “the scribes and the Pharisees” re- 
garded as themselves unclean and by contact 
polluting (Luke v. 30; xv. 2; xix. 7). 
Christ, it is true, both himself observed the 
Law and taught his disciples to observe it. 
He wore “the border” (κράσπεδον) attached 
to his garmcnt; but he did not wear the 
“border” unnecessarily “enlarged.” On 
the contrary, the rabbinical exaggcrations: of 
legal prescriptions, inconsistent with charity 
or with reason, he was wont cmphatically 
to repudiate (Matt. xxiii.; Mark vii. 1—13). 
But when they were come, he withdrew and 
separated himself (dre δὲ ἦλθον, ὑπέστελλε 
καὶ ἀφώριζε» ἑαυτόν); but when they came, he 
began to shrink back and separate himself 
from them. ‘“Eavtby is governed by ὑπέστελ- 
λεν a8 Well 88 by ἀφώριζεν, ὑπέστελλεν ἑαυτὸν 

GALATIANS. 


being equivalent to ὑπεστέλλετο, the use of 
which middle voice is illustrated by Acts 
xx. 27. The Gentile converts could not but 
perceive that his manner with them was less 
openly cordial than heretofore. He was no 
longer so ready to go to their houses. In 
public, he shrank from being seen with them 
on terms of frank and equal companionship. 
Fearing them which were of the circum- 
Gision (φοβούμενος τοὺς ἐκ περιτομῆ5); fear- 
tng the brethren drawn from the circumsision. 
If the apostle had written φοβ. τὴν περιτομήν, 
the expression would have taken in the not- 
believing Jews as well; whereas the prepo- 
sition ἐκ, like ἀπὸ in Acts xv. 19, indicates 
the branch of mankind from which the con- 
verts had come (Acts x. 45; xi. 2; Col. iv. 
11; Titus i. 10). 

Ver. 13.—And the other Jews dissembled 
likewise with him (καὶ συνυπεκρίθησαν αὐτῷ 
καὶ of λοιποὶ ᾿Ιουδαῖοι); and the rest of the 
Jews dissembled likewise with him. “The 
Jews,” ἐ.6. the Christian Jews who were at 
Antioch before these brethren “ from James” 
arrived there, and who, as Cephas had done 
till, their coming, associated quite frankly 
with the Gentile Christians. ‘“ Dissembled 
with him;” they as well as he acted in a 
manner which did not faithfully represent 
their own inward man. They were, in 
reality, convinced that Christ had made all 
those who believed in him alike righteous 
before God with themselves, and alike meet 
to be admitted to Christian fellowship. But 
now, by practically siding with those who 
treated their Gentile brethren as more or 
less unclean, not fit for them to associate 
with, they disguised their real sentiments 
from “fear” of forfeiting the confidence and 
good will of those narrow-minded Jews. 
The apostle brands their behaviour es “ dis- 
simulation” or “ hypocrisy,” because their 
motive was a deceitful one. They, though, 
no doubt, in a degree unconsciously, wished 
to make those newly arrived Jews suppose 
that they themselves did at bottom feel as 
they did as to a certain measure of unclean- 
ness attaching even to the believing uncir- 
cumcision. Insomuch that Barnabas also 
(ὥστε καὶ BapydBas); 80 that even Barnabas. 
The last man from whom such conduct could 
have been expected! The expression shows 
how deeply the apostle felt Barnabas to 
have hitherto sympathized with himself 
with regard to Gentile believers; as, indeed, 
the history of the Acts proves, beginning 
with xi. 21—26 to xv. 12, 25. Further, 
the tone of this reference to him, written 
three or four years after the occasion spoken 
of, as well as of that which he makes in his 
First Epistle to the Corinthians (ix. 6), 
written at nearly the same time as this 
Epistle to the Galatians, shows in the most 
natural manner the high and cordial esteem 

@ 


82 THE EPISTLE TO 


THE GALATIANS, (ow. rt. 1—21. 


with which he then regarded him, notwith- 
standing the unhappy variance which sprang 
up between them soon after the circum- 
stances here mentioned. Again, years 
Jater on, he commends Mark to the con- 
sideration of the Colossians (Col. iv. 10), as 
being a cousin of Barnabas’s, this giving 
him a high title to their respect. Obviously, 
the disapproval which St. Paul eo openly 
expressed at Antioch of the behaviour of St. 
Peter and those who acted as he did, Barna- 
bas, it seems, being one of them, helps to 
explain the sharpness of his subsequent 
difference with Barnabas concerning Mark. 
If St. Paul now, so long after the occur- 
rence, does not hesitate in calm relation to 
brand the conduct of the party with the 
stern censure of “ hypocrisy,” it is not likely 
that he denounced it with less severity at 
the time in the excitement of actual con- 
flict. How sharply and unsparingly he 
could on occasion express himself, his 
Epistles elsewhere very abundantly ex- 
emplify; and such vehement censure, 80 
publicly expressed, and, which made it so 
especially cutting, so justly deserved, might 
well leave a sore feeling in the mind of the 
whole Judaic party, including even Barnabas, 
making the latter but too ready to take 
umbrage when the apostle insisted, with 
apparently again so much justice, upon the 
want which Mark had evinced of thorough- 
going sympathy with the work of evangelizing 
the Gentiles. This last was, in fact, a con- 
tinuation of the conflict waged with Cephas 
probably but a short while before. On this 
point the Acts and the Epistles sustain each 
other. Was carried away with their dis- 
simulation (συναπήχθη αὐτῶν τῇ ὑποκρίσει) ; 
or, with the hypoorisy of them. ‘The position 
of αὐτῶν (“of thom”) is emphatic. St. Paul 
means that, if it had not been for their 
hypocrisy, Barnabas would never have fallen 
into so grievous a mistake in conduct him- 
self. The construction of the verb συναπά- 
ομαι here is the same as in 2 Pet. iii. 17; 
the dative which follows in each case being 

verned by the σὺν in the verb: “their 
issimulation” was as it were a mighty 
torrent which swept even Barnabas away 
with it. 

Ver. 14.— But when I saw that they 
walked not uprightly (ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε εἶδον ὅτι οὐκ 
ὀρθοποδοῦσι) ; but when I saw that they were 
not walking rightly. The strougly adversa- 
tive ἀλλὰ seems to imply: But I sct myself 
to stem the mischief; comp. “ withstood ” 
(ver. 11). The precise force of ὀρθοποδεῖν is 
doubtful. The verb occurs nowhere else 
except in later writers, who, it is thought, 
borrowed it from this passage. Etymolo- 
gically, according to the ambiguous meaning 
of 6p0és—“ straight,” either vertically or 
horizontally—it may be either “walk up- 


rightly,” that is, “sincerely” which, how- 
ever, is an unusual application of the notion 
of ὀρθότης ; or, “ walk straight onward,” that 
is, “rightly.” As the apostle is more con- 
cerned on behalf of the truth which he was 
contending for than on behalf of their 
sincerity or consistency, the latter seems the 
preferable view. Compage the force of the 
same adjective in ὀρθοβατεῖν, ὀρθοπραγεῖν, 
ὀρθοδρομεῖν, ὀρθοτομεῖν, etc. According to 
the truth of the gospul (πρὸς τὴν ἀλήθειαν 
τοῦ εὐαγγελίου); with an eye to the truth o 
the gospel. Πρός, “ with an eye towards,” 
may refer to the truth of the gospel, either 
as a rule for one’s direction (as in 2 Cor. v. 
10, Πρὸς ἃ ἔπραξεν) or 88 a thing to be for- 
warded (cf. Ὑπὲρ τῆς ἀγηθείας, 2 Cor. xiii. 8), 
The same ambiguity attaches to the use 
of the preposition in Luke xii. 47. The 
“truth of the gospel,” as in ver. 5, is 
the truth which the gospel embodies, with 
especial reference to the doctrine of justifica- 
tion by faith. Peter and Barnabas were 
acting in a manner which both was incon- 
sistent with their holding of that truth, and 
contravened its advancement in the world. 
I said unto Peter (εἶπον τῷ Knoa [Receptus, 
Πέτρῳ]); I suid to Cephas. Here again we 
are to read Cephas. Before them all 
(ἔμπροσθεν πάντων). At some general meet- 
ing of the Antiochian brethren. Both the 
expression and St. Paul’s proceeding are 
illustrated by 1 Tim. v. 20, “Them who sin 
[so. of the elders] reprove in the sight of 
all (ἐνώπιον πάντων ἔλεγχε). If thou, being 
adew (εἰ σύ, Ιουδαῖος ὑπάρχων); tf thou, 
originally a Jew, as ἕξοι art. ᾽Ὑπάρχων, as 
distinguished from ὥν, denotes this, together 
with a reference to subsequent action start- 
ing from this foregoing condition. Compare, 
for example, its use in ch. i. 14; Phil. ii. 6. 
This distinctive shade of meaning is not 
always discernible, Livest after the manner 
of Gentiles, and not as do the Jews (ἐθνικῶς 
Gis καὶ οὐκ "lovdainds); livest as do the 
Gentiles and not as the Jews. In what 
sense, and to what extent, were these words 
true of St. Peter? Whien, in the vision at 
Joppa, unclean animals together with clcan 
were offered to him for food, he had an- 
swered, “Not so, Lord; for I have never 
eaten anything that is common and un- 
clean.” This shows that, up to that time, 
the personal teachings of Christ when he 
was upon earth had not relieved his mind 
of the sense that to use certain kinds of 
meat was for him an unlawful thing. The 
heavenly rejoinder, “What God hath 
cleansed, make not thou common,” appears 
to have been understood by him with refer- 
ence, at least in the first instance, to human 
beings (Acts x. 28). There seems to be no 
doubt that the habit of mind generated 


by long subjection to the Levitical Law, 


On. it, 1—21.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 88 


producing repugnance to Gentiles as habit- 
ually using unclean meats, he brought with 
him when crossing Cornelius’s threshold; 
and that it is quite supposable that, in 
“eating with Gentiles” while his visit to 
Cornelius continued, be had had no occasion 
to break through those barriers of restriction 
which the Law of itself imposed. But, on 
the other hand, it is also quite supposable 
that the answer made to him in the vision 
had, if not at once, at least later, led him‘on 
to the further conviction that God had now 
made all kinds of meat lawful for a Chris- 
tian’s use, although, when consorting, as in 
the main he had to do, with Jews, he would 
still bow to the Levitical restrictions. The 
Petrine Gospel of St. Mark appears, accord- 
ing to the now by many accepted reading 
of καθαρίζων in the text of vii. 19, to have 
stated that Christ in teaching, “ Whatsoever 
from without goeth into the man, it cannot 
defile him,” had said this, “making all 
meats clean.” There is no question that in 
St. Paul’s own view at that epoch of his 
ministry when he wrote this Epistle, “no- 
thing,” to use his own words, “is unclean 
of itself” (Rom. xiv. 14; 1 Cor. x. 23, 25); 
and we have no reason to doubt that he 
had “been in the Lord Jesus persuaded ” of 
this long before,—at the very outset pro- 
bably of his ministry. It is, therefore, not 
unlikely that this same persuasion of the 
real indifferency of all kinds of meat had 
been by Christ instilled into St. Peter’s 
mind as well. But if it were thus in re- 
spect to the use of meats, it would be thus 
also in reference to all other kinds of purely 
ceremonial restriction. Very shortly before 
these occurrences at Antioch, St. Peter bad 
at Jerusalem openly and strongly expressed 
the feeling which he experienced, how in- 
tolerably galling were the restraints imposed 
ay the Levitieal, not to say by the rabbini- 
zal, ceremonialism; “a yoke,” .he said, 
“ which neither our fathers nor we were able 
to bear”—language which seems to betoken 
a mind which had spiritually been set at 
liberty from the yoke. On the whole, the 
inference naturally suggested by St. Paul’s 
words, “ Thou livest as do the Gentiles, and 
not as do the Jews,” commends itself as the 
true one; namely this—that St. Peter, not 
on that occasion only, but also on others, 
when thrown into contact with masses of 
Gentile converts, was wont to assert his 
Christian liberty ; that, like as St. Paul did, 
so did he: while, on the one hand, to the 
Jews he became asa Jew, to them under the 
Law as under the Law, that he might gain 
the Jews, gain them that were under the 
Law, so also, on the other, to them that 
were without Law he became as without 
Law, that he might gain also them (1 Cor. ix. 
20,21). Why compellest thou the Gentiles 


to live as do the Jews? (πῶς [Receptus, 7: 

τὰ ἔθνη ἀναγκάζεις ᾿Ιουδαΐζειν ;). In place 

τί, why, recent editions read, πῶς, how, 
which is a more emphatic interrogatory 
with a tinge of wonderment; as if it were, 
“ How is it possible that-——?” (so 1 Oor. 
xv. 12), The verb “Judaize” occurs in 
the Septuagint of Esth. viii. 17, * And many 
of the Gentiles had themselves circumcised 
and Judaized (ἰουδάϊζον) by reason of 
their fear of the Jews.” It is plainly equi- 
valent to ἰουδαϊκῶς (jv. Compellest, te. 
settest thyself to compel. The “compul- 
sion” applied by Cephas was a moral com- 
pulsion ; he was, in effect, withholding from 
them Christian fellowship, unless they 
Judaized. Put into words, his conduct said 
this: “If you will Judaize, I will hold fellow- 
ship with you; if you will not, you are not 
qualified for full fraternal recognition from 
me.” The withholding of Christian frater- 
nization, short of formal Church excommuni- 
cation such as 1 Cor. v. 3—5, is a powerful 
engine of Christian influence, the use of 
which is distinctly authorized and even 
commanded in Scripture (Rom. xvi. 17; 
1 Cor. v. 11; 2 Thess. iii. 6, 14; 2 Tim. 
fii. 5; Titus iii. 10; 2 John 10), and may on 
occasion be employed by private Christians 
on their own responsibility. But, its use, 
when not clearly justified, is not only a 
cruelty to our brethren, but an outrage upon 


_what St. Paul here calls the truti: of the 


gospel. It is at our peril that we grieve, 
by a cold or unbrotherly bearing towards 
him, one whom we have reason to believe 
God has “ received” (Rom. xiv. 3; xv. 7). 
If God in Christ owns and loves him as a 
son, we ought to frankly own and love him 
asa brother. 

Ver. 15.—We who are Jews by nature 
(ἡμεῖς φύσει Ἰουδαῖοι); we being Jews by nature; 
or, we are Jews by nature. In point of con- 
struction, it may be observed that, after 
εἰδότες in the next verse, recent editors con- 
our in inserting δέ. With this correction of 
the text, we may either make this fifteenth 
verse a separate sentence, by supplying 
ἐσμέν, “we are Jews by nature,” ete. and 
begin the next verse with the words, “ but 
yet, knowing that . . . even we believed,” 
etc. ? or we may supply in this verse “ being,” 
and, conjoining it with “knowing,” take the 
two verses as forming one sentence; thus: 
“We being Jews. . . yet knowing that... 
even we believed,” etc. For the general 
sense, it is quite immaterial which mode of 
construing we adopt. The Revisers have 
preferred the latter. The former makes the 
passage run more smoothly ; but this, in con- 
struing St. Paul’s writings, is by no means a 
consideration of weight. ‘ We,” that is, 
41 Paul, and thou Cephas,” rather than 
“I Paul, and thou Cephas, with those who 


84 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


(ou. π. 1—21. 


are acting with thee;” for we read before, 
“1 said unto Cephas,” not “ unto Cephas and 
the rest of the Jews.” “ By nature;” because 
we were Jews by birth. But the two ex- 
pressions, “by nature” and “ by birth,” are 
pot convertible terms, as is evident from 
eb. iv. 8 and Rom. ii. 14; the former covers 
wider ground than the latter. The pre- 
rogatives attaching to the natural position 
of a born Jew were higher than those which 
appertained to a circumcised proselyte. 
This is why he adds, “ by nature.” “ Jews;” 
a term of honourable distinction, closely by 
its etymology connected in the mind of a 
Hebrew with the notion of “ praise” (comp. 
Gen. ix. 8; Rom. ii. 29); a term, there- 
fore, of theocratic vaunting (Rom. ii. 17). 
And not sinners of the Gentiles (καὶ οὐκ ἐξ 
ἐθνῶν ἁμαρτωλοί); and not of the Gentiles 
sinners. The word “sinners” must be here 
taken, not in that purely moral acceptation 
in which all are “ sinners,” but in that mixed 
sense in which moral disapproval was largely 
tinged with the bigoted disdain which the 
theocratic Israelite felt for “the uncircum- 
cised ;” the Levitically purist Jew for them 
who, having no“ Law ἢ (ἄνομοι), wallowed in 
every kind of ceremonial pollution, “ un- 
clean,” “dogs” (comp. Matt. xv. 37; Phil. 
iii. 2; Acts ii. 23). Asa notion correlative 
to that of “Jews,” the word is used by our 
Lord himself when he spoke of his being de- 
livered into the hands of “sinners” (Matt. 
xxvi. 45; comp. Matt. xx. 19). As corre- 
lative to that of persons fit for the society of 
the righteous and Levitically holy, it is used 
by Christ and the evangelists in the phrase, 
“publicans and sinners,” in which it is 
nearly equivalent to “outcasts.” So the 
apostle uses it here. With an ironical 
mimesis of the tone of language which a 
self-righteous legalist loved to employ, he 
means in effect, “not come from among 
Gentiles, sinful outcasts.” May not the 
apostle be imagined to have quite lately 
heard such phrases from the lips of some 
of those Pharisee-minded Christians to 
whom Cephas was unhappily now truckling? 
For the right appreciation of the train of 
thought which the apostle is now pursuing, 
it is important to observe that both Cephas 
and Paul had reason to regard themfelves 
as having been, before they were justified, 
sinners in another sense of the deepest dye, 
St. Paul felt to the very end of his days that 
Be had once been, and that therefore in 
himself he still was, 8 chief of sinners 
(ἀμαρτωλούς, ὧν πρῶτός εἰμι ἐγώ); and surely 
the wickedness into which Cephas precipi- 
tated himself on the morning of his Lord’s 
passion must have left ever after in his mind 
too a similar consciousness. 
Ver. 16.—Knowing (εἰδότες δέ: see note on 
ver. 15); yet knowing. That a man is not 


justified by the works of the Law (ὅτε οὐ 
δικαιοῦται ἄνθρωπος ἐξ ἔργων νόμου); ow, by 
works of Law ; or, by works of the Law. That 
is, works prescribed by the Law of Moses. 
The verb δικαιοῦται is in the present tense, 
because the apostle is stating a general 
principle. The sentence, Οὐ δικαιοῦται ἐξ 
ἔργων νόμου, if regard be had to the exact 
sense of the proposition ἐξ, may be supposed 
to mean “does not. dertve righteousness 
from works of the Law;” does not get to bo 
justly regarded as holy, pure from guilt, 
approvable, tn consequence of any things done 
in obedience to God’s positive Law. The 
precise meaning and bearing ef the aphorism 
will appear presently. But by the faith 
of Jesus Christ (ἐὰν μὴ διὰ πίστεως ᾿Ιησοῦ 
Χριστοῦ); but only through fatth of Jesus 
Christ. ᾿Ἐὰν μή, like εἰ μή, properly means 
“except,” “save; ” but St. Paul would have 
betrayed his own position if he had allowed 
that “works of the Law” could ever have 
any part whatever in procuring justification. 
"Edy μὴ nust, therefore, be understood here 
in that partially exceptive sense remarked 
upon in the note on ch. i.7 as frequently 
attaching to εἰ μή, that is, it means “but 
only.” The apostle plainly intends to make 
the categorical affirmation that no man gains 
justification save through faith in Ohrist; 
ob δικαιοιῖῖται ἄνθρωπος εἰ ph διὰ πίστεως Ἰησοῦ 
Χριστοῦ. The variation of the proposition, 
διὰ in this clause for ἐκ in the preceding 
clause, we find again in Phil. iii. 9, “Not 
having a righteousness which is mine own, 
that which is (ἐκ νόμου) of the Law [te. 
derived from the Law], but that which is 
(διὰ πίστεως) through faith of Christ.” That 
no real difference is here intended in the 
sense is shown by the use immediately after 
of ἐκ in the clause, ἵνα δικαιωθῶμεν ἐκ πίστεως 
Χριστοῦ. For the apostle’s present argu- 
ment it is immaterial whether we are 
said to gain righteousness through faith or 
from it. As Bishop Lightfoot, however, 
observes, “ Faith is, strictly speaking, only 
the means, not the source of justification. 
The one proposition (διὰ) excludes this latter 
notion, while the other (ἐκ) might imply it. 
Besides these, we meet also with ἐπὶ πίστει 
(Phil. iii. 9), but never διὰ πίστιν, “ propter 
fidem,’ which would involve (or, might per- 
haps suggest] ἃ doctrinal error. Compare the 
careful language in the Latin of our Article 
XL, ‘per fidem, non propter opera.’” The 
genitive Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ after πίστεως is 
paralleled by ἔχετε πίστιν Θεοῦ in Mark xi. 
22, and by πίστεως αὐτοῦ in Eph. iii, 12. 
Possibly the genitive was preferred here to 
saying εἰς Ἰησοῦν Χριστόν, as verbally pre- 
senting the sharper antithesis to ἔργων 
νόμου. Even we μὰ ἡμεῖς); just as any 
sinful outcast of a Gentile would have to do 
Have believed im Jesus Christ (cis Χριστὸν 


cu. 11, 1—21.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 85 


Ἰησοῦν émoredcaper); did tn Christ Jesus 
believe. The aorist of the verb points to the 
time of first making Christ the object of trust. 
The changed order, in which our Lord’s 
proper name and his official’ designation 
appear in this clause compared with the 
preceding, and which, somewhat strangely, 
is ignored in our Authorized Version, does 
not seem to have any real significance ; such 
variation frequently occurs in St. Paul, as 
eg. 1 Tim. i. 15,16; 2 Tim. i. 8,10; Eph. 
i, 1,2. In the present instance it may have 
beon dictated by the reversal of the order of 
the ‘deas, πίστεως und Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ. That 
we might be justified by the faith of Christ 
(ἵνα δικαιωθῶμεν ἐκ πίστεως Χριστοῦ). Re- 
nouncing all thought of gaining righteous- 
ness by (or from) doing works of the Law, 
we fixed our faith: upon Christ, in order to 
gain righteousness by (or from) believing in 
him. The form of expression does not 
determine the time when they expected to 
become righteous; but the whole com- 
plexion of the argument points to their 
justification following immediately upon 
their believing in Christ. That full recog- 
nition of fellow-belicvers, which is the hinge 
on which the discussion turns, presupposes 
their being already righteous through their 
faith. And not by the works of the Law 
(καὶ οὐκ ἐξ ἔργων νόμου). This is added ex 
abundanti, to clench more strongly the 
affirmation that works of the Law have no 
effvct in making men righteous. For by the 
works of the Law shall no flesh be justified 
(διότι (or rather, 871] οὐ δικαιωθήσεται ἐξ ἔργων 
νόμου πᾶσα σάρξ). This simply repeats the 
affirmation in the first clause of the verse, 
with only an intensified positiveness; the 
future tense, “ shall be justified,” expressing, 
not the time at which the act of justification 
takes place, but the absoluteness of the rule 
that no human being is to expect ever to be 
justified by works of the Law. In Rom. iii. 
20 we have identically the same sentence 
with the addition of “in hissight.” Instead, 
however, of the διότι found in that passage, 
mary recent editors here give ὅτι, there 
being no more difference between διότι and 
ὅτι than between “because that” and 
“because.” In both passages it looks as if 
the apostle meant to be understood as citing 
a locus probativus; and the addition of the 
words, “in his sight,” in Romans indicates 
that the authoritative passage referred to is 
Pa. exliii. 2, which in the Septuagint reads, 
“Ὅτι οὐ δικαιωθήσεται ἐνώπιόν σου πᾶς ζῶν. The 
clause, ἐξ ἔργων νόμου, added in both, is ἃ 
comment of the apostle’s own, founded as 
it should seem upon the case of the people 
of Israel, whom the psalmist manifestly in- 
cluded in his universal statement; those 
who had the Law yet lacked justification 
before God, every one; those even of them 


who more or less were doing its works. This 
verse, viewed as a statement of the indi- 
vidual experience of the two apostles Peter 
and Paul themselves, is verified with respect 
to the latter by the accounts given in the 
Acts of his conversion. With respect to St. 
Peter, its verification is supplied to the 
reflective student of the Gospels by his 
realizing the process of feeling through 
which that apostle’s mind passed in the 
several situations thus indicated: “This 
day thou shalt deny me thrice ;” “He went 
out and wept bitterly;” “Go and tell his 
disciples and Peter, he goeth before you into 
Galilee ;” “The Lord is risen indeed, and 
hath appeared to Simon;” “Simon, son of 
John, lovest thou me?” “They worshipped 
him, and returned to Jerusalem with great 
joy.” Further, the highly animated lan- 
guave with which, in their writings, each of 
these apostles—St. Paul, for instance, in the 
Romans (v. and viii.) and Ephesians, and 
St. Peter in several passages of his First 
Epistle—portrays the peace and exulting 
joy which Christ’s disciples experience 
through faith in him, is evidently drawn 
from their own mental history. And this 
happy experience of theirs was, most pal- 
pably, in no degree whatever derived from 
works of the Luw, but solely from the grace 
of Christ. As St. Peter had recently inti- 
mated at Jerusalem, their hearts, as truly as 
the hearts of their fellow-believers of the 
Gentiles, “God had cleansed” from the 
sense of guilt and pollutedness before him 
“by faith” (Acts xv. 9). It is necessary 
here to be quite clear as to the nature of 
those “works of the Law” which the 
apostle has now in his view. This is de- 
termined by the preceding context. The 
works of the Law now in question were 
those, the observance of which characterized 
a man’s “living as do the Jews” and their 
non-observance a man’s “living as do the 
Gentiles.” It was the disregard of these 
works on the part of the Gentile believers 
which the Jewish Christians, whom St. 
Peter would fain stand well with, considered 
as disqualifying them from free association 
with themselves. So, again, when St. Peter 
was “living as do the Gentiles,” he was 
viewed as setting at nought, not the moral 
precepts of the Law, but its positive cere- 
monial precepts only. Itis the making that 
distinction between believers living as do 
the Gentiles and believers living as do the 
Jews, which Peter and the brethren from 
James were in effect making, that the apostle 
here sets himself so sternly to reprobate. 
It is with this view that he here asserts the 
principle that through faith in Christ a 
man is made righteous, and that through 
faith in Christ only can he be, these worka 
having nothing whatever to do with it 


86 THE EPISTLE TO 


THE GALATIANS. fom. τί, 1—21, 


“You Cephas,” he says, “and I were living 
as do the Jews; no unclean sinners of 
Gentiles were we! And both you and I 
have been made righteous. And how? 
Not through those works of the Law, but 
through believing in Christ Jesus. And 
these Gentile brethren, from whom you are 
now shrinking back as if they were not 
good enough for us to associate with,—they 
believe in Christ as truly as we do; they are 
therefore as truly righteous as we are. It 
is absurd for you to try to thrust upon them 
those works of the Law; by the works of the 
Law can neither they be made righteous nor 
yet we. So neither, on the other hand, by 
disregarding the works of the Law can 
either they or we be made sinners.” This 
last position, that the neglect of the works 
of the Law does not disqualify a fellow- 
Christian for brotherly recognition, is 
plainly essential to his present argument. 
But this is true only of the neglect of the 
positive Levitical precepts of the Law; the 
neglect of its moral precepts does disqualify 
him (1 Cor. vy. 11). Does it not scem a just 
inference from this course of argument, that 
no man whom we have reason to believe to 
be justified by faith in Christ is to be 
refused either Christian association or 
Church fellowship ? 

Ver. 17.—But if, while we seek to be 
justified by Christ (εἰ δὲ ζητοῦντες δικαιωθῆναι 
ἐν Χριστῷ); but if while seeking to be jus- 
tified in Christ. The present participle, 
“while seeking,” that is, “ while we sought,” 
is referred back to the time indicated in the 
words, “we believed,” of the preceding 
verse—the time, that is, when, made aware 
that works of the Law could not justify, they, 
Cephas and Paul, severally set themselves 
to find righteousness in Christ. At that 
time they in heart utterly renounced the 
notion that “works of the Law” had any 
effect upon a man’s standing before God; 
they saw that his doing them could not 
make him rizhteous, as well as that his not 
doing them would not make him a sinner 
(see Matt. xv. 10—20). This was an essen- 
tial feature of their state of mind in seeking 
righteousness in Christ. They distinguished 
Levitical purity and pollution from spiritual 
and real. And the principle was not only 
embraced in their hearts, but, in course of 
time, it embodied itself also, as occasion 
served, in outward deed. ‘hey, both Paul 
and Cephas himself, were bold to “live after 
the manner of Gentiles” (ver. 14), and with 
Gentiles to freely associate. If this was 
wrong, it was most heinously wrong; for it 
would be nothing short of a presumptuous 
setting at nought of God’s own Law by 
which they flagrantly proved themselves to 
be, in δ fatal aud damning sense, sinners, 
But it was by the gospel that they had 


been led to think thus and to act thus; in 
other words, by Christ himself. Would it 
not, then, follow that Christ was a minister 
to them, not of righteousness, but of sin, of 
damning guilt? The participle “seeking” 
does not merely mark the time at which 
they were found to be sinners, but also and 
indeed much more, the course of conduct by 
which they proved themselves such. The 
words, “in Christ,” are not equivalent to 
“through Christ,” though the former idea 
includes the latter; the preposition is used 
in the sane sense as in the sentences, “In 
God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ ” 
(1 Thess. i. 1); “ Of him are ye in Christ 
Jesus” (1 Cor. i. 30); “ Sanctified in Christ 
Jesus” (1 Cor, i. 2). It denotes a state of 
intimate association, union, with Christ, 
involving justification by necessary conse- 
quence. Comp. Phil. iii. 9, “That I may 
be found in him, not having a righteousness 
of mine own, even that which is of the Law, 
but that which is through faith in Christ.” 
We ourselves also are found sinners (εὐρέθη- 
μεν καὶ αὐτοὶ ἁμάρτωλοι); we ourselves alse 
were found sinners. The word “found” 
hints a certain measure of surprise (comp. 
Matt. i. 18; Acts viii. 40; Rom. vii. 21; 
2Cor.x.12; xii.20). Cephas was behaving 
now as if to his painful surprise he had 
found himself to have been previously acting 
in ἃ most guilty manner. The word “ sin- 
ners” appears to denote more than the state 
of ceremonial uncleanness incurred by vio 
lating the prescriptions of Levitical purity ; 
indeed, it meant more even as used by 
thorough-going ceremonialists (as in ver. 
15); it points to the gross outrage which 
“would in the case supposed have been put 
upon the majesty of God’s Law. In the 
next verse “ transgressor” is used as 8 con- 
vertible term. “ Ourselves also ””—as truly 
as any Gentile of them all. There is a 
touch of sarcasm in the clause, having a 
covert reference to St. Peter having turned 
his back upon his Gentile brethren as unfit 
for him to associate with; he thercby was 
treating them as “siuncrs.” Is therefore 
Christ the minister of sin? (dpa Χριστὸς 
ἁμαρτίας διάκονος ;); ts Christ a minister of 
sin? 7Apais found in the New Testament 
besides only in Luke xviii. 8 and Acts viii. 
30, in both which passages it simply pro- 
pounds a question, without indicating 
whether tle answer is expected to be nega- 
tive or affirmative. So Soph., ‘ id. T.,’ dp’ 
ἔφυν κακός ; ap’ οὐχὶ was &vayvos; The in- 
ference here is 80 shocking that the apostle 
is unwilling to put it forward except asa 
question that might fairly be asked upon 
such premisses, This gives the sentence a 
less repnisive tone than the reading, which 
without an interrogative puts it thus: “Apa 
Χριστὸς ἁμαρτίας διάκονος, God forbid (μὴ 


zane? 


cH. 1. 1—21.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 87 


γένοιτο). “ Abhorred be the thought !” we 
both say; but (the apostle means his inter- 
locutor to understand) since it cannot 
without horrid impiety be said that Christ 
was 8 minister to us of sin and not of right- 
eousness, it follows of necessity that we did 
not sin against God when we set the works 
of the Law aside and sought righteousness 
in Ohrist alone without any respect had to 
them. The Greek phrase is one of several 
renderings which the Septuagint gives to 
the Hebrew word chali‘lah, ad profana, 
which 18 frequently used interjectionally to 
relegate some thought to the category of 
what is utterly abhorrent and polluted, 
The Hebrew word is discussed fully in 
Gesenius’s ‘Thesaurus,’ ¢n verb. St. Paul 
uses the Greek phrase twice again in this 
Epistle (once absolutely, 111. 21, and once 
inweaved in a sentence, vi. 14); ten times 
‘absolutely in his Epistle to the Romans (iii. 
4, 6, ete.). It occurs also Luke xx. 16. It 
is impossible to mend the vigorous rendering 
of our Authorized Version. 

Ver. 18.—For if I build again the things 
which I destroyed (εἰ yap ἃ κατέλυσα, ταῦτα 
πάλιν οἰκοδομῶ); for tf I am building up 
again the things which I pulled down, 1 
make myself a transgressor (παραβάτην ἑμαυ- 
τὸν συνίστημι [or, συνιστάνω, another form of 
the same verb]); a transgressor is what I am 
showing my own self to be. I must be wrong 
one way or the other; if Iam right now, I 
was wrong then; and from the very nature 
of the case now in hand, wrong exceedingly ; 
no less than an absolute transgressor. This 
word “ trausgressor”” denotes, not one who 
merely happens to break, perchance inad- 
verdently, some precept of the Law, but one 
who, perhaps in consequence of even one 
act of wilful transgression, is to be re- 
garded as trampling upon the authority of 
the Law altogether (comp. Rom. ii. 25, 
27; Jas. ii. 9, 11, which are the only places 
of the New Testament in which the word 
occurs; it is therefore a full equivalent to 
the word “ sinner” of ver. 17). The Greek 
verb συνιστάνω, “to put forward in a clear 
light,” is used similarly in 2 Cor. vi. 4; vii. 
11. It is much debated, and is certainly 
nowise clear, how far down in the chapter 
the rebuke addressed to St. Peter extends. 
If it docs not reach to the end of the chapter, 
as some think it does, the break may be very 
well placed at the end of this verse. For 
this verse clearly relates to St. Peter, 
whether actually addressed to him or not; 
notwithstanding that the verbs are in the 
hypothetical first person singular, they can- 
not be taken as referred to St. Paul, not 
being at all applicable to his cise. On the 
other hand, with the nineteenth verse the 
first pereon is pluiuly used by St. Paul with 
reference to his own self, which is indeed 


marked by the emphatio ἐγὼ with which it 
opens. 

Ver, 19.—For I through. the Law am dead 
to the Law (ἐγὼ γὰρ διὰ νόμου νόμῳ ἀπέθανον); 
for I, for my part, through the Law died unto 
the Law, This ἐγὼ ig not the hypothetical 
“TI” of ver. 18, which in fact recites the 
personality of St. Peter, but is St. Paul 
himself in his own concrete historical per+ 
sonality. And the pronoun is in a measure 
antithetical ; as if it were: for whatever may 
be your feeling, mine is this, that I,” ete. 
The conjunction “for” points back to the 
whole passage (vers. 15—18), which has 
described the position to which St. Paul had 
himself been brought and on which he still 
now, when writing to the Galatians, is 
standing; he here justifies that description. 
“Through the Law;” through the Law’s 
own procuring, through what the Law itself 
did, I was broken off from all connection 
with the Law. From the words, “I have 
been crucified with Christ,” in the next 
verse, and from what we read in ch. iii. 13, 
most especially when taken in connection 
with the occurrences at Antioch which at 
any rate led to the present utterance, and 
with the hankering after Judaical ceremo- 
nialism in Galatia which occasioned the 
writing of this Ictter, we may with confi- 
dence draw the conclusion that St. Paul 
is thinking of the Law in its ceretmo- 
nial aspect, that is, viewed as determiu- 
ing ceremonial purity and ceremonial 
pollution, He is here most immediately 
dealing with the question, whether Jewish 
believers could freely «associate without 
defilement in God’s sight with Gentile 
believers who according to the Levitical 
Law were unclean, and could partake of the 
like food with them. The notion of becoming 
dead to the Law through the cross of Christ 
has other aspects besides this, as is evinced 
by Rom. vii. 1—6; a fact which is indeed 
glanced at by the apostle even here; but of 
the several aspects presented by this one 
and the same many-faced truth, the one 
which he here more particularly refers to is 
that which it bore towards the Law as u 
ceremonial institute. That which the Law 
as a ceremonial institute did in relation 
to Christ was this—it pronounced him as 
crucified to be in the intensest degree cere- 
monially accursed and polluting; to be 
most absolutely cherem. But Christ in his 
death and resurrection-life is appointed by 
God to be the sinner’s only and complete 
salvation. It follows that he who by faith 
and sacrament is made one with Christ, 
does, together with the spiritual life which 
he draws from Christ, partake also in the 
pollution and accursedness which the Law 
fastens upon him; he is by the Law bidden 
away: he can thenceforth have no connes 


88 THE EPISTLE TO 


THE GALATIANS. ἴση. τι. 1—21. 


tion with it,—the Law itself will have it ao. 
“ But (the apostle’s feeling is) the Law may 
curse on as it will: I have life with Gud 
and in God nevertheless.” This same 
aspect of the death of Christ as discon- 
necting believers from the Law viewed as ἃ 
ceremonial institute, hrough the polluted- 
ness which the Law attached to most 
especially that form of death, is referred to 
in Heb. xiii. 10—13. The phrase, “I died 
unto the Law,” is similar to that of “being 
nade dead to the Law” (ἐθανατώθητε τῷ 
νόμῳ), and being “discharged (or, ‘de- 
livered’) from the Law (κατηργήθημεν ἀπὸ 
τοῦ νόμου)» which we have Rom. vii. 4, 6; 
though the particular aspect of the fact that 
the cross disconnects believers from the Law 
is not precisely the same in the two pas- 
sages, since in the Romans the Law is 
viewed more in its character as a rule of 
moral and spiritual life (see Rom. vii. 7— 
23). That I might live unto God (ἵνα Θεῷ 
Chow); that I might become alive unto God. 
It is not likely that ζήσω is a future indi- 
cative, although we have καταδουλώσουσιν 
after ἵνα in ver. 4, and the form ζήσομεν in 
Rom. vi. 2; for the future would most pro- 
bably have been ζήσομαι, as in ch. iii 11, 
12: and Rom. i. 17; viii. 18; x. δ. It is 
more likely to be the subjunctive of the 
aorist ἔζησα, which, according to the now 
accepted reading of ἔζησεν for ἀνέστη καὶ 
ἀνέζησεν, we have in Rom. xiv. 9; where, 
as well as the ζήσωμεν of 1 Thess. v. 10, 
it means “ become alive.” In verbs denot- 
ing a state of being, the aorist frequently 
(though not necessarily) means coming into 
that state, as for example, ἐπτώχευσε, “ be- 
δ poor” (2 Cor. ix. 9). “Living unto 
God” here, as in Rom. vi. 10, does not so 
much denote any form of moral action to- 
wards God as that spiritual state towards 
him out of which suitable moral action 
would subsequently flow. The apostle died 
to the Law, in order that through Christ 
he might come into that vital union with 
God in which he might both serve him and 
find happiness in him; this service to God 
and joy in God being the “fruit-bearing ” 
in which the “life” is manifested (Rom. 
vii. 5, 6). 

Ver. 20.—This verse brings out into fuller 
detail the several points bound up in the 
succinct statement of ver. 19. I am cruci- 
fied with Christ (Χριστῷ συνεσταύρωμαι); I 
have been crucified with Christ. Iam on 
the cross, fastened thereto with Christ; 
the object, therefore, with him of the Law’s 
abhorrence and anathema. If we ask, how 
and when he became thus blended with 
Christ in his crucifixion, we have the answer 
auggested by himself in Rom. vi, 8, 6, “ Are 

Ὁ ignorant, that all we who were baptized 
to Christ Jesus were baptized into his 


death ?’—“ that our old man was crucified 
with him?” It was by believing in Christ 
and being baptized into him; comp. ch. 
iii. 27, “All ye who were baptized into 
Christ did put on Christ”—words which 
have to be taken in connection with the 
reference to “faith in Christ” in ver. 26. 
The perfect tense of the verb συνεσταύρωμαι. 
points to a continued state of being, fol- 
lowing upon that decisive crisis of his life; 
the apostle images himself as still hanging 
on the cross with Christ, while also gharing 
in his resurrection-life ; his “ old man” is on 
the cross, while his spirit partakes in and 
is renewed by Christ’s life in God (Rom. 
vi. 6, 8,11). The pragmatism of the pas- 
sage, however, that is, its relevancy to the 
subject discussed by him with St. Peter, 
consists in the twofold statement: (1) that 
the Law as a ceremonial institute has now 
nothing to do with him nor he with it, 
except as mutually proclaiming their entire 
disseverment the one from the other; and 
(2) that nevertheless, while thus wholly 
apart from the Law, he has life in God, 85 
he further proceeds to declare. Neverthe- 
less I live (ζῶ δέν. Notwithstanding all tha 
Law’s anathema, I am alive unto God 
(comp. Rom. vi. 11), the object of his love, 
and an heir of his eternal life. With this 
exalted blessedness of mine the Law cannot 
in the slightest degree meddle, by any de- 
termination which it will fain propound « 
cleauness or uncleauness. No ceremonial 
pollution of its constituting can touch this 
my life. My own life and my fellow-be- 
liever’s life in God is infinitely removed 
from the possibility of receiving taint of 
pollution through eating (say) of blood, or 
suet, or pork, or through touching a leper 
or the remains of a deceased man. Nothing 
of this kind can mar or stain my righteous- 
ness or my follow-believer’s righteousness. 
Both he and I, sharing in the like “life” 
and righteousness, rejoice and exult to 
gether; let the Law denounce us for unclean 
as loudly and as bitterly as it will. Nay, if 
I were to allow myself to be disquieted by 
any such denouncement of pollution, 

should, in fact, be allowing myself to har- 
bour misgivings and unbelief touching the 
very essence of the grace of Jesus Christ. 
Yet not I, but Christ liveth in me (οὐκ ἔτ. 
ἐγώ, (ἢ δὲ ἐν ἐμοὶ Χριστός); and yet no longer 
1, but Christ liveth tn me. It was essential 
to the apostle’s argument that he should 
assert himself to be, in spite of the Law’s 
anathema, “alive,” in the full possession 
of life in God; but he hastens to qualify 
this assertion by explaining how entirely 
he owes this life of his to Christ; and, in 
his eagerness to do this, he compresses the 
assertion and the qualification in one clause 


ΒΟ closely together as, in a way not at all un- 


on. τι. 1—21.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 89 


usual with him, well-nigh to wreck the gram- 
matical construction, A method, indeed, 
has been pruposed by critics of disposing 
this clause with respect to the preceding in 
such a manner as to make the sentence run 
quite smoothly; thus: Ζῶ δὲ οὐκέτι ἐγώ, (ἢ 
δὲ ἐξ ἐμοὶ Χριστός : that is, as given in the 
margin of the Revised English Version, “I 
have been crucified with Christ; and it is 
nv longer I that live, but Christ liveth in 
me.” But not only does this method of 
construing altogether cfface the apostle’s 
assertion of his being alive notwithstanding 
the Law’s malediction—an assertion which 
agrees 80 thoroughly with the defiant tone 
of the argument, but the abruptness of the 
construction as presented in the ordinary 
reading of the passage ia its very recom- 
mendation; for such uncouthness of style 
is wont to show itself in St. Paul’s more 
eager, impassioned passages. “No longer 
I;” as in those old days when I prided 
myself on being anu especial favourite of 
Heaven, eminently righteous through meri- 
torious doings of my own, through my punc- 
tilious observance in particular of all that 
the Law prescribes for gaining and maintain- 
ing ceremonial sanctity (comp. Phil. iii. 4, 
6). “In those days it was I that was alive; 
it ig not so now.” The ἐγὼ ἔζων, “1 was 
alive,” of Rom. vii. 9, serves again as a 
perfect illustration of the phraseology of the 
present passage ; only we have still to bear 
in mind that the apostle is at present con- 
teisplating the ceremonial aspect of his old 
life, rather than, as in the Romans, the 
moral; the two being no doubt, however, in 
this former Pharisee scheme of religion, 
essentially conjoined. The in-being of 
Christ is to be understood as blending in 
one the two notions, of Christ as the ground 
of our acceptableness before God and of our 
being alive unto God, and of Christ as the 
motive spring of true practical well-doing 
(Rom. viii. 10). The two things, though 
notionally distinct, cannot exist apart, but 
the formar is the more prominent idea here. 
And the life which I now live in the flesh 
(ὃ δὲ νῦν ζῶ ἐν σαρκί). “ Life” still denotes 
his spiritual state of being, and not his 
moral activity, though by inference in- 
volving this latter; as if it were “the life 
which I now possess.” The construction of 
ὃ (@ is paralleled by the ὃ ἀπέθανε, “the 
death that he died, he died,” and the’ (ῇ, 
“the life that he liveth, he liveth,” of 
Rom. vi. 10. “Now,” as well as “no 
longer,” stands in contrast with his old life 
in Judaism. But, on the other hand, “in 
the flesh,” viewed in conjunction with ἰὼ 
πίστει) “in faith,” or “ by faith,” must be 
taken as in Phil. i. 22, that is, as contrasted 
with the future life; while we are in the 
flesh “we walk by faith, not by sight” 


(2 Cor. v. 7). I live by the faith of the Son 
of God (ἐν πίστει (ζῶ τῇ τοῦ υἱοῦ τοῦ Θεοῦ); 
1 live by faith, the faith which is in the Son 
of God. By faith, not by works of the 
Levitical Law. It was by faith in Christ 
that I first became partaker of this life; it 
is by faith in Christ that I continue to par- 
take of it; letting go my fuith in Obrist, I 
partake of the life no longer. The especial 
relevancy of this statement of the apostle’s, 
whether with respect to the matters agi- 
tated at Antioch, or with respect to any such 
revival of Levitical notions of acccptable- 
ness with God as was now perplexing tho 
Churchmen of Galatia, is the warning which 
it implicitly conveys that, to revert to Levi- 
tical notions of uncleanness or of righteous- 
ness, was to sin against faith in Christ, and 
therewith against the very essence of a 
Christian’s spiritual life. It was the strong 
sense which the apostle had of the abso- 
lutely fatal tendency of such relapses to- 
wards Judaism that inspired the deep 
pathos which here tinges his language. 
Hence the magnificent title by which he 
recites Christ’s personality, “the Son of 
God;” possessing as such an absolutely 
commanding claim to his people’s adherence, 
which they dare not decline. Hence, too, 
the words which follow. Who loved me, 
and gave himself for me (τοῦ ἀγαπήσαντός 
με, καὶ παραδόντος éautdy ὑπὲρ ἐμοῦ); who 
loved me, and gave himself up for me. 
Fain would the reader realize to his mind 
the fervid, thrilling tones and accent of 
voice in which the apostle, while uttering 
these words, would give vent to the senti- 
ment which so powerfully swayed his whole 
life, and which he so vividly describes in 
writing to the Corinthians: “The love of 
Christ constraineth us; because we thus 
judge, that one died for all, therefore all 
died [namely, to all but him]; and he 
died for all, that they which live should no 
longer live unto themselves, but unto him 
who for their sakes died and rose again” 
(2 Cor. v. 14, 15). The same appropriation 
of Christ’s love to his own individual self 
which the apostle here gives utterance to, 
“who loved me, and gave himself up for 
me,” may every human creature also ex- 
press in whom only is the faith which 
takes hold of bis love. In fact, the apostle 
speaks thus for the very purpose of prompt- 
ing every individual believer who hears 
him to feel and say the same. This, he 
indicates, should be their feeling just as 
much as his; a sentiment just as irre- 
sistibly regulative of their life. Why not? 
Do they not also owe to him all their hope 
on behalf of their souls? For the expres- 
sion, “gave himself up,” comp. ch. i, 4 and 
note. The Greek verb παραδόντος is dis- 
tinguished from the simple δόντος, “ gave 


90 THE EPISTLE TO 


THE GALATIANS, (cn. πι. 1—21, 


himself,” by its bringing more distinctly 
into view the notion of Christ’s giving him- 
self over into the hands of those who sought 
his life. : 
Ver. 21.—I do not frustrate the grace of 
God (οὐκ ἀθετῶ τὴν χάριν τοῦ Θεοῦ): Ido not 
reject the graceof God. ΑΒῚ should be doing, 
if, instead of resting with “glorified” 
(1 Pet. i. 8) satisfaction in the fatherly love 
and complacency with which God regards 
me in Christ, I began to give anxious heed 
to what the Law prescribes touching things 
or persone clean or unclean, and to deem it 
possible and needful to secure acceptable- 
ness with God through works of ceremonial 
performance. If it were only for one single 
reason alone, I do net, I cannot, thus slight 
and get at nought fhe state of grace with all 
its attendant blessings into which God has 
in Christ Jesus brought me. The “grace 
of God” presents that entire notion of the 
kingdom of grace which the apostle sets 
forth, and on which he descants with such 
glowing animation, in the fifth chapter of 
his Epistle to the Romans. The term of 
itself stands in vivid contrast to that 
slavish, anxious, never assured working for 
acceptance, which characterized the Jewish 
legalist, and characterizes the legalist 
Christian as well. As the apostle does 
not write ἐγὼ οὐκ ἀθετῶ, which would mean, 
“1 do not set aside, not I,” he is not to be 
read as if just now emphasizing a personal 
contrast between himself, and either St. 
Peter or the Judaizers with whom St. Peter 
was then to outward appearance taking 
sides; heisat present simply winding up his 
recital of hia remonstrance at Antioch with 
the one terse argument, with which he then 
justified his own position, and, as if with a 
sledge-hammer, at once demolished the 
position of the Judaizers. The verb ἀθετῶ 
means “reject,” “turn from as from a thing 
unworthy of vegard;” as in Mark vii. 9, 
“Yo reject the commandment of God, that 
ye may keep your tradition ;” Luke vii. 30, 
“The Pharisces and lawyers rejected for 
themselves the counsel of God;” 1 Thess. 
iv. 8, “He that rejecteth [our testimon 
touching this], rejecteth not man, but God;” 
Heb. x. 28, “ A man that hath set at nought 
Moses’ Law;” in which last passage it 
indicates, but without itself fully desorib- 
ing, ἃ more aggressive disobedience. The 
rendering “made void,” adopted by the 
Revisers, in the sense of “disannul,” is 
doubtless fully authenticated by ch. iii. 15; 
1 Tim. v. 12; Heb. ix. 18. Since even an 
apostle could not “ disannul” the “grace of 
God” viewed in itsvlf, this sense of the 
word, if adopted, would, as well as the per- 
haps questionable rendering of our Autho- 
rized Version, “frustrate,” apply to the 
previous work of Divine grace wrought 


upon the apostle’sown soul. But the logical 
connection of the following clause is more 
easily shown by our reverting to the sense 
before given to the verb, which in the New 
Testament is the more usual one. For if 
righteousness come by the Law, then Christ 
is dead in vain (εἰ γὰρ διὰ νόμον δικαιο- 
σύνη, ἄρα Χριστὸς δωρεὰν ἀπέθανεν); for if 
through the Law is righteousness, then did 
Christ for nought die. This one reason is 
decisive. The sole reason why the Son of 
God came into the world to suffer death 
was to do away our sins and make us 
righteous with God. But if sin can be 
purged by the purifications of the Law, and 
cleanness before God is procurable by 
Levitical ceremonies, then there was no necd 
for this; then the Crucifixion, for this one 
end ordained and from the beginning of 
time prepared for by the Father, and for 
this one end, of his own free choice gone 
forward to, brought about, and undergone 
by Christ himself, was a simply superfluous 
sacrifice. We might have been saved, nay, 
have perchance saved ourselves, without it. 
It is impossible to find in all Scripture a 
more decisive passage than this in proof 
both of the fact of the atonement and of 18 
supreme importance in the Christian system. 
This is emphatically Christ's great work. 
Compared with this, all besides is either 
subsidiary or derivative. δωρεάν, (as. 8 
mere gift,) “for nought;” that is, with- 
out cause, there being nocall or just occa- 
sion for it; thus, John xv. 25, “They hated 
me without cause;” 1 Sam. xix, 5, Septua- 
gint, “Slay David without a cause ;” Lzek. 
vi. 10, Septuagint, “I have not said tn vain 
that I would do this evil unto them;” Ecclus. 
xxix. 6, “He hath got him an enemy with- 
out cause.” Tho apostle adds nothing as 
to the effect of his remonstrance. It is 
impossible, however, to doubt that, so in- 
stinct as it was with the power of the Holy 
Spirit, it proved successful, not only in the 
healing of the mischief which had begun to 
show itself in the Antiochian Church, but 
also in its effect upon St. Peter. Nothing 
has transpired of any later intercourse 
between the two apostles. But the thorough 
honesty which in the main was one of St. 
Peter’s great characteristics, notwithatand- 
ing the perplexed action in which from time 
to time he got involved, through the warmth 
of his sympathetic affections and his some- 
times too hasty impulsiveness, would be 
sure to make him pre-eminently tractable to 
the voice of a true-speaking and holy friend ; 
and, moreover, in the present instance, St. 
Paul was appealing to sentiments which he 
had himself recently proved at Jerusalem 
to be deeply operative in his own bosom. 
How deeply operative, is further evinced 
in hie own two Epistles, written some eight 


cu. τι. 1—21.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 91 


or ten years Jater than this Epistle, and 
addressed also in part to the same Galatian 
Churches; in which he not only weaves 
into his language not a few expressions and 
turns of thought which have all the appear- 
ance of being borrowed from Epistles of St. 
Paul, but also in the second of them makes 
direct mention of those Epistles, speaking 
of them as standing on the footing of “the 
other Scriptures,” and of their author as 
* our beloved brother Paul; ᾿" notwithstand- 
ing that one of those very writings contains 
the extremely plain-spoken account of that 
ead fall of his at Antioch, which we have 
here been considering. (On St. Paul’s later 
relations with St. Burnabas, see above on 
ver, 13.) 


AppirionaL Nore. 


Ver. 12.— The Judaism of the earliest 
Pentecostal Church not rabbinical. Any 
one who will be at the pains of reviewing 
the contents of the four Gospels with au eye 
to this particular subject, cannot fail to be 
struck by the frequency with which Christ 
in his own conduct placed himself in even 
the sharpea} antagonism to the “ traditions 
of the eldezs,” and encouraged his disciplee 
in likewise setting them at nought. And 
tbis he did in cases in which the contrast 
of his behaviour to the abject submissivn to 
vhose traditions paraded by the Pharisees 
must have been most striking, and have 
jarred, no doubt, very often even painfully, 
upon the ill-inatructed religious sensibilities 
of those, who had grown up in the belief 
that to observe the traditions was both 
scemly and pious and to neglect them 
unseemly and schismatical. For example, 
in daily life, neither he nor his disciples 
would “baptize” themselves when coming 
home from the market, nor even apply 
lustral water to their hands before taking a 
meal, though there before their eyes stood 
the vessels filled with water which had been 
provided for the guests and which the other 
guests were punctual in using. It was not 
without significance that in his first miracle 
he withdrew the water which had been set 
apart for such lustrations from one use of it 
which he would pronounce to be utterly 
frivolous and vain, to apply it to one which 
should really be serviceable and beneficent. 
Again, many were the restrictions which 
the traditions imposed upon men’s actions 
on the sabbath—restrictions which not only 
were additional to those enjoined by the 
Law, but aleo in many cases contravened 
the calls of mercy and benevolence. Such 
restrictions Christ very frequently, and in 
the most public and pointed manner, 80 as 
to directly chullenge attention to what he 
did, broke through, and taught his disciples 


to disregard; the Pharisees being repeatedly 
ΒΟ enraged at these transgressions of the 
traditions [88 to endeavour in consequence 
to take his life. The fastings enjoined by 
the traditions, he and his disciples likewise 
offended the Pharisees by taking no account 
of. The traditions of especially one popular 
echool of teaching allowed so great a facility 
of divorce as served to disguisy a frightful 
excess of licentiousness, in which many of 
the Pharisees were themselves implicated ; 
in opposition to which Christ was wont 
publicly to declare that connections formed 
after divorces not justified by adultery were 
themselves adulterous. Continually was the 
Lord warning his followers against the 
leaven of Pharisaism, to wit, its ostenta- 
tion in religious observances ; its laying so 
much stress upon the outward act, in neglect 
of the inward motive and the posture of the 
spirit; its draining away the forces of morat 
earnestness from the prosecution of justice, 
mercy, and truth, to squander them upon 
scrupulous and vigilant devotion to the 
veriest trifles of formalism; the consequent 
hollowness and hypocrisy of the religious 
character of its votaries; their love of 
money; their eagerness for social distinc- 
tion; their cruelty to the poor amid all 
thair ostentatious almsgiving; their hard- 
heartedness to the fallen; their intense, 
devilish hatred of real piety. All the four 
Gospels abound in indications of that anti- 
pathy to Pharisaism and traditionalism 
which Christ both entertained himself and 
was careful to instil into the minds of hia 
disciples. It cannot, therefore, be ques- 
tioned that the disciples who formed the 
first nucleus of the Christian community, 
especially the twelve and the brethren of 
the Lord, were animated by similar senti- 
ments of anti-Pharisaism; and so also the 
Pentecostal Church at Jerusalem as moulded 
under their influence. The Law of Moses, 
no doubt, they continued to obey, as their 
Master had done—the Law of Moses, how- 
ever, as construed in the more humane and 
spiritual sense put upon it by the Sermon on 
the Mount, and not as stiffened and hardened 
into intolerable cruelty by the rabbinism 
which the Pharisees insisted upon. Such, 
we may feel certain, had been the attitude 
of St. Peter’s mind in reference to the Law 
when, years before at Joppa, he had received 
the summons to go &nd visit Cornelius at 
Caesarea, It was with constraint put upon 
his own hitherto cherished tastes that he 
submitted to the call; and wher he entered 
the Gentile’s house, the fibre of Israelitism 
in his soul is seen quivering, shrinking back 
from the step which he was compelled to 
take. “Ye yourselves know,” he said to 
the company of uncircumcised men among 
whom he ‘found himself, “that it is an 


92 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 


(on. 1. 1—21, 


unlawful thing for a man that is a Jew to 
join himself or to come unto one of another 
vation; and yet unto me hath God showed 
that I should not call any man common or 
unclean.” It was painful to him as an 
Israelite and a Mosaist; but God’s declared 
will was leaving him no alternative. Now, 
whence had arisen those feelings of repul- 
sion? Partly it was, no doubt, a kind of 
caste sentiment. It had been then more 
than two thousand years a traditional con- 
sciousness with the Hebrew race that their 
circumcision lifted them to a higher level 
than the rest of mankind stood upon; and 
the persuasion inspired them with a disdain 
of uncircumcised nations, which with the 
most had little or no admixture of really 
religious feeling, being felt by the idolatrous 
Ephraimites as well as by the less unfaith- 
fulchildren of Judah. With the more pious 
members of the nation, this repulsion from 
Gentiles was partly the outcome of their 
sense of the deep degradation, religious and 
moral, in which heathen nations were 
sunk, steeped as they were in idolatry; but 
their sense of this was greatly intensified by 
the moral effect of the separation from other 
nations enforced by the ceremonial law. 
This was effected partly by the distinction 
between clean and unclean animals, which, 
recognized in an elementary degree as early 
as the time of Noah, was made in the 
Levitical legislation a matter of very 
minutely definite prescription (Lev. xi.); 
and partly by the prohibition of eating 
either certain kinds of fat (Lev. iii. 17) or 
blood: to partake either of the flesh of an 
unclean animal, or of suct or blood, was 
emphatically declared by the Law, and by 
the long-inherited tradition of the nation 
had grown to be instinctively felt to be, 
“defilement” and “abomination.” There 
is no ground for supposing that St. Peter’s 
shrinking back from Gentiles as common or 
unclean was caused by rabbinism. Rabbin- 
ism, no doubt, added much to the bitterness 
of the repulsion with those who served the 
traditions; but even where there was no 
bondage owned to the dicta of the elders, 
repulsion from the contact of a Gentile 
was a powerful sentiment, having its roots 
deep in the instinctive sentiments of the 
_ Hebrew race and in the feelings instilled by 
the peremptory enactments of the Divine 


Law. Now, however, in Cornelius’s house, 
St. Peter does not allow his spirit to ba 
dominated by sentiments such as these. 
God and Christ his Master were making 
it manifest, as‘in other ways, so especially 
by the astonishing illapse of the Holy 
Spirit into these believing hearers of the 
gospel message, that they were no longer 
unclean, and therefore he cannot ῬΟΒΒΙΕΙΥ 
any longer treat them as unclean. He 
tarried with them certain days, and, accord- 
ing to the charge immediately after preferred 
against him and not denied, ate with them. 
That he partook of the same food as they, 
whether of a kind forbidden by the Mosaic 
Law or not, is not stated and is no necessary 
inference drawn from the circumstances. He 
would not, we may well believe, scruple now 
to recline at the same table with them; butit 
may be readily imagined that for a guest so 
highly revered, of whose Jewish sensibilities 
respecting food they could not be unaware, 
even if he or the six Jewish brethren who 
accompanied him from Joppa did not make a 
pointofapprising them,the wealthy centurion 
and his family would be only too anxious 
to provide such food as both he and his 
felluw-visitors would find acceptable. Thus 
St. Peter might have “eaten bread” with 
the Gentiles, neither, on the one hand, him- 
self breaking the Levitical Law by partak- 
ing of food which was forbidden to him as a 
child of the legal covenant, nor, on the other, 
declining to recognize the full acceptable- 
ness before God and the equal brotberhood 
in Christ of believers who were still in their 
uncircumcision. The caste feeling of proud 
disdain of uncircumcised men as men of an 
inferior grade, and the dread of ceremonial 
defilement from contact with those who 
were levitically unclean, dared no longer 
assert themselves, could, indeed, no longer 
be permitted to lodge in his bosom, in the 
face of the clear proof which had been 
afforded that the Almighty had in Christ 
adopted them as his own children equally 
with himself. Thus it appears that when 
at Antioch, at the time here referred to by 
St. Paul, Cephas was seen partaking of 
social meals in company with the Gentile 
converts, be was only acting in the same 
way 88 he had acted at Casarea ten years 
before. 


HOMILETICS, 


Vers. 1—5.—The battle of Christian liberty fought over the case of Titus. The apostle 
proceeds to show that, on his subsequent journey to Jerusalem, he maintained his 
independence, and was recognized by the other apostles as possessing equal authority 


with themselves, 


I, His NEXT INTERVIEW WITH THE APOSTLES. “ Then fourteen years after I went up 


cH, 11, 1---21.} THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 93 


again to Jerusalem with Barnabas, and took Titus with me also.” 1. The period of 
this visit. It was fourteen years from the date of his conversion—not from the date of 
his former visit to Jerusalem—for he seems always to view his conversion as the true 
starting-point of his career. The word “again ” does not determine whether he here 
refers to the second or third visit, It was evidently his third visit ; for the second was 
with alms, when he probably saw no apostle, for the gift of the Gentile Churches was sent 
to “the elders,” not the apostles, “by the hands of Barnabas and Saul” (Acts xi, 30). 
There was no need to mention all his visits to Jerusalem, only those which gave him 
opportunities of intercourse with the apostles, This visit, then, was that of Acts xv., 
the period of the council of Jerusalem. 2. His companions on this visit—Barnabas 
and Titus. There was something significant in this companionship, Barnabas, a pure 
Jew, was the companion of the apostle in preaching freedom from the Law. He was 
one of the most beautiful characters in New Testament times, especially distinguished 
by the generosity of his disposition. Titus was a Gentile Christian, not even circum- 
ciscd, and may have been sent to the council as the representative of Gentile Christians. 
The apostle took him there as an illustration of Christian liberty, for the council would 
be obliged to decide whether Titus was to be circumcised or not. Thus the apostle 
manifested the consistency of his doctrine and his practice. This is the first 
mention of Titus in Scripture; for the Galatian Epistle preceded the Second to the 
Corinthians, in which his name occurs in terms of high commendation. 8. The 
interval between his visits to Jerusalem was filled with constant labours as an apostle. 
He was engaged during all this period in independent labours, and therefore before the 
apostles could have had an opportunity of recognizing his work. During this time the 
apostles never thought of calling in question his free gospel. The Acts of the Apostles 
supply the history of his labours during this time (Acts xi. 26; xiii.; xiv. 28). 
4, His journey was taken “by revelation.” According to St. Luke, he was sent by the 
Church at Antioch (Acts xv. 2), and therefore was not summoned by the apostles to 
give an account of his gospel. But the revelation may have suggested the very action 
of the Church at Antioch, or it may, on the other hand, have confirmed it. The apostle 
was in any case assured of Divine guidance at a most critical epoch in Christian 
history. 

Il. Tis BOLD YET PRUDENT EXPOSITION OF HIS GOSPEL. “ And I went up by reve- 
lation, and laid before them that gospel which I preach among the Gentiles, but privately 
to them of reputation, lest by any means I might be running, or have run, in vain.” 
1. His public exposition. (1) It was addressed to the general body of Christians at 
Jerusalem, not to the apostles or elders exclusively ; for he expounded the gospel “ pri- 
vately ” to the apostles. (2) His gospel was that of justification by faith without 
circumcision. (3) It was a gospel which had not changed since the council; for he 
speaks of it as that which “I preach,” not which “I preached.” The conference, there- 
fore, made no change upon it. 2. His private exposition. (1) It was addressed to the 
apostles— to them of reputation,” as Peter, James, and John are called in ver.;9. Not 
so called in any spirit of irony, but because it is as authorities their names came at all 
in question. Besides, one of them, James, was not an apostle. (2) Its object was to 
have ἃ more thorough discussion, with a view to a mutual understanding in the interests 
of peace and the gospel. A private conversation admits of greater freedom and dis- 
cursiveness in dealing with difficult or contested points. The apostle did not seek the 
testimony of men, as if the Word of God could not stand without it; but he knew that 
a cordial understanding with the apostles would add powerfully to the confirmation of 
the faith, If his gospel was approved by apostles, it would be clear of the charge of 
singularity, and would no longer be regarded as an invention of his own. He knew, 
besides, that, if the leading men could be gained over, the multitude would follow. He 
was anxious for the success of the gospel, “lest he should run in vain,” for a misunder- 
standing at that critical moment might involve the loss of his past and future labours, by 
imperilling the free mode of his offering the gospel to the Gentiles. Grave differences 
of judgment among ministers of the gospel compromise alike its authority and its 
practical effect. (3) There is nothing here to justify a secret and underhand policy. 
The Church of Rome points to this case as favouring its doctrine of reserve. It is 
necessary to see, however, the utter groundlessness of this assertion, The apostle did 
not aay one thing in private and another in public, but communicated, as he expressly 


94 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. (ou. τι. 1—21 


says, the same gospel on both occasions. Openly he expounded it to the Christians at 
Jerusalem, but entered into its doctrinal aspects more deeply in private. 

II. Tue apostiu’s victory. “ Titus was not compelled to be circumcised,” Greek 
though he was, 1, The language tmplies that efforts had been made to this end, not 
by the apostles, however, but by “the false brethren.” But these efforts were defeated 
by the council. Had the council been of the opinion of the false brethren, Titus would 
have been compelled to be circumcised. 2. Mark the firmness of the apostle. “ Not 
even Titus”—though he was brought into close contact with the Jews, and might 
therefore have taken a more conciliatory course toward them, especially in the great 
centre of Judaist influence—“ was forced to be circumcised.” If the apostle yielded at 
Jerusalem, he must yield everywhere else, Yet he allowed Timothy to be circumcised 
at Lystra, but that was a case of deference to the scruples of weak brethren, For the 
sake of gaining souls he will renounce liberty. But he will not allow the truth of 
the gospel to be sacrificed by men who say that circumcision is necessary to salvation, 
3. Mark the ground of the apostle’s firmness. ‘And this, because of false brethren 
insidiously brought in, who came in privily to spy out our liberty which we have in 
’ Christ, that they might bring us into bondage.” ‘That is, he resisted the circumcision 
of Titus, because the false brethren would have taken advantage of the concession to 
bring the Gentiles into bondage to legal ceremonies. (1) Who were the false brethren 3 
They were persons at Jerusalem, not at Antioch (2 Cor. xi. 26). They were brethren 
only by profession, and therefore more dangerous than open enemies. ‘ Pharisees at 
heart, these spies and traitors assume the name and garb of believers.” The apostles 
did not coincide with them. They must have been Judaizers, Yet all Judaizers were 
not necessarily false brethren; but these were Christians only in profession. (2) Their 
furtive attitude. They were “ brought in insidiously,” either into the ministry or into 
the membership of the Church. They had a standing somehow that entitled them to 
influence the usage or doctrine of the Church. False teachers always enter the Church 
in disguise (2 Pet. ii. 1). “These hell-scouts are skulking in every corner ” (Trapp). 
The policy of such persons has nothing of Christian simplicity in it. (8) Their design. 
“To spy out our liberty which we have in Christ.” Their work was “ inspection for 
a sinister purpose.” An impure intention was at the bottom of the movement. The 
liberty they threatened to destroy was not spiritual liberty in general, but that which 
was compromised by the demand of subjection to the ceremonial law. The liberty 
of believers was a present possession enjoyed by virtue of their union with Christ, 
4, The result of the apostle’s firmness. “To whom we gave place by subjection, no, 
not for an hour.” If he had doneit once, Christian liberty would have been sacrificed. 
The characteristic truth of the gospel—justification by faith without the deeds of the 
Law—was now safe. It was to “remain steadfast” with the Gentiles, Thus truth 
and freedom were henceforth to go together. 


Vers. 6—9.— The apostle takes counsel with the other apostles on perfectly equal terms, 
He is still asserting his apostolic independence. 

1. His REBUKE OF THOSE WHO LEANED UPON AUTHORITY. “ Those high in reputation ; 
whatsoever they were, it maketh no difference to me: God respecteth no man’s person.” 
The apostle does not mean to disparage either the reputation or the authority of the 
other apostles. It was not his interest to do so, because it was important for him to 
show that he was even acknowledged by them. But the false brethren had unduly 
exalted the authority of the “ pillar apostles,” so as to establish a sort of papacy in 
the Church, He was, therefore, led to show that, in matters of faith, the authority 
of individuals has no weight; that we are bound to lean upon God, not upon men, even 
though they be persons of position and respectability. “God accepteth no man’s person.” 
He may employ whom he pleases to carry out his work, and can qualify them fully 
for the purpose. The Galatians were “ respecters of persons,” inasmuch as they depre- 
ciated the apogtle, because the twelve were apostles before him and enjoyed the peculiar 
privilege of personal intercourse with the Lord on earth. The apostle declares, in fact, 
that God did not prefer James, or Cephas, or John to him, much less employ them to 
appoint him to apostolic office. 

11. THE APOSTLES ADDED NOTHING TO HIS INFORMATION OR AUTHORITY BY THEIB 
ACTION ΑἹ THE CONFERENCE. “ They who seemed to be somewhat added nothing to me.’ 


on. τι. 1—21.] THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 98 


He got nothing from them; they added nothing to his knowledge of the gospel: he 
received no new instructions; they were perfectly independent one of another. They 
did not interfere with the course he had hitherto pursued, much less question its 
rightness. 

Til. THe aposT.Es, ON THE CONTRARY, PRACTICALLY APPROVED HIS course. “But 
contrariwise, when they saw that 1 was entrusted with the gospel of the uncircumcision, 
as the gospel of the circumcision was to Peter... they gave to me and Barnabas the 
right hands of fellowship.” 1. They acknowledged his perfect equality with Peter. 
(1) As to apostolic commission. ‘“ When they saw that I was entrusted with the 
gospel of the uncircumcision, as the gospel of the circumcision was to Peter.” These 
words suggest: (a) That the gospel is a solemn trust. There are many human trusts 
from which men naturally shrink because of the risk, labour, and anxiety involved in 
their faithful discharge. Yet the apostle thanked God that the weightiest of all 
trusts had been committed to him who was “a blasphemer, a persecutor, and injurious ” 
(1 Tim. i. 13). Still he could say, “ Who is sufficient for these things?” (δ) The 
gospel is one, though it may be addressed to different circles of hearers. It is not 
implied in the apostle’s language that there were two separate gospels—one for the Jews, 
and another for the Gentiles; for both Peter and Paul, as we know by their discourses 
and their Epistles, were in complete harmony as to the way ofa sinner’s salvation. 

c) The gospel was committed to Paul, not by Peter or any other apostle, but by 
himself. (2) As to apostolic success. ‘For he that wrought effectually for Peter 
toward the apostleship of the circumcision, the same wrought for me toward the 
Gentiles.” (a) The equal success of the two apostles, The false brethren boasted 
that Peter’s gospel was most effectual in conversions, and that he himself was a 
mighty worker of miracles, The success of Paul was equally manifest. (6) The 
true source of succcss in both cases was God himself, who worked mightily in the 
two apostles (Phil. ii. 13; 1 Cor. xii. 6). All gifts, all adaptation, all power, come 
from him. Thus Divine appointment was signified equally in both cases by the 
effectual working of God. 2. The apostles acknowledged his official status and prerogative 
by giving him the right hand of fellowship in respect of future labours, “ But when 
James, Cephas, and John, who have the reputation of being pillars, became aware of 
the grace that was given to me, they gave to me and Barnabas the right hands of 
fellowship, that we should go to the heathen and they to the circumcision.” They 
recognized him as a fellow-labourer, “for the grace given to him,” both in respect to his 
success and his calling by grace to the apostleship. (1) Mark the wisdom of a division 
of labour, They made a sort of convention as to the limits of their future labours— 
a convention, however, which could not always be very strictly observed. Paul was, 
no doubt, mainly concerned with the Gentiles, but usually preached first to the Jews 
in all places that he visited. Peter and John resided in their later years among the 
Gentiles. But it was an arrangement, notwithstanding, that was well calculated to 
romote the growth of Christianity at a time of great friction between the Jewish and 
Gentile elements in the Christian Church. Peter could not have been universal bishop 
or pope, if he was the apostle of the circumcision ; for he practically conceded to Paul 
the apostolate of the largest part of the world—the Gentile nations. (2) The tmportant 
bearing of this convention upon the position and authority of the apostle. Those who 
so frankly entered into this arrangement “had the reputation of being pillars in the 
Church.” They were so regarded even by the “false brethren ” and the Judaists 
everywhere. Their act was therefore calculated to cut the ground from under the feet 
of the disaffected, who would see in it an approval of Paul’s gospel. (a) The apostle 
does not call the three pillars apostles, but “ those in reputation,” for one of them, 
James the Lord’s brother, was not an apostle. ® Peter was not head of the Church, 
for he received exactly the same commission as Paul. Even James is mentioned here 
before Peter, evidently because of his permanent connection with the great centre of 
Jewish Christianity. It was very important for Paul to be able to quote James on his 
side, (6) The gospel does not stand upon the authority of one apostle, any more than 
of twelve. It is the gospel of God. (d) The conduct of the apostles in this whole 
transaction is worthy of general imitation. They first examined Paul’s doctrine and 
listened with candour to his explanations, and then gave up their particular opinions 
when they became convinced of his Divine commission. 


96 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. {ox. m1, 1—21 


Ver. 10.—The claims of the saints in Jerusalem. ‘Only they asked us that wa 
should remember the poor; which very thing I also was forward to do.” While they 
gave us the right hand of fellowship that we should go to the Gentiles, there was an 
agreement that we should remember the poor of the circumcision. 

I, W#o weRE THE POOR? They were the poor saints in Judea, not in Jerusalem 
merely (1 Cor. xvi. 1). Their poverty arose, probably, from “the spoiling of their 
goods,” so familiar in persecuting periods, as well as, perhaps, from forfeiting business 
relations with their own countrymen, 

II, A COMMON AGREEMENT TO REMEMBER THEM. 1. Itis agreeable to mark this unity 
of feeling in the midst of controversy. 2. There ought to be no division with regard to 
the poor. The dictates of humanity, the demands of duty, the claims of interest, alike 
enforce a due consideration of the poor, but especially of those who belong to the 
household of faith. 3. 44 common object of charity ought to have a uniting effect on 
people separated by other interests or opinions. 

IIT. THe APosTLE’s SPECIAL ANXIETY ON THEIR BEHALF. 1. He would naturally 
desire to conciliate the Jews and destroy their anti-Gentile prejudices, 2. Yet his 
liberality was no token of dependence upon Jerusalem. 3. The prospect of ingratitude 
from the Jews would have no effect in repressing his charitable zeal on their behalf. 4." 
The apostle was more forward on their behalf than any other apostle. How he fulfilled 
the engagement is abundantly manifest (1 Cor. xvi. 1; 2 Cor. viii.; Rom. xv. 26). 


Vers. 11—14.— The apostle’s rebuke of Peter at Antioch. There is no record of this 
scene elsewhere in Scripture. It is a further proof of the apostle’s independence as 
well as of his devotion to Christian liberty. 

1. ConsiperR THE conpUcT oF PETER. 1, The scene of this interview between Peter 
and Paul—Antioch. It was a city on the Orontes, in Syria, the scat of the Macedonian 
empire in Asia, chiefly inhabited by Greeks, liberalized in thought by considerable 
culture, It was the second capital of Christianity, Jerusalem being the first, and held a 
prominent place as the centre of Gentile Christian life. What occurred here would have 
wide results. 2. Thetime. It occurred probably during the sojourn of Paul and Barnabas 
at Antioch, after the council of Jerusalem had settled the whole question of the relation 
between Jewish and Gentile Christians (Acts xv. 30—40). Peter’s conduct was, 
therefore, all the more singular and indefensible, because it was so necessary to secure 
Christian liberty on the basis of the decrees. We cannot forget that, long before, the 
vision from heaven showed him the worthlessness ef Jewish traditions (Acts x. 27). 
3. The circumstances. “Before that certain came from James, he was eating with the 
Gentiles; but when they were come, he withdrew and separated himself, fearing them 
of the circumcision.” ‘Those who came from James were not false brethren, nor even 
necessarily Judaic zealots, but certain persons whom he sent to Antioch, not to impose 
a yoke of ceremonies on the Gentiles, but to reassure Jewish Christians as to their 
right to observe the divinely appointed usages of their fathers, which the decrees of the 
Jerusalem council had done nothing to overthrow. The conduct of James was perfectly 
legitimate. Yet it is probable they pleaded that there was no warrant in the decision 
of the council for the freer intercourse with Gentile Christians which Peter had been 
practising. The Jewish Christians were still to “keep the customs,” and not to mix 
freely with the Gentiles (Acts xv. 19). When these persons came to Antioch, they found 
Peter eating with Gentiles as he had done before (Acts x.), disregarding the isolation 
established by Levitical laws. They found him, in fact, living as a Gentile, not as a 
Jew. Peter at once, through the influence of fear—probably the fear of losing his 
influence with the Jewish Christians—began to withdraw himself from the Gentiles, 
discontinuing his eating with them, without giving one word of explanation, and 
attaching himself to the Jewish Christians, as if the old distinctions of meats were still 
in force and still sacred in his eyes. It is not said that the “ certain from James” 
reproached him with his laxity. It may have been, after all, an empty fear on his part, 
Yet it was a most extraordinary act of tergiversation on the part of one of the “ pillars ἢ 
of the Church. 4. Its effects upon both Jews and Gentiles at Antioch. It involved the 
Jewish Christians in the hyprocrisy of Peter himself. “ And the other Jews dissembled 
likewise with him ”—even those very persons who rejoiced at the decision of the 
couneil (Acts xy. 31). The Jewish converts might-be tempted to believe that the 


on, 11. 1.--:λ 1 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 7 


Mosaic Law was still in force. ‘ Even Barnabas was also carried away with their dis- 
simulation.” “Even Barnabas ”—my fellow-labourer in missionary work, “a good man, 
full of the Holy Ghost and of faith,” who once fought by my side the battle of Gentile 
liberty (Acts xv.), who had hazarded his life by my side (Acts xv. 16)—“ was carried 
away” by the force of such a formidable example in opposition to his own judgment 
and conviction. This incident probably led to the separation of Barnabas from Paul 

' (Acts xv. 39), for they never after appear together, though the affectionate relationship 
between the friends was never broken. But the effect upon the Gentile Christians at 
Antioch must have been something almost inconceivable. They would no more meet 
with their Jewish brethren at the Lord’s Table. ‘lhey were treated as unclean. Peter’s 
conduet virtually condemned their liberty, and was an indirect attempt to bring them 
under the yoke of Jewish usages. ‘“ Why,” says Paul, “compellest thou the Gentiles to 
live as do the Jews?” The compulsion was exercised by the authority of bis example ; 
for the Gentile Christians could not know of his dissimulation, but would rather think 
he had changed his opinion upon the subject of the relation of the Gentiles to the gospel. 
5. The true character of Peter’s action, It was hypocrisy; for he acted against his 
better convictions, as if it were really wrong to eat with Gentiles. He concealed his real 
convictions, No voice had been louder at the council in protesting against the imposi- 
tion of a yoke which “neither we nor our fathers were able to bear.” He certainly did 
not “ walk uprightly.” 6. Its true explanation. This is to be found in Peter’s 
character, which was one of unusual strength and of unusual weakness. He was that 
apostle who was the first to recognize and the first to draw back from great principles. 
He was the first to confess Christ and the first to deny him; the first to own Gentile 
liberty, the first to disown it. ‘* The fear of man is often as authoritative as papal bulls 
and decrees.” 

II. Tue reBUKE or PavL. “I withstood him to the face, because he was condemned.” 
There was no controversy between the two apostles; there was no difference of 
opinion; it was only a case of indecision in acting up to one’s unchanged convictions. 
Peter was self-condemned, for his conduct bore the broad mark of inconsistency. 1. The 
rebuke was public. Such as sin openly should be rebuked openly. It is a necessary 
and difficult and much-neglected duty, and ought always to be discharged in a loving 
temper, without vanity or haughtiness. Here it was administered before the assembled 
Church at Antioch, Jews and Gentiles ; otherwise it would have failed to influence the 
Jewish converts. Its publicity was necessary, as it was essential in the circumstances to 
establish fixed principles for all coming time. 2. The rebuke was fully justified. (1) 
Peter was condemned by his own act. (2) The rebuke would prevent the Zealots from 
being hardened and confirmed in their error. The Judaists would be allowed to receive 
no encouragement from Peter’s tergiversation. (3) The Galatians would receive a new 
lesson as to the relation of the gospel to the Law. They would be made to see what it 
was “to walk uprightly according to the truth of the gospel.” 3. 1ὲ was meekly and 
piously received. ‘Vhere is no record of Peter’s answer. But there was no sharp con- 
tention between the apostles. It is pleasing to think that the rebuke did not sunder 
the friendship of the two good men. Years after Peter speaks of his rebuker as “ our 
beloved brother Paul also” (2 Pet. iii, 15). 4. The rebuke proves at least that Paul was 
on an equality with Peter. If the rebuke had been administered by Peter to Paul, 
bow we should have heard of Peter’s primacy! Yet nothing said by Paul affects in the 
least the apostolic authority and dignity of Peter. It was not a case of error in doctrine, 
but of inconsistency in conduct. “ Ministers may err and sin; follow them no further 
than they follow Christ.” 


Vers. 15, 16.—The true way of salvation. The apostle then proceeds to show that 
the way of salvation is not by the works of the Law at all, but in a quite different way. 
His words to Peter imply— 

J, THE NECESSITY OF JUSTIFICATION FOR BOTH JEWS AND GENTILES. “ We being Jews 
by nature, and not sinners from among the Gentiles.” He tells the Judaists the Jews 
had some advantage over the Gentiles. Yet, after all, the Jews themselves, such as Paul 
and Peter, were obliged to renounce trust in Judaism and to find their justification in 
Christ Jesus. The apostle shows the necessity of justification elsewhere in the case of 
both Jews and Gentiles (Rom. i.,ii.. ‘All the world is found guilty before God ” 

a 


GALARIANS, 


98 TNE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, (on. m. 1-21. 


(Rom, fii. 19). The charge is abundantly proved, and the sentence has gorie forth: 
“ Qursed is every one that continueth not in all things written in the book of the Law. 
to do them ” (ch. iii. 10). 

JI, Tue NATURE or susTIFIcATION. ‘ Knowing that a man is not justified by the 
works of the Law, but by the faith of Christ.” Its meaning is to declare a person to be 
jase It does not mean either to pardon or to make just. It is a strictly judicial act. 
Newman admits that it signifies, not “to make righteous,” but “to pronounce righteous; ἢ 
yet he says it includes the “ making righteous” under its meaning. That is, the sense 
of the term is counting righteous, but the sense of the thing is “ making righteous.” 
This is to make nonsense of Janguage, To say that it means * making righteous ” is to 
make justification and sanctification the same thing. This Romish divines actually 
do; yet they regard sanctification, that is, infused or inherent righteousness, as the 
ground of justification. That is, sanctification is at once a part of justification and the 
ground of it. Cana thing be at once part of a thing, and at the same time the ground 
of a thing? The meaniug of the term “justification” is fixed by its opposite, “ con- 
demnation,” which is, not to make wicked, but to pronounce guilty. “He that 
justifieth the wicked, and he that condemneth the just, even they both are abomination 
to the Lord” (Prov. xvii. 15), “If there be a controversy between men, and they come 
unto judgment, that the judge may judge them ; then they shall justify the righteous, 
and condemn the wicked ” (Deut. xxv. 1). “The judgment was by one to condem- 
nation, but the free gift is of many offences unto justification of life” (Rom. v. 16). 
The term is thus forensic. Justification includes more than pardon, because: 1. The 
very terms imply a difference. "10 pardon is to waive the execution of the penal 
sanction of the Law. ‘To justify is to declare that the demands of the Law are satisfied, 
not waived. Pardon is a sovereign act; justification, a judicial act, 2. Pardon is 
remission of penalty, in the absence of a satisfaction. It is not an act of justice. But 
justification proceeds on the ground of a satisfaction. One is the remission of punish- 
ment; the other is a declaration that there is no ground for the infliction of punishment. 
8, The apostle speaks of “the blessedness of the man to whom the Lord imputeth right- 
eousness without works” (Rom. iv. 6). To impute righteousness is to justify. To 
pardon ἃ man is not to ascribe righteousness to him. 4. The terms of Scripture require 
this distinction. It would be unmeaning to say, “No flesh shall be pardoned by the 
works of the Law.” Justification includes both pardon and acceptance with God. It 
includes a title to eternal life, and therefore is called “ justification of life,” and on account 
of it men are made heirs according to the hope of eternal life (Titus iii. 7). This is the 
“true grace of God in which we stand.” God does more than pardon; he “imputeth 
righteousness without works.”’ Christ is made “ the righteousness of God” tous. We 
are “accepted in the Beloved.” Yet the pardon and the acceptance are never sepa- 
rated. All who are pardoned are justified, and all who are justified are pardoned. 

III, Tue @rounp or sustiricaTion. “ A man is not justified by the works of the 
Law, but by the faith of Christ.” 1, It is not by the works of the Lau. (1) Of what 
Law? It is not the mere ceremonial law, though that was here prominently in question. 
(a) It is the whole Law—the Law in the sense in which the apostle’s readers would 
understand it, that Law whose violation brings in the whole world guilty before God 
(Rom. iii. 19). (6) The apostle never contrasts the works of the ceremonial with the 
works of the moral law, as if to imply that we cannot be justified by the first class, 
but may by the second. The opposition is always between works in general and faith. 
(c) He excludes as inadequate to our justification those very “ works of righteousness ” 
(Titus iii, 5), that is, according to Romish theology, works done after regeneration, 
which may be regarded as possessing the highest order of excellence. He even 
excludes the works of a good man like Abraham, the father of the faithful (Rom. 
iv. 2), (d) The objection of Rom. vi. 1, that if works are not the ground of our 
justification, we may live in sin, supposes that good works of every sort are excluded 
from the ground of our justification. (2) The works, then, of the whole Law of God are 
excluded. Because Scripture repeatedly asserts the fact. We are not justified “by our 
own righteousness, which is of the Law” (Phil. iii. 9). _(@) The Law demands perfect 
obedience, and no obedience at one time can atone for disobedience at another &. iii, 
10, 21; v. 8). (Ὁ) If we are justified by works, Christ is dead in vain. There was no need 
for his death (ch. ii, 21; v.4), (c) Our salvation would not in that case be af grace, 


ou, τι. 1—21.] THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 69 


but of debt (Rom, xi. 6), (d) It would give room for boasting, which is excluded by 
the law of faith (Rom. 111. 27). 2. Our justification ts by the faith of Christ. There 
are two facts here set furth—faith and the object of faith, ‘The faith that justifies 
is distinguished by its object, Jesus Christ, The two prepositions (ἐκ and διὰ), used in the 
passage are designed to mark, respectively, source or cause and instrument. (1) Con- 
sider the relation of faith to our justification. Strictly speaking, Scripture never says 
that faith justifies, but that we are justified by faith, (a) Faith is not the ground of 
our justification. Yet it is said, “ Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him 
for (eis) righteousness” (Rom. iv, 8), This does not mean that faith is the graciously 
admitted ground of justification. For: (a) We are never said to be justified on acconnt 
of faith (διὰ πίστιν), but through (διὰ) faith or of (ἐκ) faith. (8) This view of the 
relation of faith to justification is not consistent with those passages which affirm that 
the ground of our justification is not anything in us or done by us; for faith is a work 
done by us, quite as much as prayer or repentance. (y) It is not consistent with 
those passages which make Christ’s merits, his blood, his death, his cross, the ground 
of our acceptance. Faith cannot, therefore, be at once the ground and the instrument 
of our justification. (5) We are saved by the righteousness of another, but that right- 
eousness is always distinguished from the faith that apprehends it (Rom, i. 17; Phil. 
11, 8—11). Faith cannot, therefore, both be and not be that righteousness, (ε) The 
apostle, when he says that Abraham’s faith “was counted to him for (εἰς) righteousness ” 
or “ as righteousness,” meant merely to say that faith, not works, secured his salvation, 
The word eis is used in two senses—“ instead of” and “ with a view to,” and Ellicott is 
of opinion that the idea of destination is here blended with that of simple predication. 
Thus if Abraham’s faith is equivalent to righteousness in God’s account, it is because 
it is designed to secure that righteousness. “It was not the act of believing which 
was reckoned to him as a righteous act, or on account of which perfect righteousness 
was laid to his charge, but the fact of his trusting God to perform his promise introduced 
him to the blessing promised ” (Alford). (Ὁ) Faith is not the ground, but the instrument 
of our justification. It receives and apprehends Christ in his righteousness, We have 
proved that faith is merely the instrument of our justification when we have proved 
that the only ground of our acceptance with God is the finished work of Christ, and that 
the only grace by which we rely upon that work is faith. For there is a relation between 
justification and faith which does not exist between justification and every other grace. 
(2) Consider Jesus Christ as the object of faith. The Saviour appears in this passage 
under thres names—Jesus Christ, Christ Jesus, and Christ; as if the apostle meant to 
emphasize at one time the loving humanity, at another the official work, at another 
simply the Saviour in whom Jew and Gentile alike have their meeting-place. The 
“faith of Christ ” includes a reference alike to his person and his work. The emphatic 

hrase, “we believed upon Christ,” shows that faith is not a mere intellectual belief, 

ut an act of trust, in which tne soul goes out to him as at once “ Wisdom, Right- 
eousness, Sanctification, and Redemption,” 

IV. THE KNOWLEDGE oF OUR JUSTIFICATION. ‘ Knowing that weare justified.” There 
is a twofold aspect of this knowledge. It is: 1, Doctrinal. The apostles, both Peter 
and Paul, understood the true doctrine of a sinner’s justification, as we see by their 
discourses and their writings. 2. Haxperimental. They realized it in its blessed fruits, 
hey had an assured sense of God’s favour, and of all the blessings involved in it. 

v. THE EFFECT OF OUR JUSTIFICATION. The only effect pertinent to the present 
discussion was the new relation of the justified sinner to the Law. In virtue of his 
union with Christ, he died to the Law. ‘lhere was, therefore, no longer any question of 
his submission to legal observances, or to “the beggarly elements” of a forsaken 


Judaism, 


Vers. 17—19.—An objection met. “For if, while we are seeking to be justified in 
Christ ”—our union with Christ being the spring and fount of all our blessings —‘ we 
ourselves also ”—-as well as these Galatians who are sinners and Gentiles—“ were found 
to be sinners, is Christ a minister of sin? God forbid!” 

I. TRE TRUE ATTITUDE OF ALL JUSTIFIED PERSONS IN RELATION TO SIN AND CHRIET, 
1. renounce all legal righteousness, such as the Judaists boast of, and reduce 
themselves to the level of Gentile “ainnera.” There ia no difference between Jew and 


ie 


100 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. foit. 11. 121. 


Gentile at the first point of contact between the soul and the Saviour. They are alike 
guilty before God. 2. They look for justification only in Christ. They-are pronounced 
just by God because they arein Christ. 3. Because the Jewish Christians, in renounc- 
ang the Law, reduced themselves to the level of sinners like the Gentiles, Christ did not 
therefore become a minister of sin, because that renunciation was carried out under his 
authority. Yet Peter seemed to say by his conduct that the renunciation was altogether 
wrong, 

II, THE mNconsisTeNcy or Peter's conpuct. “ For if I build again ”—as you, Peter, 
are proposing —“ the very things which I destroyed, I am proving myself a transgressor.” 
Because the work of legal reconstruction would imply that my work of demolition was 
wrong. You, Peter, prove by your conduct that your former setting aside of the Law 
was 8 transgression. 

III. Tae Law was ITSELF DESIGNED TO MAKE WAY FOR SOMETHING BETTER THAN 
ItsELF. “ For I through the Law died to the Law, that I might live untoGod.” 1. The 
apostle’s death to the Law. “Idied to the Law.” The Law in question is the Mosaic Law. 
The apostle’s readers could understand it in no other sense. This death came through 
“the body of Christ.” ‘Ye also became dead to the Law by the body of Christ ” 
(Rom. vii. 4). He bore its penalty, and was therefore no more under its curse; and 
therefore, as “1 have been crucified with him ” (ver. 20), so that his death is my death, 
I died to the Lawin him. 2. The Law itself led directly to that death. “41 through 
the Law died to the Law.” Not merely because it was a schoolmaster to lead me to 
Christ or manifested its own helplessness to justify, but because it was through the 
Law that sin wrought death in me (Rom. vii. 8). The Law took action upon me as 
a sinner. It wrought its will upon Christ when it seized him and put him to death. 
But in that death the Law lost its dominion over him, and therefore over us. Thus 
Christ is shown to be the “end of the Law for righteousness.” Thus the apostle might 
say to Peter that “in abandoning the Law he did but follow the ieading of the Law 
itself.” 3. Death to the Law is followed by life to God as tts great purpose. “I 
died to the Law that I might live unto God.” It is suggestive that this was the very 
end of Christ’s death. ‘“ For in that he died, he died unto sin once; in that he liveth, he 
liveth unto God ” (Rom. vi. 10). We are, therefore, to reckon ourselves “alive unto God 
through Jesus Christ our Lord.” This death to the Law does not involve iawlessness 
or freedom from moral restraints; for in its very nature it involves ‘death ” to that 
sin, which is the strength of the Law. As we live in Christ, and Christ lives in God, 
cur life is wrapped up in God. Therefore we cannot “serve him any longer in the 
oldness of the letter, but in the newness of the Spirit ”—“‘in the newness of life; ἢ 
“ bringing forth fruit unto God.” 


Ver. 20.—Fellowship with Christ in his death and in his life. “ I have been crucified : 
nevertheless I live; yet not I, but Christ liveth in me.” The apostle is showing how 
he died to the Law and became released from legal bondage ; it was through his becom- 
ing a partaker of the death of Christ. 

1. FELLOWSHIP WITH CHRIST IN HIS DEATH. “I have been crucified with Christ.” 
1. Here ts a true identity of position. I was one with him under Law and in suffering 
and death, so that when he died I died with him. I died in him when he died as my 
surety, satisfying Divine justice for me. ‘Thus baptism for me signifies “ baptism 
unto his death” (Rom. vi. 4); “We are buried with him in baptism unto death.” 
We are “planted in the likeness of his death.” All this purports the interest of the 
believer in the merit of Christ’s death. 2. It is a position tnvolving a threefold change 
of relation. (1) “ As crucified with Christ,’ I become dead to the Law, so that the 
Law shall no more become “an occasion of sin” (Rom. vii. 5,6). (2) I become dead 
unto sin, and therefore no more the servant of sin (Rom, vi. 6—16). (3) I become 
dead to the world, and the world to me (ck. vi. 14), 

11. FeLLowsuip WITH Curist IN Η1Β LIFE. “ Nevertheless I live; yet not I, but 
Christ liveth in me.” This a mystery to the world. The apostle is dcad and is yet 
alive. 1. Our death with Christ involves our life with him. “ If we died with Christ, 
we believe that we shall also live with him ” (Rom. vi. 8). It is thus we realize “ the 
power of his resurrection ” (Phil. iii, 10), Thus “we shall live with him by the 
power of God” (2 Cor. xiii. 4), 2, It to not a life which has tts root in the apostle 


em, 1. 1—21.] THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 10% 


himself. “Yet not 1." We are by nature “ dead ” (Eph. ii. 1), and cannot quicken 
ourselves, Our life is no natural principle. Neither can we sustain this life nor 
prolong its existence. This fact explains at once the backslidings, the fears, and the 
unfruitfulness of believers, 3. Christ ts the very life of the soul. ‘ Christ liveth in me.” 
(1) He is the substance as well as the source of that life. “Because I live ye shall live 
also” (John xiv. 19); “Christ, who is our life ” (Col. iii. 4); “He that hath the Son 
hath life ” (1 John v. 12). (2) This life is in virtue of a union with him produced by. 
the Holy Spirit. Thus we become “one spirit” with him. (8) Christ is the cause of 
its continuance (Eph. iv. 15,16; John xv.1—8; vii. 48). 4. The blessed fruits of 
this life. (1) It is an absolutely secure life. The life is not in the believer’s own 
keeping. (2) It involves a near relationship to Christ (John xv. 6). (8) It is the life 
at once of earth and of heaven. 65. It is a life of which the apostle was fully conscious. 
He does not say, “I am elected,” or “I am justified,” but “I live.” He speaks the 
lancuagze of happy assurance. He knows he is spiritually alive. His confession is a 
rebuke to those who doubt the possibility of attaining to the “ full assurance of hope.” 


Ver. 20.—The nature and conditions of Christian life. “The life which I now live 
in the flesh I live in the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me.” 

1. THE NATURE OF THIS LIFE. There is a mystery surrounding the origin of all life. 
There is mystery, too, in regeneration (John iii. 8). Yet spiritual life is due to the. 
quickening power of the Holy Spirit, through the Word, “making all things new.” 
The first effect of regeneration is faith; and the life thus begun is sustained by the 
indwelling of the same Spirit through all the stages of a sanctified experience, till it 
shares in the glorified life of the Redeemer in heaven. 

IL Tre conprrion OF THIS LIFE—IT 18 LIFE “IN THE FLESH.” That fs, in the body. 
All life—physical, intellectual, moral—is exposed to risk of some sort. Frost or 
lightning may blight flower or tree; disease may undermine animal life; madness may 
aitack intellectual life. So Christian life is exposed to many risks, simply because it ia 
lif “ in the flesh,” that is, in a body with passions and appetites prone to evil, and in a 
world with many seductions that appeal to the senses. Yet we must not regard the 
body with ascetic aversion, as if it were the sole cause of the soul’s embarrassments. It 
is God’s wonderful workmanship; it is the temple of the Holy Ghost, to be kept free 
from defilement; and it is and ought to be the willing servant of the immortal spirit in 
all the various activities of Christian life. 

Ill. Tas mepiom or CHRISTIAN LIFE—FAITH. Faith is not merely the instruments 
of our justification, but the root-principle of our life. It is the principle which maintains 
this life in its constant exercise. We “live by faith;” we “walk by faith;” we 
“stand by faith;” we “overcome by faith;” we are “sanctified by faith;” we are 
“kept by faith” through the power of God unto the final salvation. As the principle 
which unites the soul and the Saviour, it is the conduit which carries the mighty 
supplies of grace into the soul. 

IV. Tue EXTERNAL SUPPORT OR NURTURE OF THIS LIFE. “ The Sou of God, who 
loved me, and gave himself for me.” 1. All life finds its nurture or suyport in sources 
external to itself, which it assimilates to its own inner growth. So it is iu the animal and 
the vegetable worlds. Thus the soul finds its support in the Bread of life who came 
down from heaven. It is not faith that supports this life. Faith is nothing apart from 
itsobject. 2. It is not the Son of God merely who ts the support of (his life, He might 
be only “ Guide, Philosopher, and Friend,” as in Socinian theology ; but our life could 
find no adequate fulcrum or point of support in the Son of God thus regarded. The 
apostle emphasizes (1) the love and (2) the sacrifice of Christ, ‘‘ who gave himself for 
me.” He is no Saviour to me unless he is my High Priest, my Substitute, my Surety. 

V. THE APOSTLE’S ASSURANCE OF HIS PERSONAL INTEREST IN Curist’s work. He does 
not use terms of generality, such as “he gave himself for us,” but “ for me.” Thus he 
added assurance to his faith. 

VI. THE LIFE IN QUESTION I8 DESIGNED TO BE MANIFEST. It is life to be lived, 
“The life which I now live in the flesh.” Life may be secret in its origin, but it 
comes forth into visible display. We cannot see the life of the tiny seed-grain cast by 
the husbandman into the ground, bat it gradually makes its way to the surface through 
all obstacles, Thus our life is to be an open life. We are not to “ hide our light undet 


102 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. fom. τι. 1—21. 


a bushel;” we are not to bury our talent in the ground; but as “ye have received 
Christ Jesus the Lord, 80 walk ye in him.” It is the duty of the saints to be witnesses 
to the Lord; it is their privilege to glorify him, it is their glory to reflect the image 
of his blessed character. ᾿ 


Ver, 21.—No frustration of Divine grace in the apostle’s teaching. “I do not 
frustrate the grace of God; for if righteousness come by the Law, then Christ died 
without cause,” 

I. Tue cRacw or Gop Is THE TRUE SOURCE OF SALVATION. This grace was manifested 
in the death of Christ, and in the blessings derived to believers from their union with 
him. The apostle’s trust in him only magnified the grace of God. 

II. Ivs FRusTRATION was PossIBLE oN Pprer’s princiries. If any attempt were 
made to put works in the place of faith, or to mix works with faith as a ground of 
justification, or to establish a system under which ceremonialism was made essential to 
salvation, the grace of God were effectively frustrated. 

ΠῚ, ΤῊΣ ULTIMATE PRINCIPLE INVOLVED IN THIS FRUSTRATION, “If rightcousness 
come by the Law, then Christ died without cause.” 1, The righteousness tn question ts 
that by which q@ man becomes right with God. A man might attain to this righteous- 
ness if he could keep or had kept the Law of God, But he has broken the Law and is 
under its curse. The righteousness must therefore be reached inanother way. It comes 
“by faith,” not “by the Law ” (Phil. iii.9). 2. Christ’s death is altogether unnecessary 
on the supposition of a righteousness by the Law. Why should the Son of God have 
died to procure what a sinner can win for himself by his own personal obedience? 
This closeg the argument in the most effective manner. 


HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 


Vers, 1—10.— The apostolic conference. Fourteen years elapsed between the first 
and second visits of Paul as apostle to Jerusalem. During this interval of severe 
work he hae experienced the opposition of the Judaizers. He deemed it advisable, 
therefore, ana was also impelled by the Spirit, to go up to have a conference with the 
apostles about the whole policy to be pursued in the Gentile mission, In the verses 
before us he relates what took place in connection with the conference, And here we 
learn— 

J. How AGREEABLE TO THE MIND OF THE SPIRIT THE CONFERENCE OF BRETHREN 18. 
(Ver. 2.) For Paul went up with Barnabas and Titus “by revelation.” The Spirit 
impelled him to confer with the apostles at Jerusalem, and to strengthen his own 
judgment by securing theirs. And in the conference he scems to have laid before them 
the gospel of free grace which for fourteen years he had been preaching among the 
Gentiles. His statement was an exposition of his message, how he had taught the 
Gentiles that they were to be justified by faith and not by ceremony. Moreover, he 
was careful to enter into conference only with those who were of reputation, whose 
judgment would command respect, and to insist on the conference being private and 
confidential. Now, there can be no question about the great value of such confidential 
interchanges of thought by brethren. Even when there is not much light shed upon 
the path of duty, as seems to have been the case here, there is yet the confirmation of 
the Lord’s servants in the propriety of their course. 

11. In conTENTION WITH OTHERS WE SHOULD HAVE OLEARLY BEFORE US THE INTERESTS 
OF THE GosPEL. (Vers. 3—5.) Titus, who accompanied Paul to Jerusalem, had been 
Paul’s companion in Galatia and in the mission tours of Asia Minor. He was a Greek, 
a Gentile therefore, as distinct from a Jew. He had not, like Timothy, any Jewish blood 
in his veins. When the Judaizers, therefore, urged that Titus should be circumcised, 
and so become a proselyte to Jewish eceremonials, Paul resisted the demand so 
determinedly that no circumcision of Titus ever took place. In doing so, Paul had 
the interests of truth clearly in view. Had he yielded to the clamour, the gospel 
would have ceased practically to be a power in Galatia. It would not have continued 
with them. It would have been said, on the contrary, that salvation does not come by 
faith alone, but by ceremony as well. It was the interests of the gospel which Paul had 


OH. 11, 1—21.] THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 108 


clearly in view. It would be well if we had always so clear a view of the interests of 
truth in our contentions with others. It is to be feared we sometimes fight for our 
consistency and personal interests rather than for the gospel. We should suspect our 
motives until we sce the gospel’s interests clearly involved in our struggle. : 

TII. A CONFERENCE MAY ADD NO FRESH LIGHT TO WHAT WE HAVE, BUT 6IMPLY 
CONFIRM US IN OUR couRSsE. (Ver. 6.) The apostle admits that the brethren at 
Jerusalem seemed to the Galatians to be most important judges of such matters as 
were brought before them.! He himself did not form the same extravagant opinion of 
their ability, for he felt assured that ‘God accepteth no man’s person,” and that he, as 
an apostle born out of due time, had as much light given to him for his work 
as those who were in Christ before him. Hence he states plainly that they imparted 
nothing to him in the conference. ‘hey simply confirmed him in the practice of 
Christian liberty. And this will often be the case in Christian conferences, It is not 
the fresh light they shed upon doctrine or duty, but mainly the confirmation they afford 
of lines of duty already taken up. ‘This, however, ought not to be despised, but rather 
gratefully accepted as according to the will of God. 

IV. Toe IMPRIMATUR OF THE APOSTLES 18 SIGNIFIOANT, (Vers. 7—9.) It is to 
be observed that Paul never sought apostolic ordination. He and Barnabas were 
designated by the brethren at Antioch when about to proceed upon their first missionary 
journey (Acts xiii. 1—3). But he had never all these years sought for ordination at 
the hands of the apostles who were in office before him, At the end of fourteen years 
he gives in a report, and all that he receives from the apostles is “the right hand of 
fellowship.” In this connection we may quote from the able book of the “ American 
citizen” on ‘The Philosophy of the Divine Operation.’ He is contending for Paul, not 
Matthias, being the twelfth apostle. After showing Paul’s superior marks of apostle- 
ship, he proceeds, “‘ Ordination, where there is no Holy Spirit, is not scriptural ordination, 
The laying on of hands by men who do not possess the Spirit of Christ themselves is 
not consecration, Hence offices and interests imparted by men or Churches whose 
spirit is merely formal and secular have no Divine validity. ‘The men appointed. 
under such circumstances may be good and useful, as many of them are. Communica- 
tions of grace from above may be granted them. But the seal of God is not in the act 
of ordination, And Paul, called of God, with only the right hand of fellowship given 
him by the apostles, does the work of God better than Matthias, ordained by non- 
spiritual administrators.” 

V. THz REMEMBRANCE OF THE POOR WAS ALWAYS TO CHARACTERIZE THE CHRISTIAN 
mission, (Ver. 10.) The apostles, in recognizing Paul’s policy and mission among the 
Gentiles, merely reminded him of the care of the poor, which was to be a first note of 
the Christian mission. The gospel is preached to the poor; it charges itself with their 
care. It was with the gospel the obligation recognized by the “ poor laws” arose, 
The care of the poor was not felt by other religious systems as it is by Christianity, 

_ And it is questionable if the poor are as well cared for by law as they would be if left 
to Christian love? Now, there can be no doubt of this trait of Christianity being a 
most important evidence of its Divine origin. The care of the poor would never have 
become the commonplace it now seems to be had not Christianity charged itself with 
the enlightenment and the care of the poor (Matt. xi. 5). The Christian commune, the 
noble experiment which succeeded Pentecost, put for a time poverty outside the 
Church’s pale (Acts iv. 84). But even when poverty is driven out of the Church, it 
will still exist in the world, and for the poor Christianity must provide. This is one 
of its great missions; the apostles, though poor themselves, nobly responded to the call 
and faced the problem; and 80 must we all in our spheres if we have aught of the 


apostolic spirit.—R. M. E. 


Vers, 11--18.—The apostolic strife at Antioch. Passing from the Jerusalem con- 
ference, Paul next mentions the strife which Peter and he had at Antioch. Peter had 


1 Of Lightfoot on the use of the present, of δοκοῦντες, which the Authorized Version 
and even the Revised Version translate as a past. ᾿ ; 

2 Cf ‘The Letters and other Writings of the late Edward Denison, M-P.,’ passim; alse 
‘The Houses of the London Poor,’ by Octavia Hill; ‘'The Service of the Poor,’ by Caroline 
Emelia Stephen; and of course Dr. Chalmers’ ‘ Christian and Civic Economy.’ 


104 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. (cu. τι. 1—21 


come down to see the work of God among the Gentiles. In his large-heartedness he 
had not only approved of it and rejoiced in it, but, laying aside all his Jewish prejudices, 
he had taken his seat at the table of the Gentiles, and had eaten whatever was placed 
before him. But certain “ false brethren” having come round, and having urged the 
imperative necessity of ceremony, he yielded to his fears, withdrew from Gentile society, 
and lived in quarantine with the Judaizers. It would appear also that Barnabas was 
entrapped into similar vacillation; so that there was nothing for it but for Paul to 
stand up like a man and denounce Peter for his weakness, In doing so he was con- 
tending for the truth of the gospel. Let us look into the subject a little more closely. 

1. Consiprr Prrer’s LIFE OF LiBeRTY. (Ver. 12.) It was only right, and what 
we should expect, for Peter to throw aside his Jewish narrowness, the punctiliousness 
about meats and drinks, and to go in for brotherhood with the Gentiles at their feasts. 
Here we have the noble and big-hearted apostle acting upon his own better impulses. 
It is such liberty the gospel fosters. It is the foe of that narrowness which so often 
keeps men from uniting. It is the foe of that little-mindedness which keeps so many 
in estrangement. We cannot be broader in our sympathies or freer in our life than the 
gospel makes us. It can be easily shown that the so-called liberties beyond its sphere 
are real bondages. 

11. ConstperR PETER’s RETURN To CONDAGE. (Vers. 12, 13.) When the Judaizers 
came down from Jerusalem, they were so positive about the necessity of the Jewish 
ceremonies and scrupulosities, as to put pressure upon the apostle; so that, taking 
counsel of his fears, he deliberately withdrew from Gentile society and shut himself 
up with the Jews. This was a sore fall. And so astute were these brethren in 
their dissimulation that Barnabas was also led away. It is well to see clearly how 
bondage sets in immediately on our abandoning principle and acting on the pressure of 
our fears. Men fancy that, when called upon to act on principle, they are forfeiting 
their liberty; but the truth is all the other way, The free are those who act upon the 
dictates of truth; the slaves are those who have surrendered principle because of 

ressure, 

III. Consiper PAvl’s NOBLE REPRIMAND OF ΡΕΤΒΕ. (Ver. 14.) It must have been 
a trial for Paul to take his stand against his senior both in years and in the apostolate, 
He must have appreciated the delicacy of his position in standing up against the conduct 
of the apostle of the circumcision. But he felt constrained to rebuke his brother as by 
his vacillating conduct traitorous to truth. Andin no way can we testify so powerfully 
to truth as when we take the field, however reluctantly, against those we respect, and 
who are deservedly popular, but who have somehow erred in judgment upon some point 
of importance. It requires courage and firmness ; but it always has its reward in the 
extension of truth and of God’s kingdom. 

IV. PauL sHowWs THAT THE QUESTION OF JUSTIFICATION WAS REALLY INVOLVED IN 
Prrer’s conpuct. (Vers. 15—17.) Peter had very properly, though a Jew, lived 
after the manner of Gentiles, and so manifested his Christian liberty. Why, asks Paul, 
does he now turn round and require Gentiles to live like Jews? Is it to be thus 
insinuated that ceremonies save men’s souls? Is not this the vilest bondage? Is not 
the gospel, on the contrary, the embodiment of the truth that a man is not justified by 
the works of the Law, but by faith in the Lord Jesus Christ? If Jewish ceremonies 
are still necessary to justification, then the work of Jesus Christ, in which we are asked 
to trust, cannot be complete. Such ceremonialism is thus seen to be in conflict with 
the gospel of justification by faith alone. To tell men that ceremonies must save them 
is to turn them away from Christ as the object of trust to rites and ceremonies as the 
object. Am [ to believe in the power of baptism and of the sacraments as administered 
by certain persons in order to salvation? oram I to trust my Saviour? The two methods 
of salvation are totally distinct, and it is fatal to confound them. The meaning of all 
such ceremonialism is to put souls upon a false track, so far as salvation is concerned. 
It is to translate man’s justification from the true foundation in Christ’s work to the 
rotten foundation of self-righteousness. Against this we must ever wage persistent war. 

V. Pav consEQUENTLY INSISTS ON THE SINFULNESS OF THE LEGAL SPIRIT. (Ver. 18.) 
For what we destroy in accepting the gospel is all trust in ceremonies as grounds of 
salvation. The works of the Law are seen to be no ground of trust for justification and 
salvation, If, then, after having destroyed the self-righteous and legal spirit, and fled 


os. π. 1—21.J THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 105 


for refuge to Jesus as our Hope, we turn round like Peter to rebuild the edifice of self- 
righteousness and legalism, we are simply making ourselves transgressors, We are 
forfeiting our liberty and piling up fresh sin. Hence it is of the utmost moment that 
we should clearly and constantly recognize the sinfulness of the legal spirit. It robs 
Jesus of his rightful position as Saviour of mankind. It casts away the gospel and 
goes back for salvation to the Law, which can only condemn us; it makes the sacrifice 
of Jesus vain and only increases sin. Against all legalism, consequently, we must wage 
incessant war. Nothing is so derogatory to Jesus or destructive of men’s souls. It is 
another gospel, but an utterly fallacious one. Unless Jesus has the whole credit of 
salvation, he will not be our Saviour. He must be all or nothing. “ Other foundation 
san no man lay than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ.”—R. M. E. 


Vers, 19—21.— The death of legal hope the life of evangelical obedience. Paul pro- 
ceeds in the exposition of Peter’s mistake to show that it is only when through the Law 
we die to all legal hope, we can live unto God. When legal hope has died within us, 
Christ has room to live and be the source of our spiritual energy. 

I. ConsiDER THE DEATH OF LEGALISM. (Vers. 19, 20.) The idea of self-righteous- 
ness or Pharisaism was and is that we can live through the Law. But the more careful 
analysis of sin leads us to sce that the Law can only condemn and slay us. The same 
experience became our Lord’s when he became our Representative. ‘hough obeying 
the Law in every particular, he found that, in consequence of our sin, for which he had 
made himself responsible, the Law demanded his death in addition to his obedience, or 
rather “ his obedience even unto death.” Not until he was crucified had he satisfied 
the demands of Law. In his crucifixion, therefore, he died to the Law. It had after 
that no more claim upon him. When he said on the cross, “ It is finished,” he died to 
the Law. Now, it is only when we enter into this purpose of the crucifixion, and die to 
all hope from the Law, that we are in a position to live nnto God. “ ‘The death of legal 
hope ” is “the life of evangelical obedience.” The legalism must dio within us before 
we get into the large place of new obedience. Among the many purposes of our Lord’s 
death upon the cross, this was a prime one, viz. to wean us away from all idea of 
winning life by law-keeping, that we may gratefully receive it as the gilt of free grace. 

11. Consmper THE LIFE UNTO Gop. (Vers. 19, 20.) Though legal hope has died, so 
that Paul is “dead to the Law” like Christ in Joseph’s tomb, he is at the same time 
enabled to “live unto God.” In truth it is then that the life unto God begins. For 
life by the Law is life for self; whereas when we die to all legal hope, we are delivered 
from the self-life, and enabled to live the life of consecration to God. And when does 
this life of consecration to God come? By inspiration Christ comes and lives literally 
within us by his Spirit, so that we become in a real sense inspired persons. Consc- 
quently, Paul declares that it is not he himself who lives the consecrated life, but 
“Christ liveth in me.” He abandoned himself to the Spirit of Christ, and thus made 
way for the life of consecration. Nothing is more important, then, than this self- 
abandonment to the Spirit of Christ, who is the Spirit of consecration. This is the 
holocaust of the Christian life, the abandonment of every faculty and power to the 
Divine fire, that all may rise in sublimity to heaven. 

II]. ConstipeR THE LAW OF THE NEW LIFE. (Ver. 20.) Paul has abandoned 
himself to the Spirit of Christ. His life becomes in consequence one of simple dependence 
upon the Son of God ; or, as it is here put, “ The life which I now live in the flesh, I live 
by the faith of the Son of God;” or, as the Revised Version has it, “ And that life which 
T now live in the flesh I live in faith, the facth which is in the Son of God.” The self- 
abandoned life is the life of constant dependence upon the Son of God. But this being 
s0, the law of Christ’s life necessarily becomes the law of the life of consecration. What, 
then, is the law of Christ’s life? It is the law of love leading to self-sacrifice ; for of the 
Son of God it is here said by Paul, “ Who loved me, and gave himself for me.” Christ, 
in consecrating himself to God, dedicated himself to our salvation. He became the 
voluntary victim; he died that we might be redeemed. Hence self-sacrifice is the law 
of the new life. Now, no other system but Christianity secures such self-abandonment 
and self-abnegation. The Hindu self-abandonment to Brahma, for example, is aban- 
donment to a desireless condition. “He remains,” it has been said, “ stupidly still 
(immobile), his arms in air, Brahma is his death, and not his life” Again, Moham- 


106 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. (ou. π΄. 1—21, 


medan self-abandonment is crude fanaticism. “It is true,” says the same writer, 
“that Allah does not kill all the faculties of the soul as Brahma does; but he 
renders them fatalistic, fanatic, and sanguinary. He is for his adorers the fire which 
consumes them, and not their life.” The Jesuit, again, has a self-abandonment to 
the chief of his order at Rome; but in renouncing judgment, affections, will, and 
conscience to his superior, he allows his true life to be killed, and his obedience is only 
the galvanism of spiritual death. It thus turns out that all other self-abandonments 
but that to Christ are counterfeits, and his only stands the test of experience. He 
rouses us to action, to intelligent self-sacrifice. He teaches us to “live not unto 
ourselves, but unto him who died for us, and rose again” (2 Cor. v. 15). 

IV. In THIS ARRANGEMENT THERE IS NO FRUSTRATION, BUT A MAGNIFYING OF THE 
GRACE or Gop. (Ver. 21.) If righteousness came by ceremonialism, if ceremony were 
the secret of salvation, then assuredly the grace of God would be frustrated, and Christ 
have died in vain. If legal hopes are still legitimate, then the crucifixion of Christ was 
a mere martyrdom by mistake. On the other hand, when we have seen clearly, as Paul 
did, that the Law cannot save us, but must be given up as a ground of hope, then we 
gather round the cross of Christ, and we adore the devotion which thereby secured our 
salvation, and we magnify the grace of God. Legalism is the antithesis and frustration 
of Divine grace; whereas the life of consecration, which the death of all legalism 
secures, is the true exaltation of God's grace manifested in a crucified Saviour. Let us 
make sure, then, of the crucifixion of the legal spirit within us, and then the conse- 
crated life which the contemplation of Christ crucified inspires shall be found to be the 
true way of magnifying the grace of God.—R. M. Εἰ, 


Vers. 1—10.— Period of third visit to Jerusalem. Three preliminary points are 
mentioned. (1) Time. “Then after the space of fourteen years I went up again to 
Jerusalem.” It is possible to date this from his conversion, but it is more natural and 
quite tenable to date it from the last-mentioned visit. If so, then we have seventeen 
important years, during which all the interccurse that Paul had with the senior apostles 
extended to fifteen days spent with Peter in Jerusalem. That, surely, was very little 
on which to found a representation of his being a pupil of these apostles, or one acting 
under their orders. (2) Companions. ‘ With Barnabas, taking Titus also with me.” 
The mention of Barnabas as his principal companion helps to identify the visit with 
that recorded in the fifteenth of the Acts. Titus also is brought in, as afterward to be 
referred to. Both may have been known to the Galatian Churches, and would be able 
to bear witness to the accuracy of his account of the conference. (3) Jmpulse. “ And 
I went up by revelation.” The impelling influence was a supernatural communication 
made to him, that it was his duty to go up to Jerusalem, It may have been with or 
against his own inclination. It was certainly conjoined with the action of the Gentile 
Churches, But what determined his action was no feeling of his own as of doubt about 
his teaching, or summons from Jerusalem to give an account of his teaching, but simply 
the intimation to him of the Divine will. Zhe private conference. ‘The great feature 
of the third visit was conference, There was the public conference, of which we have a 
record in the fifteenth of the Acts. But there seems to have been beforehand a private 
conference with the men of repute, which alone is mentioned here, as being that which 
affected the question of his independence as an apostle. (1) Subject of conference. 
“ And I laid before them the gospel which I preach among the Gentiles.” He laid not 
before some, but before all the Christians at Jerusalem, the gospel which he was still 
in the habit of preaching among the Gentiles. He made it a public enough matter that 
he preached justification by faith. He made it equally public that, as an inference 
from that, he taught that there was no necessity to impose circumcision on Gentile 
converts, (2) Reuson for private conference. “ But privately before them who were 
of repute, lest by any means I should be running, or had run, in vain.” While courting 
publicity, he had a regard to prudence, The gospel he preached might have a strange 
sound to them at Jerusalem. He did not, therefore, in the first place lay it before the 
general body of Christians there. But he began by laying it privately before the three 
afterward mentioned, viz. James, Peter, and John. They had special qualifications for 
understanding what was to come up for public conference. And experiences, reasons, 


Δ Cf. F. de Rougemont’s ‘La Vie Humaine,’ pp. 96, 97 


cu. 11 1—21.] THE EPISTLE TO ΤΙΝ GALATIANS. 107 


nice points, could be gone into with them that could not so suitably be gone into at a 
public conference. ‘They were, moreover, men of repute, men of leading, who might be 
expected to influence the others. If, then, he secured a good understanding with them, 
his course, both what it had been and what it might yet be, would have its full effect. 
Whereas, if for want of the proper means being used, he failed in securing a good 
understanding, he would really be impairing the effect of what he had done or might 
yet do. Results of private conference as bearing on the question of independence— 

I. He Dip NoT YIELD ON THE QUESTION OF LIBERTY. 1. No compulsion was used 
in the case of Titus. ‘But not even Titus, who was with me, being a Greek, was 
compelled to be circumcised.” This was a good case for trying the question of liberty. 
Timothy, who was after this circumcised in accommodation to Jewish feeling, was of 
half-Jewish extraction. Titus was of pure Gentile extraction. Was he, then, necessi- 
tated to cireumcise Titus? No; it wasa notorious fact that under the eye of the three, 
under the eye of the whole Church, he was allowed to go about Jerusalem with an 
uncircumcised Gentile convert as his recognized companion and assistant. That was 
not as though he had weakly yielded at the conference. It was, on the contrary, a 
signal triumph obtained for liberty. 2. The reason of his taking so firm α stand was 
that it was made a question of liberty. Character of the false brethren. ‘ And that 
because of the false brethren privily brought in, who came in privily to spy out our 
liberty which we have in Christ Jesus, that they might bring us into bondage.” They 
were false, men who had never really agreed to the terms of Christian membership, 
They had become connected with the society of Christians, not as genuine believers in 
the Lord Jesus Christ, but on falsely pretending faith. They climbed into the Christian 
fold by some other way than Christ. There were others in the background who prompted 
them to make a false profession. They acted as the tools of others for dlegitimate 
purposes. Espionage was one purpose. They stole into the Christian camp, not because 
they had any delight in being there, but simply as spies. What they wished to spy 
out was the liberty enjoyed by the Gentile Christians, ¢.e. liberation from circumcision 
in the possession of Christ. More particularly Ὁ was the action of the Church in 
Jerusalem in view of the association of an uncircumcised Gentile convert with Paul. 
A further purpose was bondage. They spied out the liberty that they might have it 
as an object for their attack. Their tactics were to make a demand for the circumcision 
of Titus. Their success would hats been the enslavement of Gentile Christians. Stand 
made by Paul against the false brethren. “To whom we gave place in the way of 
subjection, no, not for an hour; that the truth of the gospel might continue with you.” 
It was a bold step, in the first place, to take Titus to Jerusalem, Feeling may have 
been stronger than he expected to find it. How was he to act? It would, no doubt, 
have been pleasing to many if he had seen his way to circumcise Titus. Under certain 
circumstances he might have been free to doit in the way of accommodation, But seeing 
that the false brethren, by the circumcision of Titus, meant the enslavement for ever 
of Gentile Christians, he gave place in the way of subjection, no, not for an hour. He 
acted thus decisively in the interests of all his Gentile constituents. And his successful 
resistance on this occasion, which some were now seeking to turn against him (as 
though he had then given in his submission to Peter and the rest), was really a triumph 
obtained for the Gentile Christians everywhere, for which particularly they, the 
Galatians, should show gratitude in the way of resisting the assaults of the Judaists on 
them. Let the truth of the gospel—justification simply by faith—continue with them. 

II, HE PRESERVED HIS EQUALITY WITH THE THREE. 1. They imparted nothing to 
him. “But from those who were reputed to be somewhat (whatsoever they were, it 
maketh no matter to me; God accepteth not man’s person)—they, I say, who were of 
repute imparted nothing to me.” The construction with which the sentence commences 
is not carried out to the end. ‘From them of repute” would naturally be followed up 
by “I received nothing.” But instead of that, after the parenthesis which is in three 
clauses, it is taken up in the form—* they of repute,” which is followed by “ imparted 
nothing to me.” The three were reputed to be somewhat, and Paul does not mean to 
hint that this reputation was not deserved. What he has to do with is that their 
reputation should be thought to destroy his independence. He esteemed them, and he 
was glad to know of their being esteemed. In that respect their reputation did matter 
to him, but it mattered nothing for his independence, It is not upon reputation that 


108 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. (on. 11. 1—21, 


God proceeds in his choice or acknowledgment of instruments, And with all their 
reputation they imparted to him no additional authority or element in teaching, as 
superiors to an inferior, 2. They recognized him. 4.5 having an independent trust. 
“But contrariwise, when they saw that I had been entrusted with the gospel of the 
uncireumcision, even as Peter with the gospel of the circumcision (for he that 
wrought for Peter unto the apostleship of the circumcision wrought for me also 
uuto the Gentiles)” Of the men of repute, he singles out Peter as the principal 
representative of the circumcision. He was entrusted with the gospel whose sphere 
was the circumcision; and he presented it, as may be seen from his aadress and 
Epistles, with a certain adaptation to the Jews. The burden of his early preaching 
was the great crime which the Jews had committed in crucifying their Messiah, 
and their duty to repent of that crime and to trust in Christ for salvation. When 
he writes to them as the Dispersion, he is still a Jew, in dwelling on the ancient 
glories of the race. His mind is imbued with the deliverances wrouvht for them, the 
majesty and sanctity of their temple, the sacred functions of the priesthood, the mystery 
of sacrifice, all receiving their fulfilment in the Christian manifestation. He is also a 
Jew in looking forward to a glorious future. His gospel points away to “ the inheritance 
incorruptible and undefiled, and that fadeth not away;” “the salvation ready to be 
revealed in the last time; ” “ the appearing of Jesus Christ.” But Paul was on a parity 
with Peter, He was entrusted with the gospel, whose sphere was the uncircumcision, 
and he presented it with a certain adaptation to the Gentiles. Not shunning Jewish 
imagery, he combined with it a ccrtain free use of Gentile imazery. And it was 
specially given him to preach, what Peter indeed had learnt before him, that the 
Gentiles were to be admitted into the kingdom of God without kein: required to submit 
to circumcision. ‘This parity of trust was made evident to the men of repute at 
Jerusalem, And the way in which it was made evident was this. It was evident 
that Peter was appointed to the apostleship of the circumcision by the abundant energy 
with which God supplied him for working among them, It was equally evident that 
Paul was appointed to the apostleship of the Gentiles by the abundant energy with 
which God suyplied him for working among them. As having such a trust by the display 
of gruce toward him. “ And when they perceived the grace that was given unto me.” 
‘The conclustea was forced home on them that he had an independent trust. When 
they compared that with their former knowledge of him, they could only ascribe it to 
grace. Their knowledze was now of him asa remarkable trophy of grace. 3. They 
gave him formal recognition. ‘ James and Cephas and John, they who were reputed to 
be pillars, gave to me and Barnabas the right hands of fellowship, that we should go unto 
the Gentiles, and they unto the circumcision.” The three are now mentioned by name. 
‘The last mentioned is John, and it is remarkable that in this, the only mention of him 
by Paul, he is represented as doing a kindly act. Peter, who is called Cephas (which 
also means “ rock”), has just had a wide sphere connected with him. James is here 
placed before him on the same ground on which he presided at the public conference, 
viz. as representative (not necessarily bishop) of the mother Church at Jerusalem. 
His taking the lead made the formal recoznition of Paul the act of the Church: while 
the association of Peter and John with him gave it a wider significance. These three 
were had in estimation as pillars (stoops, supports), ὁ.6. men upon whom (humanly 
speaking) the keeping up of the Church greatly depended. Their formal recognition 
extended to Barnabas, ‘I'hey recognized in what was not exclusively Eastern fashion 
(being rather universal), by each giving the right hand of fellowship. That in regard 
to which they expressed fellowship was the division of work—Gentile and Jewish— 
which is not to be understood with the greatest strictness. The fellowship they 
expressed amounted to giving Paul and Barnabas their hearty good wishes in theit 
separate and co-ordinate sphere. 4, They only recommended. “Only they would that 
we should remember the poor; which very thing I was also zealous to do.” There is 
a recognized ecclesiastical distinction between an injunction and a recommendation, 
The three did not, as ecclesiastical superiors, lay their authority upon Paul sed 
Barnabas; they only, as brethren, made a request of them. The request chimed in 
with Paul’s own habitual feeling. He speaks only for himself, his zeal extending 
beyond the time when he could speak for Barnabas, who shortly afterwards parted 
from him, Thus conclusively does he establish his independence. The matter οἱ the 


cH. 11, 1—21.] THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 109 


request was remembering the poor. It was a request that came very naturally from 
the three, ‘lhey were counected with a poor Church. Intolerance, too, was more rife 
and keen in Palestine than elsewhere, And it would often be a perplexity to them— 
taking them to the throne of grace—how the poor under their charge were to be 
provided for. They therefore took occasion to conimend them to these representatives 
of the Geutile Churches. It was a providential arrangement that the Jewish Christians 
were to some extent dependent for support on the Gentile Christians. It tended to 
call forth the charity of the latter and to counteract the narrowness of the former, and 
thue to promote unity. [10 is a peculiarly Christian thing toremember the poor. Christ 
has shown men to be equal irrespective of condition, in that he has died for all, and 
would have all raised to sonship. Having taught us to care for men’s souls, he has 
taught us, as we could nut otherwise so forcibly be taught, to care also fur men’s boaies. 
We are to show our affection for Christ in ministering to the wants of his poor. And 
we will show a tenderness even for the wants of those who are not with us in the same 
Christian bond.—R. F. 


Vers. 11—21.— Withstanding of Peter at Antioch. ‘But when Cephas came to 
Antioch, I resisted him to the face.” From the public conference at Jerusalem, Paul 
and Barnabas went down to Antioch, where, it is said, they tarried. They separated 
aller this stay. The visit of Peter to Antioch must be referred to this period, seeing 
Barnabas is inentioned as still with Paul, ‘There was more than resistance made tu 
Peter ; tliere was the going up to him, meeting hira face to face, and charging him with 
inconsistency. So significant was this,'that three such I'athers as Origen, Chrysostom, 
and Jerome were only able to get over it by unwarrantably supposing it to be s¢mu- 
lated. It was Paul himself who quoted the words, “Thou shalt not speak evil of a ruler 
of thy people.” He could not have borne himsel|' thus to Peter if he had owed obedience 
to him as his ecclesiastical superior. But, having an independent sphere, and being 
specially entrusted with the liberty of the Gentile Christians, he had a right to speak 
(reely. Nor was there impropriety in his bringing this incident forward here, although 
it reflected ou Peter, seeing that it was necessary tv put his independeuce beyond 
question, which had been cailed in question in the Galatian Churches. 

J. How THe occasioN DEMANDED HIS WITHSTANDING OF Perer. ‘+ Because he stood 
condemned.” He was condemned by his own conduct. Its inconsisiency was so 
marked. 1. Before the coming of certain from James, he mined frecly with the Geutile 
Christians. ‘For before that certain came from James, he did eat with the Gentile:.” 
It is difticult to say whether, or how far, James is involved by the introduction of his 
name here, ‘There is no reason to suppose that he sent these men (esyccially as Peter 
was already on the spot) to raise the question of intercommunion in the Church at 
Antioch. He had been remarkably explicit on the question of circumcision at the 
public couference in Jerusalem. We can understand his not being thoroughly liberated 
from Jewish uarrowness. And those men who used bis name or came from under his 
influeuce may have been of a more timid type than he. The question related to eating 
with the Gentiles. ‘This was forbidden under the old order of things, on the ground of 
its being a barrier against heathenism. But when Jews and Gentiles were both within 
the one Church, circumstances were changed. There was no need for the barrier bing 
continued. But it was difficult for these who had been accustomed to the barrier to 
regard it as done away. ‘The difficulty had been got over at Antioch, but it still 
existed to comers from Jerusalem. Peter had been broadened in his ideas, and when 
he came to Antioch he had no difficulty in eutering into the free communion which 
had been established there. He lived as though he lial been one of the Gentiles. He 
made no difference at private meals or at the public agapa. To 860 ἃ leader like Peter 
following such a course promised well for the interests of lilerty. 2. On the coming 
of certain from James, he gave way to fear, “But when they came, he drew back and 
separated hinisclf, fearing them that were of the circumcision.” He drew back until he 
occupied a sejarate position, he influence by which he was swayed from the course 
which he had been following was fear. His fear was occasioned by the coming of 
ceitain from James. ‘Ihe objects of his fear were they of the circumcision, ie. Jewish 
Christians, especially at Jerusalem, with whom these comers from James would com- 
municate. Hv was afraid of what thev of the circumcision would say. We need not 


110 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. (on. τι. 1—21, 


be surprised at his being suddenly swayed from a noble course. It was of a piece with 
his nobly daring to walk on the water toward Christ, and then, when he looked on the 
troubled water, crying out in fear, “ Lord, save me; I perish.” It was of a piece witi. his 
drawing his sword in defence of his Master, and then, when questioned by the servants 
in the hall of the high priest, denying him three times, the third time with an oath. 
So he had made a noble vindication of his conduct on a former occasion, when taken to 
task for going in to the uncircumcised and eating with them. He was still acting 
under the same noble impulse when at first in Antioch he freely associated with the 
Gentile Christians. But when he saw certain from James, from no unbrotherly feeling 
toward Paul or toward the Gentile Christians, but, simply afraid of how it would affect him 
with them of the circumcision, he drew back and back until he placed a decided distance 
between him and the Gentile Christians. 3. His dissimulution was followed. “ And 
the rest of the Jews dissembled likewise with him; insomuch that even Barnabas was 
carried away with their dissimulation.” Peter's conduct is characterized as dissimula- 
tion. That was the head and front of his offending. And a very serious offence it 
was. It was not that he was narrow-minded like the comers from James, but that he 
concealed his liberal sentiments. It was not that he had changed his mind, but that 
he acted as though he had changed his mind. This was serious, not only in itself, but 
in its consequences, For Peter held high position as an apostle. His influence would 
have carried the rest of the Jews forward in their free intercourse with the Gentiles, 
But when he dissembled, he carried the rest of the Jews with him in his dissimulation. 
Numbers carry influence as well as position. Even Barnabas got into the stream, Ho 
was a man of position. He had been under the influence of Paul, and with Paul had 
championed Gentile liberty at Jerusalem. But when the rest of the Jews dissembled 
with Peter, the consequence was (expressed, if not by “insomuch,” by “ carried”) that 
he was carried away as by a stream. Paul was equal to the occasion. “But when I 
saw that they walked not uprightly according to the truth of the gospel.” The influence 
from James was not decided enough. Peter dissembled, the rest of the Jews followed, 
even Barnabas was carried off his feet, only Paul walked, as the expression here is, with 
straight feet,—the stream did not carry him away; for which the Church to all time is 
his debtor. He saw that they were not straight-footed, that they were being carried 
away and aside from the path of gospel liberty. He saw what was at stake, that it was 
really, as before, the enslavement of the Gentiles; and therefore, unawed by the reputa- 
tion of Peter, unawed by the influence of numbers, unshaken by the desertion of 
Barnabas, he to the face withsteod Peter. 

11. THE words WITH WHICH HE WiTHsroop Peter. “1 said unto Cephas before 
them all.” It was not silent, dogged withstanding ; it was rational withstanding. Paul 
had his reason, which he stated, not only promptly, but publicly. Peter’s offence had 
been public, especially in its consequences. It was not a case, therefore, for consulting 
the feelings of the offender. 'lhere was public procedure to be counteracted. hey all, 
as well as Peter, needed to be brought back to the truth of the gospel. And therefore 
what he said, he said, not behind Peter’s back, nor to him in private, but to his face 
before them all, 1. Peter was not acting fairly with the Gentiles. “If thou, being a 
Jew, livest as do the Gentiles, and not as do the Jews, how compellest thou the Gentiles 
to live as do the Jews?” Paul proceeds upon Veter’s practice. He had been living up 
to that time in Antioch after Gentile fashion, @.e. in disregard of the law of meats, and 
not after Jewish fashion, ¢.e. showing regard to the law of meats. There was no con- 
sistency, therefore, in compelling the Gentiles to Judaize. That is the word which is 
in the Greek (distinct from the former mode of expression), and which ought to have 
been in the translation as guiding to the meaning. ‘he force put upon the Gentiles 
was not the force of Peter’s example, but the force or logic of Peter's position. It was 
not that Gentiles needed to be circumcised in order to have communion with Christ, 
which had been disclaimed at the public conference; but it was that they needed to 
be circumcised in order to have communion with Jewish Christians. In that respect 
it was putting the Gentiles to the necessity of Judaizing. 2. Jews as well as Gentiles 
needed to believe on Christ in order to be justified, «We being Jews by nature, and not 
sinners of the Gentiles, yet knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the 
Law, save through faith in Jesus Christ, even we believed on Jesus Christ, that we might 
be justified by faith in Christ and not by the works of the Law: because by the worke 


ow, it, L—21.] THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 111 


of the Law shall no flesh be justified.” Three times is the word “justified ” used here, 
three times are the works of the Law disclaimed as the ground of justification, and three 
times are we said to be justified by faith in Christ. Paul proceeds on the fact that 
they (and he includes himself) were Jews. The Gentiles were sinners (actually) ; 
hence the need for a barrier being raised against Gentilism. The Jews were privileged. 
There was much in the distinction, apart from the sclf-righteousness that might be put 
into it, and which Paul here meets with a touch of irony. But there was nothing in 
it for justification. ‘To be justified is to be regarded as having met the requiremerts of 
Law. They, Jews, saw two things with regard to justification. They saw that a man 
ts not justified by the works of the Law. ‘he requirements of the Law are briefly that 
we love the Lord our God with all our soul, with all our strength, and with all our 
mind; and that we love our neighbours as ourselves, This love should be exhibited 
in our works. But, as they fall far short of such a standard, they are not the source 
out of which we can be justified. They saw also that a man is justified through faith 
in Jesus Christ. ‘They saw where justification was not to be found; they, beyond 
that, saw where it was to be found. Not seeing it in themselves, in their own works, 
they saw it in Christ. He has met all the requirements of Law. His work can carry 
a favourable sentence. And we are justified by means of faith in him; not because of 
the nature or degree of our faith, but simply because of our faith bringing us into a 
relationship to Christ as our Surety, in which we are regarded as having met all the 
requirements of Law. Sceing these two things with regard to justification, they, Jews, 
acted upon them, They believed on Christ Jesus not otherwise than the Gentiles. 
They sought to be justified, not on the ground of their own works, but on the ground 
of Christ’s work. They saw that works could not be the ground from their own 
Scriptures, in which they read, “ By the works of the Law shall no flesh be justified.” 
8. Paul repudiates an inference from Jews needing to tuke up the position of sinners 
along with Gentiles, in order to be justified in Christ. “ But il, while we sought to be 
justified in Christ, we ourselves also were found sinners, is Christ a minister of sin? 
God forbid.” He is proceeding upon the former statement. They, Jews, were not 
justified by the works of the Law,—that was equivalcnt to their being found sinners. 
This name, jarring to the ear, had formerly been applied to the Gentiles. Were they, 
then, to be classed as sinners with the Gentiles in order to be justified in Christ? Was 
that not (some might say) making Christ a minister of sin? Such an inference with 
all his heart he repudiates. God forbid. It is no more making Christ a minister of sin 
than one who comes with the means of escape to a man who is unconsciously perishing 
is the minister of danger to him, The first ministry that man needs is the ministry of 
conviction. We must be roused out of our self-pleasing dreams to see that we are sinners. 
And Christ is doing us a loving service when, even in his offer of salvation, he convicts 
us of sins. 4. He ts rather proved the transgressor who builds up after pulling down. 
“ For if I build up again those things which I destroyed, I prove myself a transgressor.” 
The connection is that, instead of Christ being the minister of sin, he himself would be 
proved the transgressor. While not using Peter’s name, he puts Peter’s case. Peter 
had pulled down, in becoming a Christian believer; he had abandoned Law-righteous- 
ness. Now he was building up again, in giving the Law a place for justification, If 
he, Paul, did that, he would be proved a transgressor. He would certainly be a trans- 
gressor between the time of his pulling it down and the time of his building it up again. 
5. His own experience carried him beyond the Law. “For I through the Law died 
unto the Law, that I might live unto God.” The Law was the instrument by which 
there was effected his death to the Law. It showed him to be a sinner, but that led 
to his seeing how the curse was removed, how all the claims of Law were for ever met; 
so that he becanie a dead man to the Law, placed for ever beyond its power. He was 
a dead man io the Law, that he might be a living man to God—in his having his 
covenant standing secured, but also in his having his being vitalized by God and drawn 
towards God. 6. He presents in himself a threefold contrast. (1) Crucified, and yet 
he lives. “1 have been crucified with Christ; yet I live’? The contrast has already 
been presented ; here (if we adopt the punctuation, to which there is no decisive objec- 
tion) it is made to stand out. How he became a dead man to the Law was by sharing 
death with Christ as his represcntative, even the particular form of death, viz, eruet- 
fixion, The contrast was startling (to the disciples aud to the murderers) when Christ 


112 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. [cx. nm. 1—21 


presented himself alive after his crucifixion, “I am he that liveth, and was dead.” 
This representation repeats the contrast in us. Nay, our crucifixion is carried down so 
that not in successive moments but in the same moment we share with Christ in hi 

crucifixion and in his resurrection. (2) Himself, and yet not himself. “And yet no 
longer I, but Christ liveth in me.” ‘The crucifixion has not been the annihilation of 
self; for it can still be said, “I live.” It is he who, as a living man, stretches himself, 
who before was crucified, All the elements in the new life are ours as subsisting in us. 
But there has been the crucifixion of the old self. here is a rapidity in the thought— 
No longer 1. It is no longer self that is the ceutral principle of our life. That isa 
false, God-opposing self that has been, and is being, taken forth and crucified before our 
eyzs. Away with self in the place that does not rightfully belong to it, A change has 
heen made from wrong to right. It is Christ we have placed at the centre of our life; 
trom which centre he rules the whole life, fills us with his own light, and strength, and 
peace, and joy, so that it is truly Christ living in us. (8) A life in the flesh, and yet a 
life of faith. “ Aud that life which I now live in the flesh I live in faith, the faith which 
is in the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself up for me.” “ We exist here ina 
double connection—first, with the transitory on one side; and, secondly, with the untran- 
sitory on the other. The sponge gets its food and life from the fluid, ever-moving waters 
of the sea; but it must be also fastened to some rock that does not move, and gives firm 
anchorage to it in the waters. The bird has wings connecting it with the air, and feet 
on which it takes the ground for rest or settles in firm hold on its perch for the slee;) 
of the night. Trees get their feeding largely from the air, and the light in which their 
foliage so receptively spreads itself and their limbs so gracefully play; but they must 
have their roots also taking firm hold of the ground, by these to be localized and kept 
erect and steady in the storms. By such feeble analogies we conceive the double state of 
man, connected on one side with infinite mutabilities in things, and on the other with 
immttable ideas and truths and God.” The great object with which our Jaith brinys 
us into communion in the unseen world is here said to be the Son of God, who loved us 
and gave himself for us. And what we have to do in our life in the flesh is to draw 
our life from redeeming love. What we have to do amid our experience of sin is io 
appropriate redemption. And this we have to do, not once, but habitually. 7. What 
his care was. “Ido not make void the grace of God: for if righteousness is throu. ἢ 
the Law, then Christ died for nought.” His care was to magnify the grace of God in ihe 
death of Christ. He would not allow the Law to be sufficient for righteousness, becatise 
that would be to make void the grace of God ina way which was never to be thought of, 
viz. making the death of Christ superfluous. All make void the grace of God who live 
as though Christ had never died. Let us magnify the grace of God by regarding the 
death of Christ as all-sufficient for righteousness—taking it as our righteousness.—R, |". 


Ver. 7.—Diversities of administrations. I, THE GOSPEL 18 OFFERED TO MEN IN ALL 
CIRCUMSTANCES OF LIFE. It is for men of every race, practising all varieties of social 
habits, living in different stages of civilization, holding the utmost diversities of creed, 
viewing the gospel itself from many distinct standpoints. None are so privileged as 
not to need it—the circumcised want it. None are so neglected as to be excluded from 
it—the uncircumcised have it preached to them. In the breadth of Divine love God 
has so ordered it that means shall be found for spreading his grace in the various 
directions where it is needed. 

II. Dirrzrent MEN ARE CALLED TO DIFFERENT FIELDS OF CHRISTIAN WoRK. Division 
of labour is as valuable in the Church as in business. This princiyle is generally 
recognized in foreign missions. It would greatly economize work and money and save 
much unseemly strife if it were equally acknowledged at home, It is to the shame of 
the Church tliat so much of its efforts is spent in maintaining the rivalry of the sects 
and parties, while the great world lies neglected. If the labourers are few it is a scandal 
that they should be quarrelling for their rights on the little patch already cleared. 
We are too short-sighted, We should “lift up our eyes.” There the fields white to 
the harvest would call us out to broader efforts. 

II, Tue various FUNCTIONS OF CHRISTIAN WORK ARE DETERMINED BY THE VARIOUS 
GIFTS OF THE CuRISTIAN LABOURERS. St. Paul was most fitted for Gentiles, St. Peter 
for Jews. ‘They wisely recognized their diversity of vocations. It is important to 866 


on, 1. 1—21.] THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 113 


that we are in the right work. What is the best work for one man may be very 
unsuitable for another, We shall fail if we slavishly copy the most successful servants 
of Christ in a line that may not be ours, Butler could not organize a revival; nor 
could Wesley confute deism. We may be discouraged needlessly at our failure. Try 
some other work till the right work is discovered. The important point is to find our 
mission in our capacities rather than in our inclinations. We are not necessarily most 
fit for the work we like best. Still sympathy with a particular work is one great aid 
to success; only let us see that we do not confound this with self-will or ambition. 

IV. Diversiry OF ADMINISTRATIONS IMPLIES No Discord. Rather it is the best 
security for harmony. When all attempt the same work jealousy and rivalry spring 
up. If we differ naturally we are sure to come in conflict when trying to do the same 
thing. ‘The ox and the ass are useful beasts, but bad yokefellows. ‘The Apostles Paul 
and Peter could not have remained on friendly terms if they had kept to the same 
field, We should show friendship for those who are carrying on a different work from 
our own, recognizing them as fellow-servants with one Master. 

V. THE SAME ‘TRUTH AND GRACE ARU FOUND IN DIVERSITIES OF ADMINISTRATIONS. 
St. Paul and St. Peter preached essentially the same gospel. ‘There is but one Christ 
and one narrow way. Diversity cannot go beyond the one gospel without becoming 
apostasy —W. I. A. 


Ver. 11.—A bold rebuke. 'Yhere can be no doubt that this rebuke offered by one 
apostle to another was rea] and earnest, and not, as St. Jerome tricd to maintain, adramatic 
pretence. We have here, then, the startling spectacle of the two leading apostles in 
conflict. Yet it is plainly implied that they were not opposed in their general work. 
It was not their teaching nor their normal practice, but one particular act of weakness 
that occasioned the trouble. 

1. APosTLES ARE FALLIBLE. Plainly St. Peter was to blame. If St. Paul’s view of 
tue gospel were correct—as we must all now hold—St. Peter was wrons in ceasing to eat 
with Gentiles. But even if the view of the Jerusalem Church were correct, he was 
not the less to blame in first following the more liberal course, and then abandoning it 
out of deference to the party of James. He was clearly inconsistent, and it is evident 
that his inconsistency was not due to change of conviction, but only to culpable weak- 
ness, 1. If an apostle fail, who else will presume to be safe? 2. ‘lhe “fear of man 
that bringeth a snare” is a fruitful source of temptation to many of the best men, 
espccially in regard to sins against charity. We secm to be ashamed of our charity 
more than of any other grace, and yet it is the noblest and the most essentially Chris- 
tian. 8. Distinguish between apostolic teaching and apostolic conduct. Neither in 
his preaching nor in his writing did St. Peter defend the course he pursued at Antivch, 
Inspiration ior teaching does not imply faultlessness in action. 

11. 11 15 RIGHT TO REBUKE DANGEKOUS FAULTS. St. Peter was the senior apostle, 
and it might seem presumptuous to oppose him. He was the foremost apostle, and 
opposition might endanger the peace of the Church. Many would let deference to 
years and rank and fear of painful discord prevent them from acting as St. Paul acted. 
But right is above all personal considerations, There are interests of the Church that 
may be ruined by a slavish fear of disturbing peace, The peace thus secured is a false 
peace. There are times when controversy in the Church is a duty of paramount 
importance. It may be the only security against fatal error. Yet, though then the 
least of evils, it is still an evil, and should not be undertaken without grave reason. 1. 
In the present instance the question was of vital importance, It cut ut ti.e root of the 
unity and brotherhood of the Church. If Christians could not eat together at the 
“agape,” te simple but all-significant meal of the Chrislian family, the Church would 
be bruken up. This was no light matter to be overlooked. It demanded even the 
contention of apostle with apostle. Let us see that the importance of the cause is 
sufficient to justify the painful consequences of a controversy before opening it up. 2. 
The question was of publicinterest. ‘Ihe lault of St. Peter was no secret, nor did it only 
concern himself. His powerful example affected others, till even St. Barnabas was led 
away. No private friendship can be pleaded in excuse for letting a public evil go 
unchecked. In such cases brother must oppose brother, though his heart bleeds at the 
necessity. 

GALATIANS, I 


114 HE EPISTLE TO THR GALATIANS, fom. πὶ 1-- 51. 


Til. ΒΕΒΟΚΕ sHOULD BE OPEN AND DIRECTLY OFFERED TO THE OFFENDER. St. Paul 
““withstood him to the face.” It needed no little courage for the new and often-sus- 
pected apostle thus to challenge the first man in the Church. Few have such courage, 
and many only betake themselves to backbiting. If we have anything against a man, 
the right thing is to tell it him to his face. This is the only honourable course. It is 
due to him in fairness. It prevents misunderstanding, and often saves a long and 
widespread quarrel. Such a course escapes presumption if it is taken with an honest 
conviction that the conduct opposed is wrong, with a sincere desire to save others 
from the consequences of it, with all humility in regard to one’s self as equally fallible 
and with great kindness and charity for the offender. Yet we are not all called to this 
work, It requires a Paul to rebuke a Pcter wisely and well.—W. F. A. 


Ver. 16.—Justification by faith. These words contain the pith and kernel of the 
Epistle. Occurring in historical narration, they strike the key-note of what is rather an 
expostulation and appeal to previous convictions than an original, calm argument, such 
as is the treatment of the same subject in the Epistle to the Romans, St. Paul says 
he convicted St. Peter of inconsistency in requiring Gentiles to Judaize, by reminding 
him that even they, Jews as they were, were not justified on account of works, but 
through faith in Christ. By an easy and natural transition this reminiscence is made 
the occasion for passing from the historical to the doctrinal part of the Epistle. That 
vreat truth which called forth the protest of apostle against apostle is the truth from 
which the Galatians, like the Christians at Antioch, are being lured away. It is of the 
essence of Christianity to them as it was to their sister Church, and as it will be to the 
Church in all ages. 

I, CunisTIANITY BRINGS JusTIFIcATION. What is justification? Some have under- 
stood it as “ making righteous,” others as “accounting righteous.” It is plain that 
St. Paul does teach that real righteousness is obtained through faith (e.g. Rom. iii. 21). 
But it is equally plain that the natural rendering of such a passage as that now before 
us suggests the idea of treating or reckoning as righteous. The inference is that St. 
Paul used the expressions in both senses. And the inference from that is, not that he 
was confused in thought or consciously ambiguous, but that he saw a much closer 
connection between the two than Protestant theology, in revulsion from Romanism, has 
always made apparent. Justification is the immediate result of forgiveness. God 
cannot think a man to be other than he is; but he can act towards him better than he 
deserves, can treat a sinner as only a righteous man deserves to be treated. This is 
justification. Now, forgiveuess is personal and moral. It is not mere remission of 
penalties, It is reconciliation and restitution. The justification which is the con- 
sequence is not a mere external thing. It sows the seed of positive righteousness by 
infusing the highest motive for it. If it did not do this it would be immoral. Jus- 
tification is itself justified by its fruits. This great boon is the first grace of Christianity. 
Until we are forgiven and thus justified we cannot begin to serve God. 

11. CHRISTIANITY DECLARES THE FAILURE OF ATTEMPTING TO SECURE JUSTIFICATION 
THROUGH WORKS OF Law. All the world over men have been making frantic but futile 
efforts in this direction. A sickening sense of failure is the invariable result (Rom. 
vii. 24). It is like the vanishing of a nightmare to see that the whole attempt is a 
mistake, that God recognizes its impotence, and that he does not expect us to succeed 
in it. 1. We cannot be justified through works of Law, because if we do our best we are 
unprofitable servants, and have only done what we ought to have done. The slave whose 
whole time belongs to his master cannot earn anything by working overtime, Future 
obedience is simply obligatory on its own account; it cannot atone for past negligence. 
2. We cannot renew our own nature by anything we do, seeing that we only work 
outwards from our nature. While the heart is corrupt the conduct cannot be justifying. 
3. There is no life in Law to infuse power for holier service. Law restrains and 
represses; it cannot renew and inspire. Only love and grace can do that. 4. Never- 
theless, obedience to the principles of the Law is not superseded by any other method of 
justification. It is the justified through faith, and they only, who truly obey the Law, 
delighting to do the will of God. 

IIL. CHRIsTIANITY PROMISES JUSTIFICATION THROUGH FAITH IN CuRist. 1. Faith is 
the means of justification, not the grounds of it. We are not justified on account of 


én. τι. 1—21.] THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 118 


faith, but through faith. Faith is not, taken as itself, a virtue serving just as works of 
Law were supposed to serve. The one ground of forgiveness and renewal is the grace 
of God in Christ. Faith is the means of securing this, because it unites us to Christ. 
2. Tris faith is in Christ, not in a creed. We may cast our thoughts about Christ into 
acreed, Yet what is necessary is not the understanding of and assent to any doctrines, 
but trust in a Person. 3. The faith is active trust. It is not only believing about 
Christ, but relying on him in conduct. For example, it is like, not only believing that 
a certain pillar-box belongs to the post-office, but also dropping one’s letter into it. 4. 
It is trust to Christ in all his relations, and therefore as much the confidence in him as 
our Lord and Master that directly leads to obedience, as passive reliance on him as a 
Sea for the forgiveness and renewal which we can never work out for ourselves.— 


Ver. 19.—Dying to Law and living to God. Here 1s ἃ history of man’s experience 
with Law. At first the vision of Law crushes and terrifies. Then it works deliverance 
from the life that is wholly given up to it. This deliverance is not for antinomian 
licence, but for spiritual life in God. 

I Wuarisir ΤῸ pix ΤῸ Law? Law here is not merely the Mosaic code. It is 
generic. Every nation has more or less some conception of Jaw. We all feel it in our 
conscience. ‘To live for this, to toil simply to meet its requirements, to be gloomy and 
despondent at our failure, is to live to Law. ‘This by no means implies perlect or even 
partial obedience to Law. It may go with absolute failure; it is never found resulting 
in the complete harmony of Law and conduct. Now, to die.to Law is to be free from 
this galling yoke. It is to be liberated from the frightful vision of an obligation that 
is imperative and yet beyond our powers—the nightmare feeling that we must do 
what we cannot do. It is freedom, too, from the habit of living in regard to Law ag 
the rule and motive of life. 

II. How pors Law LEaD To THIS RESULT? We can understand how the gospel does 
it by offering forgiveness and by calling us to a better method of holiness. But Law 
also strangles the life that dwells in it, 1. J¢ condemns our failure, and so shows us that 
it is vain to attempt to live in it. 2. Jé proves itself impotent to give us the means of 
fulfilling its requirements. The longer we live in it the more do we see that such a 
life is fruitless. Thus we gradually cease to feel drawn to it. At length we confess 
our failure and abandon the attempt. ‘The Law has then killed the life we had in it. 

Ill. WHat 18 THE OBJECT OF THIS DEATH TO Law? Revarded by itself it is a 
miserable disaster. Law points to righteousness. ‘lo cease to live in Law is to dismiss 
the discredited guide in the wilderness and to be left alone, By itself the result would 
be ruinous. But it is only permitted in order to clear the way for something better. 
We must not rest in freedom from Law. To be free from the obligation and free from 
the penalty, and to have no new and better life, would be the collapse and degradation 
of all moral order. That is a false and fatal gospel which consists only in the promise 
of such a result, The only reason for allowing it is to secure the new life in God. 1. 
This means exchanging a blind submission to Law for a loving obedience to our Father 
in heaven. 2. It means abandoning the helpless command for the inspiration of a 
living presence. This is the true Christian life. It is therefore no selfish salvation 
that is offered to us, but a life of self-dedication, a losing of self in God. Note that 
the Law does not lead to this result, nor does dying to the Law. Thus far only the way 
is prepared. The new life in God flows from the gospel of Christ.—W. F. A. 


Ver. 20.—Crucified with Christ. St. Paul’s Christianity was identification of the 
Christian with Christ. It was not merely believing a scheme of doctrine, nor following 
a certain course of devotion, nor accepting an offered grace. It was absolute union 
with Christ in spiritual experience. Nothing is more characteristic of the apostle than 
the way in which, in almost every Epistle, he describes the Christian life as going step 
by step with the life of Christ from the earthly humiliation and death to the heavenly 
triumph. Here the most essential elements of that experience are pointed out, and the 
secret of them declared. 

I, THE ESSENTIAL CHRISTIAN EXPERIENCE. 1, Crucifixion with Christ. This ia no 
figure of speech, meaning only that, inasmuch as Christ died for us, we may be said to 


116 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. (cu. π΄ 1: -21. 


have been crucified representatively in him. The passionate earnestness of St. Paul in 
describing his own spiritual renewal goes far beyond any such shallow conception. He 
is plainly describing what he really endured. (1) This is death. The old life is killed 
out. The passions, lusts, habits, and associations of the life in sin, self, and worldliness 
are mortified. Christianity is not simply educational. It is first of all militant— 
purging, scouring, killing. (2) This is crucifixion—a painful, violent death ; for it is 
no light matter to destroy the life in sin, so full of pleasant attractions, and so deeply 
rooted in our inmost nature—and a judicial execution, wrought on us by the vindictive 
powers of our own treacherous passions when once we turn from them to faith in 
Christ. (8) This is a crucifixion with Christ. Our union with Christ necessitates this 
death of the old life and brings it about. ‘The new wine bursts the old bottles. Con- 
science and Law fail to destroy the old life, though they reveal its hideous deformity. 
But when we come to Calvary and reach out to the dying Christ, entering into his 
experience by faith and vivid sympathy, the old self receives its mortal wounds. Then 
we can live the former life no longer. 2. Christ liviny in us. St. Paul feels that he 
has so given himself up to Ubrist that the ruling power in him is no longer self but 
Christ. This is true Christianity. (1) It is life. We die that we may live. We 
begin with mortifying the old life, but we do not continue to exist in a barren asceti- 
cism. New energies spring up from the grave of the old life. (2) This life is Christ’s. 
It derives its power from Christ, it is swayed by the will of Christ, it seeks the ends of 
Christ, it breathes the spirit of Christ, it is lived in personal communion with Christ. 
Selfish aims and self-devised resources are gone, and in their place the grace of Christ 
is the inspiration, and the mind and will of Christ are the controlling influences of the 
new life. This is not a future possibility, out a present attainment. The life is now 
lived in the flesh. 

11. THE SECRET OF THIS EXPERIENCE. 1. It is realized through faith. St. Paul lives 
“in faith.” The power of Christ to destroy the old life and live himself in us depends 
on our faith in him, and is excrcised just in proportion as we yield ourselves to him in 
trustful reliance and loyal obedience. No fate will make it ours, no mechanical 
jufluence will secure it. Intelligently, voluntarily, we must exercise faith in him to 
be joined to him in crucifixion and new life. Faith is always the greatest bond of 
union, 2. It is determined by the love and sacrifice of Christ. Here is the motive 
for our faith. The love of Christ constrains us. The gift of himself for us reveals 
and confirms his love and brings it home to our hearts. The explanation of the revo- 
lution in St, Paul’s life, of the death of the persecutor, and the creation of the apostle, 
is his coming under the influence of these truths, To enjoy the same experience we 
must (1) fix our thoughts on the same great, wonderful love and sacrifice of Christ; 
and (2) appropriate them personally to ourselves. “He loved me,” ete.—W. F. A. 


Ver. 21.—Grace frustrated. 1. Ir wE SEEK FOR RIGHTEOUSNESS BY MEANS oF Law 
WE MAKE NO USE OF THE GRACE OF Gop, Here are two rival methods for obtaining 
righteousness. The first is wide and various, by means of Law, any law—the Levitical 
system, ascetic discipline, rites of heathen mysteries, Stoic philosophy, our own attempts 
to conform to an outside rule. The second is specific, the grace of God, the grace 
shown in the gospel, the grace that comes through the sacrifice of Christ. These two 
methods are mutually exclusive. They run in opposite directions. The Judaizing 
party was trying to combine them. The Roman Catholics made the same attempt 
when they regarded justification as the result of works wrought by means of grace. 
But, though grace does lead us to confurmity with Law, it can only do so in its own way 
by changing the heart and planting principles of righteousness, not by assisting the 
old servile effort to keep certain external ordinances. The old stage-coach can be of no 
assistance to the express train. By so much of the distance as you go by road you 
leave the rail and therefore lose ground. The mistake of neglecting grace for Law is (1) 
foolish, for we thus lose a help freely offered ; (2) ungrateful, for we refuse the gift of 
God; and (3) dangerous, for we shall be to blame for the failure that could Lave been 
avoided had we not declined to avail ourselves of God’s method of righteousness, All 
attempts, then, to increase holiness by monastic rules, regulations of a religious order, 
specific vows, or restraints of formal Church discipline are unchristian. The higher 
righteousness must be attained by the same means through which the first elements 


on. πὶ, 1—29,] THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 117 


were secured. Auy other method is poorer and weaker. 
can never improve upon grace. 

11. IF RIGHTEOUSNESS WERE ATTAINABLE BY MEANS OF Law, CHRIST’S DEATH WOULD 
WAVE BEEN TO No PURPOSE. 1. The method of Law was the older method. If this had 
been successful there would have been no need to add another. If the Old Testament 
were enough the New Testament need never have been produced. 2, The method of 
Law was the Jess costly method. We do not turn to more expensive methods if no 
auperior advantage is to be gained by them. The new method is only possible at the 
greatest possible cost. The righteousness by Law required no special sacrifice, The 
righteousness by grace required the death of the Son of God. How much superior 
must God consider it to be willing to pay so heavy a price in order to secure it to us! 
We may be sure that, if by any easier way the same results could have been reached, 
God would have spared his own Son. Yet they who neglect this grace for the old 
method of Law proclaim by their actions that the great sacrifice was unnecessary. For 


We begin with grace; we 


themselves, too, they do make it a useless thing, 
Refusing to avail themselves of the grace of God, they bring it to pass that, as 


error, 


This is the pathetic side of their 


far as they are concerned, Christ died in vain.—W. F, A. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER OL 


Ver. 1.—0 foolish Galatians (ὦ ἀνόητοι 
Γαλάται). In thus apostrophizing them, the 
apostle brands their present behaviour, not 
any lack of intelligence on their part in 
general (comp. Luke xxiv. 25). “ Foolish” 
~—to allow yourselves to be thus robbed of 
your happiness. The transporting feeling 
of elevation and joy with which, in ch. i, 
19—21, the, apostle describes himself as 
crucified with Christ to the Law, and as 
living in Christ and through Christ, makes 
him the more keenly sensible of the sense- 
less folly shown by the Galatians in taking 
up the observance of the Law. Who hath 
bewitched you, that ye should not obey the 
truth? (rls ὑμᾶς ἐβάσκανε; [Receptus adds, 
τῇ ἀληθείᾳ ph πείθεσθαι); who in his envy 
did bewitch you? With respect to the 
Greek text, there is now no doubt amongst 
editors that the words, τῇ ἀληθείᾳ μὴ πείθε- 
σθαι, “that ye should not obey the truth,” 
are not genuine here, being in all proba- 
bility foisted in from ver. 7, We have, 
therefore, to omit them and to read ἐβά- 
σκανεν a8 before οἷς. ᾿Εβάσκανεν is a remark- 
able word, and calls for comment. In common 
Greek, βασκαίνειν τινά, to treat one with 
malignant words, means either to slander, 
belie, blacken oharacter, or to cast upon 
him primarily words conveying baleful 
s2lls, and then, in later usage very fre- 
ezently, baleful spells of any kind, ond 
more especially spells from the “ evil eye” 
(Aristotle, Plutarch); in the language of 
old English superstition, ‘ forclook” or 
“overlook.” Indeed, so closely did this 
last notion cling to the verb, as to have 
suggested to Greek grammarians for its 
etymology, φάεσι xalvew, “to kill with the 
eyes.” The more scientific etymologista of 


recent days derive it from βάζω, βάσκω, 
speak; as if it were “to bespeak a 
man.” The nouns βάσκανος, βασκανία, 
following the senses of the verb, express 
the ideas, either of envious detraction or 
of sorcery (see Schneider; Passow; Liddell 
and Scott). In the New Testament the 
word occurs only here. In the Septuagint 
we meet with it in Deut. xxviii54, where, 
for the words, “ His eye shall be evil to- 
wards his brother,” we have Βασκανεῖ τῷ 
ὀφθαλμῷ αὐτοῦ τὸν ἀδελφὸν αὐτοῦ, meaning 
apparently, “ He shall grudge with his eye 
his brother;” and so again in ver. 56, the 
same phrase is used analogously of the 
tender woman, “She shall grudge with her 
eye her husband;” ‘cclus. xiv. 6, “There 
is not @ worse man (τοῦ βασκαίνοντος ἑαυτόν) 
than he that grudges his own self;” ibid. 
ver. 8, “Evil is (6 βασκαίνων ὀφθαλμῷ) he 
that grudgeth with his eye.” In Scripture, 
both in the Old Testament and the New, 
and in the Apocrypha, the phrases, “the 
eye being evil,” “the evil eye,” following 
the Hebrew, always denote envy, ill nature, 
niggardliness (Deut. xv. 9; xxviii. 54, 56; 
Prov. xxiii. 6 [comp. Prov. xxii. 9, “a 
bountiful eye”]; Matt. xx. 15; Mark vii. 
22). Nowhere either in the Scriptures or 
in the Apocrypha is there any reference 
to “forelooking,” unless perchance the 
me’énen, Deut. xx. 10 (Authorized Version, 
“observer of times”), is etymologically 
connected with the Hebrew word for “eye,” 
which, however, few critics suppose. Igna- 
tius, ‘Ad Rom.’, 3, has Οὐδέποτε ἐβασκάνατε 
οὐδένα, ἄλλους ἐδιδάξατε, “never grudged 
any man.” This Septuagintal use of the 
verb presents, as the reader will observe, a 
somewhat different shade of meaning to 
any of those cited above from the lexicons 
Following, however, its guidance, we may 


118 


THE EPISTLE ΤῸ THE GALATIANS, 


(cu. πὲ, 1-29, 


understand the apostle as here asking, 
“Whose ill-natured jealousy was it that 
did light upon you?” and as intending to 
convey these two ideas: (1) the envy of 
their once happy state which actuated the 
agent referred to; and, (2) by implication, 
the baleful effect wrought by the envier 
upon them. The aorist of the verb seems 
to point to a decisive result. He had, it is 
hinted, succeeded in his wish; he had 
robbed them of the blessedness which had 
excited his jealousy. In respect to the 
former idea, elsewhere (ch. ‘iv. 17, “They 
would fain shut you out”) the apostle 
ascribes the action of their misleaders to 
sinister designs- against their well-being. 
It is, indeed, this thought that inspires the 
extreme severity of his language above in 
ch. ii. 4; the βάσκανος, of whom he here 
speaks, belonged to, or derived from, them. 
In short, the pathetic question here before 
us breathes the like indignation and vexa- 
tion as that in ch. v. 7, “ Ye were running 
on well: who did hinder you that ye should 
not obey the truth ?”—the last words of 
which passage, though not admissible here 
in the text, would, however, if there, form a 
perfectly correct explanatory clause. The 
more distinctly to mark the effect actually 
produced. by the envier, very many com- 
mentators have enwoven into their interpre- 
tation of ἐβάσκανεν, besides its Septuagintal 
sense, its other sense of blasting with some 
kind of charm: “The malignity,” Chrysostom 
writes, “ofa demon whose spirit [or, ‘breath’] 
had blasted their prosperous estate.” Great 
use has been made, in particular, by many, 
as, e.g. Jerome and, according to Estius, by 
Thomas Aquinas, of the superstition of the 
“evil eye,” which, in the countries border- 
ing on the Meditcrranean, bas in all ages 
been so rife. Bishop Lightfoot, in his 
interesting note on the passage, offers the 
following paraphrase: “Christ’s death in 
vain? O ye senseless Gauls, what bewitch- 
ment is this? I placarded Christ crucified 
before your eyes. Ye suffered them to 
wandcr from this gracious proclamation of 
your King. They rested on the withering 
eye of the sorcerer. They yielded to the 
fascination and were riveted there. And 
the life of your souls has been drained out 
of you by that envious gaze.” It may, 
however, be questioned whether the apostle 
would have recognized his own thought in 
this thorough-going application of tle super- 
stition of the “evil eye.” It is doubtful 
whether he used the verb ἐβάσκανεν with 
reference to any species of sorcery at-all; 
but if he did, he may have intended no 
more than this: “ What envious ill-wisher 
has by some strange, inexplicable sorcery 
s0 wrought upon you? Or, how can I ex- 
plain your behaviour, except that you have 


been acting under some binding spell? 
Surely such folly is well-nigh inconceivable 
with men in free possession of their own 
souls.” But (1) each of these two render- 
ings of the passage is open to the objection 
that St. Paul, in writing ἐβάσκανεν, either 
might have intended to express by the word 
“envious grudging,” according to ita Sep- 
tuagintal use, or he might have meaat 
some kind of sorcery according to a common 
acceptation of the term, but could hardly 
have meant to convey both senses together. 
(2) The introduction of the supposition is 
inconvenient, not only because there could 
not have really been any such ingredient 
in the actual circumstances of the present 
case, but also because its mention would 
serve to excuse the folly of the Galatians, 
as indeed Chrysostom observes that it does, 
rather than to enhance its censure, which 
latter would have been more to the apostle’s 
purpose. (3) It seems especially improbable 
that the apostle was thinking of the “evil 
eye”? when we consider the entire absence 
of its mention in the sacred writings. Before 
whose eyes Jesus Christ hath been evidently 
set forth, crucified among you? (οἷς κατ᾽ 
ὀφθαλμοὺς ᾿Ιησοῦς Χριστὸς προεγράφη, ἐν ὑμῖν 
ἐσταυρωμένος ;); to whom, before your very 
eyes, Jesus Christ had been (literally, was) 
aforetime (or, openly) seé forth crucified 
(among you)? ‘The genuineness of the 
words, ἐν ὕμιν, “among you,” is very doubt- 
ful. The Revised Greek text omits them. 
The words, κατ᾽ ὀφθαλμούς, “ before your very 
eyes,” are very pointed; for the Greek ex- 
pression, comp. κατὰ πρόσωπον (ch. ii. 11), and 
Aristoph., ‘ Ran.,’ 625, iva σοι κατ᾽ ὀφθαλμοὺς 
λέγῃ, “that he may say it to your very 
face.” The sense of προεγράφη is much 
disputed. It is not clear whether the πρὸ 
is the “ before” of time or of place. Of the 
other passages in the New Testament in 
which this compound verb occurs, in Rom. 
xv. 4 twice, and Eph. iii. 3, πρὸ is certainly, 
and in Jude 4 probably, not so certainly 
(comp. 1 Mace. x. 36, “ enrolled”), “ before” 
of time. In the present passage a reference 
to the prophecies of the Old Testament 
seems out of place. It is far more suitable 
to the connection to suppose that the apostle 
is referring to his own preaching. Some 
commentators, retaining the werds, ἐν ὑμῖν, 
connect them with προεγράφη in the sense 
of “in you,” comparing “Christ in you” 
(Col. i. 27), and “ written in your hearts” 
(2 Cor. iii. 2); and so render the words thus: 
“written of, or described, before in you.” 
But such an expression, sufficiently awkward 
in itself, would further be very unsuitably 
introduced after the words, “before your 
very eyes.” Supposing we take the πρὸ as of 
time, there is no satisfactory explanation 
of the ἐγράφη, if understood in the sense of 
om, 


on. mr. 1—29.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 


119 


writing, there being no tablet (so to speak) 
suggested on which the writing could be 
conceived of as done. γράφω, it is true, 
means “describe” in John i. 45 and Rom. 
x. 5; but it is still a description in writing. 
We are, therefore, driven to assign to the 
verb the notion of portraying as in a paint- 
ing, 8. sense which in Common Greek ‘it 
certainly does sometimes bear, and which 
attaches to it in the διαγράφω of Ezek. iv. 1; 
viii, 10 (Septuagint). We thus gain the 
sense, “‘had before been set forth or por- 
trayed;” before (that is) the envier assailed 
you. This same sense, of portraying rather 
than of writing, would be also the best to 
give to the verb, supposing the πρὸ to be 
understood as the “before” of place; which 
conception of the preposition Bishop Light- 
foot contends for, urging the use of the verb 
προγράφειν, and the nouns πρόγραμμα and 
mpoypaph, with reference to the placards on 
which public notices were given of political 
or other matters of business. When, how- 
ever, we consider how partial the apostle 
is to verbs compounded with mpd of time, 
as is secn in his use of προαιτιάομαι, mpoaxodw, 
προαμαρτάνω, προελπίζω, προενάρχομαι, προ- 
επαγγέλλομαι, προετοιμάζω, προευαγγελίζομαι, 
προκαταγγέλλω, προκαταρτίζω, προκυρόομαι, 
προπάσχω, not a few of which were probably 
compounded by himself as he wanted them, 
it appears highly probable that, to serve 
the present occasion, he here forms the 
compound προγράφω in the sense of “ por- 
traying before,” the compound not existing 
elsewhere in the same sense. He compares, 
then, the idea of Christ crucified, presented 
to his hearers in his preaching, to a por- 
traiture, in which the Redeemer had been 
so vividly and with such striking effect 
exhibited to his converts, that it ought in 
all reason have for ever safeguarded their 
souls against all danger from teaching of an 
alien character. If the phrase, ἐν ὑμῖν, be 
retained, it appears best, with Chrysostom 
and many others, to understand it as mean- 
ing, that St. Paul had presented Christ 
crucified 1n such lively colours to their view, 
that they had, as it were, seen him hanging 
‘on the cross “in their very midst.” ‘The 
position of ἐσταυρωμένος, disconnected from 
᾿Ιησοῦς Χριστὸς and at the end of the sen- 
tence, gives it intense signilicance. What 
the idea of Christ crucified was to his own 
self, the apostle had just before declared ; 
for him it at ouce had destroyed all spiritual 
connection with the ceremonial Law, the Law 
which bade the crucified One away from 
itself as accursed, and also by the infinite 
love to himself which ho beheld manifested 
in Christ crucified for him, had bound him 
to him by spiritual ties both all-constrain- 
ing and indissoluble. And such (he means) 
should have been the effect produced by 


that idea upon theér souls. What envier of 
their happiness in him could, then, possibly 
have torn them from him? This same 
portraiture of “Christ crucified ” whieh he 
reminds the Galatians he had in those days 
presented to them, he also, as he tells the 
Corinthians (1 Cor. i. 23; ii. 2; 2 Oor. v. 
20, 21), had been intent on holding up 
before the Greeks of Achaia; while, further, 
he intimates to the Romans, in his Epistle 
to them, how eager he was to come and at 
Rome also hold up Christ as him whom 
God had set forth to be a Propitiation, 
through faith, by his blood (Rom. 1. 15, 16; 
iii. 25). Both to the Jew and to the Gentile, 
both to Grecks and to barbarians, both 
to wise and to unwise, this, emphatically 
this, was the alone and the sovereign salva- 
tion. This picturing forth of the crucified 
One, however, would hardly from Paul's 
lips concern itself much with the outward 
particulars of the passion; it might have been 
this, in a far greater degree, in St. Peter’s 
presentment of it, who hail been himself 
witness of those sufferings; but Paul, with 
his habits of thought, as we know them from 
his writings, who knew Christ as in the spirit 
rather than as in the flesh, would occupy 
himself more with the spiritual idea of tho 
cross—its embodiment of perfect meekness 
and gentleness and self-sacrifice, of humility, 
of obedience to the Father’s will, of love to 
all mankind, of especial care for his own, 
and its antagonism to the spirit of Levitical 
ceremonialism, ‘Such presentment,” re- 
marks Calvin, “as if in a picture, nay, as if 
actually crucified in the very mist of the 
hearers themselves, no eloquence, no arti- 
fice of rhetoric, can produce, unless that 
mighty working of the Spirit be assistaut 
of which the apostle speaks in his two 
Epistles to the Corinthians (eg. 1 Cor. ii. 
4, 5, 13, 14; 2 Cor. iii. 3, 6). If any, there- 
fore, would fain duly discharge the ministry 
of the gospel, let them learn not so much to 
apply eloquence and declamation, as to 
likewise so pierce into men’s consciences 
that these may truly feel Christ crucified 
and the dropping upon them of his blood. 
Where the Church hath painters such as 
these, she very little needeth any more 
representations in wood and stone, that is, 
dead images, very little auy paintings; and 
certainly among Christians the doors of the 
temples were not open for the reception 
of images and paintings until the shep- 
herds either had grown dumb and become 
mere dolls, or else did say in the pulpit 
no more than just a few words, and these 
in so cold and perfunctory a manner that 
the power and efficacy of the gospel minis- 
try was utterly extinct.” 

Ver. 2.—This only would I learn of you 
(τοῦτο μόνον θέλω μαθεῖν ἀφ᾽ ὑμῶν); this 


120 THE EPISTLE TO 


THE GALATIANS. [ox. τπ. 1—29, 


only would I learn from you. I need ask 
for nothing more to show that the Law is 
nothing to you, than that you should tell 
me this. Received ye the Spirit by the 
works of the Law ? (ἐξ ἔργων νόμου τὸ Πνεῦμα 
ἐλάβετε;); was tt in consequence of works of 
the Law that ye received the Spirit? I came 
amongst you as an apostle, preaching the 
gospel, and upon your baptism laying my 
hands upon you; and the Holy Spirit came 
down upon you, proving the reality of his 
presence both by signs and miracles and 
powers, and also by the love, joy, and peace 
with which your hearts were filled; sealing 
at once the truth of my doctrine and your 
own position individually as recognized 
heirs of the kingdom of God. You re- 
member that time. Well, how was it then? 
Had there a word been then spoken 
touching meats or drinks, or washings of 
purification (besides your baptism into 
Christ), or circumcision, or care of ceremonial 
cleanness? Had you attended to any one 
point whatever of Levitical ordinance? Had 
either you or I cast one thought in that 
direction? The “works of the Law” here 
referred to must still be works of ceremonial 
performance, not those of moral obedience ; 
for repentance, the practical breaking off 
from sin, the surrender of the soul to God 
and to Christ in faith and loyal obedience, 
the outward assuming of the character of 
God’s servants, the purpose and inchoate 
performance of works meet for repentance,— 
these actings of compliance with the moral 
Law were there. The gift of the Spirit was 
evidenced by charisms plainly supernatural ; 
but it comprised more than the bestowment 
of these. Or by the hearing of faith? (ἢ ἐξ 
ἀκοῆς πίστεως ;); or was it in consequence of 
the hearing of faith? The noun ἀκοὴ de- 
notes sometimes (what is heard) “report,” 
“yumour,” as Matt. iv. 24; xxiv. 6; Rom. 
x. 16, 17; sometimes, especially in the 
plural, the organs or sense of hearing, as 
Mark vii. 85; Luke vii. 1; Acts xvii. 20; 
Heb. v. 11; 2 Tim. iv. 3, 4; sometimes the 
act of hearing, as Matt. xiii. 14; 1 Sam. 
xv. 22 (Septuagint). The last appears more 
suitable here than the first taken (as some 
take it) as describing the doctrine or mes- 
sage which they heard respecting faith; 
standing as ἀκοὴ does in contrast to “ works ” 
which would have been an acting of theirs, 
this likewise was most probably meant by 
the apostle subjectively of something ap- 
pearing on their own part. “Were you not 
at once received into the kingdom of God 
and filled with joy in the Holy Spirit, im- 
mediately upon your believing acceptance 
of the gospel message?” With exquisite 
propriety, as Bengel observes, is hereby 
marked the nature of faith, not working, 
but receiving. This agrees also best with 


the illustration which in ver. 6 the apostle 
gives of the phrase as introduced by him 
again in ver. 5. 

Ver. 3.—Are ye 80 foolish? having begun 
in the Spirit, are ye now made perfect by 
the flesh? (οὕτως ἀνόητοί ἐστε; ἐναρξάμενοι 
πνεύματι, νῦν σαρκὶ ἐπιτελεῖσθε); are ye 80 
foolish? having begun with the Spirit, are ye 
now finishing with the flesh? Πνεύματι, as 
contrasted with σαρκί, means the elemont of 
spiritual existence (comp. the use of πνεῦμα 
in Rom. i. 4; 1 Pet. iii. 18) into which they 
had been brought at their conversion by 
the Holy Spirit’s influence; including the 
spiritual sensibility and spiritual activity 
which had at first marked their Christian 
life, as eg. joy in God in the sense of 
pardon, adoption (ch. iv. 6), love to God, 
affectionate attachment to their spiritual 
teacher (ch. iv. 14, 15), brotherly love 
among themselves: at that hour all their 
soul was praise, joy, love. Xap} denotes a 
lower, merely sensuous kind of religious- 
ness, one busying itself with ceremonial 
performances, observance of days and fes- 
tivals (ch. iv. 10), distinctions of meats, and 
other matters of ceremonial prescription ; 
with petty strivings and disputings, of 
course, about such points, as if they really 
mattered at all; in which kind of religious- 
ness the former tone of love, joy, sense of 
adoption, praise, had evaporated, leaving 
their souls dry, earthly (comp. “ weak and 
beggarly rudiments,” ch. iv. 9; and for the 
use of odpt, Heb. ix. 10). Perhaps the 
apostle includes also in his use of the term 
the loss of spiritual victory over sin. If in 
place of surrendering themselves to the 
leading of the Spirit (comp. ch. v. 18) they 
put themselves under the Law, then they 
fell back again under the power of the 
“ flesh,” which the Law could only command 
them to control, but could of itself give 
them no power to control (Rom. viii. 3). 
The Authorized Version, “begun in,” is 
doubtless faulty, in taking πνεύματι a8 go- 
verned by the ἐν of the compound verb. 
The two verbs ἐνάρχομαι and ἐπιτελεῖν are 
balanced against each other in 2 Cor. viii. 6; 
Phil. i. 6. ᾿Ἐπιτελεῖσθε may be either a 
passive, as it is rendered in the Authorized 
Version, “ Are ye made perfect,” i.e. “ Are ye 
seeking to be made perfect; ” so the Revised 
Version, “Are ye now perfected;” or 8 
middle verb, as ἐπιτελοῦμαι is often used in 
other writers, though nowhere in the New 
Testament or Septuagint. The latter seems 
the more suitable, with the understood sup- 
pletion of “your course” or “ your estate,” 
as in our English word “finishing.” The 
apostle is partial to the deponent form of 
verbs. 

Ver. 4.—Have ye suffered so many things 


in vain 7 if it be yet in vain (τοσαῦτα ἐπάθετε 


- OH. MIL, 1—29.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


121 


εἰκῆ ; εἴγε καὶ εἰκῆ); did ye suffer all those 
troubles for nought? if indeed really for 
nought. The ambiguity of τοσαῦτα, which 
means either “so many” or “so great,” is 
preserved by the rendering all those. The 
Rovisers put so many in the text, and “ or so 
great” iu the margin. In respect to ἐπάθετε, 
the leading of the context in which the 
yarse is embedded might incline us to take 
the verb in the sense in which it frequently 
oceurs in Greck writers, that of being 
subjects of such and such treatment, good 
as wellas bad; as, for example, in Josephus, 
‘Ant, iii, 15, 1,°Oca παθόντες ἐξ αὐτοῦ καὶ 
πηλικῶν εὐεργεσιῶν μεταλαβόντες, “* What 
treatment having received from him [86. 
God], and what huge benefits having par- 
taken of "—the charactcr of the treatment 
being sufficiently indicated by the context 
as being that of kindness. But it is a fatal 
objection to this view of the passage that, 
in the forty passages or more in which the 
verb πάσχω is used in the New Testament, 
it never is used of good treatment, but 
always of bad; and so also always in the 
Septuagint. We are, therefore, shut up to 
the sense of “suffering ills,’ and must en- 
deavour to find, if we can, some circum- 
stancea marking the troubles referred to 
which might serve to explain the seemingly 
abrupt mention of them here. And the 
probable explanation is this: those suffer- 
ings were brought upon the Galatian con- 
verts, not only through the influence of Jews, 
but also in consequence of the bitter enmity 
with which the Jews regarded St. Paul, as 
bringing converts over from among the 
Gentiles to the service of the one true God 
apart from any regard to the ceremonial 
Law of Moses., That Jews in general did 
thus regard St. Paul is shown by the sus- 
picion which even Christian Jews felt 
towards him (Acts xxi. 21). For this no 
doubt, it was that the Jews in Asia Minor 
persecuted him from city to city as they 
did, their animosity against him extending 
itself also to those who had attached them- 
selves to him as his disciples. That it did 
extend itself to his disciples as such appears, 
as from the nature of the case, so also from 
Acts xiv. 22, “That through many tribula- 
tions we must enter into the kingdom of 
God ;” as alzo it is evinced by the strongly 
indignant tone in which he speaks of the 
persecuting Jews in his two Epistles to the 
Thessalonians, written near the very time 
to which he here alludes (1 Thess. ii. 14—16; 
2 Theas. i. 8, 9)—this indignation being 
best accounted for by the supposition that 
it was roused by his sympathy with the 
similarly originated sufferings of the Mace- 
donian brethren to whom he was writing. 
That the troubles here referred to emanated 
from the hostility of Jewish legalists may 


be further gathered from ch. v. 11; vi. 12 
(on which see Exposition). Those Jewish 
legalists hated both St. Paul and his con- 
verts, because they alike walked in “the 
Spirit,” that is, in the element of Christian 
spirituality emancipated from the bondage 
of the Law, and not in * the flesh” of Mosaic 
ceremonialism. Hence it is that the men- 
tion in ver. 3 of the Galatian brethren 
having “begun with the Spirit,” leads him 
on to the thought of the sufferings which 
just on that very account had been brought 
upon them. “ For nought.” This adverb 
εἰκῇ sometimes means, prospectively, “to no 
good,” as in ch. iv. 11, “bestowed labour 
upon you ἐπ vain,” and probably in 1 Cor. 
xv. 2; sometimes, retrospectively, “for no 
just cause,” as in Col. ii. 18, “ vainly puffed 
up.” The English phrase, “ for nought,” 
has just a similar ambiguity. The apostle 
may, therefore, mean either this—Did ye 
suffer all these troubles to reap after all no 
benefit from your suffering them, forfeiting 
as you do (ch. v. 4) the reward which you 
might else have expected from the great 
Retributor (2 Thess. i. 6, 7) through your 
forsaking that ground of faith on which ye 
then stood, if indeed ye have forsaken it? 
or this—Did ye provoke all that persecution 
without just cause ?—if, indecd, there was 
no just cause as ye seem now to think. 
According to the former view, the Galatians 
were now nullifying the benefit which 
might have accrued to them from their 
former endurance of persecution; according 
to the latter, they were now stultifying 
their former conduct in provoking these 
persecutions, ‘I'he first seems somewhat 
the easiest. EY ye, as in Col. 1. 23, The 
concluding clause has been here regarded 
as a reaching forth of the apostle’s soul 
towards the hope that better thoughts 
might yet prevail with the Galatian wa- 
verers, so that they would not lose the 
reward of having suffered for Christ—a 
hope which he thus glances at, if so be he 
might thus lure them to its realization. But 
another view of the words has commended 
itself to not a few eminent critics, namely, 
that the apostle glances at the darker pro- 
spect; as if he had said, “If it be, indeed, 
merely for nought, and not for far worse 
than that! By falling away from the gospel, 
ye not only lose the crown of confessorship : 
ye forfeit also your hope of your heavenly 
inheritance” (ef. ch. v. 4). The conjunction 
καὶ is, confessedly, sometimes almost equiva- 
lent to “ merely,” “ only,” as eg. in Homer, 
‘Odyssey,’ i. 58, Ἱέμενος καὶ καπνὺν ἀποθρώ- 
σκοντα νοῆσαι ἣς γαίης, “ Longing ifonly but 
to see the smoke leaping upward from his 
nativeland.” But in the present case εἴ ye 
does not so readily suggest the last proposed 
auppletion of thought as it does the other. 


122 THE EPISTLE TO 


THE GALATIANS. fou. πι. 1-29. : 


Ver. 5.—He therefore that ministereth to 
you the Spirit, and worketh miracles among 
you (ὁ οὖν ἐπιχορηγῶν ὑμῖν τὸ Πνεῦμα, καὶ 
ἐνεργῶν δυνάμεις ἐν ὑμῖν); he then that sup- 
plieth to you the Spirit and worketh powers 
tn you, or, miraclesamong you. The “then” 
marks the taking up afresh of the topic 
brought forward in ver. 2, with especial 
prominence given here to the miraculous 
manifestations of the Spirit’s presence. The 
argumentative treatment of this topic of the 
gift of the Spirit was interrupted in vers. 3 
and 4 by curt, strongly emotional inter- 
rogatories, darted forth upon the apostle’s 
recollecting the animated spirituality which 
marked those early days of their discipleship. 
The impassioned desultoriness of his lan- 
guage here, together with its abrupt, 
niggardly wording, is paralleled by ch. iv. 
10—20. Perhaps these features in the form 
of the composition were in part occasioned 
by the circumstance that he was writing 
this Epistle with his own hand and not 
through an amanuensis; such manual exer- 
tion being, it should secm, unusual with 
him, and from some cause even laborious and 
painful: and so from time to time he appears, 
as it were, laying down the pen, to rest, to 
quell emotion, to reflect. The compound 
verb ἐπιχορηγεῖν, supply, differs probably 
from the simple form χορηγεῖν only by indi- 
cating profusion in the supply; but this 
qualification of its meaning is too slight to 
be representable in translation. Besides 2 
Pet. i. 5, 11, we find it in 2 Cor. ix. 10, “ He 
that supplieth (ὁ ἐπιχορηγῶν) seed ... shall 
supply (χορηγήσει) and multiply your seed 
for sowing;” Col. ii. 19, “From whom all 
the body . . . being supplied;” 1 Pet. iv. 
11, “Asof the strength which God sup- 
plieth.” And with similar application 
the substantive “supply ” (ἐπιχορηγία) in 
Phil. 1. 19, “Supply of the Spirit of 
Jesus Christ;” Wph. iv. 16, “Through 
every joint of the supply.” These passages 
make it clear that “he that supplieth” 
is no other than God. And this con- 
clusion is borne out by the comparing of 
the other elause, “ worketh powers in you,” 
with 1 Cor. xii. 6, “It is the same God (6 
ἐνεργῶν) who worketh all in all” (referring 
to the charismata)—which passage shows 
that “ powers” (duvduers) are not “ miracles” 
themselves as in Matt. vii. 22 and xi. 20, and 
often, but power to work miracles, the 
plural number pointing tothe various forms 
of its manifestation, as in 1 Cor. xii. 10, 28, 
29. The apostle uses the present participles 
ἐπιχορηγῶν and ἐνεργῶν as describing an 
agency which the Almighty was continually 
putting forth among believers in general, 
including the Galatian Churches themselves. 
Doeth he it by the works of the Law, or by 
the hearing of faith? (ἐξ ἔργων νόμου ἢ ἐξ 


ἀκοῆς πίστεως ;) tn consequence of works of 
the Law or of the hearing of faith? With the 
sparingness of words above noted, the apostle 
barely jots down, so to speak, the substance 
of the interrogative dilemma, without filling 
in the form of the question. The suppletion 
would naturally be that of our version, 
“doeth he it.” The substance of the 
argument apparently required no more 
than, as before, the question—Was it in 
consequence of works of the Law or of the 
hearing of faith that the Spirit and his 
wonder-working powers were received ? 
But instead of putting it so, St. Paul inter- 
poses the personality of th: great God 
himself as imparting these great gifts, 
making his sentence thereby the more stately 
and impressive: it is with God in the might 
of his working that these corrupters of the 
gospel have to reckon. The impartation 
of the Spirit and the charisms evidenced 
God’s complacency in the recipients. On 
what was that complacency founded? on 
their earning it by ceremonial performances, 
or on their simply opening their hearts to 
receive his love? It was a question which 
the Galatian Churchmen might, if they 
would, see the answer to in experiences of 
their own. Among themselves tliese powers 
had appeared, and no doubt were stil] opera- 
tive. ‘ Well, then,” says the apostle, “ look 
and see: are they not operative in those 
only of you who had received them upon 
the mere acceptance of righteousness 
offered them through faith in Christ simply, 
without having given any heed to Mosaic 
ceremonialism? Have any of you received 
them after taking up with such ceremonial- 
ism?” The apostle, it will be observed— 
and the remark is one of no small impor- 
tance—makes an appeal to simple matters 
of fact, founded upon his and their own 
familiar acquaintance with the facts, and 
defying contradiction. We may be sure, 
therefore, that the facts were as he indicates, 
however small the extent may be to which 
we, with our imperfect knowledge of the 
circumstances, are ourselves able to verify 
his statement. In some degree, however, 
we can. Besides the striking illustration 
afforded by what occurred in the house of 
Cornelius (Acts x. 44), we see that such 
charismita were bestowed, and in some 
instances, as, eg. at Corinth, in exceeding 
great profusion, in the train of St. Paul’s 
evangelizing ministrations ; and how remote 
those ministrations were from the inculca- 
tion, or even the admission, among Gentile 
converts of Mosaic ceremonialism we know 
perfectly. 

Ver. 6.—Even as Abraham believed God, 
and it was accounted to him for righteous- 
ness (καθὼς ᾿Αβραὰμ ἐπίστευσε τῷ Θεῷ, καὶ 
ἐλογίσθη αὐτῷ εἰς δικαιοσύνην) ; was reckoned 


on. In, 1—29.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 


128 


unto him for righteousness. The answer to 
the question in the foregoing verse is so 
obvious that the apostle goes on as if that 
answer had been given, namely, that it was 
simply in consequence of the hearing of 
faith that God conferred on any the Holy 
Spirit and his powers. This, he now adds, 
was in exact conformity with what was 
recorded of Abraham; as soon as Abraham 
heard the promise made to him, “So shall 
thy seed be,” he believed it, and by the 
hearing of faith was justified. The mutual 
correspondence of the two cases lay in this, 
that in imparting to those believers the 
Holy Spirit, God showed that they were in 
his favour, were justified people, simply, 
because of their faith; even as Abraham 
was shown to be in his favour, having 
likewise by faith been justified. The 
apostle weaves into his sentence the very 
words of Gen. xv. 6, as they appear in the 
Septuagint, with scarcely any modification ; 
the Septuagint reading thus: Καὶ ἐπίστευσεν 
"“ABpay τῷ Θεῷ, καὶ ἐλογίσθη αὐτῷ εἰς δικαιο- 
σύνην. But in doing so he both himself 
feels, and will have his readers feel, that 
they are words of Seripture from which, as 
such, reliable conclusiovs might be drawn, 
as is shown by the next verse. In the 
Hebrew, however, the passage runs as in our 
Authorized Version, “He believed in the 
Lord, and he accounted it to him for 
righteousness.” The words are quoted with 
substantially the like agreement with the 
Septuagint and divergence from the Hebrew 
also in Rom. iv. 3, and by St. James in his 
Epistle (ii. 23) (ἐπίστευσε δὲ ᾽Αβραὰμ, etc.). 
“It was reckoned;” in the Hebrew, “ he 
reckoned it;” “it,” that is, his believing: 
God regarded it as imparting to him perfect 
acceptableness, his sins no longer disquali- 
fying him for being an object of the Divine 
favour. It is of the greatest importance to 
take note what the kind of faith was which 
God reckoned to him for righteousness. 
It was not simply a persuasion that what 
God says must be true. As Calvin remarks, 
Cain might have a hundred times exercised 
faith in what God had said to him, without 
thereby receiving righteousness from God. 
The reason why Abraham was justified by be- 
lieving was this: a promise had been given 
him by God of his fatherly goodness towards 
him; and this word of God’s he embraced as 
certainty. The faith, therefore, which the 
apostle is thinking of is the faith which has 
respect to some word of God which is of 
such a sort that reliance upon it will enable 
a man to repose in God’s love to him for 
time and for eternity. The reference to 
Abraham’s case which St. Paul makes in 
such very brief terms he expands in the 
fourth chapter of his Epistle to the Romans 
to a considerable length, ending with these 


words: “Now it was not written for his 
sake alone that it was reckoned to him [for 
sb cog raed but for our sake also, unto 
whom it shall be reckoned, who believe on 
him that raised Jesus our Lord from the 
dead, who was delivered up for our offences, 
and was raised for ourjustification.” Christ’s 
death and resurrection are God’s word and 
guarantee to the whole human race, assuring 
us of his forgiveness and of his offer to us 
of eternal life. If we hear this word with 
faith, committing ourselves to his love, God 
on that ground at once justifies also us. It 
is evident that, in the apostle’s view, the word 
“righteousness,” as used in the recited 
passage of Genesis, docs not mean “a 
righteous act,’—that is, that Abraham’s 
believing God’s promise was viewed by 
Heaven with approval; but complete ac- 
ceptableness investing Abraham himself. 
In consideration of that exercise of faith 
God accounted him a righteous man. The 
Greek phrase, ἐλογίσθη εἰς δικαιοσύνην, “ waa 
reckoned for righteousness,” ἐ.6. reckoned 
as being righteousness, is similar to λογι- 
σθῆναι εἰς οὐδέν, “reckoned as nought” 
(Acts xix. 27); εἰς περιτομὴν λογισθήσεται, 
“reckoned for circumcision ” (Rom. ii. 26); 
λογίζεται els σπέρμα, * reckoned for a seed ” 
(Rom. ix. 8). Are we to infer from these 
two verses, 5 and 6, that in the apostle’s 
view all who received spiritual gifts were 
thereby proved to be, or to have been, 
justified persons and in enjoyment of the 
Divine favour? We can hardly think 
this. The phenomena disclosed to us in the 
two Epistles addressed to the Corinthians, 
as to the moral and spiritual behaviour of 
some at least of their body, tend to show 
that individuals possessed of charisms were 
found in some instances to make a very vain- 
glorious use of them, and needed to be 
reminded that the thaumaturgic gifts were 
of a fleeting character and of incomparably 
less value than qualities of moral goodness. 
Certainly Christ himself has told us that 
“many” will at the last be found to have 
been possessed of such miraculous gifts, 
whom nevertheless he “ never knew.” One 
of the very apostles was a Judas. Perhaps 
the solution is this: companies of men 
were dealt with in the diffusion of these 
gifts according as they were characterized, 
viewed each as a whole, though there might 
be individuals in each company imperfectly, 
very superficially, some perhaps not at all, 
animated by the sentiment generally pre- 
vailing in the body. Ifa community as a 
whole was pervaded extensively by 8 spirit 
of frank acceptance of the gospel doctrine 
and of pious devotion, its members brought 
by baptism into tle “body which is Christ,” 
the Holy Spirit made such a community 
his habitation (1 Cor. iii. 16, 17; vi. 19 


124 THE EPISTLE TO 


THE GALATIANS. ἴσα. τα, 1—29. 


2 Cor. vi. 16), and diffused his gifts among 
its members diversely and to all appearance 
indiscriminately (1 Cor. xii. 13); atall events 
not in such wise discriminately as that 
degrees of personal holiness and acceptable- 
ness before God could at all be estimated 
as standing in proportion to the outward 
brilliancy of thaumaturgie gifts severally 
possessed, 

Ver. 7.—Know ye therefore (γινώσκετε 
ἄρα); or, ye perceive then. Critics are 
divided between the two renderings, the 
imperative and the indicative, both here 
and Matt. xxiv. 43; 1 John ii. 29. In 
Luke x. 11 and Heb. xiii. 23 γινώσκετε is 
certainly imperative. The categorical im- 
perative seems of the two the more suited 
to the apostle’s impetuous temperament. 
The verb γινώσκω, like the Latin nosco, 
properly denotes “to come to know,” “learn,” 
“ perceive,” “get apprised ;” ἔγνωκα or 
ἔγνων, like novi, having more properly the 
sense of “knowing.” But this distinction 
*does not always hold,ase.g. Rom.vii.l. That 
they which are of faith (ὅτι of éx πίστεω5); 
that the men of faith; that is, who derive their 
position from faith, belong to faith, are above 
all things characterized by faith. Compare 
the expressions, τοῖς ἐξ ἐριθείας, “ the men of 
factiousness,” ὁ.6. “ factious men” (Rom. ii. 
8); τὸν ἐκ πίστεως Ἰησοῦ, “the man of faith 
in Jesus,” taking his stand thereupon (Rom. 
iii, 26). Closely affine to this usage of the 
preposition, if not quite the same, is, ὁ ὧν ἐκ 
τῆς ἀληθείας, “that is of the truth” (John 
xviii. 37); of ἐκ νόμου, “they which are of the 
Law” (Rom. iv. 14); ὅσοι ἐξ ἔργων νόμου 
εἰσίν (ver. 10 of this chapter). The same 
are the children of Abraham (οὗτοί εἰσιν υἱοὶ 
’ABpadu); these are sonsof Abrahum. ‘The 
form of expression is precisely the same as 
in Rom. viii. 14, “As many as are led by 
the Spirit of God (οὗτοί εἰσιν viol Θεοῦ) 
these are sons of God.” In both cases the 
absence of the article before viol suggests 
the feeling that the apostle is simply stating 
a predicate of the class before defined, but 
not now affirming that this predicate is 
confined to that class, although, again in 
each case, he knew that it was so confined. 
Just here, what he is concerned to affirm is 
that the possession of faith is a complete 
and suflicient qualification for sonship to 
Abraham. There is, perhaps, a polemical 
reference to the teaching of certain in 
Galatia, that, to be sons of Abraham or 
interested in God’s covenant with his peuple, 
it behoved men to be circumcised und to 
observe the ceremonial Law. This error 
would be satisfacturily met by the affirma- 
tion of the present verse, that the being 
believers, simply this, constitutes men sons 
of Abraham. In the tenth verse the apostle 
goes further, aggressively denying to those 


who “were of the works of the Law” the 
possession at all of Abrahamic privilege. 
The class, “men of faith,” did in fact 
include Jewish believers as well as Gentile; 
but just here, as seems probable from what 
is said in the next verse, the apostle has 
in view Gentile believers only. The writer’s 
thoughts are hovering round that promise 
of God (“So shall thy seed be’’) which had 
been on that particular occasion the object 
of Abraham’s faith. That this was the 
case we may infer from his citation of the 
words in Rom. iv. 18, the explanation of 
which had been prepared for by him in what 
he has said before in ver. 16, “To the end 
that the promise may be sure to all the 
seed: not to that only which is of the Law, 
but to that also which is of the faith of 
Abraham, who is the father of us all.” It 
was this that led him to speak of being sons 
of Abraham. This train of thought is 
pursued further in the next two verses. 

Ver. 8.—The substance of this verse, 
taken in conjunction with the next, is this: 
The announcement which the Scripture 
records as made to Abraham, that “in him 
all the nations should be blessed,” that is, 
that by being like him in faith all nations 
should be blessed like him, did thus early 
preach to Abraham that which is the great 
cardinal truth of the gospel preached now: 
it proceeded upon a foresight of the fact 
now coming to pass, that by faith simply 
God would justify the Gentiles. As well 
as the Scripture quoted before from Gen. xv., 
so this announcenent also ascertains to us 
the position that they that are of faith, 
and they alone, are blessed with the be- 
lieving patriarch. Such appears to be the 
general scope of the passage; but the verbal 
details are not free from difficulty. And 
the Scripture, foreseeing (προϊδοῦσα δὲ 7 
γραφή); and, again, the Scripture, foreseeing. 
The conjunction δὲ indicates transition to 
another item of proof, as, e.g. inj Rom. ix. 
27, Ἡσαΐας δέ. The word “Scripture” in 
2 Pet. i. 20, “no prophecy of Scripture,” 
certainly denotes the sacred writings as 
taken collectively, that is, what is frequently 
recited by the plural, ai γραφαί, “ the Scrip- 
tures.” So probably in Acts viii. 22, “the 
passage of Scripture.” We are, therefore, 
warranted in supposing it possible, and 
being possible it is here also probable, that 
this is the sense in which the apostle now 
uses the term as well as in ver. 22, rather 
than as denoting, either the one particular 
passage cited or the particular book out of 
which it is taken. This view better euits 
the personification under which the Old 
Testament is here presented. This per- 
sonification groups with that in Rom. ix. 17, 
“The Scripture saith unto Pharaoh, For this 


very purpose did I raise thee up.” In beth 


on. mt, 1—29.] THE EPISTLE TO 


THE GALATIANS, 125 


eases the “Scripture” is put in place of 
the announcement which Scripture records 
as having been made, the Scripture itself 
being written after the time of both Abra- 
ham and Pharaoh, and not addressed to 
them. But here there is the additional 
feature, of foresight being attributed to 
Scripture—a foresight, not exactly of the 
Holy Spirit inspiring the Scripture, but of 
the Divine Being who, on the occasion re- 
ferred to, was holding communication with 
Abraham ; although, yet again, “ the Scrip- 
ture” seems in the words, “ foreseeing that 
God would justify,” etc. distinguished 
from “God.” The sense, however, is clear; 
Scripture shows that, as early as the time 
of Abraham, a Divine intimation was given 
that God would, on the ground of faith 
simply, justify any human being throughout 
the world that should believe in him as 
Abraham did. Rabbinical scholars tell us 
that in those writings a citation from Scrip- 
ture is frequently introduced with the words, 
“What sees the Scripture?” or, “ What 
sees he (or, ‘it’]?” That God would justify 
the heathen through faith (ὅτι ἐκ πίστεως 


δικαιοῖ τὰ ἔθνη ὁ Oeds); that by (Greek, out - 


of) faith would God justify the nations. 
The position of ἐκ πίστεως betokens that 
the apostle’s point here is, not that God 
would justify the Gentiles, but that it was 
by faith that he would do 80 irrespectively 
of any. fulfilment on their part of cere- 
monial observances. The tense of the 
present indicative δικαιοῖ is hardly to be 
explained thus: would justify as we now 
see he is doing. The usual effect of the 
oratio obliqua transfers the standpoint of 
time in δικαιοῖ to the time of the foresight, 
the present tense being put instead of the 
future (δικαιώσει), a3 intimating that God 
was, 80 to speak, even now preparing thus 
to justify, or, in the Divine estimate of 
spaces of time, was on the eve of thus 
justifying; analogously with the force of 
the present tense in the participles “ given ” 
and “poured out” (διδόμενον, exxuvduevov) 
in Luke xxii. 19, 20. The condition of 
mankind in the meanwhile is described in 
vers. 22, 23—shut up unto the faith that 
was to be revealed. A question arises as 
to the exact interpretation of the word ἔθνη 
as twice occurring in this verse. Does the 
apostle use it as the correlative to Jews, 
“Gentiles;” or without any such sense of 
contradistinction, “ nations ” including both 
Jews and Gentiles? In answer, we observe: 
(1) The great point in these verses (6—9) ia, 
not the call of the Gentiles, but the efficacy 
of faith without Leyitical ceremonialism, as 
summed up in the words of ver.9. (2) The 
original passage which the apostle is now re- 
ferring to is that in Gen. xii. 3, where the 
Septuagint, conformably with the Hebrew, 


has Kal ἐνευλογ θήσονται ἐν σοὶ πᾶσαι al φυλὰι 
τῆς yas: in our Authorized Version,“ And in 
thee shall all families [Hebrew, mishpechoth } 
of the earth be blessed :” only, through some 
cause or other, instead of “all families,” 
he writes the words, “all nations” (πάντα 
τὰ ἔθνη), Which we find in what was said by 
the Lord to the two angels (Gen. xviii. 18), 
Kal ἐνευλογηθήσονται ἐν αὐτῷ [that is, Abra- 
ham] πάντα τὰ ἔθνη τῆς yas: Authorized 
Version, “ all the nations of the earth” 
(Gen. xxii. 18, and the promise to Isaac, 
Gen. xxvi. 4, are irrelevant to the point 
now under consideration). We, therefore, 
are warranted in assuming that, as ἔθνη 
might be used as coextensive with φυλαί 
(“ familics ”), it really ἐδ here employed by 
the apostle with the same extension of 
application. We may add that, most cer- 
tainly, the apostle utterly repudiated the 
notion that God justifies Gentiles on a 
different footing from that on which he 
justifies Jews: whether Jews or Gentiles, 
they only who are of faith are blessed with 
Abraham ; and, whether Jews or Gentiles 
all who are of faith are blessed with him. 
Preached before the gospel unto Abraham, 
saying (προενηγγελίσατο τῷ ᾿Αβραάμ, ὅτι); 

reached the gospel beforehand unto Abra- 
am, saying. Very striking and animated 
is the apostle’s use of this word προευηγ- 
γελίσατο, a compound verb, minted no doubt 
for the occasion out of his own ardent 
thought, though it is found also in his 
senior contemporary, Philo. Itis plainly an 
allusion to the “gospel” now openly pro- 
claimed to the world as having been “ by 
anticipation” already then announced to 
Abraham, the Most High himself the herald; 
signifying also the joy which it brought to 
the patriarch, and (Chrysostom adds) his 
great desire for its accomplishment. The 
blessed and glorious gospel of the grace of 
God has been the thought of God in all 
ages. May we connect with this the mys- 
terious passage in John viii. 56? In point 
of construction, the verb εὐαγγελίζομαι is 
nowhere else followed by ὅτι: but as it 
is sometimes found governing an accusative 
of the matter preached (Luke i. 19; ii, 10; 
Acts ν. 42; viii. 12; Eph. ii. 17), there ig 
no harshness in its construction with ὅτι, 
which we may here represent in English 
by “saying.” In thee shall all nations 
bo blessed (ἐνευλογηθήσονται [Receptus, 
εὐλογηθήσονται] ἐν σοὶ πάντα τὰ ἔθνη). “In 
thee” as their type and pattern, in respect 
both to the “ blessing” bestowed upon him 
and to the faith out of which his blessing 
aprang. The “blessing” consists of God’s 
love and all the well-being which can flow 
from God’s love; the form of well-being 
varying according to the believer’s circum- 
stances, whether in this life or in the life 


12 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


(ox. mr. 1—29, 


to come; it receives its consummation with 
the final utterance, “ Come, ye blessed 
(εὐλογημένοι) of my Father, inherit the 
kingdom prepared for you from the founda- 
tion of the worid.” Into this condition of 
blessedness the sinful and guilty can only 
be brought throagh justification ; but justi- 
fication through Christ does of necessary 
consequence bring us into it. The com- 
pound form of the verb, ἐνευλογηθήσονται, 
added to ἐν σοὶ, forcibly indicates that moral 
inherency in Abraham, through our being 
in faith and obedience his spiritual off- 
spring, whereby alone the blessing is at- 
tained and possessed. Chrysostom remarks, 
“Tf, then, those were Abraham’s sons, not, 
who were related to him by blood, but who 
follow his faith, for this is the meaning of 
the words, ‘In thee all nations,’ it is plain 
that the Gentiles are brought into kindred 
with him.” Augustine explains “in thee,” 
similarly : “ To wit, by imitation of his faith, 
by which he was justified even before the 
sacrament of circumcision.” Luther writes, 
“In Abraham are we blessed, but in what 
Abraham? The believing Abraham, to 
wit; because if we are not in Abraham, 
we are under a curse rather, even if we 
were in Abraham according to the flesh.” 
Calvin likewise: “These words beyond all 
doubt mean that all must become objects 
of blessing after Abraham’s fashion ; for he 
is the common pattern, nay rather, rule. 
But he by faith obtained blessing; therefore 
faith is for all the means.” 

Ver. 9.—So then they which be of faith 
are blessed with faithful Abraham (ὥστε οἱ 
ἐκ πίστεως, εὐλογοῦνται σὺν τῷ πιστῷ ᾿Αβραάμλ). 
“Ayre blessed;” are objects of benediction. 
The apostle gathers from the words cited in 
ver. 8 the two particulars, that there are 
who get to be blessed like Abraham and 
with him, and that it is by faith like 
Abraham’s, without works of the Law, that 
they do #0. He seems to have an eye to 
the sense of Divine benediction which the 
Galatians had themselves experienced, when 
upon their simply believing in Christ the 
Spirit’s gifts had been poured forth upon 
them. The word “ faithful” (mor@) is in- 
serted, ex abundantt almost, to mark the 
more explicitly and emphatically, the con- 
dition on which both Abraham and therefore 
others in him gain the blessing. ‘This 
being “in Abraham,” which is here pre- 
dicated of all who gain justification and 
God’s benediction, is analogous to the image 
of Gentiles, being by faith “ grafted,” and 
by faith abiding, in the “olive tree,” which 
we have in Rom. xi. 17, 20. The verbal πιστὸς 
is generally passive, “one to be believed 
or trusted in,” and so a man “of fidelity ;” 
but it is also at times active, in the sense 
of “one who believes,” as John xx. 27; 


Acts x. 45; 2 Cor. vi. 15; Eph. £1; 1 Tim. 
iv. 10; v. 16; vi. 2 (s0 in ἄπιστος, John xx. 
27; ὀλιγόπιστος, Matt. vi. 30). In conse- 
quence of this use of the term in Scripture, 
both jidelis in ecclesiastical Latin and 
“faithful” in English have often this sig- 
nification. 

Ver. 10.—For as many as are of the works 
of the Law are under the curse (ὅσοι γὰρ ἐξ 
ἔργων νόμου εἰσίν, ὑπὸ κατάραν εἰσίν) ; under 
@ curse, or, under cursing. “For.” The 
apostle is now making the clause in the 
preceding verse, “they who are of faith,” 
the limiting description of those who “are 
blessed with faithful Abraham;”—I say, 
they who are of faith; for they who are of 
the works of the Law are in a very different 
case. In the phrase, “are of the works of 
the Law,” the preposition “of” (éx) has the 
same force as has been already noted in the 
phrase (ver. 9), “they who are of faith;” 
it signifies dependence upon, belonging to, 
taking position from; and it marks a moral 
posture of mind voluntarily assumed. The 
apostle in laying down the aphorism of the 
present passage has doubtless an eye to 
those of the Galatians who were moving 
for the adoption of circumcision and the 
ceremonies of the Levitical Law. With- 
drawing from the category of those who 
were of faith, they were preparing to join 
those who were of the works of the Law. If 
their taking up with circumcision, and with 
these or those of the Levitical ordinances, 
was not mere childish trifling; if in serious 
and solemn earnest it meant anything, it 
meant this—that they looked to gain from 
these observances acceptableness before 
God, as performing works commanded by 
his Law given through Moses; but in that 
view they were bound to take the Law in 
its entirety, and do every work which it 
prescribed, ceremonial and moral alike; for 
all of it came invested with the like au- 
thority and as a part of that institution was 
alike binding (see ch. v. 3). Let them now 
consider well how in such circumstances 
their case would stand. That the “ works 
of the Law” which stand foremost before 
the apostle’s view in the present discussion 
are those of a ceremonial character is ap- 
parent from the tenor both of vers, 12—19 
of the preceding chapter and of vers. 1—10 
of the next. There is, indeed, generally 
this difference observable between the phase 
of the Law regarded in this Epistle, as com- 
pared with that which engages the apostle’s 
thoughts when writing to the Romans: in 
the Romans the prominent notion of the 
spiritual condition of those under the Law 
is that they are in a state of guiltiness, 
condemnation, spiritual inability, wncon- 
quered sin; while in the Galatians the 
prominent notion of their condition is that 


on, rt. 1—29,] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 


127 


they are in a state of slavery, that the dis- 
pensation they are under is spiritually an 
enslaving one, a yoke of bondage (ch. iii. 
Qt; iv. 1—3, 9, 24, 31; v. 1, 13). In the 
Romans the moral aspect of the Law is 
mostly in view; in this Epistle its cere- 
monial aspect. The consideration of these 
distinctive features marking this Epistle 
will perhaps prepare us the more readily to 
apprehend the particular shade of meaning 
with which the apostle uses the words, “are 
under cursing.” He means, not precisely 
that a curse has already been definitely 
pronounced upon them so that they now 
stand there condemned, but that the threat- 
ening of a curse is always sounding in their 
ears, filling them with uneasiness, with 
constant apprehension that they shall them- 
selves fall under it. The noun κατάρα is 
thus used for malediction,. cursing, in Jas. 
iii. 9, 10, “ Therewith bless we the Lord and 
Father; and therewith curse we men;... out 
of the same mouth cometh forth blessing 
and cursing (εὐλογία καὶ κατάρα); Deut. 
xxvii. 13 (Septuagint), “These shall stand 
(ἐπὶ τῆς κατάρας) for the cursing upon Mount 
Ebal ”—that is, for the denouncement of the 
several curses with which they were tothreaten 
different classes of transgressors. As many, 
says the apostle, as are of the works of the 
Law are under a black cloud of malediction, 
which is ready to flash forth in lightning 
wrath upon eyery failure in obedience. 
And what man of them all can hope not to 
merit that inexorable lighting down of 
judgment? Supposing them to be ever so 
exact aud punctual in their observance of 
those ordinances of the flesh which certain 
of those Galatian Churchmen are hankering 
after, how will it fare with them in respect 
to those other weightier precepts of the 
Law which require spiritual obedience? 
For one single example, how will they be 
able to render unfailing obedience to the 
commandment, Thou shalt not covet? Be- 
yond question, the apostle writes with the 
sense which he has so fully developed in 
his Epistle to the Romans (iii. 9—20; vii. 
7—24; viii. 3), that no one under the 
economy of the Law ever did, or ever could, 
continue in all things which were written 
in the Law to do them; and that therefore 
they that forsook the gospel of Christ to look 
to the Law for acceptance with God would 
beyond doubt become, nay, taken as they were 
at any moment had already become, each 
individual, the specific object of malediction, 
a child of cursing, a child of wrath (2 Pet. 
li. 14; Eph, ii. 3; Rom. iv. 15). Never- 
theless, his purpose just here may be pre- 
sumed to be, not to affirm this, but rather 
to point to the miserable state of apprehen- 
siveness and fear of instant wrath which 
they who were of the worka of the Law 


must needs be in bondage to. Most com- 
mentators, however, understand κατάρα as 
meaning, not “cursing” or uttering general 
sentences of cursing (maledictio), but “a 
curse” (maledictum), that is, a specific curse 
incurred already by each individual in 
consequence of his having of a certainty 
already sinned against some commandment 
of the Law; if not against some ceremonial 
commandment, at any rate against some 
moral precept. Whichever way we under- 
stand it, such (the apostle at all events 
means) was the condition into which those 
Judaizing Gentile converts were preparing 
to precipitate themselves. For it is written, 
Cursed is every one that continueth not in 
all things which are written in the book of 
the Law to do them (γέγραπται γὰρ ὅτι 
[Receptus has yap without ὅτι, which con- 
junction is according to the Greek usage 
introduced superfluously] ᾿Επικατάρατος πᾶς 
ὃς οὐκ ἐμμένει ἐν πᾶσι τοῖς γεγραμμένοις ἐν τῷ 
βιβλίῳ τοῦ νόμου, τοῦ ποιῆσαι αὐτά). Θ 
Septuagint (Deut. xxvii. 26) has ’Emmard- 
patos πᾶς ὁ [this 6 of doubtful genuineness) 
ἄνθρωπος ὅστις οὐκ ἐμμενεῖ [or ἐμμένε ἐν 
πᾶσι τοῖς λόγοις τοῦ νόμον τούτου, τοῦ ποιῆσαι 
αὐτούς. The Hebrew is correctly given in 
the Authorized Version, “ Cursed be he that 
confirmeth not all the words of this Law to 
do them.” The apostle, quoting the Sep- 
tuagint apparently from memory, gives the 
general sense rather than the exact words. 
He that sins against a commandment, as (to 
use the Septuagint phrase) he does not 
“continue in” it, but departs from it, so 
also, he, as far as his action reaches, seta it 
aside or abrogates it instead of “confirming ” 
it. The word “all,” not found in our 
present Hebrew text, is stated by critics to 
be in the Samaritan as well as in the Sep- 
tuagint. This is the last of the twelve 
several maledictions pronounced from Mount 
Ebal, and certainly includes in its seope the 
ceremonial as well as the moral precepts of 
the Law. But what did this malediction 
import? Certainly it expressed abhor- 
rence—the Divine Author of the Law, and 
his ministers and people accepting, pro- 
nouncing, and ratifying the denunciation, 
all join in repudiating the offender, casting 
him out from among them with loathing: 
go much is clear. What practical effect 
was to be given to the malediction, even by 
men in this life, not to speak of the action 
of God hereafter in the life to come, is no- 
where indicated; but all could see thus 
much—the offender, if dying unreconciled, 
would depart hence accursed of both man 
and God. The notion of guiltiness before 
God and accursedness incurred by trans- 
gression of merely ceremonial precepts has 
been so greatly effaced from men’s con- 
sciousness by the teaching, direct and in- 


128 


THE EPISTLE To ‘TH GALATIANS. 


(ott. 1... 1—29, 


direct, of Christ's goapel, that we find it 
hard to realize to our minds that there ever 
existed a posture of the spirit answering to 
such ἃ notion, or, if such did exist, that it 
could be other than the fruit of an unin- 
structed, ill-trained state df the conscience. 
But it was not this, so long as the economy 
of Moses was in force. For these positive 
laws were laws of God, binding during his 
anit upon the conscience of every 

sraclite; and in proportion as an Israelite’s 
consciousness of the existence of Jehovah 
and of his own covenant relation to Jehovah 
was real and vivid, in that proportion would 
he be careful, scrupulously careful even, in 
obeying those positive laws. He had, 
indeed, to duly estimate the comparative 
importance and obligation of positive and 
of moral precepts, especially when in actual 
practice they came into conflict, according 
to the principle laid down for example in 
Hosea vi. 6; but it was at his peril that he 
at any time neglected the former, though 
still less might he dare to neglect the latter. 
For every Israelite, as long as the Law con- 
tinued in force, that which was said by 
Christ was strictly true, and in both clauses 
meant to be taken in solemn earnest, “These 
latter ought he to do, aud not to leave the 
other undone” (Matt. xxiii. 23). It was, for 
instance, a mattcr of conscience for the 
truly conscientious Israelite to carefully 
purify himself from pollution incurred by 
contact with the dead, and to abstain from 
swine’s flesh; he might not neglect such 
purifications or partake of such meat without 
breaking a commandment of God’s, without 
therefore incurring God’s displeasure; and 
it behoved him to feel that he could not, 
and in proportion to the sincerity and depth 
of his religious sentiment he did feel it. 
Now, even when Israelites lived in a world 
of their own, comparatively free from the 
presence of Gentiles, the observance of the 
Levitical Law must needs have been at times 
felt to be an irksome or even anxious obli- 
gation; but its irksomeness and anxiety 
must have been greatly increased when 
Gentiles were not merely brought into close 
contact with them, but were even their 
masters. St. Peter confessed how burden- 
some it was felt to be, when he pronounced 
it a yoke which neither they nor their 
fathers had been able to bear. The feeling 
of relief must therefore have been inex- 
pressibly great when an Israelite could come 
to be assured that those positive laws had 
ceased to be obligatory; that even if from 
habit or from national or social sentiment he 
continued to observe them, yet his conscience 
was quite free to disregard them without 
fear of displeasing God; that God’s cove- 
nanted mercy had no longer any reference 
whatever to such observances, and that he 


might worship him acceptably, and hold 
joyful communion with him (say) in the 
Lord’s Supper, though he had just before 
been handling a corpse without being since 
purified, or eating “unclean” meats, or 
working on the sabbath day. This relief 
the gospel brought; God’s servants learnt 
with joy that they were righteous and ac- 
cepted before him simply through faith in 
Christ without those “ works of the Law.” 
The curse was reversed. Now it ran thus: 
“ Anathema be he who doth not wholly trust 
in Christ crucified for righteousness! Ana- 
thema be he who brings dead ordinances of 
the Law to darken his brethren’s joy!” 
Ver. 11.—But that no man is justified by 
the Law in the sight of God, it is evident 
(ὅτι δὲ ἐν νόμῳ οὐδεὶς δικαιοῦται παρὰ τῷ 
Θεῷ); but that in the Law no man ts justified 
with God, ta evident. To “be justified” 
means to be brought out of a state of guilti- 
ness aud cursedness into a state of accept- 
ance. The apostle, assuming that every 
one is guilty and under a curse, now shows 
that the Law offers no means of justification. 
“But.” The apostle is meeting the notion 
that, though one who is of works of the Law 
is evermore threatened with a curse ready 
to light down upon him, and though the 
curse hag been, as it cannot but have been, 
actually incurred, yet, by setting himself 
afresh to the endeavour and thenveforward 
continuing stea:lfast in all things writtcn in 
the Law, he may thus win pardon and 
righteousness with God. To obviate this 
conception, without stopping to insist upon 
the fact that through indwelling sin no man 
possibly can continue in all tie things 
written in the Law, he puts the notion 
aside by stating that this is not the method 
of justification which Scripture recognizes. 
This he shows by adducing that cardinal 
aphorism of Habakkuk, by which, as it 
should seem, the apostle was wont to sub- 
stantiate the doctrine of justification by 
faith (comp. Rom. i. 17; Heb. x. 38). The 
way in which the passage is here introduced, 
almost as an obiter dictum, and as if not 
needing @ formal indication of its coming 
out of Scripture, suggests the feeling that 
the passage, as taken in the sense in 
which the apostle reads it, was one already 
familiar to his readers, no doubt through 
his own former teaching. When in the Acts 
(xiii. 39—41) we read that in the synagogue 
at the Pisidian Antioch, in close connection 
with the statement that through believing 
in Christ a man is justified, he cited another 
passage of Habakkuk (i. 5), denouncing un- 
believing despisers, we cannot doubt that 
he had made good ‘his statement about 
justification by alleging this same probative 
text. “In the Law;” that is, as being in 
the sphere and domain of the Law. Com- 


oH, mr. 1—29.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


129 


pare the use of the same preposition: Rom. 
li. 12, “As many as have sinned under 
(Greek, ‘in’] the Law;” iii. 19, “It saith 
to them that are under [Greek, ‘in’] the 
Law.” An exactly parallel construction is 
found in Acts xiii. 39, “From all things 
from which ye could not by (Greek, ‘in ἢ 
tho Law be justified.” They could not as 
being in the Law find therein any means 
of gaining acceptance. “Is justified with 
Cod ;” comes to be accounted righteous with 
him. “With God;” not merely outwardly, 
Levitically, in the judgment of a Levitical 
priest—but inwardly and in reality, in God’s 
estimation. The preposition “ with” (παρὰ) 
is used similarly in Rom. ii. 13, “For not 
the hearers of the Law are righteous with 
God ;” 1 Cor. ii. 19, “The wisdom of this 
world is foolishness with God.” It is God 
himself that justifies the sinner (Rom. iii. 
30; iv. 5); but the apostle does not write 
“is justified by God,” because he is con- 
fronting the notion so natural to man, and 
above all, to the Judaizing legalist, that a 
man is to make himself righteous by doings 
—ceromonial or moral—of his own. For, 
The just shall live by faith (6 δίκαιος ἐκ 
πίστεως ζήσεται); the righteous by faith shall 
Nive. The apostle is not weaving the pro- 
phet’s words into his own sentence simply 
as aptly expressing his own thought, but 
is citing them probatively as wor'ls of Scrip- 
ture; as if he had said, “As Scripture saith, 
The righteous,” etc. The same is the case 
with the words introduced in the next verse 
out of Leviticus; so Rom. ix. 7. In Rom. 
xv. 3 and 1 Cor ii. 9 the apostle inserts, 
“according as it is written,” as in paren- 
thesis, before adding the words of Scripture 
in such a way as to form a continuation of 
his own sentence. “The righteous by faith 
shall live; ” that is, the rightcous man shall 
draw his life from his faith. It is generally 
agreed upon by Hebrew scholars that in 
the original passage (Hab. ii. 4) the words, 
“by his faith” (or possibly, adopting an- 
other reading of the Hebrew text, “ by my 
faith,” that is, by faith in me) belong to 
“shall live,” rather than to “the righteous ”’ 
(see on this point Delitzsch on Heb. x. 38, 
and Canon Cook on Hub. ii. 4, in ‘Speaker’s 
Commentary’). And that St. Paul so under- 
stood it is made probable by the contrasted 
citation of “shall live in them ” in the next 
verse. With this conjunction of the words, 
the passage suits the apostle’s purpose per: 
fectly ; for if it is by or from his faith that 
tho righteous man lives, then it is by or from 
his faith that he gets to be accepted by God 
as righteous. The “faith” spoken of is 
shown by the context in Habakkuk to mean 
such reliance upon God as is of a steadfast 
character, and not a mere fleeting or occa- 
sional acceptance of God’s promises as true. 
GALATIANS, 


This is plainty the view of the passa re 
which is taken by the Pauline writer of the 
Hebrews in x. 38. 

Ver. 12.—And the Law is not of faith (ὁ 
δὲ νόμος οὐκ ἔστιν ἐκ πίστεω5) ; but the Law 
ts not “by faith.” This is closely connected 
with the latter part of the preceding verse, 
as forming another portion of the proof 
which is there introduced by “for.” Ver. 
11 should end with a semicolon, not with 
a full stop. The δὲ at the heginning of this 
verse is slightly adversative, setting “the 
Law” in contrast with the notion of “living 
by or from faith.” These words, “by or 
from faith” (é πίστεως), are borrowed from 
the preceding citation. We may paraphrase 
thus: The Law does not put forward as its 
characteristic principle, “by faith;” the 
characteristic principle of the Law is rather 
that which we read in the third book of 
Moses (xviii.5), “The man who hath actually 
done them shall live by them.” But, The 
man that doeth them shall live in them (ἀλλ᾽, 
Ὁ ποιήσας αὐτὰ [ἄνθρωπος] ζήσεται ἐν αὐτοῖς : 
(the word ἄνθρωπος is omitted by the recent 
editors,as having crept into the text from the 
Septuagint) ; but, He that doeth them shall 
live in them. The whole verse (Lev. xviii. 5) 
in the Authorized Version, following the 
Hebrew, stands thus: “And ye shall keep 
my statutes and my judgments: which if 
a man do, he shall live in them: I am the 
Lord.” The Septuagint runs thus: “ And 
ye shall keep [or, ‘and keep ye’] all my 
statutes and all my judgments, and ye shall 
do them [or, ‘and do ye them’): the man 
that doeth them shall live in them (6 ποι- 
hoas αὐτὰ ἄνθρωπος ζήσεται ἐν αὐτοῖς): 1 
am the Lord your God.” It thus appears 
that the pronoun “them” recites “my sta- 
tutes and my judgments.” But this the 
apostle is not at present particularly con- 
cerned to specify; his main point here is 
that the Law requircs such and such thinys 
to be actually done, before it holds out the 
prospect of life to be gained thereby. Those 
under the Law were bound to render strict 
obedience to all its requirements, whether 
moral or ceremonial; and whosoever sct 
aside any of whichever class was consti- 
tuted by the Law a “transgressor” and a 
man “accursed.” As it stands in the pas- 
sage of Leviticus referred to, the clause 
which is cited bears not so much the aspect 
of a promise as of a restrictive statement 
implying a threatening or warning, and is 
therefore in harmony with the commination 
quoted in ver. 10. The “doing” here 
spoken of differs essentially from evange- 
lical obedience. Comprising as it did in 
very large proportion the observance of the 
ceremonial prescriptions (προστάγματα) of 
the Law, it points to a course of conduct in 
which a man, striving to earn pardon and 

K 


aw 


ὔρχανοςςς 


130 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


(ow. πι. 1—29. 


acceptance by a meritorious life, had con- 
tinually to be turning his eye, slavishly and 
under fear of the “curse” in case of failure, 
towards an external Law, whose detail of 
positive enactments, in addition to the 
regulation of his moral conduct and inward 
spirit, he was bound with scrupulous exact- 
ness to copy in his life. ‘The spiritual 
obedience of “faith,” on the other hand, 
evolves itself (in the apostle’s view) freely 
and spontaneously from the inward teaching 
and prompting of God’s Spirit, of which it 
is the natural product or “fruit” (ch. v. 22). 
Such are these two forms of religious life 
when viewed each in its idea. When, how- 
ever, we compare the spiritual state of many 
even sincere believers in Christ, so far as we 
can estimate it, with the spiritual state of 
(say) the marvellous author of Ps. cxix. or 
of David and other pious Israclites, as dis- 
closed in the exercises of pious feeling gar- 
nered in that same devotional book, we 
cannot fail to perccive that an Israclite 
under the Law might yet be not “of the 
works of the Law,” but in no small degree 
qualified to teach the Christian believer 
himself, even in the life which is “ of faith,” 
“ Shall live in them;” that is, shall find in 
them a fountain, as it were, of life. The 
Targums, Bishop Lightfoot observes, define 
the meaning of “living” by “life eternal.” 

Ver. 13.—Christ hath redeemed us from 
the curse of the Law (Χριστὸς ἡμᾶς ἐξηγόρασεν 
ἐκ τῆς κατάρας τοῦ νόμου); Christ bought ue 
off from the curse of the Law. The position 
of the word “ Christ” in the Greek, heading 
the sentence, makes it emphatic—Christ ; 
he alone; no means offered by the Law 
hath procured justification for the sinner. 
“Us;” not merely the Israclites after the 
fiesh, who were visibly under the Law: but 
either all mankind, Gentiles as well as 
Israelites, being declared by the Law un- 
clean and unholy, both ceremonially and 
morally, and thus under its curse (comp. 
“for us,” 2 Cor. v.21); or God’s people, the 
children of Abraham, prospective as well as 
present (comp. John xi. 50—52 and ch. iv. 
δ). “Redeemed,” or “ bought us off.” The 
same compound Greek verb occurs ch, iv. 5, 
“That he might redeem [buy off] them who 
were under the Law;” obviously, buy off 
from being under it. Another Greek verb, 
λυτρόω, ransom, is rendered “redeem” 
in Titus ii, 14; 1 Pet. i.18; whence the 
compound verbal noun ἀπολύτρωσις, re- 
demption, in Rom. iii. 24; viii. 23; 1 Cor. 
i, 30, etc. The apostle may be supposed to 
have preferred to use ἐξαγοράζω here, as 
pointing more definitely to the price which 
the Redeemer paid; for in λυτρόω, re- 
deem, this notion of a price paid often lies 
so far in the background as to leave the 
verb to denote simply “deliver.” The un- 


‘ds he that is hanged.” 


compounded verb ἀγοράζω, buy, ia found 
with reference to Christ’s death in 1 Cor. 
vi. 20 and vii. 23, “ Ye were bought with a 

rice;” 2 Pet. 11.1, “The Master that 

ought them;” Rev. v. 9, “ Didst purchase 
unto God with thy blood.” In the present 
passage it is not the blood of Christ, as in 
1 Pet. i..18, that is regarded as the pur- 
chase money,—for the notion of expiation 
with blood of sacrifice is not even glanced 
at; but rather, as the next words show, his 
taking upon him the accursedness and pol- 
lution which by the Law attached to every 
one crucified. “From the curse of the 
Law;” its cursing affects us no more. 
God’s people are, in Christ, no longer, as 
they were before, subject to his disapproval 
or abhorrence, in consequence of transgress- 
ing the positive, ceremonial enactments of 
the Law of Moses. In respect to that class 
of transgressions, its cursing expended it- 
self, and perished, upon the crucified body 
of the Son of God. Being made a curse for 
us (γενόμενος ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν κατάρα); having 
become on our behalf a curse. The position 
of κατάρα makes it emphatic. The form of 
expression, “become a curse,” instead of 
“become accursed,” is chosen to mark the 
intense degree in which the Law’s curse 
fastened upon the Lord Jesus. Compare 
the expression, “made him on our behalf 
sin,” in 2 Cor. v. 21. Probably the form of 
expression was suggested to the apostle by 
that .found in the Hebrew of the passage of 
Deuteronomy which he proceeds to cite 
(see next note but one). The preposition 
ὑπέρ, “for,” “on behalf of,” may possibly 
mean “in place of,” as (perhaps) in Philem. 
13; but this idea would have been more 
distinctly expressed by ἀντί: and the strict 
notion of substitution is not necessary to 
the line of argument here pursued. For it 
is written (γέγραπται ydp). But the more 
approved reading is ὅτι γέγραπται, because it 
is written; which more definitely marks the 
writer’s purpose of vindicating the propriety 
of his using so strong an expression as “ be- 
coming ἃ curse.” Cursed is every one that 
hangeth on a tree (ἐπικατάρατος πᾶς ὃ 
κρεμάμενος ἐπὶ ξύλον); or, upon wood (Deut. 
xxi. 23). The Septuagint has Kexarnpapévos 
[or, Κατηραμένος) ὑπὸ Θεοῦ πᾶς κρεμάμενος 
[or, πᾶς ὁ κρ. ἐπὶ ξύλον, “Cursed by God 
ts every one hanging on a tree.” The He- 
brew is qillath elohim talut, “a curse of God 
1 The words, “ every 
one” and “on a tree,” are additions made 
by the Septuagint; the latter expression, 
however, is found in the preceding clause, 
as also in the preceding verse; so that the 
sense is given rightly. The apostle departa 
from the Septuagintal rendering of the He- 
brew phrase, “a curse of God,” probably 
because he regarded the rendering as inad- 


om. τα, 1—29.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


131 


curate; for the phrase, “curse of God,” fa 
probably a strongly intensive form of ex- 
pression, like “ wrestlings of God,” in Gen. 
xxx. 8 (“great wrestlings,” Authorized 
Version). See note on “exceeling great 
city” (Hebrow, “a city great unto God’’) 
in Jonah iii. 3, in ‘Speaker’s Commentary.’ 
According to this view, ἐπικατάρατος, in 
which the element ἐπὶ is intensive, is a just 
interpretation; while it also makes the 
clause more striking as an antithesis to the 
ἐπικατάρατος, etc.,in ver. 10, We are, per- 
haps, justified in adding that it would not 
have exactly suited the apostle’s purpose 
to admit the words, “ by God ;” for, though 
the Law pronounced the crucified Jesus a 
“curse,” God, in the apostle’s feeling, did 
not in this case ratify the Law’s maledic- 
tion. To understand the bearing of the 
verse rightly it is necessary to be quite 
clear as to. the sense in which Christ is 
here said to have become a curse. The 
eontext shows that he became a curse simply 
by hanging upon a tree. No spiritual trans- 
action, such as that of our guilt being laid 
upon him, comes into view here at all. It 
was simply the suspension upon a cross 
that imparted to him, in the eye of the 
Law, this character of accursedness, of ex- 
treme abhorrent defilement. In other words, 
the accursedness was the extreme of cere- 
monial pollutedness—ceremonial, with no 
admixture of guilt or spiritual pollution. It 
has, indeed, been attempted by critics, Jewish 
as well as Christian, as Bishop Lightfoot 
has shown, to justify this aphorism of the 
Law, by the plea that one thus punished 
might inferentially be supposed to have 
merited this form of execution by some 
especial enormity of guilt. But, plainly, 
such previous guiltiness might not have 
been present; the man crucified, or impaled, 
or hung might have suffered upon a false 
accusation. But though he had suffered 
unjustly, his being gibbeted would, notwith- 
standing his innocence, constitute him “a 
curse of God” all the same. Ceremonial 
_pollutedness, as well as ceremonial purity, 
was altogether independent of moral con- 
siderations. And at present the line of 
thought which the apostle is following 
relates simply to questions of Levitical or 
ecremonial purity or defilement. Have 
Christian believers as such anything to do 
with these matters? Thisis the point at 
isgue. The apostle proves that they have 
nothing to do with them, upon the ground 
that the crucifixion of Christ did away 
wholly with the ceremonial Law. It will 
only confuse the reader if he supposes that 
the apostle means here to embody the whole 
doctrine of Christ’s sacrificial awnement ; 
he is at present concerned with stating the 
relation which his passion bore to the Law. 


The passage before us illustrates the mean. 
ing of the words in ch. ii. 19, “I through the 
Law died unto the Law:” he felt himself 
disconnected from the ceremonial Law, in 
consequence of that Law pronouncing Christ 
crucified “a curse of God.” <A question 
arises, how far the crucifixion of Christ, 
viewed in this particular aspect of its con- 
stituting him in the eye of the ceremonial 
Law an accursed thing, modified for those 
who believe on him the effect of the maledic- 
tion which the Law pronounced upon such as 
violated its moral precepts. The following 
observations are offered for the reader’s 
consideration. The Law given in the Pen- 
tateuch is uniformly spoken of in Scripture 
as forming one whole. Composed of pre- 
cepts, some moral, some ceremonial, some 
partaking mixedly of buth qualities, it con- 
stituted, however, one entire coherent system. 
If a part of it was destroyed, the whole Law 
as such itself perished. If go, then the cross 
of Christ, by annihilating itsceremonial enact- 
ments, shattered in pieces the whole legisla- 
tion, so that the disciples of Christ are nc 
longer at all under its dominion, or subjects 
jurisprudentially (so to speak) to its coercive 
punitive power. Yet its moral precepts, so 
far as they embodied the eternal principles 
of rectitude, would, so far, and because they 
do so, and not because they were part of 
the Law given through Moses, continue to 
express the will of God concerning us 
Being, however, “letter ” and not “spirit,” 
they were always altogether inadequate 
expressions of that Divine will—a will which 
is spiritual, which is evermore changing its 
form and aspect towards each human soul, 
according to the ever-varying conditions of 
its spiritual position. The moral precepts 
of the Law are for us no more than types or 
figures, mere hints or suggestions of the 
spiritual duties which they refer to; they 
cannot be regarded as definitively regulative 
laws at all. Thus they appear to be treated 
by Christ and his apostles; as eg. Matt. v. 
21—37; 1 Cor. ix, 8—10; and it is in this 
light that the Church of England regards 
them, in reciting the Decalogue in her Pre- 
Communion Office. And, analogously, the 
curse which the Law pronounces upon those 
who set any of its precepts at nought, 
whether moral or ceremonial, may be re- 
garded as a mere type, revealing, or rather 
giving a slightest most imperfect glimpse 
of, the wrath with which the Divine justice 
burns against wilful travsgressors of the 
eternal Law; 8. hint or suggestion, again, 
and not its direct denouncement. God’s 
people, however, by being through faith 
united to the crucified and risen Christ, 
become through his cross dead to the whole 
Law of Moses, both ag regulative and as 
punitive,—freed from it absolutely; mej 


188 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


fon. πα, 1—29, 


however, to be without Law unto God; 
only, the Law they are now under is a 
spiritual Law, one conformable to the 
nature of that dispensation of life and of 
the Spirit, to which through the Risen One 
they belong. With this view it agrees that 
the execration which the Law pronounced 
upon the Son of God as crucitied, and by 
pronouncing which the Law itself perished, 
is to be regarded as a most significant and 
impressive symbol of the spiritual import of 
our Lord’s death. It pronounces to the 
universe that, for those who by faith are one 
with Christ, the wrath of Divine justice 
against them as sinners is quenched— 
quenched in the infinite, Divine love and 
righteousness of Christ.: 

Ver. 14.—Two results are here stated as 
having flowed from the abrogation of the 
Mosaic Law which was cffected by the 
crucifixion of Jesus: one, the participation 
of Gentiles in “ Abraliam’s blessing,” to 
which they could not have been admitted 
as long as the Law was authorized to shut 
them out from God’s covenant us unclean ; 
the other, the impartation to God’s people, 
upon their faith only, apart from acts of 
ceremonial obedience, of the promised gift 
of the Holy Spirit. Are these stated as 
co-ordinate results, in the same way as a 
repeated ἵνα (“in order that”) introduces 
co-ordinate results in Rom. vii. 13; 2 Cor. 
ix. 2; Eph. vi. 19,20? Or is the second a 
consequence of the first? In favour of the 
tirst view, it may be said that, in point of 
fact, Gentiles, as such, were not admitted 
into a participation in Abraham’s blessing 
till some time after the day of Pentecost. 
But on the other hand, it may be urged (1) 
that, though not as yet actually admitted, 
yet in the Divine purpose, and in the 
ordering of the conditions of the case, they 
might have come in,—the door was open, 
though the threshold not actually crossed ; 
and (2) that their admissibility may be sup- 


posed to have been in the Diviue counsels’ 


the prerequisite condition of the Holy 
Spirit being imparted, it not being fitting 
that the Spirit should be given so long as 
the Law was, so to speak, standing there, 
authorized to debar from this, the most 
essential portion of “ Abraham’s blessing,” 
any who were partakers of Abraham’s bless- 
ing. In the three passages referred to as 
favouring the construing of the two clauses 
us co-ordinate, we have not as here two 
different results, but one and the same, only 
in the second elause more fully described. 
The second view secms, therefore, the more 
probable one. That the blessing of Abra- 
ham might come on the Gentiles through 
Jesus Christ (iva cis τὰ ἔθνη ἡ εὐλογία τοῦ 
᾿Αβραὰμ γένηται ἐν Χριστῷ ᾿Ιησοῦ : so most 
recent editors read, in place οἵ ᾿Ιησοῦ 


Χριστῷ); that upon “the nations” might 
come the blessing of Abraham in Christ 
Jesus. ‘The phrase, εἰς τὰ €Ovn... γένηται, 
is illustrated by the use of γίγνεσθαι cis, 
“arrive at,” or “accrue to,” in Acts xxi. 17; 
xxv. 15; Rev. xvi. 2. For the preposition 
eis we may also comp. Rom. iii. 22, “ Unto 
(eis) all and upon (ἐπὶ) all.” By τὰ ἔθνη, 
ag the whole context shows, the apostle 
means in particular “the Gentiles,” the 
non-Jews, as such. At the same time, the 
phrase is evidently used, as found ready at 
hand in the passage cited by him in ver. 8, 
“In thee shall all the nations (ἔθνη) be 
blessed,” which passage also suggested the 
notion of “the blessing of Abraham.” It 
had therein been foretold that all the nations 
should, by exercising the faith of Abraham, 
obtain the same blessing; and (says the 
apostle) we see now by what method the 
benefit has been brought to them. “In 
Christ Jesus;” not merely by him; the 
blessing is, so to speak, immanent in Christ, 
both procured by him and obtained by the 
nations through their coming by faith into 
union with him. Comp. Eph. i. 6, 7, “His 
grace which he freely bestowed upon us in 


_the Beloved; in whom we have our redemp- 


tion;” Col. ii. 10, “In him ye are made 
full;” and the like. “ The blessing of Abra- 
ham.” The expression, being drawn from 
the passages in Genesis in which the Lord 
assures Abraham that “he would bless 
him,” and that “in him all nations should 
be blessed,” must be taken to import ¢he 
Divine good will and whatever ben: fits would 
therefrom result. Men arrive at τι is “ bene- 
diction” by being justitied ; but justification 
is only the entrance into it, and not the 
whole blessing itself. It is styled Abra- 
ham’s blessing, as having been emphatic- 
ally declared to have been possessed by the 
patriarch, “the father” of all who should 
thereafter receive it. That we might receive 
the promise of the Spirit through faith 
(ia τὴν ἐπαγγελίαν τοῦ Πνεύματος λάβωμεν 
διὰ τῆς πίστεως). The pronoun “ we” points, 
not to the Israelites as such, nor to Israelite 
believers in particular, but to those who 
were viewed as God’s covenant people. 
These had hitherto been Abraham’s natural 
seed only; and had also hitherto been 
under the Law. But the time had come 
when they were to receive the full “ adoption 
of sons,” and therewith the Spirit of God’a 
Son (ch. iv. 5, 6); which, however, could 
not come to pass until the Law, “the yoke 
of slavery,” had been cleared out of the 
way, opening the gate to God’s benediction 
to all believers, whether Jews or Gentiles. 
The Law and the Spirit could not coexist. 
Where the Law had sway, there was tutor- 
ship (ταιδαγωγία) and slavery. Such, it is 
true, was needed, so long as the Spirit wae 


ἐξ. τῇ, 1—29,) 


THE EPISTLE TO THH GALATTANA, 


183 


not there; for moral beings, forming a 
people of God’s, must be under some Law; 
and, if there was not a law written on the 
“fleshy tables of the heart” by Gou’s Spirit, 
there behoved to be one embodied in an 
outward code of ordinances, which should 
coerce men’s frowarduess and keep them 
under discipline. But when this outward 
code had been taken out of the way, “nailed 
to Christ’s cross,” then the people of God 
could not be left without the Spirit—the 
Spirit of holiness, as well as, or rather, 
because also, the Spirit of adoption; which 
accordingly was forthwith imparted, the 
sole condition of the bestowment being 
their living obedient faith, felt and by bap- 
tism professed, in Christ and in God. Comp. 
Eph. iv. 13 —18, as containing a full pre- 
sentment of these facts relative to the intro- 
duction of the new covenant, and in the 
same order of sequence. Thns the apostle 
has triumphantly returned to the thesis 
from which he had started in the two first 
verses of the chapter—Christ crucified, and 
the receiving of the Spirit without works 
of the Law. “The promise of the Spirit” 
is the Spirit which had been promised ; the 
woxl “promise” here denoting, not as in 
Hek. xi. 33, the word assuring a subsequent 
bestowment, but asin Luke xxiv. 49 and Heb. 
xi. 59, the bestowment itself. The apostle 
points not merely to such passages of the 
Old Testament as had definitely fore- 
announced the outpouring of God’s Spirit 
(Joel ii. 38; Isa. xliv. 3; and the like), 
but the whole “kingdom of God,” or “world 
to come,” whose blessedness therewith came. 

Ver. 15.—Brethren, I speak after the 
manner of men (ἀδελφοί, κατὰ ἄνθρωπον 
λέγω). “Brethren.” The tonc of indignant 
reproach with which the chapter opened 
has gradually subsided in the course of 
the apostle’s argument; so that here he 
appeals to the Galatian Churchmen as 
“brethren ;” as if to bespeak their candid 
attention to the consideration he is about 
to allege. “I speak after the manner of 
men.” I gay it as stating a principle com- 
monly recognized in human life, in respect 
to contracts between man and man (see note 
on the phrase, ch. i. 11). In ἃ similar 
manner, in Heb. vi. 16, 17 the writer refers 
to human methods of ratifying solemn en- 
gagements, in order to illustrate a course of 
proceeding on another occasion condescend- 
ingly adopted by God. Though it be but a 
man’s covenant, yet if it be (whén it hath 
been) confirmed, no man disannulleth, or 
addeth thereto (ὅμως dvOpdmov κεκυρωμένην 
διαθήκην οὐδεὶς ἀθετεῖ ἢ ἐπιδιατάσσεται). The 
Authorized Version has thus happily ren- 
dered the ὅμως, which is here transposed 
out of its logical position, as it is also in 
1 Cor, xiv. 7, and as ἔτι ἴθ in Rom, vy, 6, 


The apostle’s meaning is that, if even men 
are constrained by their sense of justice to 
abide by this rule, much more may the All- 
righteous One be expected to do so. This 
a fortiort suggestion (for St. Paul only 
hints this consideration by introducing tiie 
word ὅμως without explicitly developing it) 
is similar to the @ fortiort argument more 
explicitly stated by our Lord with reference 
to God’s justice, in Luke xviii. 6,7; and to 
his fatherliness, in Luke xi. 13. “Covenant.” 
The word διαθήκη, properly “ disposition,” 
which, in classical Greek, generally means 
“ will,” “ testament,” is used in the Septua- 
givt to render the Hebrew berith, covenant, in 
which sense it oceurs once in Aristophanes 
‘Aves,’ 439; and it appears to denote “cove- 
nant” in all the thirty-three places in 
which it is found in the New Testament; 
for even Heb. ix. 17 can hardly be allowed 
to be an exception. Bishop Lightfoot ob- 
serves that the Septuagint translators and 
the New Testament writers probably pre- 
ferred διαθήκη to συνθήκη, the ordinary Greek 
word for “covenant,” when speaking of a 
Divine dispensation, because, like “ pro- 
mise,” it better expresses the free grace of 
God. Perhaps the terms appeared to them 
more suitable also in this application, be- 
cause one of the parties to the engagement 
was no other than the supreme sovereign 
Disposer of all things. “Confirmed ;” rati- 
fied; as it were, signed, sealed, and de- 
livered. “No one;” meaning neither of the 
two covenanting parties. “ Addeth there- 
to;” addeth any fresh condition, such as 
would clog the action of the previous en- 
gagement. The apostle adds this with 
reference to the supposition that the Law 
of Moses might have qualified the Abra- 
hamic covenunt by limiting its benefits to 
persons ceremonially clean. 

Ver. 16.—Now to Abraham and his seed 
were the promises made (τῷ δὲ ᾿Αβραὰμ 
ἐῤῥήθησαν [or, éppddnoay] ai ἐπαγγελίαι, καὶ 
τῷ σπέρματι aitod); now to Abraham were 
the promises made (Greek, spoken) and to his 
seed. The question now to be determined 
is, who the parties were that were concerned 
in the covenant made with Abraham, and 
with respect to whom the principle just 
stated must be taken to apply. Of course, 
God is himself one of the two parties. This 
the apostle assumes without specific mention 
in this verse, though he refers to it in the 
next. On the other side, he discerns “ Abra- 
ham and his seed;” for the form of the 
sentence, we feel, lays emphatic stress 
upon the latter copartuer. He has in view, 
apparently, in part, the promise recorded 
in Gen. xiii. 15, “ All the land which thou 
secst, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed 
for ever;” perhaps in part the vision related 
in Gen. xv., wherein (ver. 18) “the Lord 


134 THE EPISTLE TO 


THE GALATIANS  [οη, m1. 1—29. 


made a covenant with Abram, saying, Unto 
thy seed have [ given this land,” ete. ; but 
most particularly, siuce on this occasion 
circumcision was appointed as the “sign of 
the covenant,” the words in Gen. xvii. 7, 8, 
“JT will establish my covenant between me 
and thee and thy seed after thee in their 
generations for an everlasting covenant, to 
be a God unto thee, and to thy sced after 
thee: and I will give unto ther, and to thy 
seed after thee, the land wherein thou art 
a stranger, all the land of Canaan, for an 
everlasting possession; and I will be their 
God.” In the present connection the refer- 
ence is not so obvious to the important pro- 
mise in Gen. xxii. 17, 18, on which such 
stress is laid in Heb. vi. 13—18. These 
passages, in their primary and plain obvious 
sense, point to a covenant estiblisiied by the 
Lord between himself on the one hand, and 
Abraham and Abraham’s natural sced on 
the other; ratified on the persons of Abra- 
ham and his offspring by the seal of cireum- 
cision, and collating to them the gift of the 
land of Canaan. But the aposile teaches 
us to read these passages mystically: in 
place of Abraham’s natural seed substituting 
“Christ,” a spiritnal seed; and in place of 
the land of Canaan substituting a spiritual 
inheritance. For “covenant,” to which 
term the apostle reverts in the next verse, 
we have here * promises; ” thus also in Heb. 
vii. 6, Abraham is described as “he that 
had the promises.” He saith not, And to 
seeds, as of many; but as of one, And to thy 
seed (οὐ λέγει: Kal τοῖς σπέρμασιν, ὡς ἐπὶ 
πολλῶν" ἀλλ᾽, ὡς ἐφ᾽ ἑνός" Kal τῷ σπέρματί 
σου). The use of the preposition ἐπὶ with 
λέγει, a8 meaning “ of,” not found elsewhere 
in the New Testament, occurs repeatedly in 
Plato (see Ellicott and Alford, and Winer’s 
‘Gram. 47, g). With “many” and “ one,” 
we are, of course, to supply “seeds” and 
“seed.” It has been questioned whether 
such a form of expression as “to thy 
seeds” would have been possible in the 
Hebrew. Certainly we do not in the 
Hebrew Bible find a plural of the noun 
zer@ when used for “offspring,” bit only 
when used for a grain of seed. But still, 
such 8. plural may not have been unknown 
to St. Paul in the Hebrew spoken in his 
time; for it occurs, De Wette tells us, in 
the Chaldee Paraphrast for “races” in 
Josh. vii. 14; Jer. xxxiii, 24; Gen. x. 18. 
Such a grammatical cavil to his observation, 
however, the apostle might well have 
brushed aside by giving his objector to 
understand that it was not upon a nicety 
of lingual criticism that he was taking his 
stand, but upon a fact which was not to be 
called in question; namely, that of the 
many branches of descendants owning 
Abraham as their progenitor, there was only 


one contemplated by the Almighty as des- 
tined to inherit the promise. This principle 
of discrimination among several lines of 
descendants he has himself drawn marked 
attention to in Rom. ix. 7,8, by quoting the 
words, “In Isaac shall thy seed be called,” 
and adding the gloss, “ That is, it is not the 
children of the flesh that are children of 
God; but the children of the promise 
are reckoned for a seed.” And so here, 
Among Abraham’s descendants one par- 
ticular head of a race was beforehand 
svlected in the counsels of God, whose 
issue alone should inberit. As the principle 
of discriminative predestination was applied 
with respect to the inheriting of the promises 
viewed in their secular meaning, so also was 
it applied with respect to the inheriting of 
them spiritually: to only one branch of 
Abriham’s descendants did the Divine 
Disposer guarantee the promised grant; 
that which should originate from Abraham’s 
great Descendant, Christ, and which was to 
be in him and by his name to be called. 
Which is Christ (ὅς ἐστι Χριστός); that is, 
which seed is Christ; the gender of 
the relative pronoun, which logically. as 
reciting a neuler noun, σπέρμα, should be 
neuter, being aceording to a very common 
usage of the linguage made masculine by 
the attraction of the predicate Χριστός. 
The word “seed” still retains its signifi- 
cation of a collective noun, and does not 
even here denote a single descendant—a 
sense which usaze would not justify us in 
assigning to it; for even in Gen. iv. 25 
zera’ acher means “other offspring,” and 
not “another offspring.” The word “Christ ” 
is itself employed by the apostle as a col- 
lective, as in 1 Cor. i. 13, “Christ is di- 
vided!” or, “Is Christ divided?” xii. 12, 
“ As the body is one, and hath many mcem- 
bers, . . . so also is Christ.” It is usual in 
the Hebrew idiom to apply to a people the 
very name, unmodified, of the head from 
which they derive; as “ Israel,” ‘ Jacob,” 
“Wephraim,” “Judah,” and a large multitude 
of instances. It is certain from vers. 27—29 
that St. Paul bas in view those who are “in 
Christ” as being in and with him the 
“see]” to whom the “inheritance” was by 
that covenant given. Jesus, viewed in his 
own solitary personality, has no place in the 
apostle’s present argument: he it was not 
that was to inherit the blessing, save only 
with, ov rather in, that multitude of human 
beings for whose sake he is there at all. 
Perhaps it is on that account that his 
offic al title “Christ” is alone named, in 
preference to “ Jesus” his appellation as an 
individual man. Having thus ascertained 
as definitely as we may what it is that the 
apostle here states, we are naturally led to 
consider on what grounds he is justified ia 


0. 1, 1—29.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


135 


affixing to the passnge or passages of the 
Old Testament which he refers to, the sense 
that he does; both as to the import of the 
gift which the covenant guaranteed to 
Abraham’s seed, and as to the specific seed 
itself as being “ Christ.” The answer to such 
questioning is, for us, at once in a great 
measure determined by our belief in the 
elaims which St. Paul makes to be regarded 
as an inspired teacher. With this belief, we 
do not wait first to ascertain that his ex- 
position is warranted by linguistic or his- 
torical reasoning before we will give it our 
assent, We accept his exposition as one 
imparted to himself by heavenly teaching, 
and as the result of inspired spiritual insight 
gazing into the oracles of God. We refuse 
to regard it, as some would fain persuade us 
to do, as mere midrash of unscientific rabbin- 
ism. Perhaps, indeed, rabbinism itself in its 
better schools—and iu such St. Paul had 
himself in his earlier years been trained— 
was often fur more profound and scientific 
in its scriptural exegesis than many who 
have not been conversant with Jewish com- 
mentators are disposed to imagine. His 
exposition is, therefore, not at once and of 
course condemned, because, if indeed it be 
the fact, its method seems to bear upon it 
the brand of being rabbinical. Thus much is 
clear—its substance was beyond all question 
not drawn from rabbinism, but learnt from 
higher teaching. If at first it arouses in 
our minds a feeling of surprise, and even a 
degree of hesitation in accepting it as it 1108 
there before us, we may have good grounds 
for suspecting that this is owing, not to our 


superior wisdom, but to the superficiality of | 


the views which we are in the habit of 
taking of the historics and utterances 
found in the Old Testament. Fuller and 
clearer insight into the depths of inspired 
teaching will perhaps enable us by-and-by 
to grasp with a firmer hold than now the 
veritable reasonableness and certainty of 
this apostolic woid, and to discern its co- 
herency with other portions of revealed 
truth. Meanwhile it may conciliate our 
judgment to a more unfaltering acceptance 
at once of what we here read, if we will 
consider how transcendently great is the 
glory of the personage whose Name is here 
attached to Abraham’s spiritual seed, and 
how tranuscevdent too is the corresponding 
glory of that economy of bevediction which 
that august Being has brought in. The 
infinite grandeur of “God manifest in the 
flesh” impaits’ its magnificence both to 
the community which he graciously takes 
into union with him, and to the “ kingdom 
of God” which through him they inherit. 
The glory of Christ fills the whole Church, 
which, resplendent therewith, eclipses mto 
atier obscurity all other communities here- 


tofore promised to be recipient of Divine 
blessing: those, feeble types of her, fade 
away at her coming, their glory and very 
being absorbed in hers. We need, then, not 
hesitate to believe that she with her Lord 
was from the beginning contemplated by the 
Almighty in the revelations of future bene- 
diction which he accorded to men, certainly 
with a view ultimately to this crowning 
dispeusution ; and that anterior dispensations 
of benediction were symbolically predictive 
of this. 

Ver. 17.—And this I say, that the cove- 
nant, that was confirmed before of God in 
Christ (τοῦτο δὲ λέγω, διαθήκην προκεκυρω- 
μένην ὑπὸ τοῦ Θεοῦ [Receptus adds, εἰς 
Χριστόν); and I say this: a covenant confirmed 
before of God. We have here the applivation 
of the aphorism laid down in ver. 15. “ And 
Isay this ;” that is,“ And what I have to suy 
is this.’ As God bad alrca ly before made 
a solemn covenant with Abraham and his 
seed, the Law given so long alter cannot 
have been intended to do away with it; 
fundamental principles of even human civil 
equity disallow of any such procedure. 
“ Confirmed before.” It the confirmation or 
ratification is to be distinguished as addi- 
tional to the solemu announcement, we may 
find it either in the “seal” of circumcision 
(om. iv. 11), or in the oath “with which 
God interposed” (Heb. vi. 17) after the 
sacrifice of ἴδιο. The words εἰς Χριστόν, 
“with reference to Christ,” ure expunged 
from the text by most recent editors. If 
genuine, they woul seem intended to em- 
phasize that position of “Christ” (de. in 
effect his Chur ἢ) as future copartner with 
Abraham, which has been already affirmed 
in the preceling verse. The Law, which 
was four hundred and thirty years after (6 
μετὰ τετρακύσια καὶ τριάκοντα ἔτη [Receptus 
reads ἔτη before τετρακόσια, instead of here, 
with no difference to the sense] γεγονὼς 
viwos); the Law, having come into existence 
four hundred and thirty years after. This 
number of years the apostle finds in Exod. 
xii. 40, 41. In the Hebrew text of that 
passage this term of four hundred and thirty 
years dcfines the stay of the Israelites “ in 
Egypt.” But in the Septuagint, as well as 
in the Samaritan text, the term defines the 
sojourn of the Israelites (* themselves and 
their futhcrs” is, according to Tischendorf, 
added in the Alexandrian manuscript) 
“in the land of Egypt and in the land of 
Canaan.” With the view presented by this 
Septuagintal version agrees a definite state- 
ment of Josephus (‘ Aut.,’ ii. 15, 2), “ They 
left Egypt... four hundred and thirty years 
after our forefather Abraham came into 
Canaan, but two hundred and fifteen years 
only after Jacub removed into Egypt.” In 
two other pascages, however (‘ Ant.,’ ti. 9, 1; 


136 THE EPISTLE TO 


ee 


THE GALATIANS. [ou. mr. 1—29, - 


* Bell. Jud.,’ v. 9, 4), Josephus speaks of the 
affliction in Egypt as lasting “ four hundred 
years;” probably following in this compu- 
tation the period mentioned in the Divine 
communication recorded in Gen. xv. 13, and 
cited by St. Stephen (Acts vii. 6) in his 
defence. It is unnecessary here to attempt 
to determine the chronological question, 
which is one not free from difficulty. Our 
readers are referred to some valuable obser- 
vations of Canon Cook’s, in his note on 
Exod. xii. 40; who on apparently strong 
grounds considers that a lounger period than 
two hundred and fifteen years must be al- 
lowed for the sojournin Egypt (see, however, 
Mr. Reginald 8. Poole’s article, “ Chrono- 
logy,” in ‘Dictionary of the Bible,’ vol. i. 
pp. 321, 322). If the Hebrew text of Exod. 
xii. 40 as we have it is correct, and if the 
Sepiuagintal version of it errs in including 
the sojourn of the patriarchs in Canaan in 
the there mentioned period of four hundred 
and thirty years, then the number of 
years which the apostle here specifies, 
counting apparently from Abraham’s arrival 
in Canaan when he received the first of the 
promises cited above in the note on ver. 16, 
is less than he would have been justified in 
stating by the interval between Abraham’s 
arrival in Canaan and Jucob’s going down 
into Egypt. But, however, even if the 
apostle’s mind adverted to this particular 
pe at all, which may or may not have 
been the case, it plainly would not have 
been worth his while to surprise and perplex 
his readers by specifying a number of years 
different from that which they found in the 
Greek Bible, which both he and they were 
accustomed to use, even though the greater 
number would have in a slight degrce added 
to the force of his areument. Cannot dis- 
annul (ov« ἀκυμοῖ) ; doth not disannul. The 
present tense is used, because the apostle is 
describing the present position. That it 
should make the promise of none effect (εἰς 
τὸ καταργῆσαι Thy ἐπαγγελίαν). The “ cove. 
nant” is here to a certain degree distin- 
guished from “the promise.” The latter, 
being the fundamental and characteristic 
portion of the former, is brought promi- 
nently forward, for the purpose of illustrat- 
ing the character of the Christian economy 
as being above all things one of grace and 
gratuitous bestowment. The feeling also, 
perhaps, underlies the words that with 
one of generous spirit—and who so large- 
hearted and munificent as God?—in pro- 
portion as a promise which he has given is 
large and spontaneous, and the expcctation 
raised by it eager and joyous, in that pro- 
portion is it impossible for him to baulk the 
promisee of his hope. The “ promise” was 
“To thee and to thy seed will I give this 
land;” the “covenant,” that Jehovah would 


| be their God, and that they should recognize 
him ag such. 

Ver. 18.—For if the inheritance be of the 
Law, it isno more of promise (εἰ γὰρ ἐκ νόμον 
ἡ κληρονομία, obxéri[or, οὐκ ἔτι] ἐξ emaryyeAlas)3 
for if from a Law the inheritance accruesy 
it accrues no longer from a promise. The 
two nouns “ Law” and “ promise ” have no 
article, being regarded here in their several 
characteristic principles, which were not 
only diverse, but contrary. The Law says, 
“The man that doeth these things shall 
live by them;” and this while enforcing a 
great variety of minute positive principles 
by severe threats and penalties. ‘The pro- 
mise bestows of free grace without works. 
The promised bestowment is here styled 
“inheritance,” because received by Abra- 
ham’s seed as his heirs (see ver. 29 and 
ch. iv. 1). In the Old Testament it is 
a favourite desiznation of the land of Ca- 
naan; as 6.6. ἴῃ Ps. cv. 11. Here it relates to 
a spiritual possession. Οὐκέτι seems pre- 
ferred by editors of the text, when used 
logically, as if it were, It no longer appears 
to be (so Rom. vii. 17; xi. 6); whereas 
οὐκ ἔτι might be referred to a change which 
took place at the time when the Law was 
given. But God gave it to Abraham by 
promise ( τῷ δὲ ᾿Αβραὰμ δι᾽ ἐπαγγελίας κεχά- 
ρισται ὁ Θεό); but God hath freely given tt 
to Abraham by promise. The verb χαρίζομαι 
emphatically marks a gift as freely and 
lavishly bestowed (compare its use in 
Rom. viii. 32; 1 Cor. ii. 12). The perfect 
tense points to the now and evermore en- 
during effect of the promise. The position 
of 6 Θεὸς is emphatic—God, no less than 
he! (comp. Rom. viii. 31). The march of 
this sentence, with which the apostle closes 
up this paragraph of the discussion, gives, 
as it stands in the Greck, the reader to feel 
the apostle’s soul dilating with wonder and 
delight as he gives expression to the two 
notions—the gracious freeness of the gift, 
and the Divine personality of the Giver. 
The mention here of Abraham alone, 
without “his seed,” is perhaps due to the 
apostle’s sense of the long priority of this 
guaranteed bestowment to the giving of 
the Law. In appreciating the tone of the 
passage, we must not lose sight of the 
venerableness of this personage, the pri- 
mordi:l father, not only of the Hebrew race, 
but of all believers in Christ to the end of 
the world. 

Ver. 19.—Wherefore then serveth the 
Law? (τί οὖν ὁ νόμος ;); what then (or, why 
then) ἐξ the Law? The apostle is wont thus 
to introduce the statement of some objection 
or some question relative to the point in 
hand which requires consideration (cf, 
Rom. iii. 1; iv. 1). He wishes now to show 
that, while the Law was a Divine ordinance, 


OH. ΠΙ. 1—29.} THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


137 


it was yet not intended to supcrsede the 
previously ratified covenant, but rather to 
prepare for its being completely carried out. 
It was added because of transgressions (τῶν 
παραβάσεων χάριν προσετέθη); on account of 
transgressions it was superadded. As χάριν 
denotes that so-and-so is done in consider- 
ation of this or that; this latter may be 
either some antecedent fact furnishing 
ground for subsequent action, 88 in 1 John 
iii. 12; Eph. iii. 1; Luke vii. 47, or some 
rospective result, which the action siynified 
in the verb is intended to forward, as Jude 
16. Here it intimates that the Law 
was given from a regard to men’s sinful 
actions, with an implied contrast with the 
covenant of Christ’s gospel, which was 
concerned with men’s justification and bene- 
diction. The province of the Law is to 
expose sins, rebuke them, pronounce God’s 
curse upon them, coerce and restrain them 
by the discipline of a system of outward rites 
and ceremonies, ‘The office of the Law, as 
dealing with sinners as continuing sinful, 
while unable to make them new creatures, 
is indicated by St. Paul in 1 Tim. i. 9, 
where, after saying, “The Law is not made 
for a righteous man, but for the lawless and 
unruly, for the ungodly and sinners,” he 
proceeds to add a catalogue of offendera 
chargeable with the grossest form of cri- 
minality; which furnishes a most apt 
illustration of the word παραβάσεις (“ trans- 
gressions’’) which he here uses, and which 
marks sins in their most wilful and most 
condemnable character. What was spiri- 
tually the outcome of the Law’s action upon 
men’s sinful nature, in making their “sin 
exceeding sinful,” the apostle has vividly 
portrayed in the seventh chapter of the 
Romans. This last point, however, is pro- 
bably not even glanced at here; and it is 
only by straining the sense of χάριν that 
some commentators, notably Meyer, find the 
apostle to be here stating that the Law was 
added for the behoof of transgressions, as it 
were in their interest, to increase and in- 
tensify them, as in Rom. v. 20, that the tres- 
pass might abound. This, however, is not 
naturally found in the present passage. All 
that the apostle here states is that the Law 
merely dealt with sins, having no function 
in relation to life and righteousness. The 
article before παραβάσεων indicates tle whole 
class of objects referred to, as e.g. in τοῖς 
ἀνθρώποις (Heb. ix. 27). This“ superadded” 
(προσετίθη) ia not inconsistent with the 
οὐδ᾽ ἐπιδιατάσσεται, “nor addeth thereto,” of 
ver. 15; inasmuch as it points to a Divine 
ordinance, which stood, so to speak, in a 
different plane from the covenant of grace, 
and in no way interfered with it. Till the 
seed should come (ἄχρις οὗ ἔλθῃ τὸ σπέρμᾳ.) 
The form of expression indicates the purpose 


of him who arranged it all, that the Law 
should last only so long, and was to come 
to an end when the seed came. To whom 
the promise was made (6 ἐπήγγελται) ; to 
whom the promise hath been made. The 
perfect tense of the verb, as in the case of 
κεχάρισται, in ver. 18, points to the still con- 
tinuing validity of the promise, The 
“seed” is “ Christ;” the historical Christ, 
indeed, but still viewed collectively as 
summing up in himself all who should be 
unii.d to him. And it was ordained by 
angels in the hand of a mediator (διαταγεὶς 
δι’ ἀγγέλων, ἐν χειρὶ μεσίτουγ ; being ordained 
throuyn angels by the hand of a mediator. 
The verb “ordain ” (διατάσσειν), being most 
commonly used for “command,” “ order,” 
as Luke viii. 55; 1 Cor. vii. 17, is introduced 
in preference to δοθείς (comp. ver. 20 and 
John i. 17; vii. 19), as making more pro 
ninent the notion of ¢mperative action or 
the part of the Divine Lawgiver. The 
whole passage is tinctured with the feeling 
that the giving of the Law, as contrasted 
with the dispensation of the Messiah, was 
marked by distance, sternness, alienation. 
This is the meaning of the mention of 
“angels” as the medium of communication 
on the side of Heaven, and of “a mediator” 
as the selected medium of reception on the 
side of Israel (compare the ccntrast be- 
tween the two dispensations in Heb. xii. 
18—24). This representation of the Law 
as given through angels is unmistakably 
made again in the Epistle to the Hebrews, 
in the words, “The word spoken through 
angels” (ii. 2), where also it is placed in 
the same contrast with the gospel as spoken 
by the Lord Jesus, which here is plainly 
implied, if indeed it is not expressly alluded 
to, in the enigmatic words, “ but God is one,” 
in the next verse. This view of the Law as 
communicated through the medium of 
angels is distinctly referred to by St. Stephen 
as the accepted belief of the Jewish theo- 
logians before whom he spoke: “ Ye who 
received the Lawas the ordinancesof angels” 
(Acts vii. 53), where the phrase, διαταγᾶς 
ἀγγέλων, forms a remarkable parallel to the 
words, διαταγεὶς δ ἀγγέλων, now before us. 
The same view is put forth by Josephus 
( Ant.,’ xv. 5, 3), “ We having learned the 
most excellent of our doctrines and the 
most holy part of our Law through angels 
from God.” Such, then, was incontestably 
the current belief of the Jewish people, 
both Christian and non-Christian. The 
Hebrew theologians directed a great deal of 
attention upon the doctrine of angels, of 
which the “ boundless genealogies” spoken 
of by St. Paul (1 Tim. i. 4; comp. Col. ii. 18) 
was certainly one diseased branch. We may 
without improbability suppose that their 
exegetical sagacity, not unaided by the 


THE EPISTLE 


ΤῸ THE GALATIANS. 


(ox. ru. 1—29, 


Spirit of God promised by him to his people 
upon their restoration from Captivity, de- 
tected the particular fact here indicated in 
Deut. xxxiii. 2; Ps. xviii. 17; [xod. xix. 
16,19. The countless hosts of his “ saints” 
who attended upon the Lord on that occa- 
sion were not surcly mere spectators; and 
to their intervention acting out the volitions 
of God might be most reasunably ascribed 
all the pliysical sights and sounds which 
gave to the giving of the Law its sensible 
awfulness (comp. 1 Thess. iv. 16). “They 
raised the fire and smoke; they shook and 
rent the rovk; they framed the sound of the 
trumpet; they effected the articulate voices 
which conveyed the words of tle Law to the 
ears of the people, and therein proclaimed 
and publish:d the Law; whereby it became 
‘the word spoken by angels’” (Owen, ‘ Ex- 
position of the Epistle to the Hebrews,’ ii. 2). 
Inthe hand of a mediator (ἐν χειρὶ pectrov); 
by the hand of a mediator. "Ev χειρί, in or 
by the hand,is unquestionably a Hebraism, 
being in the Septuagint the ordinary literal 
rendering of the Hebrew beyad; see eg. 
Numb. iv. 37,45; which passages likewise 
show us whom the apostle means to desig- 
nate as the mediator; in reference to which 
comp. also Deut. v. 5, “I stood between 
(ἀνάμεσον) the Lord and you at that time 
[ie. at the giving of the Law], to show you 
the word of the Lord.” So Philo (* Vit. Mos.,’ 
678) speaks of Moses as acting like a μεσίτης 
καὶ διαλλάκτης, “ mediator and reconciler.” 
Schéttgen (‘ Hor. Hebr.’) gives numerous 
examples from the rabbinical books of this 
application of the term “ mediator ” to Moses. 
This conception of Moses as a mediator 
seems implied also in the words, “ Mediator 
of a better covenaut” and ‘ Mediator of a new 
covenant,” which we have in Heb. viii. 6 and 
xii. 24, with reference to Christ. Evidently 
the mention of a mediator in the present 
passage is intended to point to the relations 
between the Lord and Israci as being those 
of distance and estrangement. If it be 
objected that the same inference would be 
deducible from the description of Christ as 
“ Mediator between God and men,” in 1 ‘Tim. 
ii. 5, we have it to say, in answer, that 
Christ, being in his nature both Gol and 
man, not only mediates between God and 
men, having made atonement or recon- 
ciliation by his cross, but in his own being 
unites God aud man, abolishing actually 
that state of mutual alienatiox which the 
mediation of Moses by figure implied but 
could not inieality doaway. We, too, were 
enemies to God before we were reconciled 
by the death of his Son (Rom. v. 10); but 
now, being reconciled, we are at one with 
God in Christ: Christ’s life in our nature 
both guarautccing and effectuatiug our 
eontinued tate of reconciliation with the 


Father as well as our own spiritual and 
eternal life. 

Ver. 20.—This verse, closing the short 
paragraph commencing the verse which 
precedes it, appears designed to mark the 
difference of the relations which subsisted 
between the Lord and Israel at the time of 
the giving of the Law, compared with those 
which subsist between God and Abraham's 
seed in the covenant of grace. Now a me- 
diator is not a merliator of one (6 δὲ μεσίτης 
ἑνὸς οὐκ ἔστιν). The article with μεσίτης, li- 
terally, “the mediator,” marks the noun asa 
class noun, giving it the sense, “ἃ mediator 
as such.” Compare the use of the article in 
τοῦ ἀποστόλου, in “ the signs of an apostle ” 
(2 Cor. xii. 12); in ὁ ἀγαθὸς ἄνθρωπος, “a 
good man” (Matt. xii. 25); in 6 ἐργάτης, 
“the labourer is worthy of his hire” (Luke 
x. 7). The clause means this: a mediator 
implies the existence of more than one 
party, of two parties at least, for him to 
mediate between; of two parties not at one, 
but standing on such terms townrds each 
other as make his intervention necessary. 
So far as it characterized the giving of the 
Law viewed in contrast with the estab- 
lishment of the covenant of grace, the 
mediation of Moses, as has been already 
observed, did not put an end to the estrange- 
ment between the Lord and Israel: tho 
estrangement went on throughout Moscs’ 
life; throughout, the Israelites stand 
marked with the brand of “ transgression.” 
‘Lhe genitive ἑνός, “ of one,” is the same as 
the genitive in μεσίτης Θεοῦ καὶ ἀνθρώπων, 
literally, “ Mediator of God and men,” iu 
1 Tim, ii. 5: it marks the party or parties 
towards whom the function of mediation is 
exercise] ; so that what the apostle hers 
affiyms is that there cannot be only one 
such party. But God is one (ὁ δὲ Θεὸς εἷς 
ἔστιν). When we consider the number of 
interpretations given of this clause in con- 
nection with the preceding, which have 
literally been computed by hundreds (the 
reader will find a spicilegium of some sixty 
or eighty of them in Meyer), we may 
infer with certainty that the sense which 
the apostle intended to convey is not an 
obvious one—not one which lies near the 
surface. So much appears, however, in the 
highcst degree probable, that he refers 
either to some disadvantageous circum- 
stance attaching to the Law or to sume 
advantageous circumstance attachiug to the 
covenant of promise, and is viewing the two 
in contrast the one with the other, On 
these grounds the present writer has lovg 
since acquiesced in the view propounded hy 
Windischmann in his Commentary on this 
Hpistle, and which is accepted by Bishop 
Ellicott, that the unity here predicated of 
God is the oneness subsisting between the 


cH. 1. 1—29.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


139 


Father and the Son. God is one in tho 
Father and in his Son—Christ our Lord. 
The fact is now present to the apostle’s 
mind, and is presently after stated by him 
(ch. iv.4), that the Son has been “sent forth” 
by God to redeem us and make us sons, and 
has thus become the “Christ,” that “ Seed 
of Abraham” to which the promises had 
been mae (ver. 29 of this chapter). Hereby 
the most perfect oneness is established be- 
tweon God and the heirs of the promise; 
for these are “clothed with Christ” (ver. 27) 
tle Son of God; and he being one with 
the Father, they in and through him are 
really and permanently “reconciled into 
God,” as the apostle writes in Col. i. 20. 
Compare our Lord’s words in his inter- 
tessury prayer (John xvii. 21, 23), “That 
they all may be one; even as thou, Father, 
art in me, and I im thee, that they also 
may be in us. I in them, and thou in me; 
that they may be perfected into one.” That 
this sense lies deep down in the apostle’s 
words and would not have readily been 
presented by them to the minds of his 
readers, forms no valid objection to this 
interpretation; for the history of the exegesis 
of the passage proves that this must have 
been the case with the sense which the 
apostle really designed to indicate, what- 
ever that was. On the other hand, it is 
w sense which perfectly suits tho require- 
ment of the context; for it illustrates the 
superiority of the covenunt of the promise 
to the covenant of the Law in the strongest 
manner possible. The nut has a very hard 
shell, but it yields a delicious kernel. 

Ver. 21.—Is the Law then against the 
promises of God? (ὁ οὖν νόμος κατὰ τῶν 
ἐπαγγελιῶν τοῦ Θεοῦ ;). “ Against” (κατά), 
as ch. v. 23; Rom. viii. 31; Matt. xii. 30. 
Since the apostle has already (vers. 15—18) 
disposed of the notion that the Law may 
have superseded or essentially qualified the 
promise, this word * against” can hardly 
intend adverse action of that kind, but 
rather imports simply contrariety of spirit 
or purpose. This objection the apostle 
meets by stating that the spirit and pur- 
pose of the Law were not contrary to the 
promises, inasmuch as the Law did not 
offer to interfere with the work which the 
promises were to do, but was designed to 
be auxiliary to their function by preparing 
the vay for its discharge. God forbid (μὴ 
yévorro). The tone of abhorrence with 
which the apostle negatives the inference 
(see note on ch. ii. 17) is due, not so much 
ἂρ its mere unreagonableness, as to tho 
nimost blasphemous character which he 
fecla to attach to the notion. To think 
that one unquestionable revelation of the 
faithful, unchangeable God can be contrary 
ia spirit or purpose to another equally 


unquestionable revelation of his! For if 
there had been a Law given which could 
have given life (εἰ yap ἐδόθη vduds 6 δυνά- 
μενος ζωοποιῆσαι); for if a Law had been 
given such as could make alive. The con- 
struction of the article in the phrase, νόμος 
ὁ δυνάμενος, is similur to that in ἔθνη τὰ μὴ 
ἔχοντα (Rom. ii. 14); μάρτυσι τοῖς mpone- 
χειροτονημένοις (Acts x. 41). The noun is 
first put undetermined, a narrowing deter- 
mination with the article being then added: 
“If (in the Law of Moses] had been given 
a Law such as,” etc. By fastening atten- 
tion upon the Law as unable “to make 
alive,” the apostle marks its character as 
contrasted with the new covenant, the cha- 
racteristic function of which is that of 
imparting a life-giving Spirit. The Law 
made men feel their sin, their spiritual 
incapacitation, “the body of death” which 
enthralled them (Rom. vii.); but the 
grace which should instil into their souls 
the life of love which they lacked, it had 
not to bestow. So far only reaches the 
unfavourable estimate of the Law’s function 
given here: it was not “able to make alive.” 
Verily righteousness should have been by 
the Law (ὄντως ἂν ἐκ νόμου ἣν ἡ δικαιοσύνη); 
in very deed then from the Law would have 
accrued righteousness. “In very deed then.” 
But as the casc now stands, it is a delusion 
to think it can, as the unbelieving Jews do, 
and as some of you seem minded to do. 
“Ovrws, 88 Luke xxiii. 47; 1 Cor. xiv. 25. 
If the Law could have quickened men with 
spiritual life it would have brought them 
justification. This is what the apostle here 
aftirms. But why so? That in the economy 
of grace there is no just fication without 
spiritual quickening, nor spiritual life with- 
out justification, we are clearly apprised by 
neny passages of St. Paul’s own writings, 
notably by Rom. viii. 1—10. The expla- 
nation, however, is probably this: in the 
apostle’s view, the gift of the indwelling 
Spirit, to sanctify us and enablo us for living 
a spiritual life, is conditioned by a state of 
acceptableness with God; until we have been 
brought into a stato of grace, we are not 
qualified to receive this the supreme proof 
of Divine love. It is “because we are sons 
that God sends the Spirit of his Son into 
our hearts, crying, Abba, Father” (ch. iv. 
6). If, then, the Law can be supposed 
capable of imparting the Spirit of life, it 
must be supposed capable of antecedently 
imparting righteousness. The “inheritance” 
of Abraham’s seed includes both, both ac- 
cruing to them from faith. 80 far was the 
Law from having these gifts to bestow, that 
on the one hand, Moses’ miuistering of the 
Law to tho people was a ministration of 
condemnation (2 Cor. iii. 6—9), and on the 
other, it brought quickening, indeed, but 


140 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


(cu. m1. 1-—29. 


not to the sinner’s spirit, but to his sin 
(Rom. vii. 9), intensifying its malignity and 
working death (ibid., vers. 10—13). These 
views, 80 explicitly expressed by the apostle 
in the two nearly contemporaneous Epistles 
just cited, reveal to us what was in his 
mind when writing the words before us, 
and may be properly adduced to explain 
them. 

Ver. 22.—But the Scripture hath con- 
cluded all under sin (ἀλλὰ συνέκλεισεν 7 
ypaph τὰ πάντα ὑπὸ ἁμαρτίαν) ; on the con- 
trary, the Scripture hath shut tt all up under 
sin. On the sense which the phrase, “the 
Scripture,” sometimes bears, denoting the 
sacred writings collectively and not one 
particular passage, see note on ver. 8 
Here, as in ver. 8, we feel ourselves at 
liberty not to limit the apostle’s reference 
to one passage, as that cited in ch. ii. 16 or 
ver. 23 of this chapter, but to understand 
him as including in bis scope the teaching 
of Holy Scripture in both these and other 
places; having probably in view some such 
general summary of the contents of God’s 
Word as bearing upon the subject, as he 
has alleged in Rom. iii. It is highly pro- 
bable that some such summary, very pos- 
sibly this identical one with variatiuns, le 
was wont frequently to employ, as he 
certainly had constant occasion to do, 
in reasoning with his fellow-Jews and 
others, in synagogues and elsewhere. As 
in ver. 8, so here, the term “ Scripture ” is 
so applied as to invest Scripture with a sort 
of personal agency, which in stricter pro- 
priety would be predicated .of its Divine 
Author. We have, in fact, presentcd to us 
the action of God himself in his ordering of 
that older economy, and nut merely the 
statement of Scripture describing the con- 
dition of things under it. “Shut it all up 
under sin;” leaving no loop-hole of escape. 
The sense of the verb is illustrated by its 
use in the Septuagint (Josh. vi. 1), “Jeri- 
cho was (συγκεκλεισμένη) straitly shut up.” 
God, in the appointments and revelations of 
the Law, found and pointedly left his peo- 
ple, so to speak, under the operation and 
overmastering of sin, providing for them 
therein, and as yet, no such outlet from either 
its condemnation or its power (“ the law of 
sin,” Romans) as he purposed in after times 
to open for them. The description stands 
in marked contrast with the blessed liberty 
predicated in the next chapter of the 
children of “Jerusalem which is above.” 
This condition of things under the old 
economy is representcd as being only a 
provisional ordering of the Divine Disposer, 
inade with a view tu a perfect manifestation 
of deliveriug goodness to come by-and-by. 
“Shut up... that,” etc. We have a remark- 
able parallel to this twofold significance of 


* 


“shut up,” both as present and as prospec- 
tive, in Rom. xi. 32,“ God hath shut up all 
men unto disobedience (συνέκλεισεν ὃ Ocds 
τοὺς πάντας cis ἀπείθειαν), that he might 
have mercy upon all;” where likewise the 
providential ordering of God is spoken of, 
and not the description of Scripture only. 
There we read τοὺς πάντας, here τὰ πάντα, 
with an evident propriety in the choice of 
gender; for there St. Paul is thinking of 
Jews and of Gentiles as severally coming 
under the operation of the Divine “shutting 
up;” here he is not thinking of varied per« 
sonalities, but rather of the entire circum- 
stances of men under the legal economy. 
That the promise by faith of Jesus Christ 
might be given to them that believe (iva ἣ 
ἐπαγγελία ἐκ πίστεως Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ δοθῇ 
τοῖς πιστεύουσι). The term “promise,” as 
connected with the verb “ might be given,” 
denotes beyond doubt the thing promised, 
as in ver. 14, ‘the promise of the Spirit:” 
this is “the promise” meant here. Now, if 
we were to join the words, “by faith of 
Jesus Christ,” with the noun “ promise,” 
we should have to understand the two to- 
gcther as meaning, “the promise which was 
made to Abraham because of his faith in 
Jesus Christ ;” and this would be attended 
with ὦ twofold inconvenience: (1) the 
term would have to be taken in two senses 
in the same sentence; it would first mean 
here, “the word of promise spoken to Abra- 
ham,” and then, when immediately after 
taken with the verb “might be given,” it 
would change its sense into that of “the 
thing prumised;” (2) this method of con- 
struing the sentence would import a new 
thought, one which did not, so far ax we 
know—it may have done so, perhaps, but 
there is no proof of it—belong to St. Paul’s 
views of the subject; namely, that ‘Jesus 
Christ ’—not merely “ Christ,” but “Jesus 
Christ,” the historical Son of David—was 
believed in by Abraham. It appears safer, 
therefore, to connect the words, “by faith 
of Jesus Christ,” with the verb; thus: “that 
the promise might by faith, as u conse- 
quence of faith, of Jesus Christ be given to 
them that believe.” The apostle redoubles 
the mention of “faith” as the qualification 
for receiving the gift. “Faith! Faith! 
with none of your wretched works of cere- 
monialism!” Compare for this iteration 
of fuith, vers. 2—7. He adds, “of Jesus 
Christ,” to “by faith,” te mark that the 
bestowment of the blessing waa delayed till 
Christ should have actually come, to whose 
line amongst Abraham’s posterity the pro- 
mise had beon made. The apostle intimates 
that the ulterior purpose which God )iad in 
view in then “shutting it all up under sin,” 
the purpose which is described in this last 
senteuce, was likewise signifled by “ Scrip 


cH. 11. 1—29.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


lal 


ture,” as well as the condition of comparative 
helplessness and condemnution, under which 
those subject to the Law were detained. 
The participle rots πιστεύουσι is either 8 
class substantive (as Acts ii. 44; 1 Cor. xiv. 
22), “to believers,” or the present tense of 
the participle points to action contempo- 
raneous with that expressed by the verb, “to 
them that should believe.” 

Ver. 23.—The feature which distinguishes 
this new paragraph (vers. 23, 24) from the 
preceding (vers. 21, 22) is the more distinct 
statement of the pedagogic function of the 
Law as preparatory to that economy of 
grace which was the ulterior purpose of the 
Lawgiver. In the meanwhile (the apostle 
here says) we were committed to the custody 
of the Law. But before faith came (πρὸ 
τοῦ δὲ ἐλθεῖν τὴν πίστιν). The “but” is an- 
tithetic to the closing clause of ver. 22, from 
which is taken up afresh the notion of faith, 
there spoken of as of old destined to become 
at the proper time the qualifier for the re- 
ceiving of the promise. “Faith” denotes, 
not objectively, “the faith,” that is, the 
gospel, as ch. i. 23, a sense in which it is 
seldom used, and which is repelled here by 
the whole context; but subjectively, the 
principle of belief in One who gives of 
mere grace. This, by a bold and surely 
jubilant figure of speech, is personified as 
“coming” for men’s deliverance, while the 
“Law ” is also personified as the stern cus- 
todian under whose charge till then men 
were detained. Compare the frequent re- 
ferences in the Psalms to “light,” “ truth,” 
“righteousness,” “ word,” etc., being “ sent,” 
“commanded,” by the Lord, as if angels, 
despatched for the help of his saints (Ps. 
xliii. 3; xl. 11; lvii. 3; evii. 20, ete), We 
were kept under the Law, shut up (ὑπὸ 
νόμον ἐφρουρούμεθα, συγκεκλεισμένοι [ovy- 
κλειόμενοι, Revised Text; so, according to 
Scrivener, L. T. Tr.]); we were kept in ward 
under the Law, shut up. The “ we” recites, 
not exactly Jewish Christians or Jews, 
except per accidens, but God’s people. The 
verb φρουρεῖν, keep carefully guarded, is 
used with a prominent notion of protection 
in Phil. iv. 7; 1 Pet. i. 5; whilst in 2 Cor. 
xi. 32, as here, the more prominent idea is 
that of preventing egress. Comp. Rom. 
vii, 6, “The Law wherein we were holden 
(κατειχόμεθα)." So Wisd. xvii. 16, of Egyp- 
tians, in the plague of miraculous darkness, 
as i¢ were imprisoned, unable to move, 
"Eqpoupeiro εἰς τὴν ἀσίδηρον εἱρκτὴν κατα- 
κλεισθείς, “ Was kept in ward, having been 
shut up into the prison which had no iron 
bars.” The reading συγκλειόμενοι Or συν- 
κλειόμενοι, although highly witnessed to by 
uncial manuscripts, appears to be accounted 
for by the reading in B, συγκλεισμένοι (very 
prebably a clerical blunder for συγκε- 


κλεισμένοι), which may have given it vogue. 
The perfect participle seems alone suitable 
to the passage, g.d. shut up for good and 
all. The present participle would require 
to be understood of the repression of a con- 
stantly repeated cndeavour to escape (or, 
what?). As the verb συνέκλεισεν occurs in 
the preceding verse, συγκεκλεισμένοι takes 
the shade of meaning, “shut up as I said.” 
Unto the faith which should afterwards be 
revealed (cis τὴν μέλλουσαν πίστιν ἀποκα- 
λυφθῆναι). “Unto;” with reference to, 
with an eye to, the coming economy of free 
grace, to which they were then to be trans- 
ferred. The same preposition (eis) is used 
in the same manner in the next verse, “ unto 
Christ.” In the words, τὴν μέλλουσαν πίστιν 
ἀποκαλυφθῆναι, we have the same form of sen- 
tence as in Kom. viii. 18, Πρὸς τὴν μέλλουσαν 
δόξαν ἀποκαλυφθῆναι, “ For the glory which 
shall hereafter be revealed.” In both eases, 
the emphatic position of μέλλουσαν appears 
to indicate, not merely that the manifesta- 
tion was future, but that the future would 
be sure to bring it; the predetermining 
purpose of God made it certain. “ Re- 
vealed :” the principle of faith as accepting 
a gift bestowed of free grace, though not 
unknown to the pious of former ages (Rom. 
iii. 21)—for how in any age could one con- 
scious of sin look for any gift at the hands 
of the Almighty except thus?—was des- 
tined, under the “gospel of the grace of 
God,” to come forth into conspicuous pro- 
minence as the one supremely commanding 
element of religious sentimeut. 

Ver. 24.—Wherefore the Law was our 
schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ (Sore 6 
νόμος παιδαγωγὺς ἡμῶν γέγονεν cis Χριστόν); 
wherefore the Law hath been the keeper of 
our childhood to keep us unto Christ. With 
St. Paul, ὥστε, so that, frequently is 
used to introduce a sentence which is not 
dependent in construction on the preceding 
words, but is one which makes a fresh de- 
parture as if with the adverbial conjunction 
“ wherefore,” or “so then.” Thus ver. 9; 
ch. iv. 7; 2 Cor. iv. 12; v. 16; 1 Thess. 
iv. 18, in which last passage it is even fol- 
lowed by an imperative. Γέγονεν differs 
from ἦν or ἐγένετο by describing past action 
as ending in a result which still continues. 
The verb γίγνεσθαι frequently denotes 
“ prove one’s self,” “act as” (comp. 1 Thess. 
ii. 7; Acts i. 16; vii. 52). The Law hath 
done with us (says the apostle) the work of 
a child’s caretaker (pedagogus), with an eye 
to Christ, to whom we have now been 
handed over. (For the use of εἰς, see note 
on ver. 23.) Padagogus has no equivalent 
in the English language ; “ pedagogue,” 
“schoolmaster,” “tutor,” “guardian,” dre 
all inadequate, covering each one an area of 
thougl:t more or less quite different. “Tutor,” 


142 


fHE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


(on. 10. 1—29, 


as the masculine of “ governess,” comes per- 
haps nearest; but a tutor to a gentleman’s 
children is generally an educated man, and 
often of like rank in life with those he is 
with; whereas a padagogus was usually 8 
slave—an element of thought probably very 
ncar to the apostle’s consciousness in his 
present use of the term. In illustration of 
this and other points bearing upon this 
subject, the reader will be interested by a 
passage cited by Bishop Lightfoot out of 
Plato’s ‘Lysis’ (p. 208, C). Socrates is 
questioning a young friend. ‘They let 
you have your own ruling of  your- 
self: or do they not trust you with this, 
either?’ ‘Trust me with it, indeed!’ he 
said. ‘But as to this, who has the ruling 
of you?’ ‘This man here,’ he said, ‘a 
tutor’ ‘Being a slave, eh?’ * But what of 
that?’ said he; ‘yes; only, a slave of our 
own” ‘An awfully strange thing this,’ I 
said, ‘that you, freeman that you are, 
should be under the ruling of a slave. But 
further, what does this tutor of yours, as 
your ruler, do with you?’ ‘He takes me,’ 
said he, ‘to a teacher’s house, of course.’ 
‘Do they rule you too, the teachers?’ ‘ Cer- 
tainly, of course.” ‘A mighty number it 
scems of masters and rulers does your 
father think proper to set over you.’” 
Teaching, except possibly of the very first 
rudiments, was not the pedagogus's busi- 
ness, but only the general care and super- 
intendence of his charge—taking him to 
and back from his teachers’ houses or the 
schools of physical training, looking after 
him in his play hours, and the like. In 
applying to the Law the figure of a pada- 
gogus, the features which the apostle had in 
view were probably these: the childhood 
or non-age of those under its tutelage; 
their withdrawal from free parental inter- 
course; their degraded condition probably 
as being under servile management; tlhe 
exercise over them of unsympathizing hard- 
ness (comp. 1 Cor. iv. 15, “ Though ye have 
ten thousand tutors in Christ, yet have ye 
not many fathers”); coercive discipline; 
the rudimentary character of their instruc- 
tion (this particular, however, is likewise of 
questionable application); the temporary 
and purely provisional nature of the con- 
dition under which they were placed; its 
termination in the full enjoyment of free- 
dom and of participation in their father’s 
inheritance. The clause, “unto Christ,” 
can hardly mean “to bring us to Christ,” 
tempting as this interpretation may seem, in 
view of the verbal constituent (ἄγω) “ bring” 
in παιδαγωγός, and of the fact that it was one 
part of the duty of the child’s keeper to take 
him to his school. For there are the fol- 
lowing objections to taking it so: (1) The 
clild-keeper’s relation to his charge did not 


end with his taking him to school, but con- 
tinued on throughout his non-age; (2) the 
function of Christ is not viewed here as 
instruction; (3) if this construction had 
been in the spostle’s view, he would have 
written πρὸς Χριστὸν or eis Χριστοῦ, as in 
the εἰς διδασκάλου (“to the teacher’s house”) 
of the passage above cited from Plato. We 
must, therefore, understand the preposition 
a8 in the preceding verse, “ with a view to.” 
The next clause is the explanation. That 
we might be justified by faith (“vu ἐκ πίστεως 
δικαιωθῶμεν); tn order that by faith we might 
get justified. This clause is the most im- 
portant part of the sentence. Not from the 
Law was to come righteousness; the Law 
was no more than introductory or prepara- 
tory ; righteousness (once more the apostle 
reminds the Galatians) was to come to us 
asa free gift through Christ, upon simply 
our faith, the Law having now nothing to 
do with us. Hence the emphatic position 
of the words ἐκ πίστεως. The apostle does 
not, in the present conncction, make it his 
business to explain in what way the Law 
was preparatory, which he does in Rom. 
vii.; his purpose at present is to insist upon 
its purely provisional character. What we 
have here is a description of the relation of 
the Law to God’s people viewed collectively ; 
but we can hardly fail to be reminded, that 
this experience of the collective people of 
God very commonly finds its counterpart 
in respect to the ethical bearing of the Law 
in the experience of each individual believer. 
Only, we have still to bear in mind that the 
apostle is thinking of the Law just now 
more in its ceremonial aspect than its 
ethical. | 

Ver. 25.—But after that faith is come 
(ἐλθούσης δὲ τῆς πίστεω5); but now that 
Faith hath come; this white-robed, joy- 
bringing angel of deliverance! (see note 
on the words, in ver. 23, “before faith 
came”). We are no longer under a school- 
master (οὐκέτι ὑπὸ παιδαγωγόν ἐσμεν); we 
are no longer under a keeper of our childhood. 
When a child becomes of age, as deter- 
mined by his father’s arrangement, the 
pexdagogus’s function, of course, ceases; 80 
also when we(God’s collective people) became 
believers in Christ, we had reached the era 
appointed by our Father for our coming of 
age, and the Law lost all hold upon -us. 
This triumphant conclusion is bared upon 
the premiss that the Law was the pada- 
gogus of God’s people, and nothing more. 
This premiss is itself proved true to the 
apostle’s conviction, by the very nature of 
the case. 

Ver. 26.—For ye are all the children of 
God by faith in Christ Jesus (πάντες γὰρ υἱοὶ 
Θεοῦ ἐστὲ διὰ τῆς πίστεως ἐν Χριστῷ Ἰησοῦν; 
for sons of God are ye all through faith tn 


6k, itt, 1—29,] 


THR EPISTLE TO THR GALATIANS, 


148 


Christ Jesus, “ For;” that is, what is just 
affirmed (ver. 25) is true, because ye are 
“sons” and no longer “children.” “ Ye 4 
are;” in ver. 25 it is “ we are.” The whole 
course of the argument, however, shows that 
the persons recited by each of the personal 
pronouns are in effect the same, namcly, the 
people of God; otherwise this verse would 
not furnish proof, as by the “for” it pro- 
fessee to do, of the statement of ver. 25. The 
change from “we” to “ye” bas by some 
been explained as due to the writer’s wish 
to preclude the supposition that the “we” 
in ver. 25 applied tu Jewish believers only. 
A more satisfactory explanation is that he 
wishes to give the statement in vers. 22—25, 
which is gencral, ἃ more trenchant force as 
applying to those whose spiritual difficullics 
he is now deuling with. In 1 Thess. v. 5, 
“Ye are all sons of light, and sons of tho 
day: we are not of the night, nor of dark- 
ness,” we have the converse transition. 
There likewise the persons recited are in 
effect the same; and the change of person in 
the pronoun, making the discourse, from 
exhortation addressed to others, pass into a 
form of cohortation applying to all Cliristians 
alike, including the writer himself, is dic- 
tated by the apostle’s sympathetic kindness 
for especially his Thessalonian converts. 
“*Yoare.” The fact that faith is the sole and 
sufficient ground of qualification eliminates 
all those distinctions by which the Law has 
herctofore fenced off Gentiles, pronouncing 
them “separated as alicns,” “strangers to 
the covenants,” and “ without God” (cf. Eph. 
ii. 12), In the sequel (ver. 28) the apostle 
passes on from the thought of this particular 
outward distinction of Jew and Gentile to 
the thought of all other purely external 
distinctions. “In Christ Jesus.” It is de- 
bated whether this clause should be con- 
nected with “ faith,” as if it were πίστεως τῆς 
ἐν Χριστῷ Ἰησοῦ, the article being omitted, as 
in Col. i. 4; Eph. i. 15, and often; or with 
the words, “ye are sons of God,” with a 
comma following the word “faith.” Both 
modes of construing find in the sentence at 
last the same contents of thought; for each 
of the two propositions thus severally formed 
contains by implication the other. It pro- 
bably suits the connection best to take the 
apostle as at once affirming that it is in 
Christ Jesus that we are God’s sons through 
faith, rather than as leaving this to be in- 
ferred from the fact of our being sons through 
faith in Christ. “In Christ” is, with St. 
Paul, a very favourite form of indicating the 
channel through which the great blessings 
of the gospel are realized (cf. Eph. i. 3, 6, 7, 
11; ii, 6, 7, 10, 18, 21, 22; 11]. 12, ete.). 
“Sons of God.” It is quite clear that the 
term “sons” (viol) denotes those who have 
come into the full enjoyment, so far as the 


present life is concerned, of the position 
which their birth had entitled them to; and 
that it stands in contrast with their earlier 
position when children in years under a 
pzxdagogus. The noun vids, son, itself, 
however, while it is never used as synony- 
mous with νήπιος to describe one as a child 
in ycars, yet, like τέκνον, child, does not ordi- 
narily betoken more than simple relation- 
ship as the correlative with ‘‘father;” for 
which reason vids (as well as τέκνον) is uscd in 
such phrases as “children of disobedience,” 
“ὁ of Israel,” “ of light,” “ of tle day,” “ of the 
devil,” “of perdition.” In Heb. xii. 6—8 vids 
isapplied in the case of one who is as yet 
under the discipline of the rod; but even there 
vids of itself immediately designates his filial 
relation only. St. Paul never uses the word 
παῖς at all, though he has παιδία in 1 Cor. 
xiv. 20 for children in years, in place of the 
word νήπιος. which he ordinarily employs 
(Rom. ii. 20; 1 Cor. iii. 1; xiii, 11; Eph. 
iv. 14; Heb. v. 18), and which we find 
presently after in vers. 1 and 3 of the next 
chapter. The particular modification of 
meaning in which the apostle here uses the 
term is justified by the consideration which 
he presently puts forward, that ason of even 
an opulent or high-born purcnt, while a mere 
child, possesses no more freedom than if he 
were the child of any other person ; his heir- 
ship or distinction of birth is for so long 
more or less veiled; it is not until he passes 
out of his nonage thet he appears in his 
proper character. 

Ver. 27.—For as many of you as have been 
baptized into Christ (ὅσοι γὰρ εἰς Χριστὸν 
ἐβαπτίσθητε) ; for all ye who were baptized 
tnto Christ. “For;” pointing back to the 
whole preceding verse, but e-pecially to the 
words, “ in Christ Jesus.” “ All ye who were 
baptized ;” more literally, “ye, as many as 
were,” eto. The rendering in our Authorized 
Version, “as many of you as have been 
baptized,” allows of, if it does not suggest, 
the surmise that the apostle was aware of 
there being those among tlie Christians he 
was writiug to who had not been “ baptized 
into Christ.” But the context proves the 
fullacy of this surmise; for the baptism of a 
part of their body, whatever its consequences 
to those particular individuals, would have 
furnished no proof of the foregoing state- 
ment, that “all” of those whom he was ad- 
dressing were “sons of God.” The class 
marked out by the ὅσοι is clearly coextensive 
with the “ye all” of ver. 26. The fact is 
that this ὅσοι marks out a distinct clase, not 
taken out from amongst Christians, but from 
amongst mankind at large. As compared 
with οἵτινες, which the apostle might have 
written instcad, it may be regarded ag 
affirming with greater positiveness than 
οἵτινες would have done, that what is predi 


144 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


(cx. mx. 1—29. 


cated in the subsequent clause t predi- 
cated of every individual belonging to the 
class definedin this. It may be paraphrased 
thus: As surely as ever any one of you was 
baptized into Christ, so surely did he become 
elotbed with Christ. Precisely the same 
considerations apply to the clause in Rom. 
vi. 3, “ All we who were baptized (ὅσοι 
€BorrloOnuev) into Christ Jesus were baptized 
into his death.” A similar paraphrase may 
be given in ver. 10 of this chapter: So surely 
as any are of the works of the Law, so surely 
are they under a curse; and in Rom. vin. 
14, So surely as any are Jed by the Spirit of 
God, so surely are these sons of God. Below, 
in ch. vi. 16, “‘ As many as shall walk by this 
rule,” the doo: does mark out a class from 
among the general body of Christians, who 
were not all acting thus. So also Phil. iii. 
15,® As many as be perfect.” Were baptized 
into Christ (εἰς Χριστὸν ἐβαπτίσθητε). So 
Rom. vi. 3, “Baptized into Christ Jesus, 
baptized into his death.” The question 
arises— What is the precise force of the pre- 
position “into” as thus employed with 
relation to baptism? With the present 
passage we have to group the following: 
“ Baptizing them into (es) the Name of the 
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy 
Ghost” (Matt. xxviii.19); “Were all baptized 
into (cis) Moses in the cloud and in the 
sea” (1 Cor. x. 2); “In (ἐν) one Spirit were 
we all baptized into (eis) one body” (1 Cor. 
xii. 13), which statement, we must observe, 
is preceded by the apologue of a body with 
many members ending with “so also is 
Christ” (ver. 13). With reference to these 
passages we may observe that, since in 
1 Cot. xii. 13 (“We were baptized into one 
body”) the preposition retains its strict 
sense of “into,” and since “ Christ” is per- 
petually set forth as for Christians the sphere 
of their very existence, in whom they are 
that which distinctively they are, it is 
reasonable to conclude that, when the apostle 
here and in Rom. vi. 3 uses the expression, 
“baptized into Christ,” he uses the prepo- 
sition in its strict sense; that is, meaning 
that Christians are in their baptism brought 
into that union with, in-being in, . Christ 
whieh constitutes their life. Nor does 1 Cor. 
x. 2, “were baptized into Moses” (where 
both the Authorized and the Revised Versions 
render, “unto,” the latter adding in the 
margin, “Greek, into”), present any real 
objection to this view. For in comparing 
objects together, the apostle not unfre- 
quently puts a very considerable strain upon 
a phrase when he wishes to bring the two 
several objects under one category, using it 
alike of that to which it is most strictly 
applicable, and of that to which it is not 
applicable strictly, but only in a very quali- 
fied sone. Compare, as a very noteworthy 


instance of this, his application of the words 
(κοινωνία, κοινωνό5), “communion,” “ having 
communion,” in 1 Cor. x. 16—20 (Revised 
Version); in which the expression, “ having 
communion with devils (κοινωνοὺς τῶν δαι- 
μονίων γίγνεσθαι), is, surely with consider. 
able violence, applied to the case of persons 
eating things sacrificed to idols; but ia 
applied thus by the apostle because he 
wishes to present a parallel to that real 
“communion of the blood, of the body, of 
Christ,” which Christians are privileged to 
have in the Lord’s Supper. Similarly, in 
vers. 2—4 of the same chapter, for the pur- 
pose of exhibiting a parallelism, he strains 
the expressions, “ spiritual meat,” “spiritual 
drink,” justly and precively applicable to 
the Lord’s Supper, to apply them to the 
manna and water from the rock, the meat 
and drink of the Israclites in the wilderness, 
although the only justification of their being 
thus designated consists in their having 
been supernaturally supplied, and perhaps 
also that they had a typical meaning. We 
can thus, then, understand how, with refer- 
ence to the other sacrament in ver. 2 of the 
same chapter, he strains the expression, 
“ baptized into,” justly descriptive of Chris- 
tian baptism, by applying it to that quasi- 
immersion of the Israelites in passing 
“through the midst of the Red Sea and 
under the cloud,” which he construes into a 
“baptism” which made them over to a sort 
of union with, in-being in, Moses, thence- 
forward their lawgiver and leader. The 
import of the expression, “baptized into 
Moscs,” is to be estimated in’ the light 
thrown upon it by the move certain import 
of the expression, “baptized into Christ ;” 
not this latter to be explained down for the 
purpose of making it correspond with the 
other. This view of the clause before us 
helps us to understand the words in Matt. 
xxviii. 19, “ Baptizing them into the Name 
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy 
Ghost;” in the comprehension of which we 
are further assisted by the very remarkable, 
pregnant use sometimes made in the Old 
Testament of the word “ Name,” when it is 
employed to designate that presence of 
Divine power and grace which is the security 
of God’s people and the confusion of their 
enemies (see Prov. xviii. 10; Ps. xx. 1, 7; 
Ixxv.1; Isa. xxx. 27, etc.). For the baptisne 
which brings men “into Christ” brings 
them into the Name of the triune God as 
manifested to us in the gospel. Such an 
interpretation of these words approves itself 
fully with reference to their use in the 
supremely solemn hour of spirit-fraught 
utterance recorded in Matt. xxviii. 19; not- 
withstanding that in other passages, of plain 
historical narrative, such as Acts viii. 16 and 
xix. 5, it may be more natural to take the 


cH. π|. 1—29.} 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


145 


preposition in the phrase, “ baptize into the 
Name of Christ,” in a lower and less deter- 
minate sense—either as “unto,” “ with 
reference to,” or, which seems more probable, 
as pointing to that professed connection 
with Christ as his people (“ Ye are Christ’s,” 
1 Cor. iii, 23), into which the sacrament 
brings men. But this lower interpretation, 
if admitted in those passages, has no claim 
to dontinate our minds when endeavouring 
to apprehend the full import of the passage 
now before us, and of Rom. vi. 3. In these 
the apostle is evidently penetrating into the 
inmost significance and operation of the rite ; 
and therefore beyond question means to 
indicate its function, as verily blessed by 
God for the translation of its faithful re- 
cipients into vital union with Christ. For 
the just comprehension of the apostle’s 
meaning, it is of the utmost consequence to 
note that he introduces this reference to 
baptism for the purpose of justifying his 
affirmation in ver. 26, that in Christ Jesus 
those whom he is addressing were all sons 
of God through faith. This consideration 
makes it clear that lie viewed their baptism 
as connected with faith. If there was any 
reality in their action in it at all, if they 
were not acting an unreal part, their coming 
to baptism was an outcome of faith on their 
part in Christ. By voluntarily offering 
themselves to be baptized into his Name, 
they were consciously obeying his own in- 
structions: they were manifesting their 
desire and their resolve to attach themselves 
to his discipleship and service ; to be thence- 
forth people of his, as by him redeemed, 
and as expecting at his hands spiritual life 
here and perfected salvation hereafter. 
Therefore it was that they were in their 
baptism translated “into Christ;” their 
voluntary act of faith brought them under 
such operation of Divine grace as made the 
rite effectual for the transcendent change 
which the expression indicates; for it is 
abundantly apparent that a spiritual tran- 
sition such as this cannot be wrought by a 
man’s own volition or action, but only by 
the hand of God; asSt. Johu testifies (John 
i. 13), Have put on Christ (Χριστὸν ἐνεδύ- 
σασθε); did put on Christ. In Rom. xiii. 
14 we find the imperative used, “‘ Put ye on 
᾿(ἐνδύσασθε) the Lord Jesus Christ.” ‘There 
the phrase has an ethical application, de- 
noting the adoption of that whole system of 
habits which characterized the Lord Jesus, 
and presenta in a more definite form that 
“putting on” of “the new man” which is 
insisted upon in Eph. iv. 24. This can 
hardly be its meaning here; rather it is to 
be regarded 88 a more determinate form of 
the notion of “being justified.” The peni- 
tent convert, by that decisive action of his 
faith which by seeking “bapfism into Christ” 
G@ALATIANS. 


put forth his hand to lay hold of the 
righteousness which is by faith, became in- 
vested with this particular form of “ right- 
eousness,” namely, that very acceptableness, 
in the sight of God, which shone in Christ 
himself. In that hour God “made him 
acceptable in the Beloved” (cf. Eph. i. 6, 
ἐχαρίτωσεν ἡμᾶς ἐν τῷ ἠγαπημένῳ) ; endued 
this poor guilty creature with the loving- 
kindness with which he regarded his own 
Son. The middle voice of the Greek verb, 
though it denotes in Rom. xiii. 14 action of 
the Christian’s own, is not to be so far 
pressed as to exclude the notion of our 
having in this case been subjected to the 
action of another. Comp. Luke xxiv. 49, 
“ Until ye be clothed (ἐνδύσησθε) with power 
from on high ;” 1 Cor. xv. 53, “This mortal 
must put on (ἐνδύσασθαι) immortality ;” so 
2 Cor. v. 3. It is the exclusive prerogative 
of God to justify the sinner; and therefore 
it must have been by him that the believer 
became clothed with Christ, not by himself, 
though it was by his own voluntary act that 
he came under this operation of the Divine 
grace. It is, perhaps, impessible more 
strongly to express the intense character (so 
to speak) which belongs to the rightcous- 
ness which comes to us through faith in 
Christ, than by the form in which it is here 
exhibited. The apostle, however, in 2 Cor. 
v. 21, uses an expression which may be put 
by the side of it: “That we might become 
the righteousness of God in him.” It isnow 
clear how completely this verse makes good 
the affirmation in the preceding one. We 
have indeed been made sons of God in 
Christ Jesus if we have become clothed 
with Christ. For what other in this relation 
does the phrase, “sons of God,” denote as 


applied to ourselves, than the intense love 


into the bosom of which God has received 
us? No higher degree of adoption to be 
aons is conceivable; though the complete 
manifestation of this adoption still remains 
in the future (Rom. viii. 19). 

Ver. 28.—There is neither Jew nor Greek, 
there is neither bond nor free, there is 
neither male nor female (οὐκ ἔνι ᾿Ιουδαῖος 
οὐδὲ “Ἑλλην, οὖκ ἔνι δοῦλος οὐδὲ ἐλεύθερος, 
οὖκ ἔνι ἄρσεν καὶ θῆλυ); there ἐδ no Jew here 
nor Gentile (literally, Greek), there ts no bond- 
man here nor freeman, there ts not here male 
and female. The word ἔνι, occurring also in 
1 Cor. vi. 5 (according to the now accepted 
reading); Jas. i. 17; Ecclus. xxxvii, 2; 
and very noticeably in Col. iii. 11, is pro- 
bably (see Winer’s ‘Gram. N. T.,’ § 14, 2, 
‘Anm.’) an adverbialized form of the pre- 
position év,of the same description as the thus 
accented πάρα and ἔπι. The prepositional 
element implies a somewhat indefinite in- 
dication of ἃ sphere in which the statement 
of the clause holds good. The Revised 

L 


148 THE EPISTLE ΤῸ 


THE GALATIANS, (om. πὶ, 129, 


Version renders, “ there can be,” and Bishop 
Lightfoot, “ there is no room for;” but 
KEeolus. xxxvii. 2 and 1 Cor. vi. 5 do not 
much favour this particular modification. 
In Ool. iii. 11 we have a very similar pas- 
sage; there, after describing Christians as 
“having put on (ἐνδυσάμενοι) the new man, 
which is being renewed unto knowledge 
after the image of him that created him,” 
the apostle adds, “Where there is not 
Gentile (Greek, ‘Greek"] and Jew, cir- 
cumcision and uncireumcision, barbarian, 
Scythian, bondman, freeman; but Christ 
is all (literally, ‘all things”) and in all.” 
We may group with them also 1 Cor. xil. 
12, 13, “So also is Christ; for in one 
Spirit were we all baptized into one body, 
whether Jews, whether Gentiles (literally, 
‘ Greeks’], whether bondmen, whether freo- 
men.” In all three of these passages we 
see the reference both to “Jew and Gen- 
tile” and to“ bondman and freeman.” The 
particular mention of these two forms of 
outward clussification was suggested Ὁ, 

the circumstances of the Christian Chure 

generally at that time. Wherever the 
apostles went, they were sure to be con- 
fronted by questions and difficulties arising 
both from the one and from the other. In 
the kingdom of God were Jew and Gentile, 
were circumcised and uncircumcised, to 
stand on the same footing? Should be- 
lievers as such be concerned to vary their 
treatment of ono another or to modify their 
own condition from regard to these circum- 
stances? Questionings of this description 
were being agitated everywhere, and most 
especially just now in the Galutian Churches. 
And, on the other point, the universal 
existence of slavery more or less through- 
out the civilized world would necessarily 
give occasion to a variety of questions 
relative to the position which bondmen 
should hold in the Christian community ; 
how a bondman on becoming a Christian 
should stand, or what he should do, in 
respect to obedience to his owner or to 
seeking a change in his condition. St. 
Paul, in his Epistles, has briefly discussed 
some of these puints, as in 1 Cor. vii. 20-—24; 
Eph. vi. 5—9. So often had the apostle 
occasion to affirm the perfect identity of 
Christian privilege possessed by all believers 
in Christ, that the statement would naturally 
mould itself into a sort of formula. In 
Colossians he varies the form by inserting 
“barbarian, Scythian ;” degrees of national 
civilization made no difference. In place 
of this, he here adds the particular, that 
diversity of sex made no difference. We 
cannot tell what especial reason he had for 
introducing these modifications in writing 
to the Ovlossians and the Gulatians re- 
spectively. Possibly he had none beyond 


the pleasure which he felt in dilating on 
the large catholicity of the Divine grace. 
In the clause, οὐκ ἔνι ἄρσεν καὶ θῆλυ, “there 
is here no male and female,” the neuter 
is used (remarks Alford) as being the only 
gender which will express both. The 
change of form, “ male and female,” from 
“no Jew nor Gentile,’ “no bondman nor 
freeman,” was perhaps suggested by the 
passage in Gen. i. 27 (ἄρσεν καὶ θῆλυν), “ male 
and female created he them,” which is 
quoted in Matt. xix. 4; Murk x. 6. If a0, 
the clause may be reyarded (as Bishop 
Lightfoot says) as forming a climax: 
“even the primeval distinction of male and 
female.” But perhaps the change is simply 
made for the sake of variety; as in the 
way in which several of the classes are 
intreduced in the Colossians. For ye are all 
one in Christ Jesus (πάντες γὰρ ὑμεῖς εἷς 
ἐστὲ ἐν Χριστῷ Ἰησοῦ); for all ye are ome 
and the same man in Christ Jesus. The 
pronoun ὑμεῖς, ye, is inserted to recite 
emphatically the qualification already ex- 
pressed; as if it were, “ye being whut ye 
are, believers baptized into Christ.” The 
apostle’s object here is not, as in 1 Cor. 
ΧΙ, 13; Col. iii, 1I—15, to exhort to the 
performance of certain mutual duties on 
the ground of the unity which in Christ 
is established among all believers, but to 
enforce the view that each individual's title 
to the inheritance is altogether irrespective 
of external distinctions, and is based eutirely, 
in one case as well as in another, upon his 
being cluthed with Christ. The word εἷς is 
“one and the same,” as in τὸ ἐν φρονοῦντες, 
“of one mind” (Phil. ii. 2); and in εἷς Θεός, 
els μεσίτης, “One and the same God, one 
and the same Mediator” (1 Tim. ii. 5). So 
Chrysostom: “That is, we have all one 
form and one mould, even Christ’s. What,” 
he adds, “can be more awful than these 
words? He that was a Greek, or Jew, or 
bondman yesterday, carries about with him 
the form, not of an angel or archangel, but 
of the Lord of all, yea, displays in his own 
person the Christ.” The distribution of the 
universal quality to each individual, so far 
as the grammar of the sentence is con- 
cerned, is imperfectly expressed. But the 
grammatical inadequacy of the verbal expo- 
sition is not greater than in 1 Cor. vi. 5, 
“Decide (ἀνὰ μέσον τοῦ ἀδελφοῦ αὐτοῦ) be- 
tween his brethren,” literally, “ between his 
brother;” and in vers. 19, 20 of the same 
chapter, σῶμα ὑμῶν, * your body ;” not “thy 
body,” nor “ your bodies.” The apostle has 
in view the subjective application only of 
the principle here stated; each was to feel 
that, having the qualification which he has 
explained, he himself is a son of God and 
full inheritor, without casting about for any 
further qualification, us, for example, from 


eth ttt, 1—29,5 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 


147 


ceremonial Judaism. The principle plainly 
is pregnant with an objective application 
also; namely, as to the manner in which 
they were to estimate and treat each other 
and every baptized believer, notwithstanding 
any circumstances of extrinsic diversity 
whatever. 

Ver. 29.~And if ye be Ohrisi’s (εἰ δὲ 
ὑμεῖς Χριστοῦ); and if ye are Christ's. The 
δὲ simply marke a fresh stage in the argu- 
ment, as @g. Rom. viii. 17, εἰ δὲ τέκνα, καὶ 
κληρονόμοι. Eor the preccding verse is no 
digression, requiring us to render this δὲ 
“but,” but simply an amplification of the 
notion of putting on Christ in ver, 27; 
and the present clause recites that previvus 
_ conclusion, to serve for a premiss toa further 
conclusion. “ Are Christ’s;” comp. 1 Cor. 
iii, 23, “ And ye are Christ's, and Christ is 
God’s.” This genitive here, as also there, 
denotes the closest and most intimate ap- 
proximation conceivable, “ Christ’s own;” 
covering, in fact, the notion of being clothed 
with Christ; and expresses what that “one 
and the same man” is, which according 
to ver. 28 in Christ Jesus all had become. 
Comp. Titus ii, 14, λαὸν περιούσιον, “ a people 
of bis very own.” Then are ye Abraham’s 
- gced (ἄρα τοῦ ᾿Αβραὰμ σπέρμα dare); then 

seed of Abraham are ye. “Ye,” Gentiles 

‘though ye be. In ver. 7 the apostle has 
affirmed that they who are of faith are sons 
of Abraham; in ver. 16, that the promises 
were made to Abraham and “his seed, 
which is Christ.” We have seen that in 
that ver. 16 “Ohrist” uppears to mean that 
branch of Abraham’s offspring which was, 
so to speak, to proceed from Christ and 
was to be called by his name. If, however, 
“(Christ ’ be there taken to mean the 
individual Son of Abraham, Jesus, then 
those who believe in him and have been 
baptized into him are to be understood as 


here affirmed to be “ Abraham’s seed,” be» 
cause, being clothed with Christ, they share 
his position. The same result is arrived at 
either way. And heirs according to the 
promise (καὶ [which word is rejected by 
recent editors] κατ᾽ ἐπαγγελίαν κληρονόμοι); 
heirs in pursuance of a promtse. “ Heirs,” 
not of Abraham, but of God ; for the notion 
connects itself with that of the sonship to 
God, which has been predicated in ver. 26 
of believers in Christ ; and these two united 
conceptions form tlie topic of the first seven 
verses of the next chapter. This is in 
accordance with Rom. viii. 16, 17, “We are 
children of God; and if children, also heirs ; 
heirs of God, joint-heirs with Christ.” It 
goes upon the same lines of thought as the 
statement made above in ver. 16, that the 
promises were spoken, not to Abraham only, 
but also to his seed as well; the seed being 
conceived of by tle apostle, not as inheriting 
from Abraham, but as holding an inde- 
pendent position of their own at his side. 
The benefits accruing to them have been 
styled “the inheritance” in ver. 18, which 
verse also serves to illustrate the spirit of 
the qlause now before us, by affirming that 
thre inheritance was a free gift of God con- 
veyed by a promise, and not one to be either 
gained or made sure by obedience to a 
ecremonial law as the Galatians were in 
danger of supposing. he article is want- 
ing before “ promise” lere, as it was also 
in ver. 18; because the apostle is not 
thinking immediately of the terms of the 
promise, but rather of its distinctive character 
as a promise, betokening a free gift of God. 
The inheritance is no doubt the adoption 
of sons, both in its firstfruits in this life 
and in its complete manifestation hereafter 
in the bliss and glory of heaven (of, Rom. 
viii. 23, 30; 1 Pet. i. 4), 


HOMILETICS, 


Ver. 1.—Beginning of the polemic part of the Epistle. The apostle has finished his 
task of self-vindication, and now proceeds in regular theological method to expound 
and defend the doctrine of justification by faith without the deeds of the Law. “O 
foolish Galatians! who bewitcled you, ... before whose eyes Jesus Christ was 
evidently set forth in you, crucificd ?” 

I. THE APOSTLE’s SEVERE REPROOF. “Ὁ foolish Galatians! who bewitched you?” 
Reproof is allowable and necessary, especially when it is prompted by love to God and 
truth and by a tender interest in the welfare of men. 1. He points to the “ witcheries ” 
of the false teachers as the only way of accounting for the sudden and inexplicable 
change of sentiment in Galatia, There must have been some extraorlinary power of 
delusion or of fascination at work to throw them so completely out of the line of 
Christian thought. Whether it was the witchery of logic or the witchery of sanctity, 
it was most effective in deluding the Galatians, 2, The Galatians were “ foolish” in 
yielding to such ensnaring delusions. ‘They were not answerable for the conduct of their 
deluders, but they showed an upcommon folly, The Celtic nature is quick, but unstable, 


The change was a senseless one, 


148 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, [ca. πι|. 1—29, 


IL, THE INEXCUSABLENESS OF THEIR conpucT. “Before whose eyes Jesus Christ 
was evidently set forth in you, crucified.” The apostle refers to his own clear exhibi- 
tion of gospel truth in Galatia, and especially to the individualizing distinctness with 
which the Redeemer was set before his converts as the only Hope of salvation. It was 
not only an exhibition, like a placard exhibited before their eyes, but it had its 
answering impression “within them.” How, then, with such a view of Christ’s 
person and work, could they have opened their minds to such destructive errors ? 

IIL Tue TRUE THEME OF THE GOSPEL—CHRIST CRUCIFIED. Naturalistic writert give 
us ἃ Christ exalted far above the average altitude of men, but a man nevertheless ; 
rationalistic writers give us a Christ as a leader of thought or as an example of self- 
sacrifice and sympathy. ‘ We preach Christ crucified, to the Jews a stumbling-block, 
to the Greeks foolishness ; but to them that are called,. . . Christ the Wisdom of God, 
and the Power of God.” The death of Christ, as expressing the whole mystery of 
redemption, involved the whole matter in dispute. There could be no compatibility 
between Christ’s cross and Jewish legalism. We can, therefore, well understand why the 
apostle resolved to know nothing in his preaching but Christ, and him crucified, 


Vers, 2—5.—The apostle’s first argument in this controversy. I. APPLICATION OF 
THE TEST OF EXPERIENCE. ‘“‘ Received ye the Spirit by the works of the Law, or by the 
hearing of faith?” He begins by a practical test, which can be easily settled by 
experience and history. He refers to the time of awakening grace and first love. They 
had “received the Spirit.* 1. He concedes that they were Christians, though they were 
neither faithful, nor stable, nor sound. “The Holy Spirit is the characteristic 

ossession of believers.” ‘ If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his.” 

he reference may have been both to ordinary and extraordinary gifts of the Spirit. 
2. He concedes that they were conscious of the possession of the Spuit. They had no 
occasion to ask him what he meant by their receiving the Spirit. Christian people 
ought to possess, not only a good hope through grace, but “a full assurance of hope.” 

11. THE RECEPTION OF THE SPIRIT POSSIBLE, NOT ON THE PRINCIPLE OF Law, BUT 
oF @race, Though the Spirit was given under the Law, it was never given on a 
principle of Law, but it was under the gospel dispensation that it was given in Pente- 
costal power and abundance. No man ever yet reccived the Spirit, as the Author and 
Sustainer of the new life, by “the works of the Law,” or by a course of obedience 
specially designed to work out salvation, Conspicuously, as to historic fact and inward 
experience, the Spirit was given to men in connection with the first promulgation of 
the “ word of faith” at Pentecost. ‘The Spirit was given “ by the hearing of faith.” 
“ Faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God.” Yet the hearing that 
brings faith with it is only possible through the S)irit’s power, for many hear who do 
not believe, and therefore receive not the Spirit. ‘There is no inconsistency here. We 
need the Spirit to enable us to believe, but the hearing is instrumentally necessary to 
our fuller reception of the Spirit. ‘Ihe apostle here, huwever, seems primarily to refer 
to the extraordinary gifts of the Spirit, of which Peter spoke when he said that, after 
his preaching the Word, “the Holy Ghost fell upon them as upon us at the begin- 
ning ” (Acts xi. 15). 

III. THE DONATION OF THE SPIRIT 18 NOT ON PRINCIPLE OF LAW, BUT @F GRACE. 
“He that ministereth to you the Spirit and worketh miracles in you, doetht he it by 
the works of the Law, or by the hearing of faith?” He first spoke of the reception, 
now he speaks of the donation of the Spirit: he first referred to a particular point of 
time, namely, their conversion; he now speaks of the principle of God’s continued 
action. It is God who ministers the Spirit—not the apostle—whether to work miracles 
of power or miracles of grace. But he does it, not on the principle of legal obedience, 
but on the principle of grace working through the instrumentality of the preached 
gospel, He is “the God of grace,” who sent his Son, “ full of grace and truth,” to pour 
grace into innumerable hearts. 

IV. THE FOLLY OF ATTEMPTING TO BEGIN ON ONE PRINCIPLE AND TO END ON 
AnoTHER. “Are ye so foolish? having begun with the Spirit, are ye now being 
completed with the flesh?” This is folly, tor it is to reverse the natural order of 
things. The opposites here are not Christianity and Judaism, but the esscntial and 
vital primeiple of each. If we begin our life with the Spirit, it must reach ite 


cu. τη. 1—29.] THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 149 


inaturity with the Spirit. The introduction of the flesh would be the annihilation of 
the Spirit. Judaism ministers to the sensuous element in our nature by making 
religion a thing of rites and ceremonies; but this is to go back upon all the progress 
we have made in life, light, and blessing. 

V. THE USELESSNESS OF THEIR PAST sUFFERINGS. “Did ye suffer so many things 
in vain ὃ if it be yet in vain.” 1. It is α sign of sincerity to suffer for owr opinions. 
There is no record in the Acts of a persecution in Galatia; but the Jewish element was 
strong enowgh there as elsewhere to resent by violence the contempt put upon their 
Law by the Gentiles being freed from it. There isa possible reference to these sufferings 
in the Epistle (ch. v.11). 2. You stultify all your past sufferings if you recede from 
the gospel. All these sufferings represent so much wasted endnrance or misery. 3. The 
apostle’s reluctance to think their sufferings were in vain. “If it be yet in vain.” He 
hopes better things of his converts. He knows that God keepeth the feet of his saints, 
so that they cannot altogether lose the things they have wrought. 


Vere. 6—9.— Second argument—the case of Abraham. The natural answer to the 
previous question is “ throuch the hearing of faith,” and this as naturally suggests the 
case of “faithful Abraham.” The Jews boasted of their relationship to Abraham, and 
therefore an example taken from his history would have special force. 

1. THE JUSTIFICATION OF ABRAHAM WAS NOT THROUGH CIRCUMCISION, BUT BY FAITH. 
“Even as Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him for righteousness.” No 
exception could be made to these words, for they were the very words of Moses (Gen. 
xv. 6), The apostle dwells longer on the Old Testament, because the Judaists would 
naturally appeal to it. 1. Abraham was not accepted for his virtues or his piety, or his 
circumcision, but because “he believed God, and it was counted to him for righteous- 
ness” (see homily on ch. ii. 16). His faith was accepted as righteousness, not as an act, 
for it had no merit in itself, but as a fact, for it was not by works, but by faith, he was 
accepted. His faith was the mere instrument of his justification, not the ground of it; for 
Scripture always represents it as being “ through” faith or “ of” faith, never on account 
of π΄, 2. The transaction here referred to occurred hundreds of years before the Law was 
given on Sinai, and even some time before circumcision was appointed as a “seal of 

“righteousness.” If he, therefore, could be justified without circumcision, and prior to 
it, how then could the Judaists insist on its necessity? Abraham was not circumcised 
in order to be justified, but circumcised because he was justified. 8, The doctrine of 
the apostle was not, therefore, in any sense a novelty, as the Judaists might think, It 
was at least as old as Abraham. 

II. THE TRUE CONCEPTION OF ABRAHAMIC SONSHIP. “ Know ye therefore that they 
who are of faith, the same are sons of Abralam.” 1. It is not Abraham’s blood, but 
Abraham’s faith, which establishes the connection between the patriarch and his descend- 
ants. The Jews might say, “ We have Abraham to our father;” and they might ask 
in surprise, “ What profit, then, is there in circumcision?” They would imitate his 
circumcision rather than his faith. But the apostle says emphatically that the true 
sons are “they of faith,” whose fundamental principle is faith. 2. J¢ ts Christ who 
makes the nexus between Abraham and us. We believe in Christ, who is Abraham’s 
seed; therefore we are sons of Abraham. 3. There is but one Church in the two 
dispensations. Some modern sects hold that the Church is a New Testament organiza- 
tion, and that Old Testament saints have no part in it. How can this be, if we believers 
“ are blessed with ”—not apart from—“ faithful Abraham ” (ch. iii. 9)? The apostle 
shows how Abraham has the heirship, the sonship, the kingdom, the glory, on the 
ground of the promise. He did not, therefore, receive the promise only for his children. 
Take the promise of the Spirit from Abraham; we take it from ourselves. Is the 
father of the family to be excluded, and only the children to gain admission to the 
kingdom ? 

ἯΙ. Tar PROOF FRoM Scripture. “ Moreover, the Scripture, foreseeing that God 
justifies the heathen through faith, announced the good news beforehand to Abraham, 

saying, In thee shall alt nations be blessed.” 1. The exact import of the promise. 

ay The blessing is justification, which is opposed to the curse of which he presently 
speaks. But that includes a title to eternal life as well as pardon. (2) The unity of 

Abraham and bis 8} iritual descendants. He is the root and the representative of hie 


166 THE EPISTLA TO THH GALATIANS. (ow. rt. 1—25, 


seed, The unity is not that established by circumcision, but something far deeper. 
2. God had purposes of mercy toward the heathen. These purposes included their 
, justification on the same grounds as those which secured the acceptance of the Jews. 
The Jewish dispensation was particularistic, and was so far temporary and preparatory 
to a dispensation universalistic in its character. In Christ there was to be henceforth 
“neither Jew nor Gentile.” 8. Zhe way of sulvation is the same in both dispensations. 
Old Testament saints were saved exactly like New Testament saints, by faith in “ the 
Lamb slain from the foundation of the world.” The Levitical system was in itself an 
evangelical representation of the true method of salvation. 4. We see here the value of 
Scripture for proof, for confirmation, for comfort, through all ages. 

IV. CoMMUNITY ΑΒ WELL AS UNITY IN THE BLESSING. ‘So then they whieh be of 
faith are blessed together with the faithful Abraham.” 1. The blessing. I¢ is the 
manifestation of Divine favour. The blessing and justification are regarded in the 
context as correlative terms, 2. 16 community between Abraham and his seed. 
(1) He is “ faithful Abraham,” because of the simplicity, strength, and activity of his 
faith. He manifested all these characteristics of faith in (a) his self-expatriation ; 
(Ὁ) his readiness to sacrifice Isaac; (c) his warlike courage ; (ὦ) his self-abnegation in 
the case of Lot. (2) He is the “father of the faithful.” There are but two properly 
representative men, the first and the second Adam; but Abraham holds a relation of 
his own, though not of a federal character, towards all who are his seed spiritually. He 
and they are blessed together. 8. The ground of this community. It is the promise 
of God, “In thee shall the nations of the earth be blessed,” realized in course of time 
in the common faith of all who, whether Jew or Gentile, trust in one Redeemer, and 
find in him their true inheritance as joint-heirs with him, 


Ver. 10.— Third argument—the curse of the Law, ‘For as many as are of the works 
of the Law are under the curse: for it is written, Cursed is every one that continueth 
not in all things written in the book of the Law todo them.” The apostle is carried 
naturally by antithesis of thought from the blessing of faith to the curse of the Law, 

1. THe curss. This is “ the curse of the Law” of ver, 13, from which the Law itself 
eannot deliver men, for its function is to condemn. 1. J¢ ts not the mere civil panish- 
ment inflicted on the Israelites for the transgression of the ceremonial or judicial Law. 
The context shows that the curse is a far deeper thing, for the contrast is between 
wrath and blessing, condemnation and justification. Besides, the passage refers to 
Gentiles who could not be affected by the dispensational peculiarities of Judaism. 
2. The curse is the Divine sentence upon transgressors involving doom and shame, the 
loss of God, and separation from him (Isa. lix.2), The curse includes the penal sanction 
of the moral Law—a Law written in the hearts of Gentiles as it was delivered to Jews 
on tables of stone; so that Gentiles and Jews were alike under curse. It is a mistake, 
therefore, to regard the curse as the mere natural consequence of transgression, as 
disease is the consequence of debauchery ; it is a penal evil. 

II, THe ranae or THE corsE. It oxtends to “as many as are of the works of the 
Law.” A distinction is here necessary between being of the works of the Law ard 
being under the Law. The Old Testament saints were under the Law, but they were 
not under curse, because, like Abraham, they “saw the day of Christ afar off.’ They 
“believed God, and it was counted to them for righteousness.” They apprehended 
God’s mercy and grace under the sacrificial forms of the Jewish economy. But the 
curse must necessarily descend upon “ all who are of the works of the Law,” because 
they have broken it and are still breaking it day by day. 

111. How ΤῊΒ curse comes INTO OPERATION. It is by a Divine sentence which 
pronounces the curse upon all transgressors of the Law. The curse here quoted is the 
last of the twelve curses pronounced by the Levites on Mount ρα] (Deut, xxvii. 26). 
The ref-rence points to ethical, not ceremonial, requirements. 1. Zhe Law demands 

racticul vledience, It is not “ hearers” of the Law, but “ doers,” who are in question. 
2. It demands a persunal obedience, “ Every one.” There is no room for ἃ proxy or a 
mediator. 8. Jt demands a perfect obedience ; for it covers “all the things written” in 
the Law. 4. Lt must be a perp tual obedience. “Cursed is every one that continueth 
not.” The least failure involves the transgression of the whole Law (Jas, ii, 10). 
ὃ. The effect of transgression ts curse. All the evil that is involved in that terrible 


JH. 1, 1—29.} THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 151 


word, ‘Death and hell are the end of every sin, but not of every sinner.” 6, The Law 
still exists to curse transgressors. It is not abrogated, though Judaism is no more, 


Vora 11, 12.—Fourth argument—the inconsistency of Law and faith, “ But that 
no man is justified in the Law in the sight of Gud, it is evident: for, The just shall live 
by faith, But the Law is not of faith: but, 'lie man that hath done these things 
suall live in them.” 

1, JUSTIFICATION I8 OUT OF THE SPHERE OF Law. 1. Not becuuse a perfect obedience 
would not bring justification, for the fundamental principle of the Law is, “he man 
that hath done these things shall live in them”’ (Lev. xviii. 5), 2. But becwuse no one 
is able to obey the Law perfectly. Thus salvation becomes impossible on the principle 
of Law. 

IL. ScrierurE ASSERTS THE CONNECTION OF JUSTIFICATION WITH FAITH. “The 
just shall live by faith.” The apostle shows the Judaists how they nisajprehended the 
doctrine of the Old Testament; for, several uudred years before Christ, the Prophet 
Iabakkuk connects life eternal with faith. ‘“‘lhe Law is not of faith;” it does not 
find its starting-point in faith; doing, not believing, is the demand of the Law; and it 
is in no sense or manner connected with faith. 


Vers. 13, 14.—Fifth argument—our salvation ts by Christ made curse for us. Two 
thoughts are here brought into contrast—the Law condemnel us; Christ redeemed 
us: “Christ redeemed us from the curse of the Law, having become a curse for us.” 

L Tue NaTURE OF THE REDEMPTION. He “redeemed us.” 1. This language does 
not countenance the theory that there was nothing in Christ’s work but a mere deliver- 
ance from the power of sin. That is certainly iivolved in his death; for he came to 
“redeem us from this present evil world” (ch. i. 4), and “to redeem us from all 
iniquity " (Titus ii, 14), 2. Neither does it countenance the idea that Christ redeemed 
us by entering into union with man and living a sinless hwman life, which is repro- 
duced in us by means of fellowship with him. Neither of these theuries makes any 
provision for the rectification of man’s relation with God, which is only effected through 
Christ being made a curse for us, 

11. How Curist ACHIEVED THE REDEMPTION. He “ became a curse for us.” This is 
an unfathomable thought. Yet let us try to interpret it in the light of Scripture. We 
are not redeemed by Christ’s Divine doctiine, nor by his marvellous holiness of. 
character, but by his entering into our very position before God, becoming “ a curse for 
us.” The Lord visited upon him what the Law awarded to us, and by that substitution 
our redemption was secured. We are not to suppose that the Son of God was Jess the 
object of Divine love at the very time that he was, in an official aspect as his righteous 
Servant, an object of Divine wrath. His Father always loved him. The assertion is 
made, first, that the curse of the Law rests upon transziessors; then, that we are 
liberated from that curse; then, that this result was achieved by Christ becoming a 
curse for us. ‘The passage shows what Clirist was in Gud’s account, not what he was 
in the eyes of men who despised him. 

III. How wis DEATH TOOK UPON IT THIS CHARACTER OF cursE. “ For it is written, 
Cursed is every one that hangeth on a tree” (Deut. xxi. 22, 23), The allusion here 
is not specially to Christ, but to a command that those executed by Jewish law should 
not remain hanging on the tree all night. It dves not refer to death by crucifixion, 
which was not a Jewish punishment, but to the exposure of the body after death, on 
crosses or stakes, But how was such a person accursed? Not because he was hanged 
upon ἃ tree, but he was hanged upon a tree because he was accursed. The apostle 
does not mean to attach the idea of shame to the mode of Christ’s death; for he was not 
made a curse by his mere hanging on 8 tree, but he hung there because he was made 
a curse for us. 

IV. ΤῊΝ ULTIMATE DESIGN OF THE REDEMPTION. “ That the blessing of Abraham 
might come on the Gentiles in Christ.” That is, the curse-bearing prepared the way 
for the blessing, which was henceforth to stream forth upon the whole world, 1. The 
blessing was justification of life, not mere temporal blessings, which were restricted te 
the Jews. 2, 1 was to reach the Gentiles “in Christ,” who was made the curse for 
“us "—both “Jews and Gentiles”—not through the Law, which demands ἃ perfect 


152 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, [cu. mx, 1—29. 


obedience. 3. Ié wus designed for Gentiles as well as Jews. The stream was destined 
to flow throuzh Jews to the Gentiles, freed from all the limitations of the old dispensation. 

V. THE ruauur oF THE BLESSING. “ That we might receive the promise of the Spirit 
through faith.” ‘Ihere is here an obvious return to the question of the second verse, 
and a definite answer is now given to that question. It was not through the Law, but 
through faith, we realize the promise of the Spirit. This was the special subject of 
promise (Joel ii. 28; Acts i. 4, 2; Eph. i, 13). Our Lord has placed us in the 
dispensation of the Spirit, and has opened all blessings to men out 91 his cross and 
his tomb, : 


Ver. 15.—A new line of argument—the relation between the covenant and the Law. 
Up to this point the apostle has touched upon vo point that we have not scen in the 
Epistle to the Romans. Now he breaks new ground. “Brethren, I speak after the 
manner of men; Thouh it be but a man’s covenant, yet if it be confirmed, no man 
disannulleth, or addeth thercto.”- 

I. Iv 1s ALLOWABLE TO USE HUMAN ANALOGIES IN ENFORCEMENT OF DIVINE TRUTH. 
The phrase, “after the mauner of men,” has various significations in the apostle’s 
writings, but he evidently means here that the human aualogy is perfectly appropriate, 
and that that which is true of a mere human arrangement is ὦ fortiori of an arrangement 
made by God. : 

II. Tue conDITIONS OF COVENANT-MAKING IN HUMAN LIFE. 1. A covenant ἐξ an 
arrangement between two parties for mutual benefit, with an implied character of per- 
manence. It is designed to perpetuate a relation of some sort. 2. The covenant stands 
in the integrity of all its provisions without either party having the power to annul it or 
to add fr: sh clauses, whether consistent or inconsistent with its provisions. 

III. ImpiicatioN THAT WHAT IS TRUE OF A HUMAN COVENANT 18 ESSENTIALLY 
INVOLVED IN THE IDEA OF A DIVINE COVENANT. It is irreversible and irrevocable, 
since it is a covenant established by oath. God swears and he will not repent. ‘I'he 
Judaistic theory, however, under the form of a supplement, would really effect the 
entire abrogation of the covenant. 


Ver. 16.— The contents of the covenant and the parties to it, “ N-w to Abraham and 
his seed were the promises made.” 

1. THE coNTENTS OF THE COVENANT. “ The promises.” They are elsewhere spoken 
of as “the promise.” It was repeated several times. This promise carrics the whole of 
salvation within it. It is elsewhere referred to as “ the oath and the promise ”—“ the 
two immutable things in which it was impossible for God to lie”’—for God confirmed the 
promise by an oath, and the promise is linked with the Melchisedce priesthood of Christ, 
and thus involves all that is involved in priesthood, that is, atonement and intercession, 
It is the promise that bears up the burden of the world’s hope, for it is on the ground 
of it we have “fled for refuge to the hope set before us” (Heb, vi. 18, 19). 

II. THE PARTIES TO THE COVENANT. These are—God on the one side; Abraham 
and his seed on the other. Not Abraham alone, but Abraham and his seed. ‘“ And he 
saith not, And to seeds, as of many; but as of one, And to thy seed, which is Christ.” 
The seed was not the Jewish race, nor strictly the spiritual posterity of Abraham, but 
Christ himself, in whom the Jewish race found its embodiment and to whom the spiri- 
tual posterity was organically united. There is a distinction between Christ personal 
and Christ mystical, regarded as the second Adam, as the Head of the body. Thus we 
understand how the whole body of believers is expressly called “Christ ” (1 Cor. xii. 12). 
They are “ Ἢ one in Christ,” and “if ye be Christ’s, then are ye Abraham’s seed ” 

ch. v. 28, 29). 

¢ II. A necessary conc.usion. If the seed is Christ, then the promise was not yet 
fulfilled, but awaiting fulfilment, when the Law was given. It could not, therefore, be 
disannulled by the Law, nor could the Law add fresh clauses to it, 


Vers. 17, 18.— The trreversibleness of the covenant by the Law, “ This, however, I say, 
that the covenant that has been confirmed before in reference to Christ, the Law, which 
was four hundred and thirty years after, does not disannul, that it should do away with 
the promise.” 


on. m1, 1—29,] THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 158 


1. THE COVENANT ON [TS OWN INDEPENDENT FOUNDATION. 1. 1} stands trrevocable 
and indestructible because it has been confirmed by God, that is, by an oath; for, 
“Because he could swear by no greater, he sware by himself, saying, Surely blessing I 
will bless thee, and multiplying I will multiply thee” (Heb. vi. 13, 14). This oath is 
to us the sure ground of hope. 2. Jt has exclusive relation to Ohrist regarded as the 
Head of the Church, He sealed this covenant with his blood, and thus the “ cup of 
blessing” in the Lord’s Supper has become “the new covenant in his blood.” All 
covenant blessings reach us by Christ through his Spirit. 3. J¢ stood for ages alone. 
The Law came four hundred and thirty years after. 

II, Tue maBiuity or THE LAW TO AFFECT THE covenant. 1. The Law and the 
covenant proceed on two entirely different lines, and cannot therefore truverse each 
other’s course, 2. The lateness of the Law, as an historic institute, leaves the covenant as 
it found it in the ages of its undisputed validity. Therefore the Law cannot disannul 
the covenant so as to throw invalidity into the promise. 

I. ‘Toe INHERITANCE NOT POSSIBLE BY THE LAW, BUT BY THE PROMISE. “ For if the 
inheritance be of the Law, it is no more of promise; but God has given it to Abraham 
by promise.” 1, The inheritance covers more than the land of Canaan; it involves 
“the heirship of the world” (Rom. iv. 13); but it symbolizes the blessings of the Mes- 
siah’s kingdom, and espccially of that “ better country ” which was an object of wistful 
expectation to Abraham himself. 2. If the Law abrogates the covenant, the inherit- 
ance would in that case come of Law ; but it is positively asserted that ‘God has given 
it "—the perfect tense marking the duration of the blessing—‘‘ to Abraham by promise.” 


Vers. 19, 20.—The use and nature of the Law. “ What then is the Law?” The apostle’s 
reasoning seemed to make the Lawa quite superfluous thing. In the eyes of the Judaists 
it was God’s most glorious institute. It was necessary, therefore, to show its nature, 
office, and characteristics, and its relation to the covenant of promise. It was really 
inferior to the dispensation of grace on four grounds, which themselves explain its 
nature and use. 

I. Tae Law piscovers stx, “It was superadded because of transgressions.” 1. Jé 
was not to check sin. 2. Nor to create sin. 3. But to discover it. “By the Law is 
the knowledge of sin ” (Rom. iii. 20). This discovery would necessarily multiply trans- 
gressions (Rom. v. 20), just as the introduction of light into a darkened room makes 
manifest the things that were before unseen. “I had not known sin but by the Law” 
(Rom. vii. 7). Many sins were not scen to be sins at all till the Law threw its intense 
light upon them. Thus the great service of the Law was to awaken conviction of sin 
in the heart and to make men feel their need of a Saviour, he ceremonial and the 
moral Law had equally this effect. ‘The system of sacrifice had no meaning apart from 
the fact of sin. What a mistake, then, was that of the Judaists who imazined that 
the Law could give them a title to eternal life in virtue of their obedience to its 
commands ! 

11. Tee Law WAs A TEMPORARY AND INTERMEDIATE DISPENSATION. “It was super- 
added ... till the seed shall have come to whom the promise has been made,” This refers 
to the coming of Christ who is “ the Sced.”_ The apostle puts himself back to the time 
of giving the Law, and looks forward from that starting-point to the future incarnation. 
The Law was thus a mighty parenthesis coming in between Abraham’s promise and the 
coming of the seed, and was specially preparative and disciplinary in relation to that 
future event. It was destined then to pass away as a dispensation, but the moral Law, 
which it held in its bosom, was to abide in its full integrity. That Law still exists in 
Christianity, with its old power of manifesting sin and carrying conviction to sinners so 
as to shut them up to Christ. 

III. Tux Law DID NOT COME DIRECT FROM GOD TO MAN, AS THE PROMISE CAME TO 
ABRAHAM, BUT THROUGH ANGELS BY A MEDIATOR. “ Being ordained through angels in 
the hand of a mediator.” This is another point of inferiority. God gave the promise 
to Abraham immediately, not mediately by angels or through any intervention like that 
of Moses; unhke the Law, which was superadded through this double intervention. 1. 
The shure of angels in the giving of the Law. (1) Evidence of Scripture on the subject. 
Stephen says in his speech that the Israelites received the Law “at the ordination of 
angels,” or “according to the arrangements of angels” (Acts vii. 53), The Law is else 


154 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. (on. τη. 1—29, 


where described as “the word spoken by angels” (Heb. fi. 2). Yet in the history of 
the giving of the Law there is uo refereuce to angels, not even to their presence. In two 
passages their presence, but not their ministration, is referred to (Deut. xxxti.2; Ps. 
lxviii. 17). (2) As the Law is said to have been ordained by means of angels and “ the 
word spoken by angels,” it is probable that the angels made it audible to the people or 
were connected with the terrible phenomena which accompanied the giviug of the Law. 
The angels came between God and the people (Ps. lxviii. 17). (3) The presence of 
angels may have led in time to a perverted doctrine of angel-worship, against which the 
apostle warns the Colossians (Col. ii. 18), 2. The share of Moses in the giving of the 
Law, Τὸ was “ordained... in the hand of a mediator,” who was Moses. He describes his 
own mediation: “I stood between you and the Lord at that time” (Deut. v. 5, 27). 
It was Moses who bore the tables of stone from God to the people. We are not to 
suppose that the reference is designed to mark the inferiority of the Law to the covenant 
of promise, which, too, had its Mediator, Jesus Christ the Lord. He is not contrasting 
the Law and the gospel, but the Law aud the promise of Abraham; and he asserts that, 
while in the one case the angels and Moses had to do with its conveyance, God in the 
other case gave the promise without the intervention of either man or angel. 

IV. Tue Law was DEVENDENT UPON CONDITIONS, THE PROMISE WA8 ABSOLUTE. “Now, 
ἃ mediator is not a mediator of one, but God is one.” The very idea of mediation 
implies two parties, who are to be brought into some relation with each other through 
the intervention of a third person. In the case of the Law, there were two parties—Go1 
and the Jewish people. In the case of the promise, ‘God is one;” he is mediatorless 
—no oue stands between him and Abraham, as Moses stood between God and the 
Israelites in the giving of the Law. There is a numerical contrast between “one” and 
“ of one.” 


Vers. 21—25.— The Law designed to be subservient to the promtee, Though the Law 
is inferior to the promise in the four points already suggested, it is not antagonistic to it. 

I. Taz Law Is NOT ANTAGONISTIC T0 THE PROMISE. ‘Is the Law against the promises 
of God? God forbid.” 1. The Law and the promise are equally of Divine origin—two 
distinct parts of the Divine plan, each part with its own distinct purpose to be carried 
out inside the Divine plan. The distinction between them is not that the one is good 
and the other evil; for “the Law is good if a man use it lawfully,” while the promise is 
self-evidently and essentially so. 2. There would be antagonism if life came by the Law. 
“For if there had been a Law given that could have given life, verily righteousness 
should have been by the Law.” In that case, the Law and the promise would have come 
into competition as two diverse methods of salvation. In the one case, salvation would 
have come “ of debt;” in the other case, it actually comes “of grace.” If life came by 
the Law, there would, in fact, be no room for free gift at all, 3. Zhe Law was absolutely 
incapable of giving life. If it could have done so, it would have been chosen as the 
method of salvation, because, in that case, man had only to use his faculties to 
accomplish it, and the agony of the cross would never have been necessary. But the 
thing was impossible; salvation is a Divine work, and, if it comes at all, it must come 
from the quickening power of the Spirit. 4, Iflife could have come by the Law, its result, 
which is righteousness, would have come in the same way. But the apostle has closed 
up the way of righteousness through the Law by many strong texts. 

II, THE TRUE EFYKCT AND DESIGN OF THE Law. “ But the Scripture shut up all 
under sin, that the promise by faith in Christ might be given to them that believe.” 1. 
The Law shuts up men under sin. The Scripture, rather than the Law, is here represented 
as doing it, It pronounces all to be guilty before God, but solely in virtue of the con- 
demnation pronounced by the Law. The phrase here employed is very expressive. Men 
are, as ἐδ were, closed in, or shut up, on every side, with only one way of escape—with 
no way left open but that of faith. 2. There is a gracious purpose in this legal incar- 
ceration, ‘That the promise by faith in Christ might be given to them that believe.” 
(1) The blessing—* the promise,” with all it involves, (2) The channel of blessing—~— 
“faith.” That is a precious conduit-pipe between the soul and the Saviour, (3) The 
pource of blessing—*‘ Jesus Christ.” (4) The recipients—“ them that believe” How 
evidently all blessing reaches us, not by the Law, but by grace! 

IML, Tue Jews ΩΝ WARD UNDER THE OLD DisreNsaTion, “ But before faith came, we 


oH. 11. 1—29,] THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 155 


were kept under the Law, shut up unto the faith which should afterwards be revealed.” 
1. The old dispensution described as the age “ before the faith.” (1) This does not mean 
that there was no faith in a Redeemer in pre-Christian ages. To say otherwise is to say 
that there was no salvation in those ages. The ajostle shows elsewhere that Abraham 
was saved as Christians are now saved (Rom. iv.). (2) Pious Israelites lived ‘‘ before 
the faith came,” because “the faith in him as really existent, or as Jesus, came with 
himself into the world.” 2. The wardship of the Law in the old dispensation. The 
apostle identifies himself with the whole body of believers under the old economy, and 
represents them as under the strict surveillaiice of a rigorous janitor, who held them 
firmly under the discipline of the Law, with the design, however, that the very severity 
of their bondage might lead them to look believingly for escape to the Lord Jesus Christ. 
3. The design of this wardship. “Shut up under the Law unto the faith which should 
afterwards be revealed.” There was thus a gracious purpose in the very Law which was 
thus seen not to be “ against the promises of God.” The Law still brings conviction of 
sin and shuts men up to the faith of Christ. It-is not to be supposed “ that the faith 
had not been revealed ” from the earliest ages of the world—for Christ was the promised 
Seed to Adam—but there was a veil upon men’s minds till it was rent in the death of 
Christ. The faith revealed in due time was the faith of Christ incarnate. 

1V. Tue Law our scHOOLMASTER For Curist. ‘“ Wherefore the Law has become our 
tutor for Christ, that we might be justified by faith.” Thus we see how “Christ becomes 
the end of the Law for righteousness.” 1. The symbolic ritual of the Law pointed expressly 
to Christ. ‘Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us.” The sacrifices had no meaning 
apatt from their typical relationship to Christ. ‘The Epistle tv the Hebrews is the best 
commentary on the Book of Leviticus. ‘The Law with its sacrifices was always leading 
the Israelites to the “ Lamb slain from the foundation of the world.” 2. The moral Law 
was always leading to Christ; for it revealed sin, which deserved God’s mighty con- 
demnation. 3. The spiritual insufficiency of the Law was its constant preparation of the 
soul for the faith of Christ, 


Ver. 26.— The blessing of adoption. The apostle has already traced justification to 
faith, the inheritance to faith, life to faith; now he traces adoption to faith. Believers 
are not children of Abraham merely, but sons of Gud, It is clear, then, that they are 
no longer children “in need of a schoolmaster.” “For ye are all”—both Jews and 
Gentiles—“ sons of God by faith in Christ Jesus.” 

I, Tue FounDaTION oF sonsHIP. 1. It originates in the distinguishing grace of 
God, We “are predestinated to the adoption of children” (Eph. i.4—6). 2. It 18 
based on the incarnation of the eternal Son, who became the Son of man that his 
people might become the sons of God. The Father loves them in his Son, and looks 
upon them with the complacency with which he regards his Son. 3. Jt ἐφ bused on 
the mediatoriul work of Christ ; tor, as it is in Christ “we have redemption through his 
blood,” so in him we “have obtained the inheritance.” Besides, God has sent forth 
his Son “to redeem them that were under the Law, that we might receive the adoption 
of sons” (ch. iv. 4, 5). ᾿ 

11. THE INSTRUMENT OF ADOPTION—FAITH. We become “sons of God by faith in 
Christ Jesus” (John i. 12), It is clear, then, that we do not become sons of God by 
nature. 1. We are “by nature children of wrath.” 2. We only become sons on 
believing. 

III. THE ADOPTION 18 COMMON TO ALL BELIEVERS, WHETHER JEW 0B GENTILE, 
It ia not enjoyed in a varying degree by believers, as some seem to think, as if God 
regarded them with varying degrees of affection, “ Beloved, now are we the sons of 
God.” The adoption carries with it Divine favour, discipline, training, tenderness, 
conformity to the image uf God’s Son, 

IV. Iv 16 ἃ PRIVILEGE CONCERNING WHICH BELIEVERS ARE NOT LEFT IN DOUBT; 
for we receive the witness of the Spirit that we are children of God (Rem. viii. 16), 


Ver. 27.—The import and obligations ef baptism. “For as many of you ss were 
baptized into Christ did put on Christ.” 

I. Tue rportT oF BAPTISM INTO CaRisT. 1. Jt declares our union with Christ 
We are baptized into his death, so far as we partake of its benefits, and are like hin 


156 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, (cu. τη. 1—29. 


separated from the world and sin. We are by baptism separated from sin and devoted 
to Christ. 2. The text does not impiy that all baptized persons have been baptized into 
Christ. Calvin well remarks that the apostle treats of the sacraments from two points 
of view. When he is arguing with hypocrites, he declares the emptiness of the outward 
symbols and the folly of confiding in them. But in dealing with the case of believers, 
while he attributes no false splendour to the sacraments, he refers emphatically ἐς tke 
inward fact signified by the ontward ceremony. There is no warrant in this passage 
for the doctrine of baptismal regeneration, because the very persons here referred to 
were regenerated before they were baptized. Baptism followed upon their profession of 
faith in Christ. 

11. Tux ΟΒΙΙΘΑΤΊΟΝΒ oF BaPrism. They did “put on Christ.” Baptized into his 
death and buried with him in baptism, they rise with him into newness of life. They 
put on Christ like a cloak. The beauty of holiness is to be upon them, because they 
are “predestinated to the very image of Christ.” ‘he text is very expressive. 1, Ohrist 
is put on for a complete covering. Not merely as a girdle to the luins, but to enfold 
the whole manhood of believers, The idea is not that of protection from the coldness 
of an outside world, but that of the full adornment of Christian character. Believers 
are so to put on Christ that the world may see Christ in the believer himself. 2. Christ 
is put on for ὦ constant covering. Not as a beautiful robe to be worn on high days and 
holidays, but on every day, in every scene of human life. 8, While believers are here 
represented as having put on Christ at their baptism, it is quite consistent for the 
apostle to say, “‘ Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ” (Rom. xiii, 12), and “ Put on the 
new man” (Eph. iv. 24). They are two sides of one great truth, representing in 
the one case a change that was complete from the very bevinning, and in the other a 
change that is incomplete, but in process of still further development. 


Ver. 28.—The unity of believers, ‘There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither 
bond nor free, there is not male and female: for ye are all one in Christ Jesus.” 

I. Iv ΙΒ aN onganio UNITY. Believers are “one body in Christ” (Rom. xii. 4, 5); 
“one man;” “one new man” (Eph.ii.15). The unity in question is no ecclesiastical 
unity; for it joins together those who are ecclesiastically separated, and it connects 
together the believers of all generations. 1. J¢ has α sevenfold relationship. ‘There 
is one body, and one Spirit, one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one hope of your calling, 
one God and Father of all” (Eph. iv. 4—6). 2. Jt ts created in Christ by the 
Holy Spirit, It is Chi’st, not the Spirit, who “hath made both one” (Eph. ii. 14); 
and we, “ being many, are made one body in Christ” (Rom. xii. 5). But wherever the 
Spirit is there is union with Christ. The indwelling of the Spirit is therefore the bond 
of unity in the Church. 

IL. Ir 18 A UNITY WHICH OBLITERATES OR IGNORES MANY WORLDLY OB NATURAL 
pistinctions. All distinctions, whether of condition, or nature, or sex, are in Christ 
lost sight of or forgotten. 1, National distinctions. “There is neither Jew nor 
Greek.” This distinction meant much in pre-Christian ages. The Jews were God’s 
peculiar people, blessed with great privileges and prepared for great destinies. The 
Greeks, representing the Gentile world, stood apart from the Jews—“aliens from the 
commonwealth of Israel, and strangers to the covenants of promise” (Eph. ii.12). But 
Jew and Greek stand on exactly the same footing in the kingdom of God, possessed 
of equal privilege, equally sons of God, and equally heirs of God, Christ broke down 
the middle wall of partition that severed them for ages, and made them one common- 
wealth. 2. Distinctions of human station. “ There is neither bond nor free.” Slaves 
were excludec from certain rites of heathen worship. But Christ takes the slave by 
the hand and places him in his kingdom side by side with the free man, The largest 
body of practical counsel in the apostolic Epistles is directed to slaves. 3. The distinc- 
tion of sew. “There is not male and female.” The apostle does not touch the original 
subordination of the woman to the man, which is a still existing fact (1 Tim. ii. 11—14), 
but shows how, religiously regarded, men and women are equal. Their relation to 
Christ does not destroy the old fact, but causes it to be lost sight of. How true it is 
that Christianity alone has elevated women, has created the sentiment which destroys 
arnt everywhere, and creates @ better understanding among the nations of the 
world ἃ 


cH, 1Π| 1—29. , ‘THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, A hy 


Ver. 29.—The heirs. “ And if ye be Christ’s, then are ye Abraham’s seed, and heirs 
according to the promise.” Mark how the apostle moves from point to point. 

I. Betizvers ΑΒΕ Curist’s possession. They are so: 1. By gift. “Thine they 
were, and thou gavest them me” (John xvii. 6). 2. By purchase. ‘Ye are bought 
with a price” (1 Cor. vi. 20). 3. By conquest. “The people shall be willing in the 
day of thy power” (Pz. cx. 3). 4. By their own self-surrender. They are “a living 
sacrifice.” They have “ committed themselves to him” (2 Tim. i. 12). 

11. Curist’s PEOPLE ARE ABRAHAM’s SEED. Christ himself is Abraham’s Seed 
Se 16), and therefore they, as one with him in the mystical union, are Abraham’s 
seed. 

III. Tue werrsuip oF promise. They became heirs, not by any legal observances, 
but according to the promise made to Abraham. 1. The inheritance is the only one 
worth having. 2. It is the only one that can be kept for ever. 3. Itis, unlike earthly 
riches or honours, within everybody’s reach. 4. It is the duty of heirs to live according 
to their prospects, to walk worthy of a Father’s house, and to behave like a brother 
to brethren. 


HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 


Vers, 1—14.—The bewitchery of Law, Paul, having stated his position as dead to 
the Law and inspired by Christ, goes on in the present paragraph to appeal to the 
Galatians to free themselves from the bewitching power of Law, and to yield themselves 
to the faith in a crucified and now risen Christ, which alone secures justification and 
its cognate blessings. And here we notice— 

I. How Law CAN COMPETE SUCCESSFULLY WITH A CRUCIFIED SAVIOUR FOR THE 
HOMAGE OF THOUGHTLESS HEARTS. (Ver. 1.) Paul here declares that two attractive 
powers had been presented to the Galatians—a crucified Christ in his own preaching, 
and the Law in the preaching of the Judaizers; and, to his amazement, the Law had 
so bewitched them as to lead them to look for salvation to Law-keeping instead of to 
the Saviour. And yet it only brings out the fact that there is in Law and self- 
righteousness a bewitchery which is continually leading souls back to bondage. It 
seen)s 60 natural to establish some claim by Law-keeping and ceremony that poor souls 
are from time to time falling into legal hope and its delusions, The superstition, which 
is abroad now, and leads so many to ceremonials for salvation, rests upon this foundation. 
Τὸ is the fascination of an evil eye which is upon the foolish votaries; they fancy they 
can save themselves by Law, and maintain their self-complacency and pride all the 
time. But it is delusion pure and simple. 

11. Ati THAT Law CAN REALLY DO FOR SINNERS 18 ΤῸ CONDEMN THEM. (Vers. 10, 13.) 
The position taken up by Law is this—to condemn every one who falls short of perfect 
obedience. No partial obedience will be entertained fora moment. “Every one that 
continueth not in αὐ things which are written in the book of the Law to do them,” is by 
the Law “cursed.” This tremendous deliverance ought to be the death of all “legal 
hope.” The soul who continues to hope in the Law, after such a definite utterance 
only proclaims his foolishness. One breach of Law is sufficient to secure the curse. 
The Law maintains its demand for perfect obedience, and, if this be not rendered, it can 
do nothing but condemn. It becomes the more amazing that any after this could be 
bewitched by Law. Surely if the Law can only. curse sinners, the sooner we leok for 
salvation in some other direction than Law, the better. And to go back to Law-keeping 
from grace, in hope of acceptance, is clear retrogression. 

IIL. JusriFicaTIoN AND ITS COGNATE BLESSINGS CAN ONLY COME BY FAITH. (Vers. 2— 
9, 12,14.) The Law in the nature of things cannot justify sinners. It has no means 
of doing so. But God in his grace has provided a way of justification. It is through 
the merits of his Son. And here we must remember that imputation of merit is the 
commonest fact of experience. ‘There is not one of us who does not get a start in life 
and a consideration extended to us which are due to the merits of others, a respected 
parent or some deeply interested friend. We are surrounded with a halo of glory by 
virtue of the character of others, Their character helps us toa position and opportunity 
we could not otherwise obtain. It may be called a mere association of ideas, but it is 


156 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. (cu. m1. 1—29, 


strictly the passing of merit over from man to man. In the same way Jesus Christ 
has come into our world, allied himself with our sinful race, merited consideration and 
acceptance by obedience to Law, even as far as death, and this merit of the Divine 
Man passes over to believers, In the Father’s sight, therefore, we are regarded as just, 
notwithstanding all our sin. We have been justified through faith. But besides, tha 
believers obtain the Spirit to dwell within them, so that a process of sanctification is 
set up within them as soon as justification takes place. And the indwelling Spirit 
may manifest his presence and power in wonderful works, as appears to have been th: 
case with these Galatians (ver. 5). So that Divine grace not only secures the justiti- 
cation of all who trust in Jesus, but their sanctification and spiritual power as well. 
Wondrous blessings are thus the outcome of Divine grace, and the heritage of those 
who believe. What a change from having to endure the curse of Law} 

IV. ABRAHAM ILLUSTRATES THE BENEFIT OF FAITH IN GOD AS CONTRASTED WITH 
RELIANCE ON Law. (Vers.6—9.) The legalists claimed Abraham as their father. One 
would have supposed that Abraham had been the greatest ceremonialist of the early dis- 
pensation. But the truth is that Abraham was justified and accepted by simply believing 
God when he promised a world-wide blessing through Abraham’s seed. The blessing 
came to the patriarch through simple trust in God. Those who hoped in Law-keeping, 
therefore, were not the true followers of Abraham. It was only those who trusted 
God for salvation and blessing who walked in the patriarch’s footsteps. Consequently, 
all the ceremonialism which tried to shelter itself under the wings of Abraham was a 
simple imposition! The “ merit-mongers,” as Luther calls them in his ‘Commentary,’ 
have thus no pretence of countenance from thecaseof Abraham. It was tosimple trust in 
God he owed his standing before him. How needful, then, it is for us to shake ourselves 
free from every remnant of self-righteousness, and to look simply and implicitly to 
Christ alone! It is by faith we stand and live. The Christ who became the curse for 
us by hanging on a tree, calls us to trust him for acceptance and inspiration; and in 
trusting him we find the promise amply redeemed.—R. M. E. 


Vers. 15—22.—The covenant of promise. Having taken up the case of Abraham as 
illustrating the necessity of faith, Paul proceeds to state the Abrahamic covenant as 
one of promise. The Mosaic covenant, promulgated four hundred and thirty years alter, 
could not, he argues, disannul the previous covenant. It must have a supplementary 
purpose ; and this he shows to be to drive the souls who have been made hopeless by 
the Law into the arms of the “ faithful Promiser.’ The following lessons are sug- 

ested :— 

Ξ I, THe COVENANT OF PROMISE MADE WITH CHRist ΑΒ SEED or ABRAHAM. (Vers, 15, 16.) 
We are too prone to contemplate the promises of God out of their relation to Christ. 
No wonder that they then scem incredible. They are too good news to be true, But 
the exceeding great and precious promises are all yea and amen in Christ (2 Cor. i. 20) ; 
they are promises made to Christ and secured by his obedience ; and consequently they 
ought not to seem at any time incredible. Now, when God spoke to Abraham of a 
universal blessing being given through the patriarch’s “Seed,” it never suggested to 
Abraham any idea of merit upon his part. He simply hoped upon God’s word, which 
would be fulfilled in due season, The Seed would convey the blessing. The old man’s 
hope rested upon his Seed, the Christ whom the ages would reveal. The Seed might be 
meritorious, but Abraham felt that he himself was not. In the humility of felt help- 
lessness, therefore, he trusted God, and found pardon and acceptance and inspiration 
through his trust. It is just here we must all begin. The Lord Jesus deserves the 
fulfilment of all the promises. The covenant of grace made with him by the Father 
has received a fulfilment of its conditions so far as he was concerned; and so he can 
claim the promises as no more than his due. Their guarantee is in his obedience untu 
death. 

IL. Tue ΒΙΝΑΙΤΙΟ Law coULD NOT DISANNUL THE COVENANT OF PROMISE. (Vers. 
17,18.) Four hundred and thirty years elapsed and, lo, another covenant is made with 
the seed of Abraham, At Sinai, and through the mediation of Moses and of angels, 
a “fiery Law” went forth from Heaven, and the question Paul answers here is what 
effect this latter covenant had upon the former. He adduces the fact that legal 
documents when once perfected are not disannulled by subsequent ones, The later 


Git. τὰ, 1-29.) THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 159 


documents must proceed upon the validity and power of the preceding. Hence the 
Mosaic Law could not render the Abrahamic covenant of promise null and void. It 
must consist with and supplement the preceding, The promise made to the seed of 
Abraham remained in force, notwithstanding the thunders of Mount Sinai. Nay, the 
thunders of Sinai were, as we shall next see, to incline the people to accept the previous 
promise. There was no antithesis between promise and Law ; but Law came to incline 
the people to embrace the promise. There was something more venerable and more 
sacred even than the covenant at Sinai, and this was the promises made to Abraham 
in Canaan. These were the well-head of Jewish privileges. The Jews had not been 
called to law-keeping and self-righteousness, but to promises exceeding great and 
precious to be won by their Messiah. It was to faith, not to ceremony, that their system 
really summoned them. 

HI. Tue purpose or tHE Law. (Vers. 19—22.) Was the Sinaitic covenant, then, 
a work of supererozation? By no means, It was a grand instrument, when rightly 
regarded, to drive sinners into a Saviour’s arms. What did it require?’ Perfect obe- 
dience, Did the people at Mount Sinai fancy they could renderit? Nay; the utterance 
of the ten commandments in the great and terrible tones convinced them that they 
could not stand up in their own strength before such a holy God. Hence their flight 
from the mount (Exod, xx. 18), Hence their cry for the mediation of Moses (ver. 19). 
In a word, the effect of the publication of the Law was to overwhelm the people with a 
sense of their sin. This is the purpose of the Law. It is not to feed man’s hope of 
claiming life by law-keeping ; it is, on the contrary, to kill that hope and send him to 
God’s free grace that he may be saved by faith in the promises. ‘The Law is to secure 
our despair of self that we may build all our hope on the Saviour, What, then, were 
the ceremonies of Judaism? ‘They were embodiments of the promises. The Judaizers 
said, “ We are to be saved by observing these ceremonies ;” but the truth was that the 
ceremonies were enacted to make the promises emphatic and to lead sinners away from 
self-rizhteousness to God and his mercy. The ceremonial Law was a pictorial gospel, 
to keep up the hearts of those whom the moral Law had reduced to despair; but the 
false teachers made the ceremonies saving, and so ignored the gospel they embodied. 
May we be kept from all analogous mistakes |—K, M. E. 


Vers. 23—29.—The Law-school and the home-coming. Paul, in the present section, 
pursues the thought of the purpose of Law. It is the tutor to convey certain lessons to 
the soul and to sccure thereby the soul’s return to-the Father and the home. Let us 
look at the interesting line of thought thus given. 

1. Taz Law-scuoon. (Vers. 23, 24.) The idea was once entertained that the Law, 
as παιδαγωγός, meant the slave who was entrusted with the guidance of the child to the 
school of Christ. But this notion is now abandoned, and, as the superior slaves were 
often entrusted with the education of the child to a certain age, the idea which is now 
accepted from this passage is that the soul goes to the school of the Law, and learns 
from the Law the lessons which fit it for coming home to Christ. Christ is not the 
Schoolmaster to whom Law leads the soul, but is the elder Brother of the Divine family 
to whom the lessons of the schoolmaster, the Law, leads the enlightened soul. The Law- 
school is an institution of great strictness and severity. Hence we are represented here 
as “kept in ward under the Law” (Revised Version). Like one of the great barracks 
which are called euphoniously “ public schools,” and where, as in public prisons, the 
youths are for some hours daily confined, and out of which they are thankful to escape ; 
so the Mosaic Law is meant to be the severe training-school which will make us relish 
ever so much the freedom and comfort of home. 

II. THE BURDEN OF ITS TEACHING. (Ver. 24.) The lesson of the Law is personal 
unworthiness, the impossibility of our ever saving ourselves. ‘Ihe more we study the 
ten commandments, the more we enter into the spirit and meaning of the moral Law, 
the deeper must be our conviction that we eannvt keep it pertectly, and so must be 
liable to its penalties. But the Jews, instead of holding bard to the teaching of the 
moral Law, turned their back upon it and betook themselves to the ceremonial Law as 
their hope of life. Their notion was that, though they might neglect the weightier 
matters of the Law, such as judgment, mercy, and faith, they were perfectly safe so long 
as they tithed the mint, the anise, and the cummin (Matt, xxiii. 23), Instead of learn- 


166 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. (om. τι, 1—29, 


ing Law’s lesson and being “ shut up to faith,” they mistook the lesson altogether and 
shut themselves up to ceremony. The Law was meant to defeat self-righteousness; the 
pupils allowed it to minister to self-righteousness. Instead of being shut up to faith, they 
remained in the school of Law for ever and never got home. Now, every well-conducted 
school impresses upon its pupils the desirability of their getting veyond its lessons and 
its confinement. ‘lhe broad liberty of manhood and of home lies in supposed suniigh* 
beyond it, and the school training encourages the vision. So with God’s Law; it.» 
designed to create a longing for the liberty in Christ and the larger opportunities that 
liberty implies. 

IIL THE Home-comina. (Vers. 25, 26.) If we learn the true lesson from the Law, 
we are carried by it to the feet of Christ, and we seek justification by trusting him. 
Faith is thus the home-coming of the soul ; and undoubtedly no schoolboy ever came 
whistling so joyfully home, even when his home-coming was the final one, as the soul 
does which has learned to trust and love Christ. Then the sense of imprisonment 
and confinement gives place to a sense of freedom. As children of God in Christ Jesus, 
we rejoice in the abundant liberty of home. Our education is so far finished when we 
have learned to hope in our elder Brother only. Then do we know what it is to be “at 
home” with God. The prodigal son enjoyed himself greatly at the father’s banquet, 
and so do all of us; for we are all prodigals by nature, when by faith and repentance we 
come home to God. 

IV. Unity rn Carist. (Vers. 27, 28.) The home-coming is attended by the enter- 
tainment of the Christian spirit. By that spirit all caste-distinctions die, Having put 
on Christ, we do not look contemptuously on any, but hopefully on all. The Jew and 
the Greek forget their national differences and separations; the bond and the free do 
not dwell despairingly or proudly on the accident of birth; the man does not tyrannize 
over the woman, and neither will. the Christian woman, when she secures her rights, 
tyrannize over the man; but each and all will rejoice in their unity in Christ. Christ 
thus proves himself to be the unifying element in the human race. Coming near to 
each, he brings each near to all, and establishes around his person the brotherhood 
of man. 

V. FAITH AL8o INTRODUCES SOULS TO THE PRIVILEGES OF THE ABRAHAMIO FAMILY. 
(Ver. 29.) Unquestionably the Jews were the heirs of magnificent promises. But is 
it carnal Jews that are to get them ? is it men who are only descended from Abraham 
according to the flesh? Nay; Abraham has a spiritual seed, and all who are Christ’s 
through faith become children of Abrabam. Paul thus proclaims a chosen generation, 
whose fellowship may be entered by faith and not by circumcision, by the Christian 
spirit and not by Jewish ceremony. This is better than converting the world to 
Judaism, to convert it to Christ, and through relationship to Christ to count kindred with 
Abraham. “ We are the circumcision,” as he says to the Philippian converts, “ who 
worship God in the spirit, who rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the 
flesh ” (Phil. iii. 3). The Law teaches us a precious lesson if it sends us for salvation to 
Christ, and enables us to find in fellowship with our Lord the privileges of the chosen 
people becoming ours.—R. M. Εἰ, 


Vers. 1—14.— Appeal to experience and Sertpture. I. FooLtsHNess oF THE GALATIANS 
SHOWN FROM THEIR OWN EXPERIENCE. 1. Expression of astonishment in view of 
their first impressions of the cross, “Ο foolish Galatians, who did bewitch you, before 
whose eyes Jesus Christ was openly set forth crucified?” Panl’s address to Peter 
concluded with his presenting the dreadful supposition of Christ having died fer nought. 
He with that turns to the Galatians, and calls to their recollection the memorable 
impression which the first presentation of Christ crucified had made on their, minds, 
There had been, as it were, a localization of the cross among them. Christ had been 
so presented to them that preacher and time and place were all forgotten. There on 
Galatian soil was the cross erected; there was the Holy One and the Just taken and 
nailed to the tree; there his blood flowed forth for the remission of sing. And they 
were deeply affected, as if the crucifixion scene had passed before their eyes. It is 
a blessed fact that the evil of our nature is not insuperable—that there is in the cross 
what can act on it like a spell. Even the greatest sinners have been arrested and 
entranced by the eye of the Crucified One. It is, on the other hand, a serious fact that 


GH. ttt, 1—29,] THER EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 161 


evil can be presented to us in a fascinating form. Here the Galatians are described as 
those who had been bewitched. It was as if some one had exerted an evil spell on 
them. His evil eye had rested on them and held them so that they could not see 
him by whose crucifixion they had formerly been so much affected. And the apostle 
wonders who it could be that had bewitched them. Who had been envious of the 
influence which the Crucified One had obtained over them? What false representations 
had he made? What flattering promises had he held out? Such a one had great 
guilt on his head ; but they also were chargeabie with foolishness in allowing them- 
selves to be bewitched by him. The Galatians were by no means stupid; they were 
rather of quick perception, They had the strong emotional qualities of the Celtic 
nature; their temptation was sudden change of feeling. They were foolish in yielding 
to their temptation, in not subjecting their feelings to the guidance of reason, in not 
using the Divine helps against their being bewitched. And the apostle, in charging 
home foolishness on them, would have them recall what the cross had once been in 
their eyes, in order to break the present spell of evil. 2. The one admission he asks of 
them in order to prove thetr foolishness, “This only would I learn from you, Received 
ye the Spirit by the works of the Law, or by the hearing of faith?” He felt that he 
had such a hold on them from their past experiences that he could have asked of them 
many admissions. With one, however, he will be content. This had reference to the 
reception of the Spirit. The gospel dispensation was the dispensation of the Spirit. It 
was by the sacrifice of Christ that the Spirit was really obtained. 10 was soon after the 
offering of that sacrifice that the Spirit was poured out, as though liberated from pre- 
vious restraints. The great blessing, then, of that dispensation, obtained they it by the 
works of the Law, or by the hearing of faith? The Law is to be understood in the 
sense of the Mosaic Law, which the Judaists sought to impose on Gentile Christians. 
The Law and faith are here placed in opposition. Works are the characteristic of the 
Law ; hearing is the characteristic of faith, Was it, then, by Law-working that they 
had received the Spirit? When would it quantitatively and qualitatively have sufficed for 
their receiving the Spirit? Was it not the case, too, that the great majority of them in 
the Galatian Churches had not been under the Law? They had not been circumcised, 
and yet the Spirit had been received by them. Was it not, then, by the hearing which 
belongs to faith? They had not tediously to elaborate a Law-righteousness. They 
had not to work for a righteousness at all, They had simply to fear in connection 
with the preaching of the gospel. They had to listen to the proclamation of a right- 
eousness elaborated for them. And while their faith was imperfect, and could not be in 
itself the ground of their justification, they had, as perfectly justified, received the Spirit. 
3. Two points in which their foolishness was shown at its height. “ Are ye so foolish ?” 
(1). They belied the beginning they had made. “ Having begun in the Spirit, are ye now 
perfected in the flesh?” They began by renouncing the flesh, by confessing that, with 
the weak elements in their nature, they never could arrive at perfection. In despair 
of the flesh, then, and in order to be delivered from its weakness, they cast themselves 
upon the Spirit. They called in Divine help against their sinful tendencies. This was 
the right beginning to make. And having thus begun, they should have gone on, in 
dependence on the help of the Spirit, toward perfection. But they were proving 
untrue to the beginning they had made. They were going back to the flesh which 
they professed to have left behind as a source of dependence, ‘They were now saying 
that it, forsooth, with all its weakness, was able to bring about their perfection. (2) 
They stultified their sufferings. ‘ Did ye suffer so many things in vain? if it be indeed 
in vain.” It is to be inferred that they suffered persecution. They suffered many 
things, though of their sufferings we have no record. They suffered for Christ, and it 
may have been for liberty in him, ‘hat gave a noble character to their sufferings, 
and promised a glorious reward.. But now, with their changed relation to Christ, 
those sufferings had lost their character. There was no longer a Christian halo around 
them. They were simply a blunder, what might have been avoided. They could not 
hope, then, for the reward of the Christian confessor or martyr. The apostle is, however, 
unwilling to believe that the matter has ended with them. In the words which he 
appends, “if it be indeed in vain,” he not only leaves a loophole of doubt, but makes an 
appeal to them not to throw away that which they had nobly won. 4. The one admission 
reverted to with special reference to the miraculous operations of the Spirit. “ He therefore 
GALATIANS, 


162 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. (on. 11. 1—29 


that supplieth to you the Spirit, and worketh miracles among you, doeth he it by the 
works of the Law, or by the hearing of faith?” It was God who supplied the Spirit tc 
them. He especially supplied the power of working miracles. It is taken for granted 
that miracles were still being wrought in connection with the Galatian Churches. 
The miraculous operations of the Spirit are not more remarkable in themselves than his 
ordinary operations; but they were more exceptional. Being more easily appreciated, 
too, they were especially fitted to attract attention to Christianity, and to commend 
it to them that were outside, And as the Galatians had thrown doubt on their rela- 
tion to Christianity, he very naturally mects them by making his appeal to the 
evidence of miracles. Did God give any token of his approval to those who were 
identified with the works of the Law—to the Judaizing teachers ὃ Was there any excep- 
tional power possessed by them? Did not God work miracles through those who 
were identified with the hearing of faith—through the preachers of the gospel? And 
was that not conclusive evidence that he was with them in their teaching ? 

II. Toe case oF ABRAHAM WITH REFERENCE TO JUSTIFICATION. 1. He was 
justified by faith. Scripture statement. “ Even as Abraham believed God, and it was 
reckoned unto him for righteousness.” There could be no question regarding the hivh 
authority of Abraham’s example. And the best way to deal with it was in connection 
with Scripture. What, then, was the Scripture account of Abraham’s justification ? In 
Gen. xv. 6 it is said, “‘ He believed in the Lord, and he counted it to him for righteous- 
ness.” It is not ‘“ He was circumcised, and that was reckoned unto him for righteous- 
ness.” There is no mention of his justification in connection with his circumcision. 
Indeed, he was justified before he was circumcised. {Abraham’s case, then, tells 
against justification by the works of the Law. On the other hand, he was a signal 
example of the hearing of faith. He heard God saying to him, “Get thee out of thy 
country, and from thy kindred, and from thy father’s house, unto ἃ land that I will 
show thee;” and he went forth, leaving country and kindred and home, not knowing 
whither he went. He heaid God saying that he should have a seed numerous as the 
stars of heaven, and it was his crediting this as God’s word, though it conflicted with 
all human experience, that was reckoned unto him for righteousness. Again, he heard 
God commanuing him to offer up the son of the promise, and, notwitlstanding all the 
difficulties it involved, he acted upon what he heard. It is true that this was personal 
righteousness so far as it went. It was the right disposition towards God. Abraham 
approved himself before God by his faith, and by his works which evidenced his faith. 
But it is not said that this was his righteousness. It was not meritorious righteous- 
ness; it was simply faith grasping the Divine word which made him righteous, It 
was imperfect faith, and therefore could not be the ground of his justification. But the 
language is that “it was reckoned unto him for righteousness.” ‘Though his faith was 
not meritorious, was imperfect, it was reckoned unto him as though he had fulfilled 
the whole Law. From the moment of his hearing in faith he was fully justified. 
Inference. “ Know therefore that they which be of faith, the same are sons of Abra- 
ham.” The contention of the Judaists would be that the keepers of the Law were the 
true sons of Abraham. The apostle regards this Scripture as a disproof of their 
position, Abraham was notably a believer. He heard God speaking to him on various 
occasions, and it was his humbly distrusting his own judgment and listening to the 
voice of God for which he was commended. It was, therefore, to be known, to be 
regarded as indisputable, that believers, those who have faith as the source of their 
life, and not those who are of the works of the Law, are the true sons of Abraham. 
2. The promise on which his fuith rested. Scripture with preface. “And the 
Scripture, foreseeing that God would justify the Gentiles by faith, preached the gospel 
beforehand unto Abraham, saying, In thee shall all nations be blessed.” The Scripture 
is here put in place of the Author of Scripture, and’ foresight is ascribed to it which is 
properly to be ascribed to God. The foresight of God was shown in the form in which the 
promise was given. It had nothing of Jewish exclusiveness about it, but was suitable 
to gospel times. Indeed, it could be described as the gospel preached beforehand unto 
Abraham. The languave recalls our Lord’s words, “ Your father Abraham rejoiced to 
see my day, and he saw it, and was glad.” [Ὁ was the promise of blessing without any 
restriction of contents. It was the promise of blessing to all nations. There was 
thus the same ring about it that there was about the angelic message when Jesus was 


ot. tix, 1—29,) THE ELISTLE To THE GALATIANS, 108 


born: “Behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people.” 
And God, having in view the extension of the blessing to the Gentiles, promised it in 
Abraham. He did not promise it in Moses, who was identified with the Law; but he 
promised itin Abraham, who was characteristically a believer. The being im him points 
to Abraham, not only as a believer, but as holding the position of the father of belcevers. 
He was thus more than an example of the mode of justitication. It was in him that 
the blessing was given, that the connection was formed between faith and justification. 
lt is as his seed, or sons, that it is to be obtained by us. General inference. “So 
then they which be of faith are blessed with the faithful Abraham.” He has already 
shown who the sons of Abraham are, viz. “they which be of faith.” Founding, then, 
upon thas, as well as upon what he has just quoted, his conclusion is that believers are 
sharers with Abraham in his blessing. He not only stood in the relation of father to 
believers: as a believer himself, he was blessed. He had especially the blessing of 
justification, which has been referred to. And along with him do all believers enjoy 
especially the blessing of justification. (1) A curse lies on the workers of the Law. 
“For as many as are of the works of the Law are under acurse.” So far from enjoy- 
ing the blessing, they are under the curse. Having laid down this proposition, he 
establishes it in the most conclusive manner. Even the form of the syllogism is 
apparent. Major proposition. “For it is written, Cursed is every one which con- 
tinueth not in all things that are written in the book of the Law, todo them.” The 
words are a quotation from Deut. xxvii. 26. ‘hey form the conclusion of the curses 
pronounced from Mount Ebal. The Law requires obedience to be rendered to it in every 
precept. And it requires obedience to all time. If a person kept all the precepts and 
transgressed only one, or if he transgressed one at last after having kept all for a life- 
time, he would thereby be placed in a wrong relation to the Law, and would be subject 
to its curse, as really as though he had been a flagrant and lifelong transgressor. All 
are cursed who do not render whole and continued obedience to the Law. Minor 
proposition. ‘Now that no man is justified by the Law in the sight of God, is 
evident.” Of the major proposition he did not need to offer any proof, because it is 
Scripture; but this minor proposition, in his singular love for proof, especially from - 
Scripture, he will not assume. It therefore becomes the conclusion of another syl- 
logism Major proposition of second syllogism. “ For, The righteous shall live by faith.” 
This is cited from Hab. ii. 4, and is also cited in Rom. i. 17 and Heb. x. 38. The 
spirit of the Old ‘lestament passage is given. The reference was to a season of danger 
from the Chaldeans. An announcement of deliverance was made in plain terms. 
“ Behold,” it is added, “his soul [either of the Chaldean or of the heedless Jew] which 
is lifted up is not upright in him;” 1.6. priding himself in his own sufliciency, he was 
destitute of righteousness, and therefore it was to be presumed, from the theocratic 
standpoint, would perish; “ but the just shall live by faith ;” ze. relying on promised 
help, he would be righteous, and thus obtain the theocratic blessing of deliverance. The 
New Testament bearing is obvious. Relying on Divine righteousness, he is righteous, 
and thus has title to life. Formally, what the apostle lays down here is that none but 
believers are justified. Minor proposition of second syllogism. “ And the Law is not 
of faith; but, He that doeth them shall live in them.” The principle of faith is 
reliance on the promise in order to obtain a title to life. The principle of the Law, as 
brought out in the quotation from Lev. xviii. 5, is reliance on our own doing of all the 
precepts in order to obtain a title to life. Thus all doers must be excluded from the 
class of believers. And thus, by formal proof, is the minor proposition of the first 
syllogism established, viz. No man is justified by the Law in the sight of God. And, 
it being established, the conclusion of that syllogism follows, which is given in the 
first clause of the tenth verse, “ As many as are of the works of the Law are under a 
curse.” (2) How the blessing is enjoyed by believers. Redemption from the curse, “Christ 
redeemed us from the curse of the Law, having become a curse for us: for it is written, 
Cursed is every one that hangeth ona tree.” The Jews (with whom Paul identifies 
himself) were under the curse of the Law for many precepts transgressed, and trans- 
gressed many times. ‘They found a Redeemer from the curse in Christ, who redeemed 
them by becoming a curse for them, #.e. on their behalf, and, by implication at least, in 
their stead. The transference of the curse, as of sin, was quite familiar to the Jewish 
mind, He not only became cursed, but abstractly and more strongly he became a 


164 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. (oa. it. 1~28, 


curse; he became the receptacle of thecurse of the Law. And in his great fondness for 
Scripture exhibited in the whole of this paragraph, the apostle points out that this 
was in accordance with words found in Deut. xxi. 23, “Cursed is every one that 
hangeth on a tree.” ‘he words did not refer to crucifixion, which was not a Jewish 
mode of putting to death; but referred to the hanging of the body of a criminal 
ona tree after death as a public spectacle. The words were applicable to Christ, 
because he was madea public spectacle, not only in hanging on a tree, but in 
being nailed to a tree. ‘Ihe infamy which Christ was subjected to from men war 
a very subordinate element in his death. There was especially the wrath which he 
endured from God, the hiding of the Father’s face from him as the Representative of 
sinners. This was the curse (all curses in one) by bearing which he became 
Redeemer. Twofold atm of redemption. Extension of the blessing to the Gentiles. 
“That upon the Gentiles might come the blessing of Abraham in Christ Jesus.” The 
effect of the endurance of the curse was the opening of the blessing to the Gentiles. 
The Law, in its precepts and curse, no longer presented an obstacle. ‘I'he whole mean- 
ing of the Law was realized ; the whole curse of the Law was exhausted. So complete 
was the satisfaction rendered, that there could be no supplementing it by works of the 
Law. All that was needed was faith to receive the satisfaction presented in Christ, 
and not in the Law, for justification. Thus did the blessing attain its world-wide 
character, announced to Abraham. Gentiles had simply to believe, like Abraham, 
in order to be blessed in and with Abraham, Reception of the Spirit. “ ‘That we 
might receive the promise of the Spirit through faith.” Not only was there the 
extension of the blessing enjoyed among the Jews, which was eminently justification 
(as appears from the whole strain of this paragraph); but this extension was 
signalized by the sending of a richer blessing. This was the realization of the promise 
of the Spirit. In this the Jews were sharers. All alike were recipients of the Spirit, 
simply through faith. And thus the apostle, after a remarkable chain of arguments, 
comes back to the point from which he started.—R. Εἷς, 


Vers, 15—22.—Promise and Law. From this point the apostle has a softened tone 
toward the Galatians. He deals with them now more in the way of instruction and 
counsel than of correction and rebuke. 

I. THE PROMISE WAS NOT INVALIDATED BY THE Law. 1. Human analogy. “ Brethren, 
I speak after the manner of men: Though it be but a man’s covenant, yet when it hath 
been confirmed, no one maketh it void, or addeth thereto.” When the apostle professes 
to speak after the manner of men, he is not thinkiny of himself as having to come 
down from the spiritual standpoint, but of God as greater than man, and of his having 
to use a certain freedom in arguing as he does from a man’s covenant te God’s covenant. 
Weare not to understand “ covenant” in the sense of “ testament.” It isan engagement 
under which one comes to another with or without engagement on the part of that 
other. To be thoroughly valid » covenant must be confirmed. Testimony must be 
given that an engagement has been really and fully entered into. The signing of a 
legal document is a common mode of confirmation. We read frequently in old times 
of confirmation by oath. When a covenant has been confirmed, no one maketh it void 
or addeth thereto. Meyer says, “no third party;” but the language is applicable even 
to the person who comes under engagement. He is not free to set his engagement aside 
or to modify it by additions. It is different from the case of a testator while he is still 
living. In signing a will he has come under no engagement to any one, and is free to 
cancel it or to add « codicil. But when an engagement has been entered into it can 
neither be set aside nor modified by additions, but stands to be carried out to the letter. 
2. Two points to be taken into account in applying the analogy. (1) The covenant with 
Abraham was of the nature of a promise. “Now to Abraham were the promises 
spoken.” This brings down the general idea of covenant to a special kind. Promise 
is not a contracting for benefit and with conditions, In its purest form, as employed 
by the apostle, it is an engagement to bestow blessing, without conditions attached. It 
is here used in the plural number, not because distinct blessings were promised, but 
because the same blessing was repeatcdly promised, with variety of form and circum- 
stance. (2) The covenant of promise was made, not only with Abraham, but included 
Curist, “And to his seed. He saith not, And to sceds, as of many: but as of ane, 


oH, 11, 1—29,) THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 166 


And te thy seed, which is Christ.” With resemblance in form to the rabbinical style 
of argument, this cannot be said to have anything of rabbinical feebleness. The point 
is, that the idea of plurality might have been brought out in the form given to the promise 
It might have been said, “ And to thy descendants,” thus excluding reference to one in 
particular. Instead of that it was said, “ And to thy seed,” which is applicable, though 
not necessarily Jimited in application, to one. The apostle, having pointed this out, 
declares (does not argue) that there was an intended application to Christ. As he was 
the Seed of the woman, so also was he the Seed of Abraham. The bearing of the 
declaration is, that, Christ having been included in the promise, it had to be made good 
to him as well as to Abraham. 3. Application of the analoyy. (1) Position. ‘ Now 
this I say: A covenant confirmed beforehand by God, the Law, which came four hundred 
and thirty years after, doth not disannul, so as to make the promise of none effect.” 
So far as God was concerned, the promise had full validity as soon as it was announced 
(Gen. xiii. 15). So far as Abraham was concerned, it was confirmed by the fire passing 
between the pieces of the sacrifice (Gen. xv. 17), and by oath (Gen. xxii. 18), and also 
by repetition (Gen. xvii. 8). It was also confirmed to the other patriarchs (Gen. xxvi. 
4; xxviii. 4). That being the case, it could not be set aside by the Law, which was 
four hundred and thirty years later. If it had been a covenant with conditions, then it 
might have been inferred that, the conditions not having been complied with, the Law 
had been introduced. Thus the Law would virtually have displaced the covenant. 
But the apostle’s position is that the covenant, being of the nature of promise, there 
cvild be no displacing of it by the Law. “So as to make the promise of none effect” 
comes in as qualifying the assertion. Whatever covenant the Law might have dis- 
placed, it could never displace a covenant of pure promise. (2) Argument by which it 
is supported. “For if the inheritance is of the Law, it is no more of promise: but 
God hath granted it to Abraham by promise.” The blessing is described as the 
inheritance, which had a reference beyond the land of Canaan to the heavenly Canaan, 
and even to the whole earth, which is now to be regarded as the carthly Canaan. If the 
inheritance was associated with the Law, then it must never have been promised, For 
promise, according to the apostle’s understanding of it, is engagement to bless without 
conditions. But the inheritance never could be associated with the Law. For it was 
authenticated that God freely promised it to Abraham. By this promise, then, to speak 
after the manner of men, God was bound. He was not in the position of a testator 
who could cancel or add fresh clauses. Nor was he in the position of one who had 
made a covenant with conditions which had not been complied with. But having given 
an unconditional promise, he could not under any circumstances withdraw it. 

II. Four points IN WHICH THE LAW DIFFERED FROM THE PROMISE, “ What then is 
the Law?” 1. It was additional to the promise. “It was added because of trans- 
gressions.” It was never intended to stand alone. It was simply intended to be an 
adjunct to the promise already given and still continuing in force. “It was added 
because of transgressions.” There is not yet brought into view the purpose which the 
Law served with reference to transgressions, checking them, making them clear. It is 
simply indicated that the introduction of the Law was necessitated by the disposition 
to transgress. There is the same teaching here as by our Lord with regard to the law 
of divorce. It was not, he said, so from the beginning; but was necessitated by the 
hardness of men’s hearts, So, with regard to the Law and its rigour, it was not so from 
the beginning. God began with promise; and it was only when it was not sufficiently 
responded to that the Law was introduced, not as a substitute, but as an addition to 
the promise. 2. [¢ wasa temporary addition, “ Till the seed should come to whom the 
promise hath been made.” ΑΒ it was an after institution, so it was never intended to 
last It had not the permanence which belonged to the promise. It had reference to 
the coming of the Seed to whom the promise had been made. That was the great 
reason of its existence. There is not yet brought into view the purpose which the Law 
served with reference to the coming Seed. It is simply indicated that it was so related 
to Christ that, when he came to receive the promise, it was necessarily done away as an 
institution. 3. Jt was given mediately by God, “ And it was ordained through angels.” 
The connection of the angels with the giving of the Law was prominent in Jewish 
tradition. It is remarkable that there is no mention of them in the historical account 
in Exodus. They are thus introduced in Deut. xxxiii, 2 : “The Lord came from Sinai, 


166 Ti EPISTLE TO THe GALATIANS. fot. mi, 1—29, 


and rose up from Seir unto them: he shined forth from Mount Paran, and he cama 
with ten thousand of his saints: from his right hand went a fiery law for them.” The 
ten thousand of his holy ones were doubtless angels, So in Ps. Ixviii. 17 it is said, 
“The chariots of God are twenty thousand, even thousands of angels; the Lord is 
among them as in Sinai, in the holy place.” This fact was so recognized among the 
Jews that Stephen could tell them that they had received the Law by the disposition 
of angels. Their connection with it was not confined to accompanying the Lord, or 
ordering the miraculous accompaniment. But the language in Hebrews—“ the word 
spoken by angels ’—taken along with the language here, points to them as the instru- 
ments employed by God in delivering the Law. This circumstance is introduced by the 
apostle here, in keeping with the context, not to glorify the Law, but to show that God 
stood at a distance {rom men in the giving of the Law. It was something which was 
in a manner foreign to him, Therefore, in giving it he did not come immediately into 
contact with men, but interposed angels on his side. 4, Jt was mediately received by 
men. “ By the hand of a mediator.” This was Moses. “I stood between the Lord 
and you.” In the giving of the Law great stress was laid on the fact that the people 
were not fit to draw near to God to receive it from him. Therefore a mediator was 
interposed on man’s side, Added comment on double mediation. ‘Now a mediator is 
not a mediator of one; but God is one.” It is said that there have been as many as four 
hundred and thirty diff-rent interpretations of these words. If that speaks to extra- 
ordinary labour bestowed on the interpretation of the words, it also speaks to extraordinary 
misdirection of labour. It can be said that now there is substantial unanimity of inter- 
pretation. The first statement docs not refer to Moses nor to Christ, but to a mediator 
generally ; and means that a mediator iniplies two parties, between whom the mediation 
takes place. The second statement, that God is one, has often been taken to mean that 
God is one of the two parties, the children of Israel being the other party, which is 
pointless fur the purpose of the argument. It means that God is mediatorless in the 
promise. In the Law, God kept at a distance, interposing mediators on his side and 
interposing also a mediator on man’s side. But in the promise God came immediately 
into contact with Abraham, employing no mediator, but speaking to him as to a friend, 

III. Toe Law was Nor ANTAGONISTIC TO THE PROMISE. “ [8 the Law then against 
the promises of God? God forbid.” In keeping with what has been said, God identifies 
himsclf with the promises, and not with the Law. They were not, however, antagonistic. 
1. Vhe Law did not supply the condition of the blessing. “ For if there had been a Law 
given which could make alive, verily righteousness would have been of the Law.” In the 
case supposed (righteousness being of the Law, and so making alive), the Law would have 
been antagonistic to the promise. There would have been an antagonistic mode of 
justification. he blessing would have been put on the ground of obedience to the 
Law. ‘The apostle repudiates that supposition, without any disparagement of the 
Mosaic Law. It had a perfectness of its own. If there had been a Law fitted to give 
lite, he strongly asserts that would have been the Mosaic Law. It was raised above all 
mere human law. It presented an admirable idea of righteousness. That it did not 
actually effect righteousness was simply because that was impossible. 2. The Scripture 
represented men as all shut up to the ubtaining of the blessing simply by faith. “ How- 
beit the Scripture hath shut up all things under sin, that the promise by faith in Jesus 
Christ might be given to them that believe.” Scripture is not the Law, but rather that 
which holds Law and promise in harmony. The oftice ascribed to Scripture is peculiar, 
It has placed, not only all men but all things (man’s surroundings) under sin as gaoler. 
In this imprisonment there was not finality On the contrary, it was with the view of 
magnifying the promise. Not by doing the Law, but by believing the promise, is the 
blessing attained. As the promise was made good to Jesus Christ, and was thus identi- 
fied with him, faith in him, as obtaining the blessing for us, has become the simple and 
all-sufficient principle of the religious lile—R. F, 


Vers. 23—-29.—Before and after faith, I. BeForm FAITH caNE. “But before 
faith came.” The faith which is here brought into prominence is that which was 
historically manifested when Christ came. Faith existed before Christianity, as is 
evident from the eleventh of Hebrews. There was trust in the Divine word. But the 
attitude toward Christ was that of expectancy. ‘ We who had before hoped in Christ,” 


* 
1 


et. 111, 1—29,] THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 167 


It had been faith along with the observance of the Mosaic Law. But when the gospel 
of salvation was preached, it was faith, pure and simple, on Christ. 1. Zhe stale of 
God’s people under the Law. “ We were kept in ward under the Law, shut up.” They 
were wards of the Law. A strict watch was kept over them, as those who could not 
manage themselves. This went the length of their being in custody. (1) There were 
manifold restrictions. The limits were greatly narrowed within which they were free 
to act. Even their common life was encompassed with ceremonial regulations. How- 
ever good these were, there was this to be said, that they were outwardly imposed. 
Ard they had the effect of multiplying the occasions of offence. They made many 
things sins which were not sins in themselves, There was thus a heavy pressure laid 
on the life. The moral Law, too, came in with its oppressive “Thou shalt not.” (2) 
There was the feeling of helplessness produced, The Law represented the Divine require- 
ment. As a revelation of what God required, it raised a very high ideal. God was to 
be loved with the whole soul, and a man’s neighbour as himself. But at the same time, 
it did not bring with it strength for the attainment of this ideal. It, therefore, soine- 
times even stimulated the sinful life. It excited desires which it had not power to 
quell, And thus it worked towards despondency. (8) There was the feeling of guilt 
produced. The Law revealed what ought to have been attained; but, revealing at the 
same time the wide distance between the idcal raised and the actual attainment, instead 
of being a witness of its high ends as accomplished, it became an accuser. (4) There 
were appeals to fears. Its “Thou shalt not” was accompanied with a threat. There 
was a curse pronounced on the breaking of every one of its requirements. (5) There 
was the feeling of condemnation produced. The Law, in showing them their guilt, 
showed them also to be condemned sinners, actually lying under the curse, Thus the 
outcome of its working was the eliciting of the cry, “Ὁ wretched man that I am, who 
shall deliver me out of the body of this death?” 2. The goal intended for them, 
“Unto the faith which should afterwards be revealed.” It is to be remembered that 
the Law existed alongside of the promise, to which it was simply an addition. It is to 
be remembered, also, that the ceremonial part of the Law had promise largely mixed up 
with it, many of the types being really promises, And, so far as the promise was con- 
cerned, there could be, in the religious life of those times, a feeling of liberty in the 
enjoyment of forgiveness and in the hope of the attainment of their ideal. There was 
grace, too, in the heart of the Law. It was a disciplinary institution, preparatory to 
Christianity. It was with a view to the people of God being brought into a higher 
state, into the freer relation of faith, which was to be revealed when Christ came. 
Illustration. “So that the Law hath been our tutor to bring us unto Christ, that we 
might be justified by faith.” The pedagogue (formerly translated “ schoolmaster,” now 
“tutor”) was one who got his name from leading the child to school. He had the responsible 
office of superintending the education of the child, and also his morals and manners. He 
had strictly to regulate and watch over the employments and deportment of the child, 
and he was armed with the power of punishment. The pedagogic function is what 
belongs to every parent. He has himself or by deputy to educate his child, physically, 
intellectually, morally, and spiritually. The restrictions he has to lay on the employ- 
ment of his time, thoughts, eneryies, are not agreeable to him, but they are with a view 
to his being of age. 1116 Law is thus laid upon him that it may be ultimately within 
him, and that he may do that which is right and proper with no sense of bondage. 
The people of God were under the Law as under a pedasogue. They were treated as 
children, and had their duty minutely prescribed to them and their fears appealed to, 
This produced a sense of bondage, but it was that by-and-by they might the better 
welcome Christ and those higher influences he was to bring with him. ‘The leeling of 
guilt and condemnation which the Law produced was that Christ might be longed for in 
his justifying merit to be received through faith. 

Il. Now THAT FAITH Is coms. “ But now that faith is come.” 1. Christian 
emancipation. ‘“ We are no longer under a tutor.” We are no longer under the dis- 
sipline of the Mosaic institution, We do not need rules outwardly imposed on us, now 
that the higher Christian influences are operative in us, We are absolutely freed from 
the ceremonial Law, which received its fulfilment in Christ. The moral Law could never 
be called Mosaic, rather it was that round which the whole Mosaic institution waa 
gathered, Weare freed from it 88 the ground of our justification or condemnation. Bus 


168 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. (cu. m1. 1—29. 


it is still needed to hold up before us higher ideas of righteousness, . It is still needed 
to work in us deeper conviction of sin. It is still needed to keep us to the true source 
of our security. But what thus disciplines us, is the Law as it has received its highest 
exhibition in the cross of Christ. From it, as connected with the Mosaic institution, 
we are freed. 2. Christian sonship, (1) The relation described. ‘“ For ye are all sons 
of God.” Gentiles as well as‘Jews are sons of God. We are not in the relation of 
slaves, without any feeling of freedom. Neither are we in the relation of servants, with 
such freedom as belongs to them. But we are in the freest relation of sons of God. 
Neither are we mere children, but we are sons tliat have come of age. That does not 
mean that we are to leave our Father’s house, “ The servant goeth away; the son abideth 
ever.” We are independent, not in being liberated from our Father’s control, but in 
having our Father’s will so much within our heart that we act according to it without 
the need of rules being imposed on us. (2) How the relation is formed. ‘“ Through 
faith.” We are not sons of God by virtue of our living in a Christian land. Multi- 
tudinism is alien to Christianity. We cannot be Christians merely in the mass, The 
state, whatever it has to do with religion, cannot relieve us of the responsibility of 
acting for ourselves. Weare not sons of God by virtue of our connection with godly 
parents, There is a certain law of heredity in religion. “The unfeigned faith that is in 
thee; which dwelt first in thy grandmother Lois, and thy mother Eunice; and, I am 
persuaded, in thee also.” The promise is to us and to our children; therefore there is 
encouragement to use the means. Still, all that parents can do is to act upon their 
children by good advice and example and prayer. ‘lhey cannot relieve their children, 
any more than the state its subjects, of the responsibility of thinking and acting for 
themselves. We are not sons of God by virtue of our having been baptized. Baptism, 
as we shall presently see, is an important Christian rite, It should be attended with 
regenerating grace. Only, when there is no evidence of regeneration in the life, it is 
vain to be satisfied with baptism. It should be used simply as an argument for taking 
action in accordance with it. We are not sons of God by virtue of our being members 
of a Christian Church. There has been, in this case, examination by a representative 
of the Church, and admission has been granted; but this is not to be rested upon. 
Man is not the lord of our conscience. Every one must judge for himself as to the 
evidences of his being a child of God. And if he was not a child of God before 
admission, the fact of his admission will not make him one. He is just presumabiy 
what he was before. The Church has no magical virtue, It can assist men in becoming 
children of God, but it cannot do more than assist. And when Church connection does 
not benefit, it will certainly add to condemnation. But we are sons of God through 
faith. This is the instrument by which we become sons of God. We take action for 
ourselves. Our souls lay hold upon Christ. We place our dependence on his finished 
work, and we are not only justified, but are adopted into the family of God. (8) Causal 
element in which our sonship subsists. “In Christ Jesus.” Christ alone cau make us 
sons of God. Our rulers cannot make us sons of God. Our parents cannot make us 
sons of God. Arite like baptism cannot make us sons of God. Even the Church 
cannot make us sons of God. Christ alone.can. He is not the means, but the efficient 
cause. It is in him that our sonship is originated and is maintained. (4) Sign of our 
sonship. “ For as many of you as were baptized into Christ did put on Christ.” By 
insisting on faith the apostle has supplied a counteractive to superstitious ideas of 
vaptism. But this shows how much importance he attached to it. Baptized into 
Christ, they did put on Christ. And from the connection it is to be understood that 
they so put on Christ in baptism as to stand in the same relation tv God in which 
Christ stanas to God. 8, Christian equality. (1) What it ts. It sometimes matters 
very essentially in whose bands is the advocacy of a doctrine. In the hands of the 
communists, who have the modern intellectual activity without any hold upon the 
everlasting principles of religion, there is no more dangerous doctrine than that of 
equality, As used by them, it would lead to complete anarchy, disturbing altogether 
the present order and putting no stable order in its stead. It is already, in one or other 
of its phases, producing a feeling of insecurity among the supporters of old institutions, 
extending to that of monarchy. Paul, also, is an advocate of equality; but he waa 
held by everlasting truth and love, And, in his hands, equality is a safe doctrine, whi 

would indeed be the salvation of society, curing present canker and alienation, and 


on. 111, 1—29,] THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 168 


Introducing a blessed order such as would realize the golden age. As men we are 
essentially equal. ‘‘ God hath made of one blood all nations of men that dwell upon the 
earth.” We lay aside this and that and all the other unlikenesses, till we come to 
that which refuses to be taken away. And this, we say, is man, the same as to kind 
under all conditions. The apostle pointed to the everlasting common humanity, when 
he quoted to the Athenians the words, “ For we are also his offspring.’ Adam, the 
source of humapity, is declared to be the son of God, ze. by constitution. ‘ Which 
was the son of Adam, which was the son of God.” What Christianity does is, not to 
ald a new element of sonship to our constitution, but to bring us back into the reality 
and forward into the full flood of this relationship. It is after establishing our sonship 
in Christ that Paul proceeds here to lay down his doctrine of Christian equality. And by 
iv he means that, in regard to this most essential element, there are no classes, no dis- 
tinctions. There are not some in the position of superiors and others in the position 
of inferiors, but all are placed on the same platform, and that the highest platform of 
sonship. All are sons of God, therefore all are equal, (2) Specimens of earthly dis- 
tinctions which are obliterated in Christ. ‘There can be neither Jew nor Greek.” The 
Greek is the weaker member in this coupling, but he was by no means to be despised. 
As there was greater natural inventiveness among the descendants of Cain than among 
the descendants of Seth, so there was greater intellectal force and culture among the 
Greeks than among the Jews. Not to speak of their art, their poetry, their philosophy, 
their language itself, slowly formed, was a magnificent product of mind. Significant of 
a widespread Greek influence, that language had mastered’ even the Jews. The mob 
at Jerusalem were prepared to hear a Greek oration from Paul, only they gave the 
more silence when he spoke in the Jewish vernacular. And, what was more, the Greek 
language was chosen by God as the medium of conveying the Christian revelation. And 
yet the Jew, thus inferior, was of more consequence than the Greek. In the wise 
purposes of God, which looked beyond one nation, the Jew was raised to very high 
religious privilege, and any Greek could only share in the same privilege by being 
naturalized as a Jew. But what was Jewish was at best only external and subject to 
removal, and was actually removed when the Divine purposes were matured. And 
now, in and through Christ, the universal Mediator, the Gentile is as near and dear to 
God as is the Jew. Weare so much accustomed to the Gentile being in Christian privilege 
that it is more to the point now to say that the Jew is as near and dear to God as is the 
Gentile. Under Christianity there is no privileged nation. In Colossians it is said that 
there is neither barbarian nor Scythian in Christ. The Scythians were those who 
appeared barbarians to the barbarians. In Christ there is no barbarian far down in the 
scale of civilization, There is not even the Scythian, down at the very bottom and 
only too readily despised by the despised. Christ does not belong to the white skin; 
but even under the black skin and crisp hair aud imperfect configuration there may 
be the same consciousness of sonship that the finest of Europeans has, in Christ There 
is a common ground, upon which all peoples and nations and tribes can meet, deep down 
below all distinctions of colour and figure and civilization, which thus appear as 
unessential. ‘There can be neither bond nor free.” There can be no greater diversity 
in social position than between the bondman and the freeman. It may be said to be 
infinite ; for the freeman has rights—rights to bestow his labour where he thinks he can 
get most for it, rights to demand redress if he thinks himself injured, to be judged if 
he is complained of. But the bondman has no rights, being classed as a chattel. Cato, 
censor-general of morals, a Roman more virtuous than the Romans, gives written advice 
to the farmers “to sell worn-out iron implements, old slaves, sick slaves, and other odds 
and ends that have no further use on the farm!” But, though thus put out of the ranks 
and trampled upon by men, he could be conscious in his own mind of his rights as a 
man, and, what availed more, through the gospel of the grace of God preached to and 
received by him, he, a man, the equal at bottom of his master and of that master’s 
master, the august Casar,—he could be ranked as a son of God, without any super- 
added badge of inferiority, as much a son of God as Paul himself. There is a most 
touching, most beautiful exemplification of this in Paul’s brief Epistle to Philemon. 
Paul takes as much interest in Onesimus, a runaway slave, converted by him at Rome, 
as though he had been a noble born. He calls him his very heart, and, more than a 
servant, even a brother beloved to Philemon, both in the flesh and in the Lord, The 


170 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. (ox. πι. 1—29, 


gap between men in respect of social standing, between the sovereign and the common 
subject of the realm, between the nobleman and the peasant, between the rich and the 
poor, between master and servant, somctimes so impresses us that we do not think of 
their being equal at all, they seem beings of a different order; but in Christ there is no 
difference; there is a great absolute equality before God, who is no respecter of persons, 
and the man with a Christian heart under a rough exterior is full brother to the Chris- 
tian gentleman, and the servant-girl who loves her Bible is of as much account as her 
Christian mistress, Paul says to slaves, wanting to be set free, ‘‘ For he that is called 
in the Lord, being a servant, is the Lord’s freeman; likewise also he that is called, being 
free, is Christ’s servant.” It has been made out of this, not that there are no conditions 
in Christ, but, what also puts us on an equality, that all conditions are possessed in 
Christ. “If a man is a slave, he may be free in Christ. If free, he may have the joy 
of utter submission to an absolute master in Christ. If you and I are lonely, we may 
feel all the delizhts of suciety by union with him. If surrounded and distracted- by 
companionship, and seeking for seclusion, we may get all the peace of perfect privacy 
iu fellowship with him. If we are rich, and sometimes think that we were in a position 
of less temptation if we were poorer, we may find all the blessings for which we some- 
times crave puverty in communion with him. If we are poor, and fancy that if we 
had a little more, just to lift us above the grinding, carking care of to-day, and the 
anxiety of to-morrow, we should be happier, we may find all tranquillity in him.” 
“There can be no male and female.” This distinction in sex has more foundation in 
nature than the distinction of men by nationality or by their social standing. “ Male 
and female created he them.” In the resurrection, the distinction, in its physical 
aspect, will have no place; but now it reigns, and forms an agreeable contrast in 
humanity. But it also disappears in the lower ground of a ccmmon sonship. There 
is dauchterhood spoken of in that passage, “ Ye shall be my sons and daughters, saith the 
Lord Almighty ;” but generally it is a filial standing, without any distinction of sex, 
that is indicated. ‘ And, after all, women are men. ‘Their relation with God is an 
immediate one. They stand in exactly the same position with regard to him as man; 
and, in this supreme point of view, the equality of the sexes is perfect, as is that 
between the rich aud the poor, the powerful and the weak. The two sexes are only the 
two forms, or two functions, of our common humanity, the members of which are all 
called to serve and glorify God, some as men, others as women. ‘Lhe service of God is 
the substance, the rest is only the mode or the accident. Now, we fully believe that 
God has made the woman for the man, in that he has dualized man, for whom it was 
not good to be alone, and who would have been alone in a moral sense, and in that sense 
more especially, with a being exactly similar and perfectly equal to himself; but we 
cannot, we must not, imagine that the whole feminine sex has been called out of 
nothingness into being, merely to complete the existence of individuals of the other 
sex. ‘The proposition, “the woman was made for the man,” has, therefore, for counter- 
poise and complement, another propusition—the woman has been created for herseif, or, 
better still, “man and woman both have been created for God.” Inferences, We are to 
rejuice most in that wherein we are equal. It is not external advantages or points of 
superiority over others that can afford any man the deepest, purest joy. If he is vain 
of these, and allows them prevalence iu his thoughts, he will certainly forfeit his joy. 
When the seventy returned from their missionary tour, they were flushed with the joy 
of a new-found power over devils: “ Lord, even the devils are subject unto us, through 
thy Name.” Christ directed them to the true source of joy: “ Notwithstanding in this 
rejoice not, that the spirits are subject unto you, but rather rejoice that your nameg are 
written in heaven.” ‘lbat God numbers us among his children—that is the humble, 
equalizing element in our joy. .1 ts not implied that inequalities are to be repudiuted. 
There are inequalities in the providence of God, mainly {or purposes of trial; and we 
are not to find fault with them. ‘Brethren, let every man, wherein he is called, 
therein abide with God.” The instance in point was the converted slave, who, when 
he came to the knowledge of Christ, was not to go away and demand a change of con- 
dition; but if it was the will of God that he should still remain in slavery, he was to 
abide therein with God, content to enjoy that freedom with which Christ had made him 
free. ‘The same consideration might lead a man not to shirk, like Jonah, but to take a 
very high position, for which, perhaps, he had no catural liking, but to which he felt 


cH. 11. 1—29.] THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 171 


that he was called by a highcr will. But, whatever the position intended for us, we ate 
to accept of it as an expression of the will of God; and, if we see the same will in the 
stations which others occupy, that will keep us right in the midst of inequalities. It 
has been remarked “that a great part of the duties of life are based, and must be, oa 
the fact that men are unequal; some inferior, some superior ; some elected to power and 
leadership, and some to homage and trust. Everything here will depend on how much 
of personal quality and soul-force different men may have for their endowments; how 
much reason, conscience, love, will, vision, music, science, and worship they have room 
for; and then it will be seen what precedences they are to yield, what deferences to pay, 
or what patronages to assume, what forward conditions to support. Thus far the true 
beauty of life will consist in a due observance of inequalities; every man consenting to 
be himself, and let everybody else be himself too, in his own true measure.” There are 
duties founded upon our equality as Christians, ‘“ Whosoever shall give to drink unto 
one of these little ones a cup of cold water only, in the name of a disciple, verily, I say 
unto you, he shall in no wise lose his reward.” One might perform the same litile act 
from considerations of humanity, but it is the performing it from considerations of 
discipleship that receives the commendation of Christ. There is a whole tier of virtues 
rising up here, for which there is required the greatest delicacy, and which are really of 
the finest mould. They are such as will be suggested by the names, Christian courtesy, 
Christian consideration, and the like. Here is culture, accomplishment, for any Chris- 
tian lady or Christian gentleman. There have none of us learned enough to show con- 
sideration all round the Christian circle because of sonship and equality in Christ, 
Some have a long, hard lesson to learn here, who, perhaps, little imagine it. The 
inequalities of Providence form their peculiar temptation. They naturally like to 
associate with persons of their own tastes aud manncrs, and, perhaps, they are so accus- 
tomed to regard men because they are rich, because they are influential, that they cannot 
bring their minds to respect a man simply because he is a Christian. Now, how 
becotming it is that those who are unequally placed in providence should meet freely 
together on the ground of an equality in the Divine covenant! It would let the rich 
feel more potently that wealth and station and culture are on the outside; and it would 
let the poor see that honesty and piety are not confined tothem. Whatever opportunities 
for meeting may be enjoyed in the common walks of life, there is a special meeting- 
ground afforded for all classes in the Church. Here the rich and the poor meet together ; 
the Lord is the Maker of them all, The Church is the place where most of all we should 
be helped to understand and to feel the levelling influence of Christian love, and to 
value and to honour the Christian under all distinctions. There ts an equalizing process 
going on under Christian influences. If we take the Jew and the Greck as bringing 
before us national distinctions, there is better feeling between nations than there once 
was. A Christian in a nation sees and feels that in Christ all nations are one, that there 
is a common salvation for them, and that the loss of one is really the loss of all. If 
there is a considerable body of Christians in each nation, especially known, in some 
degree, to one another, that will be the strongest counteractive ‘to hostile feeling; and 
it will only be in seasons of great national excitement that these will be borne down, 
and, perhaps, themselves carried away, by the national impulse, Certainly, in calm 
moments there is a growing conviction that the true and best condition to be sought 
after is that which Christianity puts before us, and gives us reasou to hope for—a 
brotherhood of nations, free from selfishness and intrigue, in which nation shall not lift 
up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more. The second distinction 
between bond and free in that particular form is very nearly obliterated. Although 
Christianity did not preach revolution, did not incite to a rising of the slaves against 
their masters, yet it has led indirectly to the abolition of slavery. When it represented 
even slaves as some of them invested with the privileges of sonship in Christ, in the 
logic of ever.ts the conclusion was sure to follow, that their rights as men could not justly 
be withheld from them. The poor African race has been the last to know the elevating, 
equalizing power of Christianity ; and some think that they may be gradually matured 
to be the equals of Europeans in civilization, having great capacities of vision, of 
song, and of worship. There will be an equalizing even in that which communists 
have an eye to—material condition. Only this is to be got at, not by any flashy com- 
munistic scheme, but by Christianity having more the moulding of the conditions of 


172 THE EPIStLE ΤῸ THE GALATIANS, (oH. κι. 1—29, 


trade and commerce, and also more the moulding of the individual character. The last 
distinction between male and female has been materially changed by Christianity. Her 
equality before God was a lever power which could not but raise woman out of that 
degradation into which man’s sin had brought her. We see the process going on in 
India which has taken place in many nations, zenana agencies especially spreading 
influences which must eventually liberate. Zhe most real inequality is that which is 
produced by sin, If we are equal iu sonship, let us also be equal in fidelity. (3) Ground 
of our Christian equality. “ For ye all are one man in Christ Jesus. And if ye are 
Christ’s, then are ye Abraham’s sced, heirs according to promise.” It has already been 
implied that we are equal because of our sonship in Christ. That it may be placed 
beyond doubt, it is explicitly stated that we are equal because of what we are in Christ. 
And we are in Christ in such a way that, because he is Abraham’s seed, we are 
Abraham’s seed too. And, as Abraham’s seed, we are heirs according te the tenor 
of the promise. This heirship he proceeds to connect with sonship. Se that the 
teaching is that our equality is based on our sonship in Christ.—R. F. 


Ver. 1.—Bewitched. Here, it is said, the doctrinal section of the Epistle begins, 
the preceding section being historical and the concluding section hortatory. But how 
unlike this is to a cold abstract theological argument the opening words clearly show. 
St. Paul cares little for mere speculations of divinity. His object is practical, personal, 
earnest. Thus he expostulates rather than argues, and appeals to experience for con- 
firmation. He is not simply shocked at a heresy; he is grieved and hurt at the 
unfaithfulness, the weakness, the folly of his hearers, All error that leads us away 
from Christ is sad and shameful. 

I, THe FIRST OBJECT OF THE TRUE PREACHER OF THE GOSPEL IS TO SET FORTH CHRIST 
CRUCIFIED. 1. He preaches Christ. Christ is Christianity. ‘lo know him is to know 
all. St. Paul was most anxious to make manifest the person and character and life of 
Christ. To demonstrate a system of doctrine or to expound a “ plan of salvation ” 
was not his method of preaching the gospel. Only show men Christ; that was enough. 
Even doctrinal errors would melt and vanish before that vision, 2. He preaches the 
crucified Christ. A crucified Christ was a King humiliated, a Lord slain; yet herein 
lay the essence of St. Paul’s gospel. We see Christ, not only as a beautiful character, 
a great Teacher, or a wise Reformer; we see him dying—revealing thus his faithfulness, 
his purity, his love, suffering for us, sacrificed for us. 8. He preaches Christ by 
setting him forth openly. St. Paul says that Christ was “ placarded ” before the eyes of 
the Galatians. This suggests a vivid, pictorial style of language united to an energetic, 
almost dramatic, force of expression. The whole effort of the apostle was to make his 
hearers see Christ. No doubt the method was in some respects specially adapted to the 
Celtic excitability and the semi-barbarous condition of the Galatians, and was in form 
very different from the apostle’s manner of speaking to the cultured Athenians on the 
Areopagus. Yet to the Greeks at Corinth he says he determined to know nothing 
among them “save Jesus Christ, and him crucified.” It is to be feared that of late the 
pulpit has lost weight through abandoning descriptive for argumentative preaching, in 
deference to the supposed higher intelligence of the age, but in defiance of the natural 
disinclination of average men for reasoning and of their susceptibility to visual imagi- 
nation. Whatever may be said as to the method of doing it, it is plain that what is 
most wanted for the man of culture, as much as for the illiterate man, is not to under- 
stand Christian theology, but to see Christ. 

11. ΤΉΒΥ WHO HAVE ONCE SEEN CHRIST ORUCIFIED SET FORTH OPENLY MUST BE 
“ BEWITCHED ” IF THEY EVER FORSAKE HIM. 1, They must have seen him. The vision 
by the hearer may be missed through no fault of the preacher. There must be the eyea 
to see. Cattle that see only the grass at their feet will not be impressed by the grandest 
scene of crag and moor. They who see Christ to any effect must see him spiritually, 
not merely as the crowd about the cross saw his bodily agony, but as St. Paul set forth 
the great, awful fact. 2. Such a vision of Christ will produce a profound impression. 
No one who saw the sea for the first time—really saw it—returned home the same 
man. There are sivhts that transform. Sinking deep into our hearts, they saturate 
our whole nature and haunt our memories for ever. Such is a true vision of Christ 
crucified. At the sight of the cross, Christian lost his burden, never to recovers it. The 


cu, τπ|. 1—29.] THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 173 


Divine majesty of sorrow and love that illumines this vision, once possessing a man’s soul, 
should dwell with him for ever. 3, To forsake Christ alter such a vision is only possible 
through some strange mulign influence. St. Paul compares it to the blighting effect of 
the evil eye. To turn to the Lord from such a gracious sight as to a hiyher and better 
thing is indeed most unaccountable, If anything allures us from Christ after we have 
once truly seen him, it must be an irrational influence to which we weakly succumb, 
for no reasonable attraction can be greater than the power with which, when once lifted 
ap before them, he draws all men to himself—W. F. A, 


Vers. 2—5.—Going back. In expostulating with the Galatians for forsaking grace 
for Law, St. Paul apyeals to their own experience. He is not expounding the gospel for 
the first time to strangers; he is arguing with Christians who know its power. His 
argument applies to all who turn aside from the early life of faith and grace to any 
supposed improvement of human discipline. Their own experience rises up in 
condemnation of them, ‘Three proofs of the foolishness of such a course are here 

iven. 
8 I. THis cOURSE REVERSES THE NATURAL ORDER OF PROGRESS. It is absurd to think 
of being perfected in the flesh after having begun in the Spirit. These two, the flesh 
and the Spirit, correspond in our experience to the two methods—by Law and by grace 
through faith. It is the weakness of Law that it is external, and governs only external 
acts, that it directs the flesh, the outer life, but infuses no inward spiritual life. Grace 
does not concern itself directly with such outward acts. It is a spiritual inspiration, 
and faith is a spiritual act. Now, the natural progress is from the outward to the 
inward. We sce this in our personal experience. Children first learn to obey direct 
commands, and gradually learn principles of right conduct, until conscience takes the 
place of external authority, With the race the same progress holds good. Larlier 
forms of religion are more external. The latest is the most spiritual. ‘To turn away 
from the spiritual is not merely to go back; it is to revert to a more improper method. 
. Spiritual religion is the highest religion, Nothing can exceed the power of faith and 
bove and inward grace. If these influences are slow in ripening the perfect character, 
it is absurd to think of hastening the result. by reverting to weaker influences of Law 
gad formal rules. 

II. THis coURSE STULTIFIES THE PAST ENDURANCE OF PERSECUTION. (Ver. 4.) St. 
Paul’s allusion implies that the Galatians had been persecuted—as we know other 
Churches had been—at the instigation of the Jews. If the Jewish Law were the highest 
method of righteousness, persecution provoked by slighting or opposing it must have 
been endured for nothing. This was an argumentum ad hominem. We have to make 
sacrifices in other ways if we are faithful to spiritual religion. We are also appealed to 
by the memories of our fathers, who testified to spiritual liberty at the rack and the 
stake. When we play with the broken chains which they cast off, and even forge them 
afresh by submitting to the revival of old formalities and superstitions, the spirits of 
those martyred heroes of Protestantism rise up to rebuke us, Or docs the most noble 

age of England’s history describe only a huge, quixotic delusion ? 

III. Tuts course coNTRADICTS THE EVIDENCE AFFORDED BY THE POWER THAT FLOWS 
FROM SPIRITUAL GRACE. (Ver. 5.) St. Paul and other men endued with the Spirit 
wrought miracles. The most rigid follower of the Law could not do so. But more 
than power over material things grew out of the grace of the Spirit. The conquests of 
the gospel flowed from faith and spiritual gifts. ‘The men of formal devotion never 
turned the world upside down. There is no fire in Law. The newcreation of the world 
only follows spiritual activity. It is the work of the men of faith. “By their fruits 
ye shall know them.” Whatever fascination there may be in religions of strict rules 
and rigid ordinances, we find that it is the free spiritual energy of unfettered souls that 
moves the hearts of others. This religion of faith and grace which possesses the most 
Divine power must be for us the highest and best.—W. Εν A. 


Vers, 6—9.—The faith and blesstng of Abraham. Not only, says the apostle, did 
you begin the Christian life in faith, but even Abraham, whom the Jews reverence as 
their great exemplar, and whose heir they profess to be, even he was justified by faith ; 
and therefore they who enjoy his blessing are the possessors of the same faith. 


174 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, (cx. ux. 1—29. 


I. ABRAHAM WAS A MAN OF FaITs. He knew nothing of the Levitical Law. He 
walked by faith. His faith was not assent to a creed. Nor was it an intelligent 
conviction of any “ plan of salvation ” obtained by means of a miraculous foresight of 
the atonement to be accomplished many centuries later in the sacrifice of Christ. It 
was a grand, simple trust in God. It was shown in his forsaking the idols of his 
forefathers and worshipping the one spiritual God, in his leaving his home and going he 
knew not whither in obedience to a Divine voice, in his willingness to sacrifice his son, 
in his hope of a future inheritance. Such a faith is personal reliance, leading to active 
obedience and encouraged by confident anticipation, Abraham’s faith is the model 
faith for us. For us faith is to rely upon Christ, to be loyal to Christ, to hope in Christ, 
and also to accept the fuller revelations of truth which Christ opens up te us as 
Abraham accepted the Divine voices vouchsafed to him. For the contents of faith 
will vary according to our light, The spirit of it, however, must be always the 
same. 

II. ABRAHAM’S FAITH WAS REOKONED TO HIM FOR RIGHTEOUSNESS. The special 
point in Abraham’s character was not his holiness, but his faith. God’s favour flowed to 
him through this channel. It was the way through which he, though imperfect and 
sinful, as are all the sons of Adam, was called to the privileged place of a righteous man. 
This is recorded of him in the sacred history (Gen. xv. 6), and therefore should be 
admitted by all Jews. So much for St. Paul’s special argument. For us the impor- 
taut lesson is that, if so famous a saint, living even under the older religion, was 
accepted through faith, how much more apparent is it that faith is necessary for us! 
The reasons for relying on faith are (1) Aéstorical—faith justified Abraham, therefore it 
will justify us; (2) theoloyical—faith brings us into living fellowship with God, and so 
opeus our hearts to receive the forgiveness that puts us in the position of righteous 
men; and (3) mvral—faith is the security for the future growth of righteousness, with 
the first effort of faith the first seed-crace of righteousness is sown. 

III. Participation In ABRAHAM’S FAITH IS THE CONDITION OF PARTICIPATION ΙΝ 
ABRAHAM’sS BLESSING. Jews claimed the blessing by birthright. Jewish Christians. 
offered it to the Gentiles on condition of their becoming as Jews. Both were wrong. 
Abraham received his blessing through his faith. It was necessarily conditioned by 
faith. Only men of faith could have it. Therefore Jews who lost faith lost the 
blessing. But all men of faith are spiritual sons of Abraham. Therefore all nations 
are blessed in Abraham just in proportion as they have a similar faith. Indeed, the 
finest legacy left by the patriarch was his faith. Canaan came and went. Spiritual 
blessings such as faith includes are eternal—W F. A. 


Ver. 18.—The curse of the Law and the curse of the cross. I. Toe Law BRINGS A 
curse, It is not itself a curse, though it isa heavy burden. It was not sent for the 
purpose of injuring us, nor, rightly obeyed, would it cause any evil to fall upon us. It 
is the breach of the Law that is followed by the curse, But we have all broken the 
Law. So long, then, as we continue to live under the Law the curse hangs over us. 
Instead of hankering after a religion of Law, as the Galatians were doing, we should 
regard it with horror as for us sinners only a prelude to a fearful doom. The curse is 
the wrath of God, banishment from God, death. 

II. CurisT REDEEMS FROM THIS cuRSE ‘This great truth implies three things, 1. 
Christians are set frec from the curse of the Law, (1) by the free forgiveness that stays 
the curse from falling on those who have incurred it in transgressing the Law; and 
(2) by removal from the dominion of Law for the future, so that its requirements no 
Jonger apply, and principles of love resulting from grace have full sway. Obligations 
to righteousness are not thereby diminished, but increased; the motive for fulfilling 
them, however, is no longer the terror of a curse, but the spontaneous devotion of love. 
2. This liberation is effected by Christ. We cannot fling off the yoke of Law nor 
dispel the curse. If done at all it must be done by One mightier than us. Hence the 
need of a Saviour. The gospel proclaims, not only deliverance, but a Christ who 
accomplishes it. 8. The deliverance is at a cost. It is redemption, The cost is 
Christ’s endurance of a curse. 

III. Curist surFERED THE CURSE OF THE cross. He was not cursed of God. It is 
significant that that expression is omitted in the quotation from the Old Testament 


6B, itt, 1-29. THE EPISTLE To Tih GALATLANS, 176 


(see Deut. xxi. 23). We have no evidence of any mysterious spiritual curse falling 
upon Christ. On the contrary, we are told in what the curse consisted. It was the 
endurance of crucifixion itself. That was a death so cruel, so horrible, so full of shame, 
that to suffer it was to undergo a very curse, Christ was crucified, and therefore the 
curse fell upon him. Moreover, this curse is very directly connected with the breach 
of the Law by us. 1. Death is the penalty of transgression. Christ never deserved 
this penalty of violated Law, yet, being a man and mortal, he suffered the fate of fallen 
men. 2. It was man’s wickedness, i.e. nothing else than man’s violation of God’s Law, 
that led to man’s rejection of Christ and to Christ’s death. The world flung its curse 
on Christ. By a wonderful act of infinite mercy that act of hellish wickedness is 
made the means through which the world is freed from the curse of its own sins, 

IV. Curist’s ENDURANCE OF THE OURSE OF THE CROSS LIBERATES US FROM THE OURSE 
or THE Law. He frecly endured the curse. He endured it for our sakes. He became 
“a curse for us.” 1. His endurance of the curse gave weight to his propitiatory sacrifice 
of himself. This was the most extreme surrender of himself to God in meek submission. 
As our Representative, he thus obtained for us Divine favour and grace of forgiveness in 
answer to that most powerful intercession, the giving of himself to a death that was 
a very curse 1ather than abandon his saving work. 2, Christ’s endurance of the curse 
for us is the grand inducement for us to leave the “beggarly elements” of Law and 
devote ourselves in faith and love to him who died for us.—W. F. A. 


Ver. 17.—The everlasting covenant. I. DivINE GRACE I8 PLEDGED BY COVENANT, 
The grace here referred to is offered to Abraham and through him to all nations 
(Gen. xii. 1—3). Thus offered in covenant, it is (1) definitely p:omised by God, (2) 
with the confirmation of an oath, (3) on condition, however, of our faith. Weare not 
left to speculate about the grace of God as a possibility; it is distinctly revealed. Nor 
are we in doubt as to its permanence; it is pledged for the future. 

ΤΙ. THe covenant or DIvinE GRACE Is ETERNAL, 1, As a revelation of truth it is 
eternal. ‘Truth does not vary with time. When once a genuine truth has been seen, 
no later knowledge of another truth can set it aside. The discovery of Australia did 
not invalidate the earlier discovery of America. 2. Asa declaration of God’s will it is 
eternal. God does not vacillate, like a fickle, capricious despot. He is constancy itself. 
What he wills now he wills for ever. 3. As a pledge of God’s honour it is eternal. 
It is in infinite condescension to our weakness that God makes us a promise. We 
ought to be able to rely on his love and goodness alone. But since he has mercifully 
stooped to encourage us in our poor faith by promise and pledge, herein lies the greater 
assurance to us of his changeless grace, : 

TII. THE cOVENANT OF GRACE IS MORE ANCIENT THAN THE CURSE OF THE Law. The 
Judaizers claim precedence for the Law over the gospel because of its greater antiquity. 
But St. Paul reminds them that the promise on which the gospel is founded is a still 
mfore ancient Divine word. Grace precedes wrath; love is anterior to Law. The first 
vision of God is a revelation of loving-kindness. The weight and dignity of hoary age 
are with the blessings of God’s goodness, A shallow research discovers Law; dig 
deeper, penetrate further, and you find love. 

IV. Later Divine UTTERANCES MAY OBSCURE BUT CANNOT ABOLISH THE COVENANT 
or grace. 1. They may obscure it. The severity of the Law appeared to hide the 
gracious promise to Abraham. Dark dispensations of Providence sometimes come 
between us and God’s love. We cannot reconcile the harder with the more pleasing 
utterances of Scripture, Stern voices sometimes repel us when we are hungering for 
gentle voices tc comfort, 2, Nevertheless, these later revelations do not nullify the 
earlier promises. The grace is still undiminished, though for a time it 1s beyond our gaze 
and grasp. Presently it will break out in more than its pristine splendour, as the sun 
shines more brightly than ever after it has been hidden by a brief summer shower, 
The purpose of grace both precedes and outlives the threatenings of Law. The 
thunders of Sinai are but an interlude between the promise of love at Bethel and its 
fulfilment at Bethlehem.—W. F. A. : 

Ver. 19.—The object of the Law. The Law, we are told, was “added because of 
transgressions.” This cannot mean that it was instituted to restrain transgressions— 


196 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. [σπ. π|. 1—29, 


the normal object of Law—since that assertion would be opposed to the main drift of 
the apostle’s argument; nor can it signify simply that the Law was added to reveal 
transgressions, or this would be more directly stated; nor certainly can it mean that 
the Law was intended to produce transgressions, to serve as an instrument of sin— 
a purpose which would be more diabolical than Divine. Probably St. Paul’s meaning 
is that the Law was intended to convert sins into transgressions; 1.6. to give to 
amorphous and almost unconscious wickedness a definite form, so that it could be 
seen, handled, chastised, and cured (Rom. vii. 8, 9). 

1. Srv 18 NATURALLY oBscURE. It spreads through the soul as a rank malaria, felt in 
its evil effects, but not clearly seen and known, We feel ourselves to be ailing, but 
cannot lay our fingers upon the seat of the disease. Just in proportion to its internal 
character it is dangerous; yet in the same proportion it is vague and beyond our reach. 
It is darkness and dcath—things vast, shapeless, without definition, mere blank 
negations, Nothing is more crratic than an unenlightened conscience. A spiritually 
ignorant person cannot tell when he sins or how far his guilt extends. He is like a 
blind man groping among pathless wilds, stumbling and falling he knows not how or 
where. 

11. Law coNVERTS VAGUE SIN INTO DEFINITE TRANSGRESSION. It does not simply 
reveal the hidden sin, as the acid develops the photograph and as the daylight lays bare 
the ugly ruin. It gives to sin a new form and character, as the chemical reagent 
precipitates a solution. It compels the diffused sinfulness to crystallize into sharply 
defined offences, The force of the tide is not seen till the wave breaks against the 
shore, The current of evil is strong, but unrecognizcd, till it meets a Law and dashes 
over it in wild assault. Sin lurks in our hearts and creeps through our lives as a 
formless spirit of evil. Then a Law is declared, “Thou shalt not steal,” or, “Thou 
shalt not kill.” Sin meeting this directly breaks the Law. Now, it is a clear offence, 
a definite, chargeable transgression, capable of being brought home to the criminal. 

III. THIs CONVERSION OF SIN INTO TRANSGRESSION IS FOR OUR ULTIMATE Goop. At 
first it looks cruel, if not immoral. It seems like God tempting us. But God does not 
send the inducement to sin. He only sends the forbidding Law, which gives form to 
the sin already present. 1. Thus Law becomes an external conscience. By means of 
it we know how far we have fallen. 2. It becomes an occasion for the Divine chastise- 
ment which we need in order to be brought to repentance. 3. It prepares us to receive 
the gospel by rousing us from the slumber of indifference, making us see how evil and 
how helpless we are, and so urging us to seek redemption from the curse of Law in the 
grace of Christ.—W. F. A. 


Ver. 20.—Direct communication with God. The mediator here referred to is not 
Christ, but Moses, for St. Paul is describing the process through which the Law was 
given, This he contrasts with the direct flow of grace in the gospel. A mediator 
implies more than one party, and the gifts that come through mediation do not come 
immediately from the hand of the giver. But God is one person, and in Christ’ le 
immediately confers his grace upon us. 

1. A reLiction or LAW SEPARATES US FROM DIRECT COMMUNION wiTH Gop. The 
Levitical Law depended on an elaborate system of mediation. The Jew regarded it as 
given through angcls. Moses received it for the people. When the Israelites saw 
the terrors of Sinai they shrank back and begsed Moses to go alone for them into the 
presence of God, and thus they received the Divine message through their human 
leader (χοᾶ. xx. 18, 19). Subsequently it was administered through the priesthood. 
The consequence was that the people were not admitted to the sanctuary. The penalty 
of relying on a human intercessor out of fear of God was separation from direct 
communion with Heaven. ‘his penalty is still paid by those who pursue the same 
course. The magnifying of human priesthood and the elaboration of ceremonial 
religion by one school in the Church, and the over-dependence on human teaching and 
preaching of another school, put new mediators between us and God, and so separate 
us from the privileges of immediate Divine fellowship. The same result follows the 
slavish observance of rules and regulations laid down by the wisest and holiest of 
teachers. Those men come between us and God. 

TI. THE HIGHEST RELIGION CONSISTS IN DIRECT COMMUNION wiTH Gop. “God is 


on. 1. 1—29.] THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 177 


one.” When he speaks to us we have all that we need. Many advantages belong 
to this pure and lofty relation with God. 1. Clear visions of truth. Truth is no 
longer adulterated with human imaginations. 2. The full efficacy of grace. This is 
not weakened by the harsh and ugly additions of man’s blundering attempts to 
improve his fellow-man. It flows clear and full in its own heavenly beauty. 3. The 
blessedness of fellowship with God. Α religion of Law is irksome. ‘There is no joy 
in obedience forced by constraint. But direct communion with God is itself the source 
oe deepest joy, and it makes all service glad, so that we delight to do the will of 


IXY. THE GOSPEL BRINGS TO US THIS RELIGION OF DIRECT comMUNION. It is true 
that Christ is a Mediator, but in quite another way from the mediation of Moses. 
Moses and all human mediators stand between us and God, so as to separate us from 
him and darken the vision of his glory by their human shadows, But Chyist only 
comes between to bridge over the gult that separates, to unite us to God, to be the 
mirror in which the presence of God is revealed; nay, to bring God to us, made 
manifest in the flesh. Tbus in Christ we have immediate communication with God. 
Through him we not only know that God is spirit and must be worshipped in spirit 
and in truth, we also have grace thus to worship. In Christ God’s grace directly flows 
to us with all its fresh, untainted purity and power. In Christ we have grace to enter 
through the rent veil to the holiest place, and to rest in the eternal light of God’s near 
presence.—W. F. A. 


Vers. 24, 25.—The tutor. The image of the Law as ἃ tutor would apply directly to 
the condition of the Jews, to whom the Levitical system was given in their religious 
childhood in order to prepare them for the privileges of sonship which Christ was to 
confer, But what was true of them is more or less true of all of us. For the religious 
history of Israel is just an emphasized epitome of the religious history of the race. 
Through Jonger ages, by more obscure methods, in spite of more grievous lapses, God 
is educating mankind as he educated the Jews. Though in their case the process was 
hastened by the tropical heat of prophetic inspiration, and the results are portrayed 
in the clear light of a Scripture revelation, the method is still essentially the same. 
Law comes first and serves as the tutor till the gospel of Christ brings the liberty 
of manhood. Individually we pass through a similar education. The function of Law 
is here described. Law is a tutor. 

J. THE TUTOR RESTRAINS AND. CONTROLS HIS PUPIL. The tutor or pedagogos was 
not so much the teacher as the person to whom was entrusted the charge of the whole 
moral direction of the child. He had an almost absolute authority, such as English 
lads with the greater freedom allowed among us would resent asa galling yoke, A 
similar function pertained to the Jewish Law, and pertains to all law in so far as 
it comes into practical relations with our religious life. In particular note three 
characteristics common to the control of the tutor over his charge and the dominion 
of a religion of Law. 1. Rigid orders, The tutor would leave little to the discretion 
of his pupil, nor would he be likely to explain the reason for his mandates, So Law 
requires definite actions and affords little scope for the intelligent consideration of general 
principles and none for freedom of action upon them. 2. Compulsion. The tutor 
commands, He does not spare the rod. Law depends on threats and fear of punish- 
ment, or on hopes of reward, or at best on astern sense of necessary obligation, and 
not on love and willing acquiescence. 3. Restraints. Probably the old tutor would ‘ 
check and repress rather than guide, encourage, and develop the natural disposition 
of his pupil. Law says, “'Thou shalt not,” with more emphasis than “ Thou shalt.” 

11. THE TUTOR IS SUITED TO THE PERIOD OF CHILDHOOD. Much that entered into 
the stern old system of discipline was as unfitted to youth as to manhood, and we are 
beginning to see the advantages of a freer kind of education, Nevertheless, certain 
restraints are essential to the condition of childhood, and the relaxing of them must be 
most disastrous, The duty of implicit obedience must be learnt before it is possible 
to understand the principles of abstract morality. Conscience must be educated by 
Law. In the infancy of the race the pure spirituality of Christianity could not be 
perceived, and a lower, narrower religion was all that came within the grasp of men. 
There is a law enclosed within the gospel, and those wko are spiritually too backward 

GALATIANS. a 


178 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. (on. mm. 1—26. 


to say, “The love of Christ constraineth me,” are reminded that “ whatsoever a man 
soweth that shall he also reap.” 

III. Tue TUTOR PREPARES FOR THE TIME OF MANHOOD. If he does his work well 
he does not convert his pupil into a slave. By teaching the habit of obedience he 
prepares for a willing acquiescence in a higher will; by inculcating a certain course 
of action he lays the foundation for a character in harmony with it. This preparatory 
fnfluence in education admits of wide application; eg. the boy must first master the 
rules of arithmetic in order that he may subsequently comprehend the principles of 
mathematics, must take grammar as an introduction to philology, etc. Thus St. Paul 
gives no excuse for the Marcionite heresy, which rejects the Old Testament religion 
as a bad thing. He not only allows it to be good in its way, but the only thing 
possible in its time and a direct preparation for the later and freer religion. ‘Uhere is 
a contfnuity in history, there is a continuity in God’s providential control of history, 
and there is a continuity in the growing stream of grace that flows through history. 
Christianity stands on the foundation of Judaism. The Old Testament is useful in 
preparing us for Christ. Nevertheless, it must not be forgotten that part of this efficacy 
is negative. The very failure of the Law and its increasing irksomeness prepare for 
Christ by making us feel the need and enjoy the liberty of his grace. 

IV. THE TUTOR 18 DISMISSED WHEN THE TIME OF MANHOOD ARRIVES. The tutor 
who was useful to the child will be a hindrance to the grown man. The submission 
which was dutiful in childhood becomes servile in manhood. The yoke of the Law 
is not the less a nuisance to the Christian because it was a necessity for the Jew. 
There is great skill in the apostle’s argument, for, while showing that he was no enemy 
to the Law but appreciated its utility, he pointed out that that very utility involved 
its being superseded. Its purpose was important, but preparatory, to prepare for the 
gospel. The blossom must fall that the fruit may develop.—W. F. A. 


Vers. 26—29.—Sonship, Liberated from the tutelage of Law through faith and on 
account of his union with Christ, the Christian is exalted into the condition of a free 
son of God and enjoys the large privileges of sonship. 

J, THE CONDITION oF sonsHIP. God is the Father of all mankind, and all 
human creatures, even the most ignorant, the most degraded, and the most vicious are 
naturally God’s children. The prodigal son is still a son and can think of “my father.” 
Nevertheless, it is clear that St. Paul often speaks of a sonship that does not belong 
to all men—a sonship which is the Christian’s peculiar condition and is not even shared 
by the Jew, a sonship which is not enjoyed by natural birth, but must be received by 
adoption, ὅσ. by a special act of Divine grace. What does this mean? 1. Near 
relationship with God. The son is most closely related to his father. But the dis- 
obedient child who forsakes his home is practically dead, for him practically the old 
Telation is severed. It needs to be-restored if he is to enjoy it again. The son, too, 
with St. Paul is not the young child in the nursery, but the older child admitted into 
the society of his father. The Jew was kept in the nursery separated from God by 
a “mediator” (ver. 19) and a “ tutor” (ver. 24). The Christian is admitted into close 
fellowship with God. 2. Liberty. This is an idea always associated with St. Paul’s 
description of sonship. The son is no longer the child “ under guardians and stewards,” 
who “ differeth nothing from a bond-servant.” He is a free man enjoying the con- 
fidence of his father. Such are Christians; to them the mind and will of God are 
revealed; they are free from restraints of formal Law; they are put in positions of 
trust. 

IJ. Tae ΟΒΙΟΙΝ or ΒΟΝΒΗΙΡ, 1. Through faith. This is an important point in the 
apostle’s arguinent. So long as we have not faith we remain in tutelage and at a 
distance from God. Faith breaks the yoke and brings us into the presence of God. 
Faith teaches us to realize that God is our Father and to trust him fearlessly, and so 
to take the position of sons. 2. By union with Christ. Christ is the Son of God. 
Yet he is not desirous of keeping his privileges to himself. On the contrary, he laboured 
and suffered that his people might share them. The baptized, that is to say, all of the 
Galatian people who accepted Christianity as a religion, had happily gone further and 
really entered into the spirit of it. They had since backslidden, but they were no 
hypocrites. Living Christianity is “putting on Christ,” being clothed with the spirit 


on. rv. 1—81.] THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS.: 179 


of Christ. They who do this through faith in Christ become one with him, and, as 
his brethren, become sons of his Father. 

JI. THe consequences or ΒΟΚΒΗΙΡ. 1. Universal brotherhood. We are all one 
“in Christ Jesus.” Here is the secret. The fraternity that sprang from the mere 
enthusiasm of philosophic philanthropy led to the guillotine. It is only union in 
Christ that secures true lasting union among men. As all colours melt into one 
common brilliancy under the rays of a very strong light, all distinctions vanish when 
Christ’s presence is deeply felt. (1) National distinctions vanish. The old antagonism 
of Jew and Gentile disappears. Christianity now tends to blend nations. (2) Social 
distinctions vanish, Slaves are free in Christ. Free men are servants to Christ. The 
gospel is the enemy of all caste-feeling. (8) Even distinctions of sex count for nothing. 
This meant much in ancient times, when cruel injustice was done to women. Women 
are under eternal obligations to the gospel, which has freed them from an unworthy 
bondage and given them their true place in the world. 2. The inheritance of ancient 
promises. The son of a king is an heir. What shall be the inheritance of a Son of 
God? To him it is said, “ All things are yours.” The Jew cherished the promises as 
ahope: The Christian enjoys the fulfilment of the promises. As yet the fulfilment 
is but partial, though enough to be an earnest of better things to come for those sons 
7 an who are being made “meet for the inheritance of the saints in light.”— 

. Ἐς Α. 5 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTER IV. 


Ver. 1.—Now I say (λέγω 34). A form of 
expression usual with the apostle when in- 
troducing ἃ new statement designed either 
to explain or elucidate something before said 
‘ef. ch. iii.17; v.16; Rom. xv. 8, according to 
the Received Text; 1 Cor.i.12. So τοῦτο 
δέ φημι, 1 Cor. vii. 29; xv. 50). It is intended 
apparently to quicken attention: ‘* Now I 
wish to say this.” In the present case the 
apostle designs to throw further light upon 
the position taken in ch. iii. 24, that God’s 
people, while under the Law, were under a 
bondage from which they have now been 
emancipated. Comparethe somewhatsimilar 
process of illustration adopted in Rom. vii. 
2—4, In both passages it is not a logical 
demonstration that is put forward, but an 
illustratively analogous case in human ex- 
perience. A metaphor, though not strictly 
an argument, yet frequently helps the reader 
to an intuitive perception of the justness of 
the position laid down. That the heir, as 
long as he is a child, differeth nothing from 
a servant, though he be lord of all (ἐφ᾽ ὅσον 
χρόνον ὅ κληρονόμος νήπιός ἐστιν, οὐδὲν διαφέρει 
“δούλου, κύριος πάντων dv); 80 long as the heir 
ts a child, he differeth nothing from a bond- 
servant, though he ἐδ lord of all. The article 
before κληρονόμος, heir, is the class article, ag 
Lefore μεσίτης, mediator (ch. 111, 20)—“an 
heir.” In the word νήπιος the apostle evi- 
dently has in view one who as yet is in his 
nonage—as in English law phrase, “an 
infant.” In Roman law language, infans is 
a child under seven, the period of minority 
reaching to twenty-five. In Attic Greck, 


the correlate to one registered amongst 
“men” was a παῖς. It does not appear that 
the apostle means to use ἃ technical legal 
expression. He contrasts νήπιος with ἀνὴρ 
in 1 Cor. xiii. 11; Eph. iv. 13, 14. “ Differ- 
eth nothing from a bond-servant;” te. is 
nothing better than a bond-servant, as Matt. 
vi. 26; x. 31; xii. 12. The verb διαφέρειν 
seems used only in the sense of your differ- 
ing from another to your advantage, so that 
τὰ διαφέροντα are things that are more excel- 
lent. “ Lord,” “ proprietor ;” the title to the 
property inheres in him, though he is not 
yet fit to handle it. 

Ver. 2.—But is under tutors and governors 
(ἀλλὰ ὑπὸ ἐπιτρόπους ἐστὶ καὶ οἰκονόμου)" 
but ἐδ under guardians and stewards. ᾿᾽Ἐπί- 
τροπος is, in Greek, the proper designation of 
a minor’s guardian ; as, for example, is shown 
by Demosthenes’s speeches against Aphobus, 
who had been his ἐπίτροπος. These speeches 
also show that the ἐπίτροπος was entrusted 
with the handling of the property of his 
ward. Yet, as οἰκονόμος more especially de- 
notes one entrusted with the management 
of property, it should seem that St. Paul 
uses the former term with more especial re- 
ference to the guardian’s control over the 
person of his ward. The ward has to do 
what the ἐπίτροπος, guardian, thinks proper, 
with no power of ordering his actions ac- 
cording to his own will; while, on the other 
hand, the youth is not able to appropriate 
or apply any of his property further than as 
the “steward” thinks right; between the 
two he is bound hand and foot to other 
people’s control. The plural number of the 
two nouns indicates the rough and general 


180 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


(cu. rv. 1—3L 


way in which the apostle means to sketch 
the case, speaking in a general way, one 
may describe a minor as subject to “ guar- 
dians aud stewards.” Untilthetime appointed 
of the father (ἄχρι τῆς προθεσμίας τοῦ πατρό5). 
The noun προθεσμία, properly an adjective, 
ὥρα or ἡμέρα being understood, is used very 
commonly to denote, either a determined 
period during which a thing is to be done 
or forborne, which is its most ordinary sense 
(see Reiske’s ‘ Lexicon to Demosthenes’) ; or 
the further limit of such a period, whence 
Symmachus uses it to render the Hebrew 
word for “end” in Job xxviii. 3; or, lastly, 
a specified time at which a certain thing was 
to take place, as, for example, Josephus, 
* Ant.,’ vil. 4,7, “ When the (προθεσμία) day 
appointed for the payment came.” This last 
seems to be the meaning of the word here, 
though it admits of being taken in the second 
sense, as describing the limit of the child’s 
period of nonage. The somewhat loosely 
constructed genitive, τοῦ πατρός, “of the 
father,” may be compared either with the 
διδακτοὶ τοῦ Θεοῦ, “taught of God” (John 
vi. 45), or, in a somewhat different applica- 
tion, “ the chastening and admonition of the 
Lord”? (Eph. vi. 4). In reference to the 
whole case as stated by the apostle, it has 
been asked—Is the father to be conceived of 
as dead, or as only gone out of the country, 
or how? It is sufficient to reply that “the 
point of the comparison”—to use Bishop 
Lightfoot’s words—“ 1108, not in the cireum- 
stances of the father, but of the son;” and, 
further, that to supplement the description 
which the apostle gives by additional par- 
ticulars not relevant for the purpose of the 
comparison would only tend to cloud our 
view of its actualimport. In fact, any image 
taken from earthly things to illustrate things 
spiritual will inevitably, if completely filled 
out, be found to be in some respects halting. 
Another inquiry has engaged the attention 
of commentators, as to how far the particular 
circumstance, that the period of nonage is 
made dependent upon the father’s appoint- 
ment, can be shown to agree with actual 
usage as it then obtained. It would seem 
that no positive proof has hitherto been 
alleged that such au hypothesis was in strict 
conformity with either Greek or Roman or 
Hebrew law. And hence some have had 
recourse to the precarious and far-fetched 
supposition that St. Paul founds his thesis 
on Galatian usage, arguing that such would 
have been in accordance with that purely 
arbitrary control which, according to Cesar 
(‘ Bell, Gall.,’ vi. 19), a paterfamilias exer- 
cised over wife and children among the 
kindred tribes in Gaul. The scruple, how- 
ever, now referred to arises from supposing 
that we know more about the facts than we 
really do know. So far as has been shown, 


we cannot tell what was really the precise 
rule of procedure which, in the case described 
by the apostle, prevailed either in Judwa, or 
in Tarsus, or in Galatia; nor again from what 
region of actual experience St. Paul drew 
his illustration. We, therefore, have no 
possible right to say that the case which he 
supposes was not fairly supposable. On the 
contrary, when we reflect how open the 
apostle’s mind was for taking note of facts 
about him, and how wide and varied his 
survey, we may safely rest assured that his 
supposed case was in reality framed in per- 
feet accordance to the civil usage, to which 
the Galatians would understand him to refer. 
At the same time, it must be conceded that, 
amongst different modes of arranging a 
minor’s case which actual usage permitted 
or may be imagined to have permitted, the 
apostle selected just that particular mode 
which would best suit his present immediate 
purpose. 

Ver. 3.—Even 80 we (οὕτω καὶ ἡμεῖς); 80 
we also. This “we” represents the same 
persons as before in ch. iii. 13, 24, 25 (see 
notes), namely, the people of God; a society 
preserving a continuous identity through 
successive stages of development, till now 
appearing as the Church of Christ. ‘The 
plural pronoun recites, not individuals, but 
the community viewed as a whole, having 
the now subsisting “us” as its present 
representatives. Individually, Christians in 
general now, and many of those who then 
when the apostle wrote belonged to the 
Church, never were in the state of nonage or 
bondage here referred to. It is, however, 
notwithstanding this, quite supposable that 
St. Paul’s account of the history of the whole 
society is in some degree tinted by the recol- 
lection of his own personal experiences. 
When we were children (ὅτε ἦμεν νήπιοι); 
that is, when we were in our nonage. The 
phrase is not meant to point to a state of 
immaturity in personal development, but 
simply to the period of our being withheld 
from the full possession of our inheritance. 
This is all that the course of thought now 
pursued requires; and we only create for 
ourselves superfluous embarrassment by 
carrying further the parallel between the 
figuring persons and the figured. The spiri- 
tual illumination enjoyed by the Christian 
Church, compared with that of the pre- 
Christian society, presents as greata contrast 
as that of a man’s knowledge compared with 
a child’s; but that is not the point here. 
Were in bondage under the elements (or, 
rudiments) of the world (ὑπὸ τὰ στοιχεῖα τοῦ 
Koupuy ἦμεν δεδουλωμένοι); were held in bond- 
age under the rudiments of the world ; or, 
were under the rudiments of the world brought 
into bond-service. This latter way of con- 
struing, separating ἦμεν from the participle 


cH. Iv. 1—31.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


181 


δεδουλωμένοι to connect it with the words 
which precede, is recommended by the pa- 
rallel, which the words, “were under the 
rudiments of the world,” then present to 
the words, “is under guardians and stewards,” 
in ver. 2; while the participle “ brought 
into bond-service” reproduces the notion ex- 
pressed by the words, “is no better than a 
bond-servant,” of ver. 1. The participle 
“brought into bond-service,” then, stands 
apart, in the same way as the participle “shut 
up” does in ch. iii. 23. This, however, is 
only a question of style; the substantial ele- 
ments of thought remain the same in either 
way of construing. The Greek word στοι- 
xeta calls for a few remarks, founded upon 
the illustration of its use given by Schneider 
in his ‘Greek Lexicon.’ From the primary 
sense of “stakes placed in a row,” for example, 
to fasten nets upon, the term was applied to 
the letters of the alphabet as placed in rows, 
and thence to the primary constituents of 
speech; then to the primary constituents of 
all objects in nature, as, for example, the 
four “elements” (sce 2 Pet. iii. 10, 12); and to 
the “rudiments ” or first “ elements” of any 
branch of knowledge. It is in this last sense 
that it occurs in Heb. v. 12, “ What are the 
(στοιχεῖα) rudiments (of the beginning, or) 
of the first principles of the oracles of God ” 
(on which compare the passage from Galen 
quoted by Alford at the place). This must 
be the meaning of the word here; it recites 
the rudimental instruction of children, as 
if the apostle had said, “ under the A, B, ©, 
of the world.” This is evidently intended 
to describe the ceremonial Law ; for in ver. 5 
the phrase, “ those under the Law,” recites 
the same persons as are here described as 
“under the rudiments of the world;”’ as 
again the “ weak and beggarly rudiments,” 
in ver. 9, are surely the sme sort of “ rudi- 
ments” as ave illustrated in ver. 10 by the 
words, “ Ye observe days, and mouths, and 
seasons, aud years.” Since the Law under 
which the people of God were placed was 
God’s own ordinance, we must infer that, 
when it is here designated as “the A, B, O, 
of the world,” the genitive can neither de- 
note the origin of these rudiments nor yet 
any qualification of moral pravity, but only 
the qualification of imperfection and in- 
feriority ; that is, it denotes the ceremonial 
institutions of the Law as appertaining to this 
earthly material sphere of existence, as con- 
trasted with a higher spiritual sphere, Thus 
“the A, B, C, of the world” is an expression 
as nearly as possible identical with that of 
“carnal ordinances” (literally, ordinances 
of the flesh), used to describe the external 
ecremonialism of the Law in Heb, ix. 10; 
which phrase, like the one before us, is used 
with a full recognition, in the word “ ordi- 
nances” (δικαιώματα), of the Law aa of 


Divine appointment, while the genitive “of 
the flesh” marks its comparative imperfec- 
tion. They were,as Conybeare paraphrases, 
“their childhood’s elementary lessons of out- 
ward things.” This designation of Levitical 
ceremonies as being an “A, B, ©,” or 
‘rudiments, of the world,” appears to have 
become a set phrase with the apostle, who 
uses it again twice in the Colossians (ii. 8, 
20), where he appears, if we may judge from 
the context, to have in view a (perhaps 
mongrel)form of Jewish ceremonialism which, 
with circumcision (mentioned in ver. 11), 
conjoined other “ordinances” (δόγματα) men- 
tioned in vers. 14, 20, relating to meats and 
drinks and observance of times, illustrated 
in vera, 16, 21. This, he tells the Colos- 
sians, might have been all very well if they 
were still “living in the world” (ver. 20); 
but now they were risen with Christ !—with 
Christ, who had taken that “bond” (χειρό- 
γραφον, ver. 14) out of the way ; and therefore 
were called to care for higher things than 
such merely earthly ones as these. Some 
suppose that the apostle has reference to the 
religious ceremonialisms of the idolatrous 
Gentiles, as well as those of the Mosaic Law. 
These former ceremonialisms belonged, in- 
deed, to “ the world,” both in the sense above 
pointed out and as tinged with the moral 
pravity characterizing the “present evil 
world” in general, But these cannot be 
here intended, forasmuch as it was not to 
such that God’s people were by his ordin- 
ance subjected. The other rendering of στοι- 
xeta—“ elements”—which the Authorized 
Version puts into the text, but the Revised 
Version into the margin, was probably 
selected in defercnce to the view of most of 
the Fathers, who, as Meyer observes, took tlie 
Greek word in its physical sense: Augus- 
tine referring it to the heatben worship of 
the heavenly bodies and the other cults of 
nature; Chrysostom, Theodoret, and Am- 
brose to the new moons and sabbaths of the 
Jews, viewed as determined by the motions 
of the sun and moon; Jerome, however, in- 
terpreting it rudimenta discipline. On the 
other hand, in Col. ii. 8, 20, both of our Ver- 
sions have “rudiments” in the text and 
“ elements” in the margin; in 2 Pet. iii. 10, 
12, “elements” only. “ Brought into bond- 
scrvice ” (δεδουλωμένοι), namely, by the act 
of the supreme Father imposing upon us the 
yoke of his Law. 

Ver. 4.—But when the fulness of the time 
was come (ὅτε δὲ ἦλθε τὸ πλήρωμα τοῦ 
χρόνου); but when the completion of the term 
(Greek, time) came. “The completion of the 
term” is the notion answering to “the time 
appointed of the father” in ver. 2. The 
“time” (χρόνος) here most probably cor- 
responds to the period terminated by the 
ποοθεσμία: that is, it is the interval which 


182 THE EPISTLE TO 


THE GALATIANS. ὠ for. rv. 184, 


God ordained should first elapse. 80 Acts 
vii. 23, ‘Qs δὲ ἐπληροῦτο αὐτῷ τεσσαρακοντα- 
ετὴς χρόνος, “" When he was well-nigh forty 
years old ;” literally,‘ When there was being 
completed to him a time of forty years” 
(comp. also Acts vii. 30; xxiv. 27; Luke 
xxi. 24; 1. 57). The substantive (πλήρωμα) 
“completion” occurs in the same sense in 
Eph. i. 10, “ Dispensation of the completion 
of the times.” The apostle might apparently 
have written ὡς δὲ ἐπληρώθη ὃ χρόνος, “ But 
when the term was completed ;” but he pre- 
fers to express it in this particular form, as 
colouring the idea with a certain pathos of 
solemn joy at the arrival of a time so long 
expected, so fraught with blessing (compare 
the use of the verb “came” in ch. iii. 25). 
Why the supreme Disposer, the Father of 
his people, chose that particular era in the 
history of the human race for his children’s 
passing into their majority is a deeply 
interesting subject of inquiry. Much has 
been said, as for example by Neander and 
Guericke in their Histories of the Church, 
and by Schaff in his History of the Apostolic 
Church, on the preparedness of the world at 
large at just that juncture for the reception 
of the gospel. It may, however, be ques- 
tioned whether the apostle lad this in his 
mind in the reference here made to the 
Divine prothesmia. 80 far as appears, his 
view was fastened upon the history of 
the development of God’s own people, 
which up to this time had been under the 
pedagogic custody of the Mosaic Law. In- 
deed, in just this context he does not even 
advert, as he may be supposed to have 
done in ch. iii. 24, to the effect produced 
by the Law in preparing God’s own people 
for the gospel, but speaks only of tho 
negative aspect of the legal economy; that 
is, of those features of “ bondage,” “ power- 
lessness,” and “ poverty” which marked it 
as a state of oppression and helplessness, 
The training, probably implied in the refer- 
ence to its “rudiments,” stands back for 
the present out of view; the only notion 
which is actually brought prominently for- 
ward being the comparatively degraded 
condition in which the child-proprietor was 
for that while detained. God sent forth his 
Son (ἐξαπέστειλεν ὁ Θεὸς τὸν υἱὸν aired). The 
terms here used require to be very closely 
considered: they are fraught with the very 
esscnce of the gospel. The compound verb 
ἐξαποστέλλω occurs in nine other places of 
the New Testament, all of them in St. 
Luke’s Gospel and the Acts. In six of these 
(Luke 1. 53; xx. 10, 11; Acts ix. 30; xvii. 
14; xxii. 21) the ἐξ is well represented in 
our English Bible by “away.” In the re- 
maining three (Acts vii. 12; xi. 22; xii. 
11)—“‘ (Jacob) sent forth our fathers first ;” 
“They sent forth Barnabas as far as to 


Antioch ;” “God hath sent forth his angel ”) 
—the preposition represented by “ forth” ex- 
presses with more or less distinctness the 
idea that the person sent belonged intimately 
to the place or the society of the person who 
sent him. In no one passage is it without 
its appreciable value. The verb ἀποστέλλω, 
without this second prepositional adjunct of 
ἐξ, is used, for example, in John xvii. 18, 
both of the Father sending the Son and of 
Christ sending his apostles “into the world,” 
but without putting forward this indication 
of previous intimate connection. So the 
verb πέμπω is used in like manner of God 
sending his Son in Rom. viii. 8, and of the 
mission of the Holy Spirit in John xiv. 26. 
It was, no doubt, optional with the writer 
or speaker whether he would employ a verb 
denoting this particular shade of meaning 
present in the é or not; but we are not, 
therefore, at liberty to infer that, when he 
chooses to employ a verb which does denote 
it, he usesit without a distinct consciousness 
of its specific force. In the clause before us, 
therefore, as also in ver. 6, the writer must 
be assumed to have had in his mind at 
least the thought of heaven as the sphere of 
existence from which the Son and tne Spirit 
were sent, as in Acts xii. 11 above cited, if 
not of some yet closer association with the 
Sender. The reference to a previously sub- 
sisting intimacy of being between ths 
Sender and the Sent, which we trace here in 
the preposition ἐξ of the compound verb, is 
in Rom. viii. 8, where the verb employed is 
πέμψας, indicated in the emphatic reference 
implied in the pronoun ἑαυτοῦ, “sending his 
own Son.” In endeavouring next to deter- 
mine the import of the expression, “ his Son,” 
as here introduced, we are met by the sur- 
mise that tle apostle may have written it 
proleptically, or by anticipation; that is, as 
describing, not what Christ was before he 
was sent forth, but the glory and acceptable- 
ness with the Almighty which marked him 
as the Messiah after his appearing in the 
world; for when, for example, in another 
place the apostle writes, “ Christ Jesus came 
into the world to save sinners,” he must be 
understood as expressing himself proleptic- 
ally, designating the person who came into 
the world by the name and office which he 
bore as among men, and not as he was before 
he came. A proleptic designation is there- 
fore conceivable. But this interpretation of 
the aposile’s meaning is resisted by the 
tendency of the context in the kindred 
passage in Rom. viii. 8, “God sending his 
own Son in the likeness of the flesh of sin;” 
for tllose added words betoken very strongly 
that Christ was viewed by the apostle as 
having been God’s Son before he appeared 
in the flesh. And such is the impression 
which ἃ reader uot preoccupied with othea 


on. iv, 1—31.) 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 


183 


ideas would naturally receive also here. The 
conviction that this is what the apostle 
really intended is corroborated by references 
which he elsewhere makes to Christ’s pre- 
incarnate existence and work; as, for example, 
In Phil. ii. 5, 6; Col. i. 15, 16; the latter of 
which passages, by describing “the Son of 
God’s love” as “the Firstborn of every 
creature, because by him all things were 
created”? (see Alford, and the ‘Speaker's 
Commentary ’ on the passage), betokens that 
St. Paul regarded him as having been even 
then the“ Son of God ;” and this, too, in the 
sense of derivation from “the substanceof the 
Father,” “begotten” (as the Nicene Creed 
recites) “of his Father before all worlds.” 
We may, therefore, reasonably believe that 
the Apostle Paul, whose views alone are now 
under consideration, recognized these two 
senses of the term, namely, the theological 
and the Christological, as inseparably blend- 
ing into one when thus applied to the Lord 
Jesus; for we must allow that it appears 
alien to his manner of sentiment and of 
representation to suppose that he ever uses 
it in the purely theological sense only. In 
the view of the apostle Christ was the “Son 
of God,” not only when appointed to be the 
Messiah, but also before he was “made to 
be of ἃ woman.” Indeed, it should seem 
that this conception of his person is just 
that which forms the basis for the subsequent 
statement that the object of his coming into 
the world was to procure the adoption of 
sons for us. Made of a woman (γενόμενον 
ἐκ γυναικός); made to be of a woman. This, 
indeed, was, probably the sense intended by 
King James’s translators, when they followed 
Wickliffe and the Geneva Bible in rendering 
“made of a woman;” whilst Tyndale and 
Cranmer, followed by the Revisers of 1881, 
give “born of a woman.” Just the same 
divergency of renderings appears in the same 
English translations in Rom. i. 3, “ made of 
the seed of David (γενομένου ἐκ σπέρματος 
Δαβίδ),᾽ except that Tyndale has “ bo- 
gotten” instead of “born.” The difference 
in sense is appreciable and important: 
“made” implies a previous state of exist- 
ence, which “born” does not. So far as the 
present writer can find, wherever in the 
New Testament the Authorized Version has 
“born,” we have in the Greek ‘either rex- 
θῆναι OF γεννηθῆναι: γενέσθαι never having 
this sense at all. As in ch. tii. 13 (γενόμενος 
ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν κατάρα), “ Being made a curse for 
us,” and in John i. 14 (ὁ Adyos σάρξ ἐγένετο), 
“The Word was made flesh ;” so here God’s 
Son is described as “ made to be of ἃ woman,” 
the phrase, “of a woman,” being nearly 
identical in import with the word “ flesh” 
in St. John, distinctly implying the fact of 
the Incarnation. The preposition “ of” (ἐκ) 
Wenotes derivation of being, as when it is 


found after the verb “to be” in John viii. 
47, “He that is of God;” “Ye are not of 
God,” pointing back to the claim which 
(ver. 41) the Jows had made that they had 
God for their Father. The construction of 
γίγνομαι, to come to be, with a preposition 
occurs frequently, as in Luke xxii. 44; Acts 
xxii. 17; Rom. xvi. 7; 2 Thess. ii. 7. There 
can be no doubt that γενόμενον must be 
taken in the next clause with the same 
Meaning as here. Made under the Law 
(γενόμενον ὑπὸ νόμον); that is, made to be 
under the Law. The “Law” here, as in the 
clause immediately after “those under the 
Law,” indicates, not Law in general, but that 
particular law of tutorship and of domina- 
tion over one as yet in the depressed con- 
dition of ἃ minor, which the apostle has just 
before spoken of; that is, a law of cere- 
monies and of external cult, The article is 
wanting in the Greek, as in Rom. ii. 12, 23; 
ch, ii. 21; iii. 11, etc. We cannot be un- 
conscious of a tone of pathos in the apostle’s 
language, thus declaring that he who had 
before been no less august a being than 
God’s Son, should in conformity with his 
Father’s will have stooped to derive being 
“from 8 woman,” as well as to become subject 
to such a Law of servitude as that of Moses 
was, In the second chapter of the Philip- 
pians we have a similar account of the 
Incarnation, in which, with similar pathos, 
the apostle remarks that he took upon him 
the form of a “ bond-servant”’ (δοῦλος), being 
made to be in the like condition to that of 
men (ἐν ὁμοιώματι ἀνθρώπων γενόμενος); but 
in that passage the line of thought does not 
lead to a definite reference of his being made 
subject to the ceremonial Law. The apostle 
probably thinks of Christ as being made 
subject to the Law by his being circumcised ; 
a child of Israelite parents, so long as he was 
uncircumcised, was repudiated by the Law 
as one not in the covenant. With reference 
to the preceding clause, “ made of a woman,” 
we are naturally led to inquire why this 
particular was specified. It does not appear 
to be essential to his argument, as the next 
clause certainly is. Probably it was added 
as marking one of the successive steps down 
which the Son of God descended to that 
subjection (“ servitude,” ver. 3) to the cere- 
monial Law which the apostle is most par- 
ticularly concerned with. As in Phil, ii. he 
is exhibited, first as emptying himself; next, 
as taking upon him the form of a bond-servant 
by being made man; and then at length as 
brought to “the death of the cross;” so 
here, more briefly, he appears as “sent 
forth ” from the bosom of the Father; next, 
as made “the son of 8 woman;” then aa 
brought under the Law, to the end that (of 
course by the Crucifixion) he might buy off 
from under the Law those who were subject 


184 


4HE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


(cn. tv. 1—31. 


thereto. If the apostle intended anything 
more definite by introducing this first clause, 
it may have been to glance at that fellow- 
ship with the whole human race, with all 
“born of women” {γεννητοῖς γυναικῶν, Matt. 
xi. 11), into which God’s own Son came by 
becoming himself “of ἃ woman” (comp. 1 
Tim. ii. 5). Τὸ refer to yet another point, 
we can fearlessly affirm that this sentence of 
the apostle is perfectly consistent with the 
belief in tho writer’s mind that our Lord 
was born of a virgin-mother, for a specified 
reference to this fact did not lie in his 
way just at present, and therefore is not to 
be desiderated. The only point for con- 
sideration in this respect is whcthcr the 
expression employed does at all allude to it. 
Many have thought that it does. But when 
we consider that “one born of woman,” 
γεννητὸς γυναικός, in Hebrew yelid isshah, 
was a set phrase to denote a human creature 
(cf, Matt. xi. 11; Job xiv. 1; xv. 14; 
xxv. 4; xi. 12 [Septuagint]), with no par- 
ticular reference to the woman except as the 
medium of our being introduced into the 
world, it has been with much probability 
judged by most recent critics that the clause 
shows no colouring of such allusion. Never- 
theless, we distinctly recognize in it the 
sentiment expressed in the familiar verse of 
the ancient hymn: “Tu, ad liberandum 
suscepturus hominem, non horruisti virginis 
uterum ;” else, why did not the apostle write 
γενόμενον ἐξ σαρκί οἱ γενόμενον ἄνθρωπον ὃ 
Ver. 5.—To redeem them that were under 
the Law (ἵνα τοὺς ὑπὸ νόμον ἐξαγοράσῃγ; that 
he might redeem (Greek, buy off) them which 
were under the Law. In what way Christ 
bought God’s people off, not only from the 
curse, but also from the dominion of the 
Law, lias been stated by the apostle above, 
at ch. iii, 18, “Christ bought us off 
(Χριστὺς ἡμᾶς ἐξηγόρασεν) from the curse of 
the Law by being made on our behalf a 
curse” (see note). But why, in order to 
effect this object, was it prerequisite, as it 
is here implied that it was, that he should 
be himself “brought under the Law”? 
The directions which the Law in Deut. 
xxi. 22, 23 gave with respect to those 
“hanged on 8 tree” were apparently held 
by Joshua (Josh. viii. 29; x. 26, 27) to 
apply also to the case of persons so hanged 
who were uot Israelites. If so, does it not 
follow (an objector may say) that Jesus, 
even if not an Israelite under the Law, 
would, however, by being crucified, have 
fallen under the curse of the Law, and 
thereby annihilated the Law for all who 
by faith should become partakers with him, 
whether Jews or Gentiles? why, then, 
should he have been brought under the 
Law? The objection is met by the con- 
sideration that, in order that Christ might 


abrogate the Law by becoming subject to 
its curse, it was necessary that he should 
himself be perfectly acceptable to God, not 
only as being the eternal “ Son of his love,” 
but also in the entire completeness of his life 
as a man, and, therefore, by perfect obedi- 
ence to the will of God as, declarcd in the 
Law, under which it had pleased God to 
place his people. The Law, whatever the 
degradation which its ceremonial institute 
inferred for “the sons of God” subjected 
to it, was, nevertheless, for the time, Ged’s 
manifest ordinance, to which all who sought 
to serve him were bound to submit them- 
selves. They could not be righteous before 
him unless they walked in all the com- 
mandments and ordinances of the Lord 
blameless (Luke i. 6). That we might 
receive the adoption of sons (ἵνα τὴν vio- 
θεσίαν ἀπολάβωμεν); that is, that our adup- 
tive sonship might be actually and in full 
meagure made over tous. The “ we” recites 
God’s people; the same persons as those 
indicated by the preceding pirase, “those 
which were under the Law,” which phrase 
was not meant to define one particular class 
among God’s people, but to describe the 
condition in which God’s people had becn 
placed, “Lheir Father had put them under 
the Law with the view of their being at 
his appointed time bought off from the 
Law and admitted to the full enjoyment 
of their filial privileges. This purpose of 
their Father, signified beforehand in the 
promises to Abraham, explains the article 
before υἱόθεσίαν : it was the uduptive son- 
ship which had been guarautged to them. 
Hence the use here of the verb ἀπολάβωμεν 
instead of λάβωμεν: for the prepositional 
prefix of this compound verb has always its 
force; generally denoting our receiving a 
thing in some way due to us, answering 
to its force in the verb ἀποδίδωμι, repay ; 
sonictimes our receiving a thing in full 
measure (comp. Luke vi. 34, 35; xvi. 25; 
xviii. 30; xxiii. 41; Rom. i. 27; Col. iii. 
24; 2 John 8). In Luke xv. 27 it is re- 
ceiving back one lost. The second ἵνα is 
subordinate to the first; the deliverance of 
God’s people from the Law was in order to 
their introduction intu their complete state 
of sonship. The noun viofecia does not 
appear to dccur in any Greek writer except 
St. Paul; though θέσθαι υἱόν, vids θετός, 
υἱόθετος, ὃ κατὰ θέσιν πατήρ, are found in 
various authors, After the analogy of other 
compound verbal nouns with a similar ter- 
mination (ὁρκωμοσία, ἀγωνοθεσία, θεσμοθεσία, 
eto.), it means first the act of adoption, as, 
perhaps, Rom. viii. 23; Eph. i.5; and then, 
quite naturally, the consequent condition 
of the adopted child, as in Rom. viii 15; 
ix.4; and this seems its more prominent 
sense here. Bom. ix. 4 suggests the gar 


cH. tv. 1—31.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


185 


mise that the term had bcen in use before 
among Palestinian Jews, with reference to 
Israel’s state under the theocracy, and that 
St. Paul borrowed it thence with reference 
te the Christian Church, in which it found 
@ more complete realization. 

Ver. 6.—And because ye are sons (ὅτι δέ 
ἐστε υἱοί). The apostle is adducing proof 
that God’s people had actually received the 
adoption of sous; it was because it vas so, 
that God lad sent into their hearts the 
Holy Spirit, imparting that vivid conscious- 
ness of sonship which they enjoyed. The 
fact of the adoption must have been there, 
to qualify them to be recipients of this 
divinely inspired consciousness. The affir- 
mation in Rom. viii. 16,“ The Spirit him- 
self beareth witness with our spirit that we 
are children of God,” closely resembles our 
present passage; but it is not identical. 
We are not made sons (the apostle inti- 
mates) by the Spirit giving us the conscious- 
ness of sonship; but, having been previously 
made sons, the Spirit raises in our spirits 
sentiments answering to the filial relatin 
already established. The position of tie 
clause introduced by “ because ” is like that 
in 1 Cor. xii. 15, 16. The persons recited 
by the “ye” are still God’s people; not 
the Galatian believers in particular, except 
as 8 portion of the whole Church of God. 
The apostle puts the thought in this form 
to bring the truth more strikingly home to 
their minds. ‘This he docs more closely 
still in the next verse by “thou.” But that 
he bas in view God’s people as a whole is 
clear, not only from the whole strain of the 
context, but also from the phrase, ‘‘into our 
hearts,” in the next clause, God hath sent 
forth (ἐξαπέστειλεν 6 Θεός); God sent forth. 
The tense indicates that the apostle does 
not refer to a sending forth of God’s Spirit 
to each individual believer, parallel to that 
“sealing ” which believers are stated to be 
subjects of in Eph. i. 18, This historic 
aoriat, as it does in ver. 4, points to one 
partiezlar emission-—that by which the 
Comforter was sent forth to take up his 
dwelling in the Church as his temple 
through all time (John xiv. 16, 17; Acts 
i. 4,5). The Spirit of his Son, The Spirit 
which “ anointed” Jesus to be the Christ ; 
which throvghout animated the God-Man 
Jesus; which prompted him in full filial 
consciousness, himseif in a certain critical 
hour with loud outcry (μετὰ κραυγῆς ἰσχυρᾶς, 
Heb. v. 7) to call out, “Abba, Father!” 
The phrase, “his Son,” is stiologicai; by it 
the apostle intimates that it was only cox- 
gruous that the Spirit which had animated 
the whole life of the incarnate Son should 
be shed forth upon those who by faith 
become one with him, and should manifest 
hig presence with thom, as well as their 


union with Christ, by outcome of sentiment 
similar to that which Christ had expressed. 
Since the sonship of Christ is here spoken 
of as if it were not merely antecedent, but 
also in some way preparatory to the sending 
forth of the Spirit, it best suits the con- 
nection to construe it, not, as in ver. 4, as 
that belonging to him in his preincarnate 
state of being, but as that which appertained 
to him after being “ made to be of a woman,” 
and in which his disciples might be con- 
sidered as standing on a certain footing of 
parity with him. This harmonizes with 
the relation which in the Gospels and Acts 
the sending of the Spirit is represented as 
holding to his resurrection and ascension. 
The interpretation above given in one point 
presupposes the apostle’s knowledge of the 
story of the agony in the garden, when, 
according to St. Mark (xiv. 36), Jesus him- 
-self used the words, “ Abba, Father.” This 
presupposition is warranted, not only by 
the probabilities of the case, but also by 
what we read in ch. v. 7 of the Epistle to 
the Hebrews, Pauline, certainly, if not actu- 
ally St. Paul’s. We have to add that the 
Gospels not only make repeated mention of 
our Lord as addressing the Supreme Being 
by the compellative of “Father,” but also 
represent him as constantly speaking of 
God as bearing that relation both to himself 
and to his disciples. This mode of desig- 
nating the Almighty was characteristic in 
the highest degree of Jesus, and up to that 
time, so far as appears in the Scriptures, 
unknown. The manner in which the apostle 
here speaks of the “sending forth” of the 
Spirit in cl.se proximity to the mention of 
the “sending forth” of the Son, strongly 
favours the belief that he regarded the 
Spirit, as being also a personal agent. In 
Ps. civ. 30 we have in the Septuagint 
“Thou wilt send forth (ἐξαποστελεῖς) thy 
Spirit, and they will Le created.” In Ps. 
xliii. 3 and Ivii. 3 God is implored to “send 
forth [ἐξαπόστειλον, Septuagint) his light 
and bis truth,” “ his mercy and his truth; ” 
these being poetically personified as angelic 
messengers. Into your hearts (εἰς τὰς καρ- 
δίας ὑμῶν). But this reading of the Textua 
Receptus is, by recent editors, replaced by 
the reading, εἰς τὰς καρδίας ἡμῶν, into our 
hearts, the other reading being regarded as 
a correction designed to conform this clause 
with the words, “ye are sons,” in the pre- 
ceding one. In both cases the apostle has 
in his view the Church of God viewed 
generally. His putting “our” here instead 
of “your” was probably an outcome of his 
feeling of proud gladness in the thought of 
his on happy experience. <A precisely simi- 
lar chauge in the pronoun, attributable pro- 
bably to the same cause, is observable in the 
remarkably analogous passage in Rom. viii. 


186 THE EPISTLE TO 


THE GALATIANS, (uu. rv. 1—31. 


15, “ Ye received not the spirit of bondage 
again unto fear; but ye recvived the Spirit 
of adoption, whereby we ery, Abba, Father.” 
Crying (κράζον); crying out aloud. The 
word expressing loud utterance betokens in 
this case undoubting assurance. No faint 
whisper this of an inner consciousness, shy, 
reticent, because afraid to assure itself of 
so glorious, so blissful a relation; no hesi- 
tating half-hope; it is a strong, unwavering 
conviction, bold, though humbly bold, to 
thus address the all-holy Supreme himself. 
The “cry” is here attributed to the Spirit 
himself; in Rom. viii. 15 to believers, these 
being the Spirit’s organs of utterance; 
presently after in the Romans, vers. 26, 27, 
the Spirit himself is said to “intercede with 
groanings which cannot beuttered, ... accord- 
ing to the will of God.” Analogously, in the 
Gospels, evil spirits in demoniacs at times 
are said to “cry out” (Mark i. 26; ix. 26), 
while in other passages the cry is attri- 
buted to the possessed person. Abba, Father 
CABB4, 6 πατήρ). In addition to Rom. viii. 
15, just cited, the same remarkable words 
are found once only besides, in Mark xiv. 
36, as uttered by our Lord in the garden. 
St. Luke (xxii. 42) gives only “ Father” 
(Πάτερ); St. Matthew (xxvi. 39, 42), “my 
Father” (Πάτερ μου: in ver. 39, however, 
μου is omitted by Tischendorf, though he 
retains it in ver. 42). St. Matthew, by 
adding μον to Πάτερ here, which he does 
not add in xi. 25, 26, seems to indicate that 
the form of address which our Lord then 
employed bespoke more than usual of fur- 
vency or of intimacy of communion. Ac- 
cording to Fiirst (‘ Concordance’), “ Abba,” 
kan, occurs frequently in the Targums 
“sensu proprio et honorifico;” in the Jeru- 
salem Targum taking the form “ Ibba,” 
xax. In consequence, we may assume, Οἱ 
the “honorific” complexion of this form 
of the word, it was in Chaldee the form 
usually employed in compellation, or for 
the vocative. The hypothesis that either 
the Divine Speaker, or the Evangelist Mark, 
or the Apostle Paul, added ὁ Πατὴρ as an 
explanatory adjunct to the Aramaic “Abba,” 
for the benefit of such es might need the 


explanation, is resisted (1) by the three- | 


fold recurrence of the conjoined phrases in 
just the same form; (2) by the absence of 
any such intimation of a translation as we 
find given in other passages where an 
Aramaic word is explained, as in Mark 
v. 41; vii. 11, 34; John i. 38, 41, 42; xx, 
16; Acts ix. 36; (3) by the addition of 
ὃ Πατὴρ being made by St Paul in the 
Romans, when writing with a glowing 
ardour of strong feeling wholly repugnant 
to the didactic calmness of a translational 
gloss: he does not pause to add such a 
gloss to “Maran atha” in 1 Cor. xvi. 22, 


where it would seem to be much more called 
for. The apparently nominatival form of 
ὁ Πατὴρ lends no countenance to this view, 
as is shown by the comparison of Matt. 
xi. 26, val, 6 Πατήρ: Luke viii. 54, 4 παῖς, 
ἔγειρε: and in the Septungint, Ps. viii. 1, 9, 
Κύριε ὁ Κύριος ἡμῶν: Ps. vii. 1, Κύριε, ὃ 
Θεός μου. Another hypothesis that the 
twofold compellative was meant to intimate 
that God was now Father alike to Jewish 
believers and to Gentile, is wrecked upon 
its occurrence in St. Mark. The present 
writer venturcs to surmise that the con- 
joined phrase originated thus: The Lord 
Jesus, being wont very commonly to sub- 
stitute for the name “ God ” the designaticn 
of “ Father,” may be supposed to have used 
for this designation the word “Abba” as 
the honorific form of the Chaldaic noun for 
“father,” in much the same way as the 
Jews regularly substituted the noun Adonai, 
an honorific form of Adonim, “lord,” or 
“master,” for the unutterable tetragram- 
maton, mim. Instead of Adonai, Christ 
(it may be supposed) customarily employed 
the word “Abba,” as an almost proper 
name of the Supreme Being. When our 
Lord had occasion to apply the word 
“ Father” as a common noun to God, whether 
in addressing him or in speaking of him, 
we may infer from the Peshito-Syriac Ver- 
sion of Mark xiv. 36 that he added another 
form of the same original noun “ Abj,” or 
“Obj,” instead of or in adiJlition to “ Abba.” 
The Πάτερ of Luke xxii. 42 may have been 
used to represent “ Abba;” St. Matthew's 
Πάτερ pou tu represent “Abj” or “ Obj.” 
The use of “ Abba, 6 Marhp” by believers, 
probably quite an exceptional use, was 
adopted, both as a conscious reminiscence 
of Christ’s utterance in the garden—they, 
by conjoining themselves thus with their 
Lord, pleading, as it were, his Name as 
their warrant for claiming this filial relation 
with the Most High—and also as an in- 
tensely emphatic description of God’s father- 
hvuod, by conjoining together the almost 
proper name denoting his general father- 
hood by which (supposably) Christ was used 
to designate Gud, and the common noun by 
which Christ’s disciples had by him been 
taught to address him in prayer, and which 
‘embudied their sense of his especial father- 
hood to those who serve him. The apostle 
is not to be understood as intimating that 
the Holy Spirit does actually produce in 
every heart in which he dwells the definite 
consciousness of sonship. It is enough for 
his purpose that the nésus, the endeavour 
and tendency of his spiritual operation, is 
in all cases in that direction, though through 
slackuess on their own part so many Chris- 
tians fail of conquering for themselves the 


full possession of their inheritance. But, 


ou. Iv. 1—-d1.} 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


187 


however, we need not (he implies) go back 
to Mosain ceremonialisin to seek there for 
our assured sonship. We have it already 
here—here, in Christ, and in the indwelling 
presence of his Spirit. 

Ver. 7.—Wherefore thou art no more a 
servant, but ason (ὥστε οὐκ ἔτι εἶ δοῦλος, ἀλλ᾽ 
vids); 8o then, no longer art thou a bond- 
servant, but a son. “Ὥστε, properly “so 
that,” is frequently used by St. Paul for “so 
then ” or “ wherefore,” to state a final con- 
clusion (cf. ver. 16, below; ch. iii. 24; Rom. 
vii. 4, eto.). It here marks the conclusion 
resulting from the statements of the pre- 
ceding six verses, viz. of God having sent 
forth his Son to do away with the Law, sub- 
jection to which had marked the nonage of 

is people, and to raise them to their com- 
plete filial position, and of his then sending 
forth his Spirit into their hearts loudly 
protesting their sonship. “No longer art 
thou;” by this individualizing address the 
apostle strives to awaken each individual 
believer to the consciousness of the filial 
position belonging to him in particular. 
Believe it: in Christ Jesus, thou, thine 
own very self, art a son! The phrase, “no 
longer,” marks the position of God’s servant 
now, as compared with what it would have 
been before Christ had wrought his emanci- 
pating work and the Holy Spirit had been 
sent forth as the Spirit of adoption; then 
he would have still been a bond-servant; 
he is not that now. This abrupt singling 
out one individual as a sample of all the 
members of a class is an instance of the 
δεινότης of St. Paul’s style (comp. Rom. xi. 
17; xii. 20; xiii. 4; xiv. 4; 1 Cor. iv. 7). 
The individual cited by the “thou” is 
neither a Gentile convert only nor a Jewish 
believer only; it is any member of God’s 
kingdom. “A son,” a member of God’s 
family, an οἰκεῖος τοῦ Θεοῦ (Eph. ii. 19), 
one free of all law of bondage and in full 
possession of a son’s privilezes; no sinner, 
now, under his Father's frown; but ac- 
cepted, beloved, cherished, honoured with 
his Father’s confidence. And if a son, then 
an heir of God through Christ (εἰ δὲ vids, καὶ 
κληρονόμος διὰ Θεοῦ [Recepius, κληρονόμος 
Θεοῦ διὰ Ἄριστοῦ and if ἃ son, an heir also 
through God, Rom. viii. 17, “ And if 
children (τέκνα), heirs also; heirs of God, 
joint-heirs with Christ.” The inheritance 

ere meant is the possession of every bless- 
ing which the theocratic kingdom entitles 
its members to look forward to. And the 
point of this added clause is that no further 
qualification is needed for our having a 
vested right in that inheritance, than that , 
which is supplied by faith in Christ, uniting 
us to him and making us sharers with him; 
no such qualification, for example, as the 
Mosaizing reactionaries insisted upon (see 


Acts xv. 1); no observance of ceremonial 
rites, whether of the Law or of such freaks 
of heretical “ will-worship” as are referred 
to in Col. ii. 23. Thy faith in Christ 
(says in effect the apostle) gives thee 
now for good and all an assured place in 
whatever inheritance God designs to give 
his people. The manuscripts and other 
authorities for the text present considerable 
variety in the reading of the last words of 
this clause. The reading adopted by L. T. 
Tr., Moyer, Alford, Lightfoot, and Hort and 
Westcott, namely, κληρονόμος διὰ Θεοῦ, is. 
that found in the three oldest uncials, and 
presents a form of expression which was 
likely so greatly to surprise the copyist as 
to set him naturally upon the work of revi- 
sion; whereas that of the Received Text, 
κληρονόμος Θεοῦ διὰ Χριστοῦ, would have 
seemed to him so perfectly natural and easy 
that he would never have thought of alter- 
ing it. The words, “heir through God,” 
taken in connection with the foregoing con- 
text, insist upon the especial appointment 
of the supreme God himself; his interven- 
tion displayed in the most conspicuous 
manner conceivable, through the incarnated 
Son and the sent-forth Spirit. The believer 
is here said to beason and an heir “ through 
God,” in the samo sense as St. Paul affirms 
himself to be an apostle “through Jesus 
Christ and God the Father,” and “through 
the will of God” (ch. i. 1; 1 Cor. i. 1); for 
“of him and through him and unto him 
are all things,” and most manifestedly so, 
the things composing the economy of grace 
which the gospel announces (Rom. xi. 36), 
The apostle has thus brought back his dis- 
course to the same point which it had 
reached before in ch. iii. 29. The reader 
will do well to carefully compare this seo- 
tion of the Epistle (vers. 3—7) with Rom. 
vii. 25—viii. 4 and viii, 14—17. With 
great similarity in the forms of expression, 
the difference of the apostle’s object in the 
two Epistles is clearly discerned. There he 
is discoursing the more prominently of the 
believer's emancipation from the controlling 
power of a sinful nature, which, under the 
Law, viewed under its moral aspect rather 
than its ceremonial, was rather fretted into 
yet more aggravated disobedience than 
quelled or overpowered, Here his subject 
is more prominently the believer’s emanci- 
pation from the thraldom of the Law's cere- 
monialism, which in the present Epistle, 
relative to the troubles in the Galatian 
Churches, he has more occasion to deal with. 
Both the one deliverance, however, and the 
other was necessary for the believer's full 
consciousness of adoptive sonship; and each 
was, in fact, involved in the other. 

Ver. 8.—Howhbeit (ἀλλά); ἃ strongly ad- 
yersative conjunction, belonging to the 


188 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


(ox. rv. 1—31, 


whole sentence comprised in this and the 
next verse, which are closely welded together 
by the particles μὲν and δέ. In contraven- 
tion of God’s work of grace just described, 
they were renouncing their sonship and 
making themselves slaves afresh. Then 
(τότε μέν. The μέν, with its balancing 
δέ, here, as often.is the case, unites together 
sentences not in their main substance 
strictly adverse to each other, but only in 
subordinate details contrasted, of which we 
lave an exemplary instance in Rom. viii. 
17, Κληρονόμους μὲν Θεοῦ συγκληρονόμους δὲ 
Χριστοῦ. In such cases we have often no 
resource in English but to leave the μὲν 
untranslated, as our Authorized Version 
commonly does; “indeed” or “ truly,” for 
example, would be more or less misleading. 
The truth is, the apostle in these two verses 
is heaping reproach upon the Galatian 
Judaizers; first, in this verse, for their 
former (guilty) ignorance of God and their 
idolatries, and then, in the next verse, for 
their slighting that blessed friendship with 
God which they owed only to his prevent- 
ing grace. In dealing with Gentile Chris- 
tians the apostle repcatedly is found referring 
to their former heathenism, for the purpose 
of enforcing humility or abashing presump- 
tion, as for example in Rom. xi. 17—25; 
xv. 8, 9; 1 Cor. xii. 2; Eph. 11. 1I—13, 17. 
In the case of the Galatians his indignation 
prompts him to use a degree of outspoken 
severity which he was generally disposed to 
forbear employing. The “then” is not 
defined, as English readers might perhaps 
miscoustrue the Authorized Version as in- 
tending, by the following clause, “ not 
knowing God,” which in that version is 
“when ye knew not God ”—a construction 
of the words which the use of the participle 
would hardly warrant; rather the time 
referred to by the adverb is the time of 
which he has before been speaking, when 
God’s people were under the pedagogy of 
the Law. ‘This, though when compared 
with Christ’s liberty a state of bondage, was, 
however (the apostle feels), a position of 
high advancement as compared with that of 
heathen idolaters. These last were “ far 
off,’ while the Israclites were “nigh” 
(compare the passages just now referred to). 
During that time of legal pedagogy the 
Galatians and their forefathers, all in the 
apostle’s view forming one class, were 
wallowing in the mire of heathenism. 
When yo know not God (οὐκ εἰδότες Θεόν); 
ye knew not God and, etc, “Knowing not 
God” describes the condition of heathens 
also in 1 Thess. iv. 5, ‘‘ Not in the passion of 
lust. even as the Gentiles which know not 
(τὰμὴ εἰδότα) God; ” 2 Thess. i. 8, “ Render- 
ing vengeance to them that know not (τοῖς 
wy εἰδόσι») God.” Both of these passages 


favour the view that the apostle does not in 
the least intend in the present clause to 
excuse the idolatries which he goes on to 
speak of, but rather to describe a condition 
of godlessness which, as being positive rather 
than merely negative, inferred utter pravity 
and guiltiness. He uses οὐκ with the parti- 
ciple here, in place of the μὴ in the two 
passages cited from the Thessalonians, as 
intending to state an historical fact viewed 
absolutely—a sense which is made clear in 
English by substituting an indicative verb 
for the participle. Ye did service unto 
(ἐδουλεύσατε); served; devoted yourselves 
to. The verb is, perhaps, used here in that 
milder sense in which it. frequently occurs ; 
as in Matt. vi. 24; Luke xv. 29; xvi. 13; 
Acts xx. 19; Rom. vii. 6, 25; xiv. 18; 1 
Thess.i.9. The Revised Version, however, 
gives “ were in bondage to” in the present 
instance, but “serve” in the passages now 
cited. The aorist, instead of an imperfect, 
describes the form of religious life which 
they then led asa whole. Them which by 
nature are no gods (τοῖς φύσει ph οὖσι 
Geots). The Textus Receptus has τοῖς μὴ 
φύσει οὖσι θεοῖς, which would apparently 
mean “which are not gods by nature, but 
only in your imagination ;” like “ There be 
that are called gods,’ in 1 Cor. viii. 5— 
Zeus, Apollo, Here, etc., mere figments of 
imagination (ont, 1 Cor. viii. 4). The 
more approved reading suggests rather the 
idea that the objects they worshipped might 
not be non-existent, but were certainly not 
of a Divine nature; “by nature,” that is, 
in the kind of being to which they belong 
(Eph. ii. 3; Wisd. xiii. 1, μάταιοι φύσει). 
The question may be asked—If they were 
not gods, what then were they? The 
apostle would probably have answered, 
“Demons;” for thus he writes to the 
Corinthians (1 Cor. x. 20): “The things 
which the Gentiles sacrifice they sacrifice 
to devils (δαιμονίοις), and not to God.” 
Alford renders, “ to gods which by nature 


-exist not,” etc.; but the more obvious sense 


of οὖσιν is that of a copula merely (comp. 2 
Chron, xiii. 9, Septuagint, “He became a 
priest (τῷ μὴ ὄντι θεῷ). 

Ver. 9.—But now (νῦν δῶ; and now. 
(See note on “ then” in ver. 8). After that 
ye have known God, or rather are known of 
God (γνόντες Θεόν, μᾶλλον BE γνωσθέντες ὑπὸ 
Θεοῦ) ; after that ye have gotten to know 
God, or rather to be known of God. Oon- 
sidering the interchangeable use of γνῶναι 
or ἐγνωκέναι and εἰδέναι in John viii. 55 and 
2 Cor. v. 16, it seems precarious to make 
much distinction between them as applied 
to the knowledge of God. The former, 
however, is the verb more commonly 
used in this relation; by St. John, in his 
First Epistle, where so much is eaid of 


on. Iv, 1—31.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 


189 


knowing God, exclusively; although in 
other relations he, both in Epistle and 
Gospel, uses the two verbs interchangeably. 
The expression, “to know God,” is one of 
profound pregnancy; denoting nothing less 
than that divinely imparted intuition of 
God, that consciousness of his actual being, 
viewed in his relation to ourselves, which 
is the result of truly “believing in him.” 
Moreover, as it is knowing a personal 
Being, between whom and ourselves mutual 
action may be looked for, it implies a 
mutual conversancy between ourselves and 
him, as the term “acquaintance” (oi 
γνῶστοί rivos), as used in Luke ii. 44 and 
xxiii. 49, naturally dues. So that “having 
gotten to be known of God” is very nearly 
equivalent to having been by God brought 
to be, to speak it reverently, on terms of 
acquaintanceship with him; and ‘this does 
indeed seem to be meant in 1 Oor. viii. 3. 
The Galatian believers had in very truth 
gotten to know God, if they had learnt to 
cry out unto him, “ Abba, Father.” And 
the remembrance of this happy experience 
of theirs, which he had, we may suppose, 
himself witnessed in the early days of their 
discipleship, prompts him to introduce the 
correction, “ or rather to be known of God.” 
Their having attained such ἃ consciousness 
of sonship had been, as he writes, ver. 7, 
“through God;” he it was that had sent 
forth his Son that his people might receive 
the adoption of sons; he that had sent 
forth his Spirit into their hearts to give 
them the sense of sonship; he had shown 
that he knew, recognized them to bo his 
(2 Tim. ii. 19), by gifting them with the 
blissful prerogative of knowing what he 
was to them. The correction of “know- 
ing” by “being known” is analogous to 
that of “apprehend” by “ being appre- 
bended” in Phil. iii. 12. The pragmatic 
value of this correcting clause is to make 
the Galatians feel, not only what a wilful 
self-debasement it was on their part, but 
also what a slight put upon the Divine 
favours shown to them, that they should 
frowardly repudiate their filial standing to 
adopt afresh that servile standing out of 
which he had lifted his people. What was 
this but a high-handed contravening of 
God’s own work, a frustration of his gospel ἢ 
And this by them whom only the other 
day le had rescued from the misery and 
utter wickedness of idolatry! How turn 
ye again; or, back (πῶς ἐπιστρέφετε πάλιν) ; 
how turn ye back again. An abrupt change 
from the form of sentence which the fore- 
going words naturally prepared us for; 
which might have been such as we should 
have by simply omitting the “how.” As if 
it were, “ After having gotten to be known 
of God, ye are turning back again—how can 


ye?—to the weak,” ete. This “ how,’’as in 
ch. ii. 14, is simply a question of remon- 
strance; not expecting an answer, it bids 
the person addressed consider the amazing 
unseemliness of his proceeding (so Matt. 
xxii. 12; comp. also 1 Tim. iii. 5; 1 John 
iii. 17). The verb ἐπιστρέφειν frequently 
denotes “turning back” (Matt. x. 13; 
xii. 44; 2 Pet. ii. 22; Luke viii. 55). To 
the weak and beggarly elements (ἐπὶ τὰ 
ἀσθενῆ καὶ πτωχὰ στοιχεῖα); the mere 
elementary lessons, the A, Β, C (see ver. 4, 
and note), which can do nothing for you 
and have nothing to give you The de- 
scription is relative rather than absolute. 
The horn-book, useful enough for the mere 
child, is of no use whatever to the grown-up 
lad who has left school. In Heb. vii. 18 
mention is made of “the weakness and 
unprofitableness οὗ the Levitical Law 
relative to the expiation of sin; which is 
not precisely the aspect of the Law which 
is here under view. The word “beggarly” 
was probably in the writer’s mind con- 
trasted with “the unsearchable riches of 
Christ” (Eph. iii. 8). Whereunto ye desire 
again to be in bondage? (οἷς πάλιν ἄνωθεν 
δουλεύειν θέλετε 3); whereunto ye destre to be 
in bondage over again? The verb δουλεύειν 
is here, differently from ver. 8, contrasted 
with the condition of a son enjoying his 
full independence (see ver. 25 and ch. v. 1). 
It would be an insufferable constraint and 
degradation to the full-grown son to be 
set to con over and repeat the lessons 
of the infant school. “Avw6ev, afresh, over 
again, intensifies πάλιν by adding the 
notion of making a fresh start from the 
commencing-point of the course indicated. 
The application of these words, together 
especially with the phrase, “turn back 
again,” in the preceding clause, to the case 
of the Galatian converts from idolatrous 
heathenism, has suggested to many minds 
the idea that St. Paul groups the cere- 
monialism of heathen worship with that of 
the Mosaic Law. Bishop Lightfoot in par- 
ticular has here a valuable note, in which, 
with his usual learning and breadth of 


. View, he shows how the former might ἐπ 


tts ritualistic element have subserved the 
purpose of a disciplinary training for a 
better religion. Such a view might be 
regarded as not altogether out of harmony 
with the apostle’s spirit as evinced in 
his discourses to the Lycaonians and the 
Athenians (Acts xiv. 15—17; xvii. 22—31), 
But though in his wide sympatheticalness 
he might, if discoursing with heathens, 
have sought thus to win them to a better 
faith, he is hardly just now in a mood for 
any such sympathetic tolerance. He is 
much too indignant at the behaviour of 
these Galatian revolters to allow that their 


190 


THE EPISTLE TO 


THE GALATIANS. (ox. rv. 1---81, 


former religious ceremonies could have 
been good enough to be admitted to group 
with those of the Law of Moses; he has just 
before adverted to their former heathenism 
for the very purpose of (so to speak) setting 
them down—a purpose which would be a 
good deal defeated by his referring to that 
eult of theirs as in any respect standing 
on @ level with the cult of the Hebrews. 
Indeed, it may be doubted whether, at the 
utmost limit to which he would at any 
time have allowed himsclf to go, in the 
“economy” which he unquestionably was 
used to employ in dealing with souls, he 
would, however, have gone so far as to class 
the divinely appointed ordinances of Isracl, 
the training-school of God’s own children, 
with the ritual of demon-inspired worships. 
It is much easier to suppose that the 
apostle identifies the Galatian Churchmen 
with God’s own people, with whom they 
were now in fact σύμφυτοι, blended in 
corporal identity with them. God’s children 
had heretofore been in bondage to the 
A, B, O, of the Law, but were so no longer; 
if any of those who were now , God’s 
children took it in hand to observe that 
Law, then were they, though not in their 
individual identity, yet in their corporate 
identity, turning back again to the A, B, C, 
from which they had been emancipated. 
The former experience of Israel was their 
experience, as the “fathers” of Israel were 
their fathers (1 Cor. s. 1); which experience 
they were now setting themselves to renew. 

Ver. 10.—Ye observe days, and months, 
and times, and years (ἡμέρας παρατηρεῖσθε, 
καὶ μῆνας, καὶ καιρούς, καὶ ἐνιαυτούς); days 
ye are tntent on observing, and months, and 
seasons, and years. In the compound verb 
παρατηρεῖν, the prepositional prefix, which 
often denotes “amiss,” seems rather, from 
the sense of “at one’s side,” to give the 
verb the shade of close, intent observation. 
This may be shown by the circumstances 
to be of an insidious character; thus the 
active παρατηρεῖν in Mark iii. 2; Luke vi. 
7; xiv. 1; Acts ix. 24, and the middle 
παρατηροῦμαι, Wilh no apparent difference of 
sense, in Luke xx. 20. Josephus uses 
the verb of “keeping the sabbath days” 
( Ant.,’ iii. 5, 8), and the noun παρατήρησις 
τῶν νομίμων, fur “ observance of the things 
which are according to the laws” (‘ Ant.,’ 
viii. 8, 9). The accumulation of nouns 
with the reiterated “and,” furnishing 
another example of the δεινότης of St. 
Paul’s style, betokens a scornfully impatient 
mimesis. These reactionaries were full of 
festival-observing pedantry—“ days,” “new 
moons,” “ festivals,” “holy years,” being 
always on their lips. The meaning of the 
first three of the nouns is partially sug- 
gested by Οὐ]. ii. 16, “Let no man judgo 


you... in respect of a feast day, or a new 
moon, or a sabbath day (ἑορτῆς, νουμηνίας, 
σαββάτωνν;" in which passage, we may ob- 
serve, there is a similar tone of half-mocking 
mimesis; where the same ideas are apparently 
presented, but in a reverse order. Comp. 
also 2 Chron. viii. 13, “ Offering according 
to the commandment of Moses, on the 
sabbaths, and on the new moons, and on 
the solemn feasts, three times in the year, 
even in the feast of unleavened bread, and 
in the feast of weeks, and in the feast of 
tabernacles.” The “days,” then, in the 
present passage, we may suppose, are the 
sabbath days, together perhaps with the two 
fast days every week which the Jewish 
tradition prescribed (Luke xviii. 12). The 
“months” point to the new moons, the 
observance of which might occasion to these 
Gentiles considerable scope for discussion 
in adjusting themselves to the Jewish 
calendar, different no doubt from the calendar 
they had been hitherto used to. The 
“seasons” would be the annual festivals 
and fasts of the Jews, not only the threw 
prescribed by the Levitical Law, but also 
certain others added by tradition, as the 
Feasts of Purim and of Dedication. So far 
we appear to be on tolerably sure ground. 
The fourth item, “ years,” may refer either to 
the sabbatical year (Lev. xxv. 2—7), which 
at any rate latterly the Jews had got to 
pay much attention to (1 Mace. vi. 49, 53; 
Josephus, ‘ Ant.,’ xiv. 10, 6; also xiv. 16, 2; 
Tacitus, ‘ Hist.’ v. 4); or possibly the 
jubilee years, one such fiftieth year, it might 
be, falling about this time due. Bengel 
(‘Gnomon’) supposes that a sabbatical ycar 
might be being held a.p. 48, to which date 
he assigns this Epistle; while Wieseler 
(‘ Chron. Synops.,’ p. 204, etc., referred to by 
Bishop Lightfoot) offers a similar conjecture 
for the year a.p. 54 autumn to a.p. 55 autumn. 
Very striking is the impatience which the 
apostle manifests in overhearing as it were 
the eager discussions occupying the atten- 
tion of these foolish Galatian Judaizers. 
Their interest, he perceived, was absorbed 
by matters which were properly for them 
things of no concern at all, but which, with 
ostentatious zeal as suci persons do, they 
were making their concern. The cause of 
their doing so lay, we may believe, in tle 
feeling which was growing up in their 
minds that such like outward observances 
would of themselves make their life accept- 
able to God; this general sentiment habiting 
itself, in the choice of the particular form 
of outward ceremonies to be adopted, in the 
observance of the celebrations given by 
God to his people fer the season of their 
nonage. The principle itself was no doubt 
repugnant to the apostle’s mind, even 


apart from the Judaizing form which it was 


ox. rv. 1—31.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 


191 


assuming, and which threatened a defection 
from Christ, Curious regard to such matters 
he evidently on its own account regards 
with scorn and impatience. But therewith 
also the old venerable religion, localized 
at Jerusalem as its chief seat, would under 
the impulse of such sentiments be sure to 
perilously attract their minds away from 
the “reformation” (διόρθωσις, Heb. ix. 10) 
to which it had now been subjected; and 
they were in danger of losing, nay, had 
in great degree at least already lost, the 
zest which they once had felt in em- 
bracing the exceeding great and precious 
gifts which Christ had brought to them. 
What was there here but the “evil heart 
of unbelief” spoken of in Heb. iii, 12, 
“in departing from the living God,” now 
manifesting himself to his people in his 
Son? It is this animus characterizing the 
behaviour of the Galatian Churchmen 
which marks its essential difference as 
compared with that observance of “days” 
and “meats” which in Rom. xiv. the 
apostle treats as a matter, relative to which 
Christians were to live in mutual tolerance. 
As long as a Christian continued to feel 
his relation to the Lord Jesus (Rom. xiv. 
6—9), it mattered not much if he thought 
it desirable to observe the Jewish sabbath 
or to abstain from eating animal food. 
He might, indeed, make himself thereby 
chargeable with spiritual unwisdom; the 
apostle clearly thought he would; but if he 
still held fast by Christ as the sole and 
all-sufficing Source to him of righteousness 
before God and of spiritual life, he was to 
he received and welcomed as a brother, 
without being vexed by interference with 
these foolish tenets of his. It became 
different when his care for such really 
indifferent externals took his heart away 
from a satisfied adherence to the Lord ; 
then his ceremonialism or asceticism became 
rank and even fatal heresy, And this was 
what the apostle was fearing on behalf of 
his once so greatly cherished disciples in 
Galatia, : 

Ver. 11.—I am afraid of you, lest I haye 
*estowed upon you labour in vain (φοβοῦμαι 
ἡμᾶς, μή πως εἰκῆ κεποπίακα eis ὑμᾶς); Iam 
sfraid of you, lest by any means I have 
bestowed labour upon you in vain. That is, 
this behaviour of yours makes me fear 
whether I may not have bestowed labour 
upon you fruitlessly. A similar construc- 
tion of μή πως with an indicative occurs 
in 1 Thess. 111. 5, Μή πως ἐπείρασεν ὑμᾶς ὃ 
πειράζων, “Fearing, whether the tempter 
may not have tempted you;” followed by 
the subjunctive, Kal εἰς κένον γένηται 6 κόπος 
ἡμῶν, “And lest our labour should [in the as 
et future ἀρ τὐνον to be for no good,” 
This passage in the Thessalonians serves to 


result. 


illustrate the nature of the mischief, which, 
in the present case, the apostle feared might 
For one thing, there was the hurt, 
the perhaps fatal hurt, which the Galatian 
believers might themselves receive from that 
virtual renouncement of their spiritual in- 
heritance which they now seemed to be 
foolishly making. But there was aleo the 
disappointment which would accrue to 
himself through the failure of his work 
among them: “For what,” as he wrote to 
the Thessalonians, ii. 19, “is our hope, or 
crown of glorying? Are not even ye, before 
our Lord Jesus at his coming?” The same 
anticipated joy he speaks of in writing to 
the Philippians, as about to accrue to him- 
self from the steadfastness of his converts: 
“That I may have whereof to glory in the 
day of Christ, that I did not run in vain, 
neither labour in vain.” This anticipation 
was a joy which he would fain not have 
wrested from him. 

Ver. 12,—Brethren, I beseech you, be as I 
am; for 1 am as yo are (γίνεσθε ὡς ἐγώ, ὅτι 
κἀγὼ ὡς ὑμεῖς, ἀδελφοί, δέομαι); be ye as I; 
because Ion my part am as yo; brethren, I 
entreat. We may compure 1 Cor. xi. 1, “ Be 
imitators of me, even as on my part I am 
of Christ (μιμηταί pov γίνεσθε, καθὼς κἀγὼ 
Χριστοῦ There is no need in respect to 
γίνεσθε to accentuate the notion of change: 
this yerb often means simply “show one’s 
self,” “act as;” as eg. 1 Cor. xiv. 20, My 
παιδία ylveqde ...; ταῖς δὲ φρεσὶ τέλειοι γίνεσθε: 
ibid., xv. 58, and often. “Be asI;” to wit, 
rejoicing in Christ Jesus as our sole and 
all-sufficing Righteousness before God, and 
in that faith letting go all caro about rites 
and ceremonies of the Law of Moses, or 
indeed ceremonialism of any kind, as if 
such things mattered at all here, in the 
business of being well-pleasing to God, 
whether done or forborne. “ Because I on 
my part am as ye.” I, a born Jew, once 
a zealous worker-out of legal ceremonial 
righteousness, haye put that aside, and have 
placed myself on the footing of a mere 
Gentile, content to live like a Gentile 
(ἐθνικῷς καὶ obs ᾿Ιουδαϊκῶς, ch. ii. 14), trust- 
ing in Christ like as any Gentile has to do 
who was bare alike of Jewish prerogative 
and of ceremonial righteousness. This 
“for” or “because” is an appeal to them 
for loying sympathy and fellow-working. 
What was to become of him if Gentiles 
withheld from him their practical sympathy 
with his religious life? To what other 
quarter could he look for it? From Jewish 
sympathy he was an utter ontcast. The 
ἀδελφοί, δέομαι, “ brethren, I entreat,” comes 
in here as a breathing forth of intense 
imploring. And a remarkable instance is 
here afforded of that abrupt, instantaneous 
transition in the expression of feeling 


192 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


(ow. tv. 1—81, 


which is one great characteristic of St. 
Paul when writing in one of his more 
passionate moods. Compare for this the 
flexure of passionate feeling prevailing 
through the tenth and three following chap- 
ters of the Second Epistle to the Corinthians. 
Just before, in this chapter, vers. 8—11, the 
language has been that of stern upbruiding, 
and, indeed, as if de haut en bas; as from 
one who from the high level of Israelite 
pre-eminence was addressing those who 
quite recently were mere outcast heathens. 
But here he seems suddenly caught and 
carried away by a flood of passionate 
emotion of another kind. The remem- 
brance comes to his soul of his own former 
sorrowa, when he “suffered the loss of all 
things,” as he so pathetically tells the 
Philippians (iii. 4—14); when in the work- 
ing out of his own salvation, and that of 
the Gentiles to whom he had been appointed 
to minister, he had cut himself off from all 
that he had once prized, and from all the 
attachments of kindred and party and 
nation. A terrible rending had it been for 
him when he had ceased to be a Jew; his 
flesh still quivered at the recollection, 
though his spirit rejoiced in Christ Jesus. 
And now this mood of feeling prompts him 
to cast himself almost as it were at the feet 
of these Gentile converts, adjuring them 
not to turn away from him, not to bereave 
him of their fellowship and sympathy. Ye 
have not injured me at all (οὐδέν με ἠδική- 
cate); no wrong have ye done me. This 
commences ἃ new sentence, which runs on 
through the next three verses. The apostle 
is anxious to remove from their minds the 
apprehension that he was offended with 
them on the ground of unkindness shown 
by them towards himself. It was true that 
he bad been writing to them in strong terms 
of displeasure and indignation; but this 
was altogether on account of their be- 
haviour towards the gospel, not at all on 
account of any injury that he had himself 
to complain of. He is well aware of the 
virulent operation of the sentiment ex- 

ressed by the old maxim, “Odimus quos 
Posimus :" and is therefere eager and 
anxious to take its sting out of the mutual 
relations between himself and them. When 
the apostle is writing under strong emotion, 
the connecting links of thought are fre- 
quently difficult to discover; and this is the 
case here, But this seems to be the thread 
of connection: the Galatian Christians 
would not be ready to accord him any 
sympathetic compliance with his entreaty 
that they would “be as he was,” if they 
thought he entertained towards them senti- 
ments of soreness or resentment on personal 
grounds. There was no reason, he tells 
them, why they should; they had done him 


no wrong. There is no reason for supposing 
that the time of the action referred to in οὐδέν 
με ἠδικήσατε is identical with that indicated 
by the aorists of the two next verses. From 
the words, τὸ πρότερον, “the first time,” in ver. 
13, it is clear, as critics have generally felt, 
that there had been a second visit after that 
one. If so, a disclaimer of offence taken 
during the first visit would not have ob- 
viated the suspicion of >ffence taken during 
a later one, Tho aoriat of ἠδικήσατε must, 
therefore, cover the whole period of inter 
course. Perhaps thus: whatever wrong you 
may suspect me of charging you with, be 
assured I do not charge you with it; there 
was no personal affront then offered me. In 
what follows, it is true, he dwells exclusively 
upon the enthusiastic demonstration which 
they made of their personal attachment to 
him when he first visited them; but though 
the assertion here made is not to its full 
extent proved good by the particulars given 
in vers. 13 and 14, and thougi the enthu- 
siasm of personal kindness there described 
must, under the circumstances, have very 
considerably abated; yet, very supposably, 
nothing may have occurred since then— 
nothing, for example, during his second 
visit—which would show that they now 
disowned those feelings of love and respect. 
At all events, he refuses to allow that there 
had. No personal affront had he to complain 
of ; while, on the other hand, their former 
intense kindness had laid up as it were a 
fund of responsive affection and gratitude 
in his bosom which could not be soon ex- 
hausted. 

Ver. 13.—Ye know (οἴδατε δέ); and ye 
know, The apostle very often uses the verb 
οἴδαμεν or οἴδατε, conjoined with either δέ, 
γάρ, or καθώς, when recalling some circum- 
stance of personal history (1 Cor. xvi. 15; 
Phil. iv. 15; 1 Thess. ii. 1, 2, 5,11; iv. 4; 
2 Tim. i. 15) or to introduce the statement 
of a doctrine as one which would be at once 
recognized as certain or familiar (Rom. ii. 
2; iii, 19; viii. 28; 1 Tim. 1. 8; 2 Thess. 13. 
6). The phrase as so used is equivalent to 
“We [or, ‘you’] do not need to be told,” 
ete. ; and with δὲ is simply ἃ formula intro- 
ducing such a reminiscence, this conjunc- 
tion having in such cases noadversative force, 
but being simply the δὲ of transition (meta- 
batic) ; equivalent to “now” or “and,” or 
not needing to be represented at ali in trans- 
lation; so that the Authorized Version is 
perfectly justified in omitting it in the pre- 
sent instance. The phrase may be taken as 
meaning “And you will well - remember.” 
If the apostle had intended to introduce a 
statement strongly adversative to the last 
preceding sentence, he would probably have 
written ἀλλὰ τοὐναντίον (ch. 11. 7) or some 


such phrase. How through infirmity of the 


om, 1v. 1—31.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


193 


flesh I preached the gospel unto you (ὅτι δι᾽ 
ἀσθένειαν τῆς σαρκὸς εὐηγγελισάμην ὑμῖν); 
that because of an infirmity of the flesh I 
preached the gospel unto you. “ An infirmity 
of the flesh:” that is,a bodily illness. The 
noun ἀσθένεια is used tor “ illness” in Jolin 
xi. 4; Acts xxviii. 9; 1 Tim. v. 23; Matt. 
viii. 17. It also denotes a nervous disable- 
ment, as Luke xiii. 11,12; John v. 5. The 
verb ἀσθενέω is the common word for “ being 
sick,” as Luke iv. 40; vii. 10; John xi. 3, ete. 
It is possible that the apostle meant to say 
that the Galatians might not unnaturally 
have thought themselves treated slightingly 
in that his remaining among them so long was 
owing to illness and not to his own choice; 
but that yet, for all that, they had shown 
themselves most eager in welcoming their 
involuntary visitor. The words, however, 
do not require to be thus construed, and in 
all probability intend no more than to bring 
back to their remembrance the disorder 
under which he was then suffering. The 
illness would seem to have been of a nature 
to make his personal appearance in some 
way unsightly, and even repulsive; for the 
ἐξεπτύσατε, spat out, of the next verse 
suggests even the lattcr idea. Evidently 
this disorder, as also the one noted in 2 Cor, 
xii. 7, 8, did not disqualify him for minis- 
terial work altogether. He adverts to the 
circumstance, as making it yet more remark- 
able and more grateful to his feelings, that, 
notwithstanding the disagreeable aspect 
which in some way his disorder presented 
to those about him, they had cherished his 
presence among them with so much kindness 
as they did and also with such revereutial 
respect. How it was that hisillness brought 
about this protracted stay, whether it was 
that he fell ill while journeying through the 
country so as to be unable to pursue his way 
to his ulterior destination, or whether the 
remarkable healthiness of thy climate either 
first attracted him thither or detained him 
there for convalescence (see Bishop Light- 
foot, ‘ Galatians,’ p. 10, note 2, for the cha- 
racter of the climate at Angora, the ancient 
Ancyra), it is impossible for us to determine. 
It is noticeable that St. Chrysostom’s com- 
ments on the passage appear to show that 
he considered the apostle to be simply stating 
the circumstances under which and not those 
in consequence of which he preached the gos- 
pel to them; and so also Gicumenius and 
‘Theophylact paraphrase δι᾽ ἀσθένειαν by μετὰ 
ἀσθενείας, suggesting the conjecture that 
they and St. Chrysostom understood the 
words as equivalent to “ during a period of 
infirmity of the flesh.” But this gives to 
διὰ with an accusative a sense which, to say 
the least, is not a common one. Is this 
illuess of body to be connected with the 
euliction, most probably a bodily affliction, 
GALATIANS, 


mentioned in 2 Cor. xii. 7, 8, “the stake in 
the flesh”? This latter affliction has been 
discussed very fully by Dean Stanley and 
Meyer on the Corinthians, by Bishop Light- 
foot in his commentary on the Galatians, 
and by Dr. Farrar in his ‘ Life of St. Paul.’ 
It appears to have first befallen the apostle 
after the “revelations” accorded to him 
fourteen years befure he wrote his Second 
Epistle to the Corinthians, which he is sup- 
posed to have done in the autumn of a.p. 
57. This would bring us back to about 
a.v. 43. The apostice’s first visit to Galatia, 
according to Bishop Lightfoot, p. 22, took 
place about a.p. 51. When we consider 
that no doubt many of those wearing labours 
and hardships, interspersed with frequent 
suffering of gross personal outrage, recounted 
in 2 Cor. xi. 23—27, had been undergone in 
the eight first of those fourteen years (the 
stoning at Lystra certainly had), it must 
seem very precarivus to conjecture that the 
malady here referred to was a recurrence of 
just that particular disorder experienced 
eight years before. How many other ail- 
ments might not the apostle have been sub- 
ject to, amid the cruel allotment of suffering 
and liardship whieh prevailingly marked 
his course! It is quite as probable, to say 
the least, that he may then have been suf- 
fering in health or in limb from some assault 
of personal violence recently undergone. 
St. Luke gives no particulars whatever of 
this portion of St. Paul’s journey, which is 
only just mentioned in Acts xvi. 6. The 
apostle visited Corinth for the first time not 
many months after this first sojourn in 
Galatia: and it is interesting to observe 
that 116 speaks of his heving then ministered 
to them in “feebleness ” (ἀσθενείᾳ, 1 Cor. ii. 
3), in a manner strongly suggestive of bodily 
weakness. At tho first (τὸ πρότερον); the 
Jirst time—an expression plainly implying 
that there had been a subsequent sojourn. 
Respecting this latter visit, all we know is 
what we have so cursorily stated in Acts 
xviii. 23; unless, perchance, we may be able 
to draw some inferences relating to it from 
what we read in this Epistle itself. Chro- 
nologers are pretty well agreed in placing 
the commencement of this third apostolical 
journey about three years after the com- 
mencement of the second. 

Ver. 14.—And my temptation which was 
in my flesh (καὶ τὸν πειρασμὸν ὑμῶν [Recep- 
tus, πειρασμόν μου τὸν ἐν τῇ σαρκί pov); and 
that which was a temptation for you in my 
flesh. “Tu my flesh ;” that is,in my bodily 
appearance. Instead of ὑμῶν, the Textus 
Receptus gives pov τόν: but ὑμῶν is the 
reading of the best manuscripts, and, as the 
more difficult one, was the one most likely 
to be tampered with; it is accordingly ac- 
cepted by recent editora with great unani- 

9 


194 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


(cn. rv. 1—81 


mity. “My trial” would add to the sentence 
a tinge of pathetic self-commiseration. 


“Your trial” brings out the sentiment’ 


how greatly his affliction would be likely 
to indispose his hearers to listen to his 
message; it “tested” very severely the 
sincerity and depth of their religious sensi- 
lility. Ye despised not, nor rejected (οὐκ 
ἐξουθενήῆσατε, οὐδὲ ἐξεπτύσατε); ye scouted 
not, nor loathed. The disfigurement on the 
apostle’s person, whatever it was, did not 
detain their attention; they did not, at least 
not long, occupy themselves with indulging 
their feelings of ridicule or disgust; their 
sense of it got to be soon absorbed in their 
admiration of the apostle’s character and in 
their delight in the heavenly message which 
he brought tothem. The verb ἐξουθενέω, in 
the New Testament found only in St. Luke 
and St. Paul, means always, not merely “to 
despise,” but to express contempt for a 
thing, “to scout” (comp. Luke xviii. 9; 
xxiii. 11; Acts iv. 11; Rom. xiv. 3, 10; 1 
Cor. i. 28; vi. 4; 2 Cor. x. 10; 1 Thess. v. 
20). Grotius observes of ἐξεπτύσατε that it 
is a figurative expression drawn from our 
spitting out of our mouth what greatly 
offends our taste; quoting Catullus (¢ Carm.’ 
50, ‘ Ad Lic.’): “ Precesque nostras, Oranus, 
ne despuas.” Critics have remarked that 
ἐκπτύειν, which is not found elsewhere used 
thus metaphorically as ἀποπτύειν is, is pro- 
bably so applicd here by the apostle to 
produce a kind of allitcration after ἐξουθενή- 
core: a8 if it were “Non reprobastis, nec 
respuistis.” But received me as an angel of 
God, even as Christ Jesus (ἀλλ᾽ ὡς ἄγγελον 
Θεοῦ ἐδέξασθέ pe, ὡς Χριστὸν Ἰησοῦν); but 
as an angel of God received ye me, as Christ 
Jesus. Their first fecling of aversation from 
his peisonal appearance gave place to cmo- 
tions of delight in his message of which he 
seemed as it were the embodiment, and of 
reverential love and gratitude to himself. 
His manifest absorption in the glad tidings 
he brought, and in love to his Lord, irra- 
diating his whole heiny with his unbounded 
benevolence and gladsemeness as the mes- 
senger of peace (Kiph. ii. 17), was recognized 
by them with a response of unspeakable 
enthusiasm, A faint parallel is aff. rded by 
1 Thess. ii. 13. 

Ver. 15.—Where is then (or, what was 
then) the blessedness ye spake of? (ποῦ οὖν 
[Receptns, τίς οὖν Fv] 6 μακαρισμὸς ὑμῶν ;); 
where, then, ia that gratulation of yourselves 
(or, of yours)? The reading, ποῦ οὖν, which 
is that of the best manuscripts, is now gene- 
rally accepted in prefereuce to that of the 
Textus Receptus, τίς οὖν ἦν, in which, how- 
ever, τίς οὖν stands on a higher footing of 
evidence than the remaining word ἦν, This 
Jatter reading may be taken to mean: either, 
«Of what sort, then, was that gratulation of 


yours?” that is, what was its value in respect 

to the depth of conviction on which it waa 

founded 2---τίς being qualis, as Luke x. 22; 

xix. 3, cte., which would bring us to much 

the same result as ποῦ : or, “ How great, then, 

was that gratulation of yours!” But the 

“then” (οὖν) comes in lamely; τότε (“at 

that time ”) would have been more in place; 

and, further, it is questionable whether the 

τίς of admiration ever occurs without the 

wonder taking a tinge of inquiry, as, for ex- 

ample, Mark vi. 2; Luke v. 21; (οἱ, i. 27, 
which would be out of place here. With the 

more approved reading, ποῦ οὖν, the apostla 
asks, “* What is, then, become of that gratu- 
lation of yourselves?” ‘'he‘tthen” recitestha 
fact, implied in the description given of their 

former behaviour, that they did once felicitate 

themselves on the apostle’s having brought 

them the gospel. Thisismoredirectly brought 
into view in the words which follow. As 

the verb μακαρίζω means “ pronounce happy,” 

as Luke i. 48 and Jas. v. 11, the substantive 
μακαρισμὸς denotes “ pronouncing one to be 
happy ;” as Rom. iv. 6, 9. So Clement of 
Rome (‘Ad Cor.,’? 50), who weaves the 

apostle’s words into his own sentence with 
the same meaning. This felicitation must 

have been pronounced by the Galatiang 

upon themselves, not upon the apostle; the 

apostle would have spoken of himself on 
the object of their ἐὐλογία, not of their 
μακαρισμός. For I bear you record (μαρτυρῶ 
γὰρ tu); for I bear you witness ; testify on 
your behalf; the phrase always denoting 
commendation (Rom. x. 2; Col. iv. 13). Com- 
pare “ Ye were running well,” ch. v.3. The 
verb denotes a deliberate, almost solemn, 
averment. That, if it had been possible, ye 
would have plucked out your own eyes, and 
have given them to me (ὅτι, εἰ δυνατόν, τοὺς 
ὀφθαλμοὺς ὑμῶν ἐξορύξαντες ἐδώκατέ [Recep- 

tus, ἂν ἐδώκατέ] μοι); that, tf possible, ye had 
spitted out your eyes to give them to me. 
The phrase, ἐξορύσσειν ὀφθαλμούς, occurs in 
“the Septuagint of Judg. xvi. 21 and 1 Sam. 
xi. 2, Hebrew, “bore out the eyes.” The 

omission of the ἄν, which is rejected by recent 

editors, perhaps intimates the certainty and 

readiness with which they would have done 

it; but the particle occurs very sparingly in 

the New Testament as compared with elas- 

sical Greek. There seems something strange 

in the specification of this particular form 

of evidencing zealous attachment. If there 

had otherwise appeared any question of 

miking gifts, the apostle might have been 

construed to mean, “ Ye were ready to give 

me anything, your very eyes even;” bu 

this is not tho case. Possibly the p riiculaz 

mention of “the Churches of Galatia” 18 

1 Cor. xvi. 1 may have been secasioned by 

their having shown an esp%cial readiness, 

*'’s secon sojourr among 


en. iv. 131.) 


THE EPISTLE To THE GALATIANS. 


198 


them, to take part in the collection referred 
to; or by their having been the first 
Churches he came to in that particular tour, 
the directions which he gave to them being 
given also to all the Churches he went on to 
visit; but on this point see Introd. p. xvi. 
The tone of ch. vi. 6—10 does not betoken 
especial open-handedness on their part, 
unless, perhaps, the words, “let us not 
grow weary,” hint at a liberality once dis- 
played but now declined from. On the whole, 
this specification of “eyes” seems rather to 
point to there having been something amiss 
with the apostle’s own eyes, either from oph- 
thalmia or as the effect of personal outrage 
perpetrated upon him. It is espccially de- 
scrying of notice how the apostle, in the two 
clauses of this verse, links together their joy 
in their newly found Christian blessedness 
with their grateful love to himself; the latter 
fact is adduced as proof of the former. Their 
gospel happiness, he feels, was indissolubly 
woven in with their attachment to him: if 
they let go their joy in Christ Jesus, as, apart 
from any qualification to be acquired by 
observances of the Law of Moses, their all- 
sufficient righteousness, they must also of 
necessity become estranged from him, who 
was nothing if not the exponent and herald 
to them of that happiness, This considera- 
tion is of great moment for the right under- 
standing of the next verse. 

Ver. 16.—Am I therefore become your 
enemy, because I tell you the truth? [ὥστε 
ἐχθρὸς ὑμῶν γέγονα ἀληθεύων ὑμῖν;}; so then, 
am I become your enemy, because I deal with 
you according to truth? This is a wailing 
remonstrance against an apprehended in- 
cipient state of alienation. “So then,” ὥστε 
(see nofe on ver. 7), occurs repeatedly before 
an imperative; as 1 Cor. iii. 21; iv. 5; x. 12; 
Phil. 11, 12; iv, 1; Jas. 1. 19; here only 
before a question, Its consecutiveimport here 
lies in the essential identification between 
their attachment to St. Paul and their al- 
legiance to the pure gospel. 1 they forsook 
the gospel, their heart was gone from him. 
Naturally also their incipient defection from 
the truth was accompanied by a jealousy on 
their part how he would regard them, and 
by a preparedness to listen to those who 
spoke of him, as Judaizers everywhere did, 
with disparagement and dislike. No doubt 
the accounts which had just rcached him of 
the symptoms showing themselves among 
them of defection from the gospel,and which 
prompted the immediate despatch of this 
Epistle, had informed him also of symptoms 
of a commencing aversation from himself. 
The construction of γέγονα with ἀληθεύων is 
similar to tlnt of γέγονα ἄφρων with καυχώμε- 
vos in the T'extus Receptus of 2 Cor. xii. 11, 
which is perfectly good Greek, even though 
the word καυχώμενος must be removed from 


the text as not genuine. The verb “I am 
become ” describes the now produced result 
of the action expressed by the participle 
ἀληθεύων, “ dealing according to truth ””—an 
action which has been continuous to the 
present hour and is still going on. If the 
apostle were referring only to something 
which had taken place at his second visit, 
he would have probably used different tenses; 
either, perhaps, ἐχθρὺς ὑμῶν ἐγενόμην ἀλη- 
Oe¥wv—compare pavp .. . κατεργαζομένη in 
Rom.vii. 13(or with a contemporancous aorist 
participle, ἀληθεύσας); or, ἐχθρὸς ὑμῶν γέγονα 
ἀληθεύσας, like εἶναι μοιχαλίδα γενομένην 
ἀνδρὶ ἑτέρῳ in Rom, vii. 3. ΑΒ it stands, 
“dealing with you according to truth” (aAn- 
θεύων ὑμῖν) expresses the apostle’s continuous 
declaration of the gospel, und his never- 
flinching insistance upon the mortal danger 
of defection from it (sce ch. i. 9, προειρή- 
καμεν); and “fam become your enemy ” 
points to the result now manifesting itself 
from this steadfast attitude of his, in conse- 
quence of their consciousness of meriting 
his disapproval. ‘The verb ἀληθεύω occurs 
only once in the Septuagint—in Gen. xlii. 
16, Ei ἀληθεύετε ἢ οὐ, “ Whether there be any 
truth in you” (Anthorized Version and 
Hebrew); and once besides in the New 
Testamcnt—in Eph. iv. 15, ᾿Αληθεύοντες ἐν 
ἀγάπῃ, where the verb denotes, apparently, 
not merely being truthful in speech, but the 
whole habit of addiction both to uprightness 
and to God’s known truth; for we can hardly 
leave out of our view this latter idea, when 
we consider how frequently the apostle de- 
signates the gospel by the term “the truth” 
(2 Cor. iv. 2; vi. 7; xiii. 8; ch. iii.1; Eph. 
i. 13; 2 Thess. ii. 10, 12,13; 1 Tim. ii. 4). 
“Enemy” is either one regarded as adopt- 
ing a hostile position to them, or one viewed 
with hostile feeling by them, which latter is 
its sense in Rom. xi, 28 ; 2 Thess. iii. 15. The 
above exposition of the import of this verse 
is confirmed by the consideration that the 
Epistle affords no trace of the apostle’s rela- 
tions with the Galatian converts having been 
other than mutually friendly at even his 
second visit to them. This tact is implied 
in ver.12, and ch. i. 9 furnishes no evidence to 
the contrary; for those warnings may have 
been uttered in his first visit as well as in 
his second, without occasioning or being 
occasioned by any want of mutual confidence. 
This view of their mutual relations is ccn- 
firmed likewise by the feelings of indignant 
astonishment with which evidently the 
apostle took up his pen to address them in 
this letter: the tidings which bad jus¢ 
reached him had been a painful surprise to 
him, 

Ver, 17.—They zealously affect yon, but 
not well (ζγλοῦσιν ὑμᾶς ob καλῶς); they ad- 
mire you in no good way. Of the several 


198 


WHE EPISTLH ΤῸ ΠῊΒ GALATTANS. 


fou. rv. 1-34 


senses of the verb (ζηλοῦν, those of “ envy,” 
“emulate,” “strive after,” are plainly un- 
suitable in this verse and the one which 
follows. So also are the senses “ to be zea- 
lous on one’s behalf,” “ to be jealous of one,” 
which in Hellenistic usage crept into it, 
apparently from its having been in other 
senses adopted to represent the Hebrew verb 
ginné, and borrowing these from this Hebrew 
verb. The only phase of its meaning which 
suits the present passage is that which it 
perbaps by far the most frequently presents 
in ordinary Greek, though not so commonly 
in the Septuagint and in the New ‘Testa- 
ment, namely, “ to admire,” “ deem and pro- 
nounco highly fortunate and blessed.” When 
used in this sense, it has properly for its 
object a person; but with a suitable qualifi- 
eation of meaning it may have for its object 
something inanimate. Very often is the 
accusative of the person accompanied with 
the genitive of the ground of gratulation, as 
Aristophanes, ‘ Ach.,’ 972, Ζηλῶ oe τῆς εὐβου- 
Alas, “I congratulate, admire, you for your 
cleverness ;” see also ‘ Equit.,’ $34; ‘ Thes- 
moph.,’ 175; § Vesp.,’ 1450; but not always; 
thus Demosthenes, ‘Fals. Legat.,’ p. 424, 
“(Oavud(over καὶ ζηλοῦσι) they admire and 
congratulate and would each one be himself 
the like;” ‘Ady. Lept.,’ p. 500 (respecting 
public funeral oratious), “ ‘This is the cus!om 
of men admiring (ζγλούντων) virtue, not of 
mcn looking grudgingly upon those who 
on its account are being honoured;” Xeno- 
phon, ‘ Mem., ii. 1,19, “ Thinking highly of 
themselves, and praised and admired (ζηγλου- 
μένους) by others; ” Josephus, ‘ C. Ap.,’ i. 25, 
“ (CnAouuévous) admired by many.” It thus 
seems to be often just equivalent to ὀλβίζω 
or μακαρίζω, with the sense of which latter 
verb it is brought into close neighbourhood 
in Aristophanes, ‘Nubes,’ 1188, “‘ Blessed 
(μάκαρ), Strepsiades, are you, both for being 
so wise yourself and for having such a son 
as you have,’—thus will my friends and 
fellow-wardsmen say, in admiration of me 
(Cnaodyres).” Probably this is the sense in 
which the apostle uses the verb in 2 Cor. 
xi, 2, Ζηλῶ γὰρ ὑμᾶς Θεοῦ ζηλῷ, “I rejoice in 
your felicity with an infinite joy;” referring 
to the immense admiration which he felt of 
their present felicity, in their having been 
betrothed a chaste maiden to Christ; not 
till the next verse introducing the mention 
of his fear lest this paradisaical happiness 
might be darkened by the wiles of Satan. 10 
is in a modified shade of the same sense that 
the word is employed—where it is rendered 
“covet earnestly” in our Authorized Ver- 
sion—in 1 Cor. xii. 31; xiv. 1,39. In the 
passage now before us, then, (nrotow ὑμᾶς 
probably means “ they admire you,” that is, 
they tell youso. They were expressing strong 
admiration of the high Chriviian character 


and eminent gifts of these simple-minded 
believers; the charisms which had been 
bestowed upon them (ch. iii. 2); their virtues, 
in contrast especially with their heathen 
neighbours; their spiritual enlightenment. 
No doubt all this was said with the view of 
courting their favour; but ζηλοῦτε can hardly 
itself mean “ court favour,” and no instance 
of its occurring in this sense has been ad- 


“duced; and this rendering of the verb breaks 


down utterly in ver.18. ‘The persons referred 
to must, of course, be understood as those 
who were busy in instilling at once Judaiz- 
ing sentiments and also feelings of antipathy 
to the apostle himself, as if he were theit 
enemy (ver. 16). The Epistle furnishes no 
indication whatever that these persons were 
strangers coming among them from without, 
answering, for example, to those spoken of 
in ch. ii. 12 as disturbing the Antiochian 
Church. It is quite supposable that the 
warning which, not long afver the writing of 
this Epistle, the apostle addressed to the 
Lphesian elders at Miletus (Acts xx. 29, 30), 
when putting them on their guard against 
those who “from among their own selves 
should rise up speaking perverse things to 
draw away disciples after them,” was founded 
in part upon this experience of his in the 
Galatian Churches. Galatian Churchmen it 
may well have been, and no other, who now 
(as the apostle had just been apprised) were 
employing that χρηστολογία καὶ εὐλογία, that 
“kind suave speech” and that “speech of 
compliment and laudation,” which in Rom. 
xvi. 18 he describes as a favourite device of 
this class of deceivers, to win the ear of their 
unwary brethren. “In no good way;” for 
they did it insincerely and with the purpose 
of drawing them into courses which, though 
these men themselves knew it not, were 
nevertheless fraught with ruin to their spiri- 
tual welfare. Yea, they would exclude you; 
Or, Us (ἀλλὰ ἐκκλεῖσαι ὑμᾶς θέλουσιν); nay, 
rather, to shut you out és their wish. The 
reading “ us,” noticed in the margin of the 
Authorized Version, is probably a merely 
conjectural emendation made in the Greek 
text by Beza, wholly unsupported by manu- 
script authority. he ἀλλὰ is adversative 
to the oJ καλῶς, the secondary thought of 
the preceding clause, in the same way as the 
ἀλλὰ in 1 Cor. ii. 7 is adversative to the 
secondary negative clauses of ver. 6, The 
verb “shut out,” with no determinative 
qualification annexed, must have it supplied 
from the unexpressed ground for the “ad- 
miration” denoted by the verb (jAotew. The 
high eminence of spiritual condition and 
happiness on the possession of which these 
men were congratulating their brethren, 
they would be certainly excluded from if 
they listened to them. Compare tlie phrase, 
“who are unsettling you,” driving you out 


on. iv. 1---81 ἢ 


THE EPISTLE TO TH GALATIANS, 


191 


of house and home, in ch. v. 12, where see 
note. That ye might affect them (iva αὐτοὺς 
(ηλοῦτε); that ye may admire themselves. The 
position of αὐτοὺς makes it emphatic. We 
my paraphrase thus: that, being detached 
from regard to my teaching, and made to 
{cel a certain grave deficiency on your own 
part in respect to acceptableness with God, 
ye may bo led to look up as disciples to these 
kind-hearted sympathetic advisers for in- 
struction and guidance. The construction 
of ἵνα with ζηλοῦτε, which in ordinary Greek 
is the present indicative, ζηλῶτε being the 
form for the present subjunctive, is precisely 
similar to that of ἵνα μὴ with φυσιοῦσθε in 
1 Cor. iv. 6. When it is considered how 
punctually St. Paul is wont to comply with 
the syntactical rule with reference to ἵνα, and 
that these two remarkable deflections there- 
from are connected with contract forms of 
verbs in -όω, Riickert’s suggestion seems to 
be perfectly reasonuble, that the solecism 
lies, not in the syntactica: construction, but 
in the grammatical inflexion, contracting -¢y 
into -od instead of into-@. This form of con- 
traction may have been a provincialism of 
Tarsus, or it may have been an idiotism of 
St. Paul himself. Other expedients of ex- 
planation which have been proposed are 
intolerably harsh and improbable. 

Ver. 18.—But it is good to be zealously 
affected always in a good thing, and not only 
when Iam present with you (καλὸν δὲ ζηλοῦ- 
cba: (Receptus, τὸ ζηλοῦσθαι) ἐν καλῷ παν- 
τότε, καὶ μὴ μόνον ἐν τῷ παρεῖναί με πρὸς 
ὑμᾶς); but good it ἐδ to be admired, in what 
is good, at all times and not only when I am 
present with you. That is, but as to being 
admired and felicitated, the good kind of 
admiring felicitation is that which, being 
ten“ered on a good account, is enjoyed at all 
times, and not only, my little children, when 
Iam with you, as on that first occasion when 
you were so full of mutual felicitation and 
joy in the newly found sense of Gud’s adop- 
tion and love in Christ Jesus. In signiti- 
cation, this ζηλοῦσθαι, to be admired, is 
equivalent to μακαρίζεσθαι, to be congratu- 
lated, and was illustrated in the first note 
on ver. 17, especially by the reference to 
Aristophanes, ‘Nubes,’ 1188. Ζηλοῦσθαι ἐν τῷ 
παρεῖναί με mpds Suas, “to be objects of admira- 
tion when I am present with you,” is mani- 
festly a recital of the μακαρισμὸς ὑμῶν, “ the 
gratulation of yourselves,” of ver. 15. The 
vivid remembrance of the simple-hearted joy 
and frank sympathy with each other’s happi- 
nese of those days comes back tu the apostle’s 
mind with fresh force, after his brief men- 
tion and rebuke of the false-hearted gratu- 
lations and compliments by which they were 
now in danger of being ensnared. With a 
gentle reprehension of their levity, in that 
they were now bartering that former well- 


founded happiness for this later poor grati- 
fication of being recipients of mere false 
flattery, he yearns to bring them back tv 
what they were so senselessly casting away, 
and that they should hold it fast, a stable 
joy, whether he was with them or not. This 
would be the case if “ Christ were truly 
formed in them.” The phrase, ἐν καλῷ, 
“in what is good,” is similar to ἐν κρυπτῷ 
(Jolin vii. 4); 6 ἐν τῷ φανερῷ, ἐν τῷ κρυπτῷ 
Ιουδαῖος (Rom. ii. 28, 29). The sphere in 
which this admiring felicitation acts must 
be “ what is good ;” here that highest good 
which these Galatians were in danger of 
losing, if, indeed, they possessed it—bceing, 
and knowing themselves to be, sons of God. 
It is a doubtful point whether ver. 19 should 
be conjoined with this present verse, with a 
colon between vers. 19 and 20, and a comma 
only at the end of ver. 18; or whether the 
sentences should be separated as they appear 
in our Authorized Version. But at all events, 
the eurnest, anxious, tender affectionateness 
which, as it were, wrings the apostle’s heart 
im writing ver. 19, is to be felt already 
working in his soul in the writing of this 
eighteenth verse. The sense above given 
to the verb ζηλοῦν, though disallowed by 
Alford and Bishops Ellicott and Lightfoot, 
appears to be that recognized by the Greek 
commentators Chrysostom and Theophylact. 

Ver. 19.—My little children, of whom I 
travail in birth again until Christ be formed 
in you (rexvla μου [or, τέκνα μου] ods πάλιν 
ὠδίνω, ἄχρις οὗ μορφωθῇ Χριστὸς ἐν ὑμῖν); my 
little children (or, my children) of whom I 
am again in travail, until Christ be formed 
in you. It has been above remarked to be 
doubtful whether this verse should be con- 
joined with the preceding verse or with 
that which follows. The objection to the 
latter arrangement, presented by the δὲ at 
the commencement of ver. 20, is thought by 
many to be obviated by ἃ number of in- 
stances which have been alleged in which 
this conjunction is used with a sentence 
following ἃ vocative compellation (see 
Alford, Ellicott). But such cases appear 
marked by a tone of vivacity and surprise 
which is not present here. On the other 
hand, the tone of loving affectionate anxiety 
breathing in this verse links it more closely 
with the preceding than with the following 
one, in which such pathos is no longer dis- 
cernible, but is replaced by a deliberative 
attitude of mind. Yhe word τεκνία occurs 
as a compellation here only in St. Paul’s 
writings, though repeatedly in St. John’s 
Epistle and once in his Gospel (John xiii. 
33), where it appears as used by our Lord 
in an access of deeply muved affectionate- 
ness. St. Paul addresses Timothy as “ his 
child” (τέκνον) in 2 Tim. ii. 1 and 1 Tim. i. 
18, not only aaa term of endearment, but ag 


198 THE EPISTLE TO 


THE GALATIANS, (on. rv. i—31 


denoting also his having been spiritually 
begotten by him (comp. Philem. 10; 1 Cor. 
iv. 15). Here the like sense attaches to the 
word, as ia clear from the following clause, 
“of whom I am again in travail;” but the 
diminutive form of the noun, agreeing well 
with the notion of a child at its birth, 
combines in this case apparently a tender 
allusion also to the extremely immature 
character of their Christian discipleship 
(compare ‘ babes (νήπιοι) in Christ,” 1 Cor. 
iii. 1)}-~s0 immature, in fact, that the apostle 
is travailing of them afresh, as if not yet 
born at all, This particular shade of mean- 
ing, however, must be sacrificed, if we 
accept the reading τέκνα μου, “my chil- 
dren,” which is highly authenticated. The 
verb ὠδίνω cannot be understood as pointing 
to gestation merely ; it can only denote the 
pangs of parturition. The apostle by this 
figure describes himself as at this hour in 
an anguish of desire to bring the souls of 
his converts both to a complete state of son- 
ship in Christ Jesus, and to a complete 
consctoueness of that state—now at length 
bring them thereto, though that former 
travail had seemingly been in vain. In 1 Cor. 
iv. 15 and Philem. 10 he refers to him- 
sell as a spiritual father of his converts, 
and this too with touching pathos. Great 
ia tle pathos too of his reference to himself 
as, in his fostering care of his Thessalonian 
eonverts, like a tender “nursing motler 
cherishing her own elildren,” and also as 
of a “father” of them (1 Thess. ii. 7, 11). 
But neither of those passages equals the 
present in the expression of intense, even 
anguisi.ed, longing to effect, if only he 
might be able to etfcet it, a real transforma- 
tion in the spiritual claracter of these 
Galatian converts. “ Until”—I cannot rest 
till then !—* Christ-be formed in you.” The 
verb poppdw, form, occurs only here in the 
New Tcstament in its uncompounded shape. 
A passige is cited from ‘Const. Apost.,’ iv. 
7, in which it occurs in the phrase, “ formed 
man in the womb.” In the Septuagint of 
Tixod. xxi. 22 we have ἐξεικονισμένον of the 
unborn infant. It certainly seems as if the 
apostle used the word as one belonging to 
the samo region of thought as the ὠδίνω, 
but, with the like bold and plastic touch as 
clsewhere characterizes his use of imagery, 
refusing to be tied to thorougl-going con- 
sistency in its application. Compare for 
example 2 Cor. iii. 2. When the hour of 
ὠδῖ"ες is come, the period of the “ formation” 
of the babe has expired. Further, as show- 
ing the freedom of the writer’s use of 
imagery, the easiest way of taking ἐν ὑμῖν 
is to suppose that “Christ” is here viewed 
as “within” them, and not as a likeness 
to which they are to be conformed; conip. ch. 
ii. 22, “ Christ liveth in me ;” and Col. i. 27, 


where the “mystery” of the gospel is 
summed up in the words, “ Christ in you the 
hope of glory.” He cannot rest, he means, 
till the image, thought, of Christ as the 
Object of their sole and absrlute trust, as 
the complete ground of their acceptance 
with God and their sonship, shall be per- 
feetly and abidingly formed in their hearts. 
The hour in which a perfectly formed 
“ Christ,” that fair Divine Child of joy and. 
hope, has come to be there, in their hearts, 
will be_the hour in which the apostle’s 
travailing pangs have issued in their birth. 
No doubt the apostle is writing to persons 
baptized into Christ and thus clothed with 
Christ (ch. iii, 27); persons, in the language 
of the Chureh, “ born again.” But however 
straitly we choose to be restrained in the 
use of such images, solidifying into rigid 
dogma similitudes used for such passing 
illustration as the occasion of the moment 
requires, the sacred writers themsclyes 
recognize no such restriction. As Chry- 
sostom observes in his ‘Commentary,’ the 
apostle’s language in effect is, “Ye needa 
fresh new-birth, a fresh remoulding (ἀναγεν- 
νήσεως ἑτέρας ὑμῖν δεῖ καὶ dvawAdoews).” 
Baptized into Christ as those Galatians 
were, they were, however, in his view no 
true sons of God, until Christ had been 
really formed in their hearts. 

Ver. 20.—I desire to be present with you 
how (ἤθελον δὲ παρεῖναι πρὸς ὑμᾶς ἄρτι); I 
could wish to be present with you this very 
hour. The δὲ marks here simply a transition 
to another thought, and, as is vot unfre- 
quently the case, and as our Authorized 
Version assumes, needs uot to be represented 
in translation at all. Bishop Lightfoot 
writes, “ But, speaking of my presence, I 
would I had been present,” ete. But this 
explanation is not necessary. The imperfect 
verb ἤθελον, like the ἐβουλόμην of Acts xxv. 
22 and the ηὐχόμην of Rom. ix. 3, denotes 
8. movement as it were which had just been 
stirring in the mind, but which for good 
rcasons is now withdrawn: “I could almost 
wish—— but long distance and pressure of 
other duties make it impossible.” Thus 
much in explanation of the withdrawal of the 
wish. The wish itself was »%ecasioned by 
the feeling that the yearning desire of his 
soul might perhaps be more likely to be 
achieved if, by being on the spot, he were 
enabled to adapt his treatment to a more 
distinct consciousness of the circumstances 
than he can possibly now have. “To be 
present with you;” the very words are 
reponted from ver. 18. It was well both 
with you and with me when I was with 
you: would that I could be with you now! 
(Ο ἄρτι,“ this very hour,” see note onch.i, 9.) 
And to change my voice (καὶ ἀλλάξαι τὴν 
φωνήν uov) The tense of the infinitive 


cH. iv. 1—31.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


199 


ἀλλάξαι hardly allows us to take the word 
as meaning “from moment to moment 
according to the rapidly varying emer- 
gencies.” ‘his would have been expressed 
rather by ἀλλάσσειν. The questivn then 
arises—Change: from what to what? to 
which a great variety of answers have been 
proposed. The clue is probally supplicd 
in the words, “ be present with you this very 
hour.” This ἄρτι, contrasting as it does the 
very present with the former occasions on 
which the apostle had been with them, 
suggests that he meant that the tone of his 
utterance would need to be different if 
amongst them just now from what it bad 
then been. Then, it was tle simple, un- 
auxious, joyous, exposition of the blessed 
gospel, untrammiclled by fear of being mis- 
understood ; such a way of speaking as one 
would be naturally drawn on to pursue 
who found himself addressing those whom 
he could confide in, and who were disposed 
frankly and lovingly, with an honest and 
good heart, to drink in from his lips the 
simple faith. Perhaps he might now find 
it necessary to replace that mode of utter- 
ance by guarded words, by stern reasoning, 
by the refuting of wilful misconceptions, 
by exposing and abashing cavil and objec- 
tion. For I standin doubt of you; or, I 
am perplexed for you (ἀποροῦμαι yap ἐν 
ὑμῖν); I am perplexed about you. Compare 
Θαῤῥῶ ἐν ὑμῖν, “1 am in good courage con- 
cerning you” (2 Cor. vii. 16). As “in” 
the Corinthians the apostle found ground 
for good cuvurage, so “in” the Galatians he 
found ground for perplexity. This explains 
his wishing that he were with them. He 
would in that case be less unable to clearly 
understand their state of mind. 

Ver, 21.—Tell me, ye that desire to be 
under the Law (λέγετέ pot, of ὑπὺ νόμον 
θέλοντες εἶνα)ῦ. After the outburst of 
affectionate earnestness expressed in the 
last four verses, the apostle seems to have 
paused, reflecting in what way he could the 
most effectually convince these Galatian 
legalists of their error. At length, a con- 
sideration occurs to him, which he im- 
petuously so to speak hastens to abruptly 
set before them. He has before (ch. iii. 29) 
shown to the Galatian believers that they 
were “ Abraham’s seed.” He now means to 
show that, as children of Abraham through 
faith in Christ, they stood on a far higher 
footing than the children of the Sinai 
covenant did—a position which, by subject- 
ing themselves afresh to the Law, they 
would forego. The verb“ desire” (θέλοντε5), 
as here introduced, intimates that this 
aspiration of theirs was a mere freak of 
self-will, there being nothing in the cireum- 
stances to prompt it. So in ver. 9, “Ye 
desire to be in bondage.” In cousequence 


of there being no article with νόμον, some 
would render ὑπὸ νόμον “under Law,” that 
is, Law viewed in genere, as in Rom. iv. 15. 
But the whole scope of the Epistle resists 
this view. ‘The apostle’s contention with 
the Galatian perverters of the truth is 
not coucerning Christians being subject to 
Law absolutely, but concerning their being 
subject to w Law of outward ceremonial 
observance; that is, to the Law of Moses; 
for there was no other system of positive 
ordinances by which, as of Divine authority, 
they could imagine themselves to be bound. 
The noun νόμος is used without the article, 
like other monadie nouns with an undcr- 
stood specific reference (for examples, Θεός, 
Κύριος, Χριστός, Πνεῦμα, διάβυλος, κόσμοΞ); as 


| it is also Rom. ii. 23; iii. 31; iv. 18, 14; 


v.13; 1 Cor. ix. 20; ch. ii. 21; iv. 5; Phil. iii. 
5, 6. Do ye not hear the Law? (τὸν νόμον 
οὐκ ἀκούετε ;); to that Law give ye no heed? 
The article is here prefixed to νόμον to 
make the repetition of the noun the more 
telling; just as it is in Rom. ii. 23,°Os ἐν 
νόμῳ καυχᾶσαι, διὰ τῆς παραβάσεως τοῦ νόμου 
τὸν Θεὸν ἀτιμάζεις; The verb ἀκούετε, hear, 
like our “listen to,” means “take to heart 
what it says;” agin Matt. x. 14; Luke xvi. 
29,31. There is no reason for attributing 
to the verb such a sense of listening to an 
oral utterance as should warrant us in 
supposing, that the aposile igs thinking 
in particular of the Galatian Christians 
as in the habit of ‘ hearing’ the Pentateuch 
and other Old Testament Scriptures read, 
whether in Jewish synagogues (ef. 2 Cor. 
iii, 14, 15; Acts xv. 2L) or in Christian 
assemblages. That such Scriptures in tlie 
Septuagint Version were customarily read 
aloud when Christians assembled for united 
worship, especially in the absence or dearth 
of other inspired writings, is more than 
probable; we know from Justin Martyr 
(‘ Apol.,’ i. p. 83) that such was the custom 
from Sunday to Sunday in his days, when 
there were ἀποστολικὰ ὑπομνημονεύματα also 
available for such use. Morcover, the exist- 
ence of such @ custom helps us to under- 
stand how it was that the apostle could 
here, as in Rom. vii. 1, presuppose with 
Christian believers an acquaintance with 
the contents of the Pentuteuch. But we 
require more here than the thought, “ Are 
ye not wont to hear the Law read?” It 
is rather an acquaintance with its contents, 
and taking due account of them, that he 
demands of his readers. Some uncial 
manuscripts have ἀναγινώσκετε, read, in- 
stead of ἀκούετε. This reading of the tuxt 
would only imply, not without a touch of 
sarcasm, the sense which the more acereditud 
reading, ἀκούετε, may be understood as 
directly denoting. The use of the word 
“Law” to denote at once the system of 


200 THE EPISTLE TO 


THE GALATIANS. (cx. rv. 1—31. 


Mosaic legislation and the historical record 
in which it is embedded, is remarkable. 
The Jews were accustomed to designate the 
Pentateuch by this term (comp. Matt. v.17; 
Luke xvi. 16; xxiv. 44); and whoever 
would fain subject themselves to the posi- 
tive enactments of the Mosaic Law as 
possessing Divine authority, would of course 
fecl themselves bound also to accept the 
teaching of the historical record as clotled 
with the like authority. The apostle him- 
self also accepted both as alike coming 
from God; only he required that the Divine 
purpose in both should be clearly under- 
stood and be suitably complied with. 

Ver. 22—For it is written (γέγραπται 
γάρ); for the Scripture saith. The phrase 
does not here, as it does usually, introduce 
the citation of a text, but prefaces a bricf 
summary of facts; these facts being recited 
in words gathered out of the Scptuagint 
Version of Gen. xvi. and xxi.,in much the 
sume way as the story of Melchisedce is 
sketched in Heb. vii. 1—4. That Abraham 
had two sons (ὅτι ᾿Αβραὰμ δύο υἱοὺς ἔσχεν) ; 
that Abraham had gotten two sons; for ἔσχεν 
is not exactly equivalent to εἶχεν. Atton- 
tion has been drawn to other sons born of 
Keturah (Gen. xxv. 1, 2), who both in 
ancient and in modern days (see Windisch- 
mann) have been very plausibly interpreted 
as analogously pointing forward allevorically 
to those heretical bodies, now vanished, 
which threatened such danger to the Church 
in the first ccnturies. But the apostle’s 
concern here is exclusively with the posture 
of affairs subsisting at the time of Hagar’s 
and Ishmael’s expulsion from the patriarch’s 
family, quoted in ver. 30 from Gen. xxi. 
Kivcn if he had seen fit by allegorical 
exposition to apply Scripture to those dire 
forms of utterly perverted Christianity, 
which Je certainly did look forward to as 
about to arise, it is very questionable 
whether he would have conceded to them 
so venerable a parentage as having Abra- 
ham for thcir forefather. Mosaism in its 
place was a thing of Divine origin, even 
as Christianity itself was, both of them 
“ covenants” of God; not so the monstrous 
forms of Gnostic and Manichein teaching 
which horrified the primitive Church. In 
fact, typology, that is to say, the interpre- 
tation of Old Testament Scripture as bear- 
ing a designed allegorical sense, requires 
very cautious handling. ‘The tracing of 
analogies is an interesting and pleasing 
exercise of theological ingenuity; but it 15 
one thing to trace a parallelism, and a quite 
different thing to detect a latent predictive 
sense intended by the Holy Spirit. The 
one by a bondmaid (ἕνα ἐκ τῆς παιδίσκης); 
one by tke handmaid; the expression 
pointing to the individual mother known 


from the sacred history. The word παιδίσκη 
in classical Greek means a girl either slave 
or free. In the Septuagint it is generally 
a slave (not, however, in Ruth iv. 12, where 
it renders the Hebrew na’arah); in the 
New Testament it is always a maidservant. 
St. Paul borrows the word from the Sep- 
tuagint of Gen. xv. and xxii where it 
renders the Hebrew shiphchah. Thagar was 
the personal property of Sarah. The other 
by a freewoman (καὶ ἕνα ἐκ τῆς ἐλευθέρα); 
and one by the freewoman. The word 
“freewoman” 18 never applied to Sarah in 
the story in Genesis; not even in the pas- 
sage freely quoted in ver. 30; but it was an 
obviously true description, and with perfect 
fairness introduced in antithesis to Hagar. 
As applied to one holding so princessly a 
position in the story as Sarah, the idea of 
a freewoman stands coloured with a deep 
tincture of dignity. 

Ver. 23.—But he who {was of the bond- 
Woman was born after the flesh (ἀλλ᾽ ὁ μὲν 
ἐκ τῆς παιδίσκης, κατὰ σάρκα γεγέννηται); 
howbeit the son by the μαπιἀηιαϊα 7s shown as 
born (or, begotten) after the flesh. The ἀλλὰ 
is strongly adversative; buth, indeed, were 
sons of Abraham, but there was a marked 
distinction in the way in which they 
severally came into being. The apostle haa 
evidently in his eye the analogy presented 
by the natural birth of the Jewish de- 
scendants from Abraham, as contrasted with 
the birth of Abraham’s spiritual seed 
through faith in the promises of the gospel. 
This point, however, he is content with 
merely, in vers. 28, 29, glancing at. His 
main point is the condition of both mother 
and child in each case, as being either both 
free or both in bondage. It is not clear 
whether the apostle by γεγέννηται meant 
“born” or “begotten,” the verb being used 
in both senses; but neither is it material. 
The perfect tense of the verb either sup- 
poses us to be as it were present at the time 
of Islhmael’s expulsion, in which case it 
would mean, “hath been born,” or ig used 
with reference to the record in the history, 
meaning in this case “appears in the story 
ashaving been born.” So the perfect tense 
is used also in Heb. vii. 6, δεδεκάτωκε, 
εὐλόγηκε, and Heb. x. 18, ἐγκεκαίνισται 
“ According to the flesh ” does not precisely 
mean “in the common course of nature;” 
the word “ flesh ” ratker contrasts the 
present visible sphere of human life with 
the invisible spiritual wom“, in much the 
same way as “flesh” is ao cften contrasted 
with “spirit.” Ishmael was born “ after the 
flesh,” because he was born in the common 
course of nature; Isanc was born (ver. 28) 
“after the Spirit,’ because his birth was 
connected with the invisible spiritual world 
“through the promise,” which on the one 


cu. Iv. 1---81.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


201 


hand was given by God the great Sovereign 
of the spiritual world, and on the other was 
laid hold of and made effectual in that same 
world of spiritual action by Abralam’s and 
Sarah’s faith. But he of the freewoman 
was by promise (ὁ δὲ ἐκ τῆς ἐλευθέρας, δι᾽ 
[Receptus, διὰ τῆς] ἐπαγγελίας); but the son 
by the freewoman through a promise (or, 
through the promise). If the article before 
ἐπαγγελίας be retained, it ia to be taken as 
pointing to the well-known promise made 
by the Lord to Abraham, both in the night 
in which God made a covenant with him 
(Gen. xv.), and afresh, in a more definite 
form, on the eve of the destruction of 
Sodom (Gen. xviii.). This promise was the 
means of Isaac’s being born, calling forth 
as it did an acting of faith in God, both in 
Abraham (Rom. iv, 17—21), and likewise 
in Sarah (Heb. xi. 11), in consideration of 
which the Almighty beyond the course 
of nature gave them this child. 

Ver. 24.—Which things are an allegory 
(ἅτινά ἐστιν ἀλληγορούμενα); which things 
are written (or, expounded) with a further 
meaning. The relative ἅτινα, as distin- 
guished from ἅ, probably means “ which 
facts, being of this description, are,” etc., or, 
“things, which are of such a sort that they 
are,” etc. (comp. Col. ii. 23 in the Greek). 
The apostle, perhaps, intimates that the 
particulars just recited by him belong to 
a class of objects distinguished among other 
objects presented to us in the Old Testament 
by having a further sense than the literal 
historical one; the literal historical sense, 
however, by no means being thereby super- 
seded. Comp. 1 Cor. x. 11, “Now these 
things happened unto them (τύποι, or tum- 
xés) as figures [or, ‘ by way of figure’].”” The 
verb ἀλληγορεῖν, is shown by lexicons, Lid- 
dell and Scott’s and others, to mean, either 
to speak a thing allegorically or to expound 
a thing as allegorical. Bishops Ellicott aud 
Lightfoot furnish passages illustrative of 
both meanings, particularly of the second ; 
and the latter adds the observation that it 
is possible that the apostle uses the verb 
here in the sense of being allegorically ex- 
pounded, “referring to some recognized 
mode of interpretation.” St. Paul did at 
times refer to authority extrinsical to his 
own (Eph. iii. 5; 1 Cor. xi. 16; xv. 11). 
But whichever of the two possible senses of 
tha verb ἀλληγορεῖσθαι was the one here 
intended by the apostle, there is no impro- 
bability in the supposition that not now for 
the first time was the narrative of Hagar 
and Ishmael thus applied: it is quite sup- 
posable, for instance, that it had been so 
applied at Antioch, in the animated discus- 
sions in which Paul, Barnabas, and Silas 
encountered the Judaists in that Church. 
A’ ol everts it is not merely supposable, 


but in a high degree probable, that at least 
some of the historical personages, institu- 
tions, and events of the Old Testament 
Scriptures were wont to be allegorically 
treated by leaders of Christian thought of 
the highest authority. We cannot acquiesce 
in the position adopted by some critics, that 
such allegorizing is to-be relegated to the 
region of mcre Jewish rabbinism, now to be 
regarded as exploded. And we need not 
here insist upon the consideration that a 
rabbinical origin would constitute no valid 
objection to our acceptance of such alle- 
gorizing treatment of Scripture, because 
that the results of rabbinical exegesis and 
of rabbinical investigations in theology 
were in many cases of the highest value—a 
fact which those who are acquainted, for 
example, with Professor Reuss’s ‘ Histoire 
de la Théologie Chrétienne’ will not be 
disposed to question. For we resist the 
attempt to thrust us back upon the schools 
of the rabbins, as if it were from them only 
that St. Paul derived this allegorical method 
of Scripture exposition. Those schools may 
have made him acquainted with it, it is 
true; but altogether independently of rab- 
binical instruction, the leading teachers of 
the Church, even before Paul’s conversion, 
“unlearned men,” ἰδιῶται, as the rabbinists 
regarded them, had, as we cannot doubt, 
learnt thus to apply Scripture in tke school 
of Jesus. Christ himself, not only before 
his passion, but also, and we may believe 
with greater definiteness and particularity, 
after his resurrection (Luke xxiv. 27, 45; 
Acts i. 3), had imparted to his apostles and 
other disciples some expositions of historical 
facts of the Old Testament, which must 
have been of this description, and which 
would suggest the legitimate application of 
the same method in other analogous in- 
stances. And those men were not only dis- 
ciples, pupils of Jesus, but were likewise 
especial, though not the exclusive, organs 
of the Holy Spirit’s teaching in the Church 
(John xvi. 12—15; Eph. iii. 5; iv. 11), 
Particular allegorical expositions, therefore, 
received amongst those apostles and pro- 
phets of Christ, came clothed with the 
highest authority, emanating as they well 
might have done from Christ’s own ora] 
teaching, or from an immediate special lead- 
ing of his Spirit. And, further, we feel 
ourselves entitled to believe that the 
supreme Revealer of spiritual truth to 
mankind micht well think fit to appoint, 
not only words or ceremonial institutions 
as means of imparting religious instruction 
or of prophetical indication, but historical 
incidents as well; not merely so ordering 
the manner in which his inspired organs 
framed their narratives of certain occur- 
rences as to make thoge narratives pro- 


202 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 


(ox. rv. 1—31. 


phetical, but also in his disposal of human 
affairs so ordering the occurrences themselves 
as that they should be prophetical; furnish- 
ing (so to speak) tableaux vivants, in which 
the faith of his servants should read, if not 
spiritual facts which were as yet future, at 
least spiritual facts after they had come to 
pass, the prophetical adumbration of which, 
now recognized by them, would serve to 
confirm their bclicf in them and their com- 
prehension of them. The fact that Christ 
repeatedly and most pointedly referred to 
the strange expericnces of Jonah as pro- 
phetical of his own passion and resur- 
rection proves to a certainty that events 
might be predictive as well as utterances 
of prophets. Our Lord’s use of the story of 
the brazen serpent, of the gift of manna, 
and of the Passover (Luke xxii. 16) points 
in the same direction. We have also apo- 
stolical guidance in construing the Passover, 
the Exodus, the story of Melchisedec, 
Abrabam’s offering up of his son, the yearly 
Fast of the Atonement, as legitimately 
subject to similar treatment. Since the old 
economy with its histories and its ordinances 
originated from the same Divine Author as 
the new, it is no unreasonable belief that in 
the things of preparatory dispensations he 
had set foreshadowings, and in no scant 
number, of those great things in the spiritual 
economy which from “eternal ages” had 
been his thoughts towards us, and in which 
the whole progress of human history was to 
find its consummation. In the apostle’s 
discussion of his subject there are in part dis- 
tinctly specified, in part merely indicated, 
a great variety of contrasts; these the 
reader will find presented by Bengel in his 
‘Gnomon’ in a tabulated form with great 
distinctness. For these are the two cove- 
nants; or, testaments (αὗται γάρ εἶσι δύο 
[Receptus, εἰσιν ai δύο] διαθῆκαι): for these 
women are two covenants. ‘The Textus 
Receptus has ai δύο διαθῆκαι: but the article 
is expunged by all recent editors. What 
the apostle meaus is this: the circumstance 
that Abraham had two wives pointed to the 
fact that there were to be, not one covenant 
only, but two. He has previously (ch. iii. 
15, 17) spoken of “the promise” as a cove- 
nant; while also this term was already a 
familiar designation of the economy which 
God appointed to the natural “seed of 
Abruham.” Compare also Jeremiah’s men- 
tion of these two “covenants” (xxxi. 
_ 81). For the use of the verb “are,” comp. 
Matt. xiii. 37-39; Rev. i. 20. A is B,and 
B is A, in the characteristics which they 
have incommon. The one from the Mount 
Sinai (ula μὲν ἀπὸ ὄρους Σινᾶ); one from 
Mount Sinat. The μία δὲ, or, ἡ δὲ δευτέρα, 
which should have followed to make the 
sequel of the sentence conformable with its 


commencement, is, in form, wanting, having 
in the framing of the sentence got lost sight 
of, through the parenthesis introduced ἴτας 
mediately after this clause to illustrate its 
bearing; for the words ἡ δὲ ἄνω Ἱερουσαλὴμ 
of ver. 26 only in substance furnish the 
apodosis to this protasis, being themselves 
evolved out of what immediately precedcs 
them. Thecovenant which is our mother is 
styled, in ver. 28,“ promise.” Windischmann 
proposes for a formally corresponding apodo- 
sis something of this sort: ‘H δὲ δευτέρα, ἀπ’ 
οὐρανοῦ (or, ἄνωθενῚ, εἰς ἐλευθερίαν γεννῶσα, 
ἥτις ἐστὶ Σάῤῥα, συστοιχεῖ δὲ τῇ ἄνω Ἵερου- 
σαλήμ, ἢ ἐλευθέρα ἐστὶ μετὰ τῶν τέκνων 
αὐτῆς τούτεστιν ἡμῶν (OF, οἵτινές ἐσμεν ἡμεῖς). 
“From Mount Sinai;” being promulgated 
from Mount Sinai, it takes its being there- 
from, Which gendereth to bondage (εὶς 
δουλείαν γεννῶσα); bearing children unto 
bondage. Those subject to ἃ covenant are 
regarded as its offspring; as Acts iii. 35, 
“Ye are the children . . . of the covenant,” 
ete.: their lives are moulded by its direc- 
tion ; they come under the promises, or the 
discipline, assured by its terms; in short, 
they owe to it their spiritual condition. 
The apostle assumes it to be a manifest fact, 
having before repeatedly asserted it, that 
those under the Law are in a condition of 
servitude. Which is Hagar (ἥτις ἐστὶν "ΑὙαρ): 
which is Hagar. The meaning of ἥτις here 
is, “‘ which being such in character as it is, 
is Hagar.” ‘Chis covenant, with its children, 
being wrapped in an element of slavery, is 
kindred in character with Hagar and her 
offspring. It is objected that Ishmael was 
not, in fact, a slave. But as Hagar does not 
appear to have been a recognized concubine 
of Abraham, in the same way as Bilhah 
and Zilpah were concubines of Jacob, but 
still continued to be Sarah’s handmaid (“thy 
maid,” Gen, xvi. 6), her child was, of course, 
born into the same condition. With Sarah’s 
consent, it is true, Abraham might, if he 
had thought fit, have adopted him asa child 
of his own; but this does not appear to 
have been done. 

Ver. 25.—¥For this Hagar is Mount Sinai 
in Arabia, This clause has been the subject 
of much conflicting opinion The reading of 
the Greek text is itself much debated, and 
in the original authorities (manuscripts, 
versions, and Fathers) it appears in a great 
variety of forms. A detailed discussion of 
the latter point would be out of place here; 
and for the premisses from which the critical 
judgment is to be drawn, the reader is 
referred to Alford, and to a detached note 
which Bishop Lightfoot adds in his ‘Com- 
mentary,’ at the end of this fourth chapter. 
Only the main result needs to be stated. 
There are two forms of the text, between 
which the choice lics. Oue is that of the. 


on. Iv. 1—381.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


203 


Textus Receptus, namely, Td γὰρ" Αγαρ, Σινᾶ 
ὄρος ἐστὶν ἐν τῇ ᾿Αραβίᾳ, “ For the word Hagar 
is Mount Sinai in Arabia.” This is main- 
tained by Meyer, Alford, Ellicott, and San- 
day. The other, omitting the word “Ayap, 
runs thus: Td γὰρ Σινᾶ ὄρος ἐστὶν ἐν τῇ 
᾿Αραβίᾳ, “For Sinai is a mountain in Arabia.” 
This is accepted by Bentley, Lachmann, 
Tregelles, Tischendorf (latterly), Bengel, 
De Wette, Windischmann, Howson, and 
Lightfoot. In respect to the original au- 
thorities, there is not generally thought to 
exist any great preponderance in the evi- 
dence for either the retention or the omission 
of the word “ Hagar.” The decision, there- 
fore, depends chiefly upon a comparison 
of the internal probabilities. In vrder to 
this, we must gain as clear a view as we can 
of the meaning of the above two readings. 


That of the ‘Textus Receptus, Td yap “Ayap- 


Σινᾶ dpos ἐστὶν ἐν τῇ ᾿Αραβίᾳ, according to 
Chrysostom, as well as modern critics, means 
this: “ For the word Hagar is [represents] 
in Arabia Mount Sinai.” Chrysostom re- 
marks, “ Hagar is the word for Mount Sinai 
in the language of that country ;” and again, 
«That mountain where the old covenant 
was delivered, hath a name in common with 
the bondwoman.” Critics make reference to 
ob. i. 17,“ I went away into Arabia.” “It 
is difficult,” says Dean Stanley, ‘Sinai and 
Palestine,’ p. 50, “to resist the thought that he 
(St. Paul] too may have stood upon the rocks 
of Sinai, and heard from Arab lips the 
often-repeated Hajar, rock, suggesting the 
double meaning to which the text alludes.” 
But the Arabic word for “rock” is chajar, 
differing from Hajar, the Arabic form of the 
bondwoman’s name, by having cheth for its 
initial letter instead of he. Further, the 
Arabs would have used the word only as a 
common noun, “rock,” and not as a proper 
noun, the name of the mountain. St. Paul 
could not have mistaken the one for the 
other. There is no evidence at all to sub- 
stantiate Chrysostom’s assertion that the 
Arabs did name the mountain Hagar; he 
apparently thought so only because the 
apostle seemed to him to affirm it. Sea 
Lightfoot further on this point. Moreover, 
the sentence, “The word Hagar is Mount 
Sinai in Arabia,” is not what St. Paul που 
have wzitten to express this idea; either, 
instead of “in Arabia” he would have 
writtea “in the language of the country ;” 
or else, “ for the Mount Sinai is calked Hagar 
in Arabia.” Another objection to this read- 
ing is the order in which the words Σινᾶ and 
ὄρος stand. Elsewhere where the words are 
conjoined the order is, as in ver. 24, ὄρος 
Σινᾶ, The passages are these: Exod. xix. 
18, 20; xxiv. 26; xxxi. 18; xxxiv. 2; Neh. 
ix. 13; Acts vii. 30. The reversal of the 
order here indicates that Σινᾶ is the subject, 


and ὅρος belongs to the predicate; that is, 
that “Ayap must be expunged from the text, 
and that we adopt the other reading, Td yap 
Σινᾶ ὄρος ἐστὶν ἐν τῇ ᾿Αραβίᾳ, “For Sinai is 
@ mountain in Arabia,” the well-known land 
of Hagar and her descendants; Gen. xvi. 7; 
xxi. 21; xxv. 18 (see Mr. Poole’s articles on 
“Hagar” and “Shur” in the ‘ Dictionary 
of the Bible’). The article is prefixed to 
Σινὰ as having been already just mentioned ; 
as if it were “for this Sina is,” etc. The 
purpose of the clause, liowever it be read, is 
plainly to make more colourable the alle- 
gorical exposition; it explains why the 
locality of the giving of the Law has been 
referred to in the words, “one, from Mount 
Sinai”—a local specification quite alien to 
the apostle’s usual manner in referring to 
the old covenant, and only had recourse 
to here for this particular object. And 
answereth to (or, ἐδ tn the same rank with) 
Jerusalem which now is (συστοιχεῖ δὲ τῇ viv 
Ἱερουσαλήμ); and standeth in the same class 
(literally, in the same column) with the Jeru- 
salem that now is. The use of the verb 
συστοιχεῖν the reader will find amply illus- 
trated in Liddell and Scott’s ‘Lexicon.’ In 
the military language of Greece, illustrated 
out of Polybius, of συστοιχοῦντες were those 
standing in the same file or column, one 
behind another (88 of συζυγυῦντες were those 
standing side by side in the same rank). 
Hence, as if tabulated on ἃ board, ideas 
belonging to the same class, both types and 
antitypes, were conceived of as if. placed in 
a vertical line in column, and so were called 
ovoroxoovres: Whilst ideas belonging to a 
class contrasted with the former, both types 
and antitypes, were conceived of as placed 
horizontally opposite to the former in another 
column; the two sets of contrasted ideas 
being ἀντίστοιχα to each other. Thus in 
the present instance we have two columns— 


Hagar, slave mother; Sarah, freewoman. 

Ishmael, slave child; Believers, free chil- 
dren. 

Promise. 

Jerusalem that ig 
above; eto. 


Covenant from Sinai; 
Jerusalem that now 
is; etc. 


(Compare Erasmus’s note in Poole’s ‘Synop- 
sis.’) It is not improbable, as Bishop Light- 
foot observes, that St. Paul is alluding to 
some mode of representation common with 
Jewish teachers employed to exhibit similar 
allegories (see Bengel’s note above referred 
to). We may, therefore, conclude that the 
subject of the verb συστοιχεῖ,ν whatever it is, 
is regarded by the apostle as standing in the 
same category with the now subsisting 
Jerusalem, especially in the particular re- 
spect which he presently insists upon; 
namely, as being characterized by slavery. 
For this is the main point of this whole 


ΤΑ, 


THE EPISTLE ΤῸ THE GALATIANS. 


fon. Iv. 1—3L 


allegorical illustration; that Judaism is 
slavery and the Christian state liberty. It 
is not clear whether the subject of this verb, 
“standeth in the same column with,” is 
“the covenant from Mount Sinai,” or “ Ha- 
gar,” or “Sinai”’ If either of the two 
former, then the first clause of this verse is 
a parenthesis. ‘lhe construction runs the 
most smoothly by adopting the third view, 
which takes “ Sinai” asthe subject. Sinai, 
that gave forth the covenant which is repre- 
sented by Hagar, “stands in the same 
column ” with “ the Jerusalem that now is;” 
for Sinai is the starting-place of the covenant 
which has now its central abode in Jeru- 
salem; the people that was there is now 
here; and the condition of slavery into 
which Sinai’s covenant brought them marks 
them now at Jerusalem. And is in bondage 
with her children (δουλεύει γὰρ [Receptus, 
δουλεύει δὲ] μετὰ τῶν τέκνων αὐτῆς}; for she 
ts in bondage with her children. The read- 
ing γὰρ is substituted for δὲ by the editors 
with general consent. That the subject of 
the verb “is in bondage” is “the Jerusalem 
that now is,” is apparent from the contrasted 
sentence which next follows, “but the Je- 
rusalem that is above is free.” ‘ With her 
children ;” repeatedly did our Lord group 
Jerusalem with “ her children ” (Matt. xxiii. 
87; Luke xiii. 35; xix. 44), having, how- 
ever, in view the city itself with its in- 
habitants; while St. Paul probably regards 
Jerusalem more in idea, as representing 
Judaism in its central manifestation ; “ her 
children” being consequently those who 
were living under the Law. The apostle 
here assumes that this mystical Jerusalem 
with her children was in bondage, making 
the fact w ground for ideutifying ber with 
Hagar. That the fact was so St. Paul 
knew, both from his own experience and 
from his observation of others. ‘lhe religious 
life of Judaism consisted of a servile obedi- 
ence to a letter Law of ceremonialism, in- 
terpreted by the rabbins with an infinity 
of hair-splitting rules, the exact observance 
of which was bound upon the conscience of 
its votaries as of the essence of true piety. 
The apostle also probably took account of 
the slavish spirit which very largely cha- 
racterized the religious teaching -of the 
ruling doctors of Judaism; their bondage, 
that is, not only to the letter of the Law, 
but to the traditions also of men; that 
spirit which those who heard the teaching 
of the Lord Jesus felt to be so strongly 
contrasted by his manner of conceiving and 
presenting religious truth. “He taught as 
vne having authority, and not as the 
scribes.” But the main point now contem- 
plated by the apostle was bondage to 
ceremonialism. 

Ver. 26.—But Jerusalem which is above is 


free (ἡ δὲ ἄνω Ἱερουσαλήμ, ἐλευθέρα ἐστίν) ; 
but the Jerusalem that is above is free. The 
mystic Jerusalem in which Christ reigns, 
the Son of David, who is at the right hand 
of God. For the word “ above,” ἄνω, comp. 
Col. iii. 1, 2, “Seek the things that are above 
(τὰ ἄνω) where Christ is, seated at the right 
hand of God: sect your mind on the things 
that are above; your life is hid with Christ 
in God;” and Phil. iii. 20, “ Our citizenship 
(πολίτευμα) is in heaven.” This 18 identical 
with the “heavenly Jerusalem” of Heb. xii, 
22, which, standing in contrast with the 
“mount that might be touched and that 
burned with fire,’ Sinai with its soul- 
crushing terrors, appears associated with 
the pacifying blood of Jesus, and with 
communion with all that is holiest and 
most glorious. The essential identity of 
the contrast in the two passages, which are 
mutually illustrative, bespeiks a common 
origin in one and the same mind. The 
supernal Jerusalem is not chiefly contrasted 
with the Jerusulem “that now is,” in point 
of time: she is not the future only, though 
in the future to be manifested—the holy 
city, New Jerusalem, coming down (as St. 
John writes) from God out of heaven (Rev. 
xxi. 2); but she zs there now, with God. It 
would be in harmony with St. Paul’s repre- 
sentation to suppose tliat he conceives of 
her having been there with God in heaven 
of old, her citizens upon earth being the 
true servants of God in allages. In former 
ages, howcver, she was comparatively barren ; 
it needed that the enthronization of the 
God-Man, “the Mediator of the new cove- 
nant” (Heb. xii. 24), on "" God’s holy hill of 
Zion,” should take place before she could 
become the prolitic mother here shown to us. 
Commentators refer to rabbinical specula- 


‘tions relative to a Jerusalem which was 


conceived of as cxisting in heaven, as 
illustrated by Schéttgen’s " Dissertatio de 
Hierosol. Calesti’ (‘Hor. Hebr.,’ vol. i. 
diss. v.), and also by Wetstein both here and 
on Rev. xxi. It would be interesting if we 
could determine when those rabbinical specu- 
lations first arose, and how far it may be 
judged probable that they or some earlier 
form of them out of which these sprang 
suggested anything to St. Paul for the form 
in which he clothed his own conception of 
this idea; there may have been such. 
Meanwhile, we cannot but be struck by the 
purely ideal and spiritual character in which 
the apostle here exhibits his conception of it; 
though something like a terrenemauifestation 
in the future scems indicated in Rom. viii. 
21. “Is free;” the counterpart of Sarah, as 
mentioned in vers. 22,23. That this Jeru- 
salem is free, the apostle feels it needless to 
state; she to his very consciousness is the very 
home and bosom of God’s love, having her 


cn. tv. 1—31.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


205 


very existence, as well as her outward-acting 
power, in his pervading, actuating Spirit. 
Bondage, constraint, there cannot be; for all 
yolitions are there harmonized, absurbed, by 
the Spirit of love uniting her componeut 
elements both with each other and with 
God. Which is the mother of us all (ἥτις 
ἐστὶ μήτηρ ἡμῶν (Receptus, πάντων ἡμῶν); 
which ts our mother. Here again, as in ver. 
24, ἥτις means “ which, being such as she is, 
is our mother.” We look at the Jerusalem 
tliat is above, and in her princely freedom 
we recognize what we her children are, 
The πάντων, which the Textus Receptus has 
before-jpav, and which ig by the general 
consent of critics rejected, is with much 
probability supposed to have come into the 
text by the copyist’s recollection of the 
similar sentence in Rom. iv. 16, 17, ’ABpadp, 
és ἐστι πατὴρ πάντων ἡμῶν. But πάντων, 
which there belongs to the essential thought 
of the context that God had made Abraham 
“the father of many nations,” is unnecessary 
here, where the apostle is chiefly concernéd 
with the freedom which characterizes the 
family of promise. If documentary evidence 
proved it to be genuine, it would find its 
justification in the uotion of the fruitful- 
ness which new at length, as the apostle 
presently shows, ia given to the supornal 
Jerusalem, ‘ 

Ver. 27.—For it is written (γέγραπται 
γάρ). The points indicated in the scction 
of Isaiah (liv.) referred to by the quota- 
tion which is made of the first verso, and 
which amply make good what the apostle 
has been stating and implying, are these: 
that ἃ new economy was to appear; that by 
this economy a multitude of servants of 
God should be ealled into being; that this 
multitude should in numbers far surpass 
those called into being heretofore; that this 
economy, though newly manifested, had 
been in existence before, but comparatively 
unblcst with offspring; that it was to bo 
known as an economy of forgiving, adopt- 
ing love, involving a principle of spiritual 
life and of spontaneous, no longer con- 
strained and servile, obedience. We nced 
not hesitate in asserting that the last-named 
features of the new economy were, in the 
apostle’s view, included in the prediction he 
means to refer to, although not contained in 
those words of the prophet which he has 
expressly quoted. for it is one of the 
characteristics of a Jewish religious teacher’s 
method of citing Scripture, noted by the 
learned Dr. Biesenthal, himself a Jew, in 
his ‘Commentary on the Epistle to the He- 
brews’ (‘ Hinleitung,’ p. 54), that he is wont 
to omit in his express citation more or less 
of the passage referred to, leaving it to his 
hearer or reader to supply the omitted 
portions from his own knowledge, even 


when these are most material for the argu- 
ment; as e.g. in Heb. vi. 13, 14, the “ oath,” 
fully recorded in Gen. xxii. 16, is not itself 
contained in the citation mede by the writer, 
The above-named, then, we may assume to 
have been points which the apostle regarded 
as contained in the passage he refers to, 
because they are contained in the section 
of which the cited words are an integral 
portion, Whatever may be thought of the 
applicability, in ὦ measure, of the prophet’s 
language in the section alluded to, to the 
case of Israel restored from the Babylonian 
captivity, yet that such an application fur- 
nishcs no complete explanation of its import 
is clear from the circumstance that this jubi- 
lant prophesying follows immediately upon 
the delineation in the preceding chapter of 
the sufferings of Christ—a delineation which 
ended with the intimation of the results 
which should follow in the triumph over 
mighty powers opposing the Sufferer, and in 
the work of justification which he would 
accomplish upon “ many ” (Isa. 111. 10—12). 
That the section was understood by our Lord 
to refer to the new cconomy which he was 
himself to introduce, is evidenced by his 
citing the words, “ All thy children shall be 
taught of the Lord ” (ver 13), as pointing to 
the spiritual illumination which should at 
the time referred to characterize the people 
of God universally, so universally that none 
would be numbered amongst God’s true 
people, that is, amongst the disciples of his 
Son, who had not “ heard from the Father ” 
(Jolin vi. 45). We have, then, in this section 
of Isaiah a distinctly predictive description 
of a condition of spiritual well-being which 
was to result from Christ’s mediation; that 
is, of the illumination, peace and joyful 
sense of God’s love which then should bo 
the “heritage of the servants of the Lord.” 
This, construed in the apostle’s imagery, 
connecting itself with that of the words 
which he expressly quotes, is the larze 
multiplication of the children of the free- 
woman, bringing forth her offspring into a 
state of freedom and adoption in the great 
Father’s family. The Greek rendering of 
the passage given by the apostle is identi- 
cal with that of the Vatic.n text of the 
Septuagint. The Alexandrian text varies 
only in adding kal τέρπου, “and be glad,” 
to the word βόησον, “ cry,” apparently to 
explain what kind of crying out was in- 
tended. Rejoice, thou barren that bearest¢ 
not (εὐφράνθητι στεῖρα ἣ ov τίκτουσα). The 
Authorized Version as well as the Revised 
thus renders the Greek here; but in the 
original passage in Isaiah the former renders, 
“that didst not bear,” the Hebrew having 
the preterite indicative; and similarly, the 
‘“travailest not” in the next clause liere is 
“didst not travail” there. The participles, 


206 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


(cu. 1v. 1—31, 


τίκτουσα and ὠδίνυυσα, may be classed with 
τυφλὺς ὥν, ἄρτι βλέπω in John ix. 25, ex- 
pressing the normal state as hitherto known, 
though just now subjected to a change. 
Break forth and cry, thou that travailest not 
(ῥῆξον καὶ βόησον ἣ οὐκ ὠδίνουσα); break 
forth and shout, thou that travailest not. But 
the Hebrew has “break forth into singing” 
instead of “ break forth and shout ;” and so 
in Isa, xlix. 13; the word for “singing” 
denoting unarticulated cries of joy, as in Pa. 
xxx. 5, and often. The Hebrew word for 
“break forth” appears to mean “scrcam 
(for joy),” as in Isa. xii. 6, ete. For the 
desolate hath many more children than she 
which hath an husband (ὅτι πολλὰ τὰ τέκνα 
τῆς ἐρήμον μᾶλλον ἢ τῆς ἐχούσης τὸν ἄνδρα); 
for more are the children of the desolate than 
of her which hath the husband. The word 
“desolate” represents the same Hebrew 
participle in 2 Sam. xiii. 20, where the 
Septuagint has χηρεύουσα, widowed. It 
points in the present case to the solitary 
and unhappy condition of a woman “ for- 
saken by her husband” (comp. Isa. liv. 6). 
On the other hand, the words, τῆς ἐχούσης 
τὸν ἄνδρα, render the one Hebrew word 
be'ulah, the passive participle of the verb 
ba’al, cohabit with. Compare the use of 
this verb in Deut. xxiv. 1 (“married her,” 
Authorized Version ; συνοικήσῃ αὐτῇ, Septua- 
gint); Deut. xxi. 13, “and be her husband.” 
The words, therefore, denote her that had 
her husband living with her as such; “hath,” 
as John iv. 18; 1 Cor. v. 1; vii. 2. “The 
husband” is conceived of as belonging both 
to her and of right to the “desolate one.” 
Perhaps τὸν ἄνδρα may be rendered “her 
husband.” In the prophet’s view, the 
“woman which had her husband” was the 
visible Israel, possessing the temple and 
the other tokens of the Lord’s dwelling in 
her midst; the “desolate one” was the 
spiritual or the ideal Israel to be mani- 
fested in the future; for the present out 
of sight and seemingly in abeyance; but 
thereafter to be quickened into fertility by 
the inhabitation of the Lord (for he in the 
prophet’s vision, ver. 5, is the Husband), 
revealed in his first suffering then glorified 
Servant as portrayed in the foregoing pro- 
phesying. So cxactly do these two images 
correspond with “the Jerusalem that now 
$s” and “the Jerusalem that is above,” of 
the apostle’s imagery, that his use of the 
prophet’s words is plainly no mere accommo- 
dation to his purpose of Janguage which 
was in reality alien to the subject, but is 
tho citation of a passage regarded by him 
as strictly predictive, and therefore proba- 
tive of the truth of his representution. 
The view of this prophecy of Isaiah found 
in Clemens Romanus, Ep. ii., ‘Ad Cor.,’ 
§ 2, and in Justin Martyr, ‘Apol.,’ p. 88, 


which regards it as referring to the Gentile 
Church as contrasted with the Jewish, is 
plainly ἃ misconception of its import: the 
rejoicing mother of the prophet, as well as 
the supernal Jerusalem of the apostle, ~ 
knows of no distinction in her believing 
offspring, between Jew and Gentile, com- 
prising both alike. 

Ver. 28.—Now we, brethren, as Isaac 
was, are the children of promise (ἡμεῖς δέ, 
ἀδελφοί, κατὰ ᾿Ισαάκ, ἐπαγγελίας τέκνα ἐσμέν 
[or, ὑμεῖς δέ... ἐστέ]); now we (or, now 
ye), brethren, after the mauner of Isaac, ars 
children of promise. In the Greek text it is 
uncertain whether we should read ἡμεῖς... 
ἐσμέν or ὑμεῖς ... ἐστέ, “ we are” or “ye are.” 
The only difference is that “ye are” would 
more directly thrust upon the attention of 
the Galatians the conclusion, which “ we 
are” would express in a more general form. 
“After the manner of Isaac;” κατὰ as in 
Eph. iv. 24, Tov κατὰ Θεὸν κτισθέντα: 1 Pet. 
i. 15, Κατὰ τὸν καλέσαντα : Lam. i. 12, 
Septuagint, “AAyos κατὰ τὸ ἄλγος μοῦ. The 
apostle is viewing Isaac as in the manner 
of his being brought into being, the type, 
to which the children of tle mystic frec- 
woman were in after ages to be assimilated, 
In both cases the children are born or 
begotten through a promise which God of 
his own free grace hath given, and which, 
by an accepting faith, is appropriated and 
made effectual. Thus Isaac was born (see 
ver. 23 and Rom. ix. 8, 9). The children 
of the supernal Jerusalem are begotten 
through the gospel, which in effect is a 
promise of adoption through Christ to be 
children of God held out to all who will 
accept it. Obviously the cases differ in 
this—that in one it was the faith of the 
parents which made the promise effectual ; 
in the other, the faith of those who in 
consequence of believing become children. 
But none the lcss is it true that the result 
is due to an announcement procecding out 
of God’s own free grace—“ Not of works 
but of him that callcth” (Rom. ix. 7—13; 
comp. John i. 12, 13; 1 Cor. iv. 15; Jas. i. 
18; 1 Pet. i, 23). The “promise” is not 
the parent of the children; this, m the 
imagery now present to the apostle’s mind, 
is in the antitypal case the mystic Free- 
woman. The genitive “of promise” is a 
genitive of qualification, pointing here to 
the means through which the children are 
begotten. Compare a somewhat similarly 
loose use of the genitive in Rom. ix. 8, “ Not 
the children of the flesh .. . but the children 
of the promise.” The case of baptized 
infants is not in the apostle’s view. 

Ver. 29.—But as then he that was born 
after the flesh persecuted him that was born 
after the Spirit (ἀλλ᾽ ὥσπερ τότε ὃ κατὰ 
σάρκᾳ γεννηθεὶς ἐδίωκε τὸν κοτὰ Πνεῦμᾳλ. 


on, τν. 1—31.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


207 


(For the phrase, “ after,” or “ according to, 
the Spirit,” see note on ver. 23.) It must be 
conceded that the apostle somewhat strains 
the expression in applying it to the case 
of Isaac; but he does it for the purpose of 
exbibiting the manner of his birth as homo- 
geneous with that of his antitypes; for 
these are they of whom it is the more 
characteristically true; for they are be- 
gotten through the Spirit’s agency, into the 
Spirit’s kingdom, to be to the uttermost 
perfected by the Spirit. The imperfect 
ἐδίωκε, was persecuting, points to the scene 
presented to our view in Gen. xxi. 9, in 
the midst of which intervenes the injunc- 
tion, “ Cast out,” ete. ; or possibly the apostle 
regards what then took place as one among 
other incidents exhibiting the same animus 
on the part of Ishmael. We cannot doubt 
that St. Paul points to the word “ mocking,” 
which occurs in the passage referred to. 
At the feast held in honour of Isaac’s being 
weaned, “Sarah saw the son of Hagar the 
Egyptian, which she had born unto Abra- 
ham, mocking.” The same Hebrew verb is 
used of insult and disrespect in Gen. xxxix, 
14, “He hath brought in an Hebrew unto 
us to mock us;” so again ver. 17. The 
Septuagint, as we now have it, instead of 
“mocking,” has παίζοντα μετὰ ᾿Ισαὰκ τοῦ υἱοῦ 
αὐτῆς, “at play with Isaac her son;” which 
would indicate no unkindness on Ishmael’s 
part, but suggest the idea that Sarah’s 
resentment was simply ἃ movement of 
jealous feeling, roused by her seeing Ish- 
mael assuming a position of equality with 
a child of hers. But the apostle disregards 
this interpretation, if indeed the words, 
“with Isaac her son,” had already then 
been interpolated into the passage. As 
those words are not in the Hebrew, the 
participle, lacking any such explanatory 
adjunct, would fail of itself to express this 
idea. It is further rendered improbable by 
the disparity in age between the two lads; 
for Isaac, having been just weaned, would 
be only two or three years old, whilst 
Ishmael would be sixteen or seventeen. It 
is much more likely that Ishmael, having 
arrived at these years, participated in 
Hagar’s feelings of jealousy and disap- 
pointment that this child should have come 
to supersede him in the position which, but 
for this, he might have held in the family; 
and that, on the occasion of this “great 
feast,” by which the aged pair were cele- 
brating their pious joy over this “child of 
promise” as well as very markedly sig- 
ualizing his peculiar position as Abraham’s 
heir, the elder-born indulged himself in ill- 
natured and very possibly profane ridicule 
of the circumstances under which Isaac was 
born. Hagar’s feelings towards her mistress 
had of old been those of upstart insub- 


ordination (Gen. xvi. 4). That both mother 
and son were very greatly in the wrong is 
evidenced by the sanction which Heaven 
accorded to the punishment with which they 
were visited. The critics (see Wetstein) 
quote the following passage from the 
rabbinical treatise, ‘Bereshith rabb., 53, 
15. “Rabbi Asaria said: Ishmael said to 
Isaac, ‘ Let us go and see our portion in the 
field ;’ and Ishmael took bow and arrows, 
and shot at Isaac, and pretended that he 
was in sport.” St. Paul’s view, therefore, 
of the import of the Hebrew participle 
tendered “ mocking ” is corroborated by the 
rabbinical interpretation of the word—a 
consideration which in such a case is of no 
small weight. The particular word, “ per- 
secuted,” with which the apostle describes 
Ishmael’s behaviour to his half-brother, was, 
no doubt, like the expression, “born after 
the Spirit,” suggested by the antitypal 
ease to which he is comparing it. But the 
features justifying its application to Ish- 
mael viewed as typical were these—spiteful 
jealousy; disregard of the will of God; 
antipathy to one chosen of God to be 
Abraham’s seed; abuse of superior power. 
Even so it is now (οὕτω καὶ viv); even so he 
does now. The full sentence represented by 
this elliptic one is: “even so now does he 
that is born after the flesh persecute him 
that is born after the Spirit.” This was a 
fact with which the apostle’s experience was 
but too familiar. In Asia Minor itself, as 
the Acts abundantly testifies, from city to 
city had he been dogged by the animosity 
of the “children of Hagar.” No doubt 
something of this had been witnessed even 
in the Gulatian towns, of the evangelization 
of which we have no equally full par- 
ticulars ; there, too, we may believe, St. 
Paul’s converts had had to note the abhor- 
rence with which their master was regarded 
by the adherents of the old religion; and 
it was natural that this should have a 
tendency. to lessen his hold upon their 
minds; for were not the Jews the ancient 
Israel of God, the depositaries of his reve- 
lations ? Moreover, the hostility which 
harassed him would also alight more or 
less upon them as being disciples of his 
(see ch. vi. 12, and note). All this might 
make some of them the more ready to listen 
to Judaizing suggestions. In this verse, 
therefore, St. Paul is not merely breathing 
out a sorrow of his own but is fortifying 
the Galatian believers against a temptation 
assaulting themselves. 

Ver. 30.—Nevertheless what saith the 
Scripture} (ἀλλὰ τί λέγει ἡ γραφή). “ Never- 
theless:” man is acting thus ; but, what doth 
God say touching the matter? The similar 
question in Rom. xi. 4, “ But what saith the 
answer of God (ὁ χρηματισμὸς) to him?” 


4 


208 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


(cx. rv. 1—31. 


favours the belief that by “the Scripture” 
the apostle does not mean Scripture in 
general (as 2g. John x. 35), but the parli- 
cular “ passage of Scripture ” to which he is 
referring (cf. John xix. 37; Acts i. 16). The 
animation of his tone is that of the trium- 
phant assertion of the Almighty’s will as 
an all-sufficing answer to all objections and 
all discouragements. For “the Scripture” 
is equivalent to “the utterance of God;” 
not merely as found in an inspired volume, 
but because of the circumstances attending 
upon the speaking of the words (comp. Rom. 
ix. 17; ch. iii, 8) They were, indecd, 
uttered by Sarah; being, however, not words 
of a simply jealous and petulant woman, but 
of a righteously indignant matron, whose 
just, if severe, requirement was enforecd 
upon the reluctant Abraham by God's own 
express command. The historical fact its If, 
as thus recorded, was singularly noticeable, 
standing in a position marking it as pecu- 
liarly significant: that it really was a type, 
prophctical of a certain future spiritual pro- 
cedure, is ascertained for us by the apustle’s 
exposition. Cast out the bondwoman and 
her son: for the son of the bondwoman shall 
not be heir with the son of the freewoman 
(ἔκβαλε τὴν παιδίσκην καὶ τὸν υἱὸν αὐτῇς" οὐ 
γὰρ μὴ κληρονομήσῃ [or, κληρονομήσει ὃ υἱὸς 
τῆς παιδίσκης μετὰ τοῦ υἱοῦ τῆς ἐλευθέρας); 
east out the handmaid and her eon: for the 
son of the handmaid shall not inherit with the 
son of the freewoman. The Septuagint has 
“Cast outthis(rat7nv) handmaid and her son; 
for the son of this (ταύτης) handmaid shiall 
not inherit with my son Isaac (μετὰ τοῦ υἱοῦ 
pov Ἰσαάκ); " the apostle’s citation being lite- 
rally exact, except that it has not the words 
ταύτην and ταύτης (which are not-in the 
Hebrew), and substitutes “the son of the 
freewoman” for ‘“‘my son Isaac.” His ob- 
ject in these changes, which do not in the 
least affuct the substance, is to mark the 
utterance the more distinctly as God’s own 
voice, speaking of the parties concerned, not 
as Sarah did, being one of them, but as 
supreme Ruler and Judge: for the Lord 
adopted her decision for h:s own. In respect 
to Ishmael’s exclusion from inhcriting, the 
instance of Jephthah (Judg. xi. 1, 2), ex- 
eluded in somewhat similar terms by the legi- 
timate sons of his father (“‘ Thou shalt not 
inherit in the house of our father; for the son 
ofa harlot woman art thou ”’), does not apply. 
Hagar was nota “harlot;” but stood with 


respect to Sarah in much the same position _ 


as did Bilhah and Zilpah to Rachel and 
Leah. We cannot doubt but that the dis- 
crimination made between the two sons, 
whatever was the character of Sarah’s fecl- 
ings in the matter, is to be ascribed to God’s 
own sovereign appointment (see Rom. ix. 7, 
11). In this terrible sentence, by which 


Hagar and Ishmael were driven forth beyond 
the pale of God’s most especial guardianship 
and blessing, the apostle hears the voice of 
God bidding away from his covenant all who 
disbelieved the gospel—all, that is, who set 
aside God’s assurances of his free unmerited 
love to all who believed in Jesus. It should 
seem that it was muinly fer the purpose of 
introducing this denunciation that the apostle 
has been at the pains to trace out the allo- 
goric:l meaning of the narrative. The 
apostle is not now thinking of the natioual 
excision of the Jews; he is contemplating, 
not nationalities, but halits of mind—servile 
legality on the one side, and on the other 
faith accepting a free gift of grace. It is at 
their cxtreme peril, he in effect tells the 
Galatians, that they forsake the latter to taka 
up with the former: Goud bas shown that by 
so doing they will forfeit the inheritanca 
altogether, 

Ver. 31.—In the Greek text of this verse, 
taken in connection with the first of the next 
chapter, there is a great diversity of readings. 
The following are the forms in which it is 
presented by the principal editors :—(1) 
Textus Receptus: “Apa, ἀδελφοί, οὐκ ἐσμὲν 
παιδίσκης τέκνα, ἀλλὰ τῆς ἐλευθέρας. Τῇ ἐλευ- 
θερίᾳ οὖν ἣ Χριστὸς ἡμᾶς ἠλευθέῤῥωσε, στήκετε, 
καὶ μὴ πάλιν ζυγῷ δουλείας ἐνέχεσθε. (2) L. T, 
Tr., Meyer, Revisers, W. and H.: Διό, ἀδελ- 
gol, οὐκ ἐσμὲν παιδίσκης τέκνα, ἀλλὰ τῆς ἐλευ" 
θέρας. Τῇ ἐλευθερίᾳ ἡμᾶς Χριστὸς ἠλευθέρωσε, 
στήκετε οὖν, καὶ μὴ, κιτιλ. (3) Ellicott: Διό, 
ἀδελφοί, οὐκ ἐσμὲν παιδίσκης τέκνα, ἀλλὰ τῆς 
ἐλευθέρας. Τῇ ἐλευθερίᾳ ἣ ἡμᾶς Χριστὸς ἤλευ- 
θέρωσε στήκετε οὖν, καὶ κιτιλ. (4) Lightfoot: 
Διό, ἀδελφοί, οὐκ ἐσμὲν παιδίσκης τέκνα, ἀλλὰ 
τῆς ἐλευθέρας τῇ ἐλευθεριά ἣ ἡμᾶς Χριστὸς 
ἠλευθέρωσε" στήκετε οὖν, καὶ κιτιλ, The follow- 
ing are the probable translations of these 
several forms of the text:—(1) “ Therefore, 
brethren, we are not a landmaid’s children, 
but children of the freewoman: stand fast 
then in [or,‘ by,’ or,‘ to’] the freedom with which 
Christ set us free; and do not again get held 
in a yoke of bondage.” (2) “ Wherefore, 
brethren, we are not a handmaid’s children, 
but children of the freewoman: with free- 
dom did Christ set us free ; stand fast, then,” 
ete. (3) “ Wherefore, brethren, we are not 
a handmaid’s children, but children of the 
freewoman; in the freedom with which Christ 
set _us free stand fast, then, and,” ete. (4) 
“Wherefore, brethren, we are not a hand- 
maid’s children, but chdldren of the free 
woman by [i.e. ‘by virtue of’] the frecdom [er, 
‘children of her who is free with that free- 
dom’] with which Christ set us free; stand 
fast, then, and,” ete. It will be seen by the 
above that there appears a general agree- 
ment among recent editors of the Greek text 
upon three points: (1) they all substitute 
διὸ for %oa—an alteration which makes na 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 20% 


lifference whatever in the sense; (2) they 
expunge the οὖν after ἐλευθερίᾳ; (3) they 
insert οὖν after στήκετε. The forms (3) and 
(4) are identical except in the punctuation. 
The construction of the dative ἐλευθερίᾳ with 
στήκετε in forms (1) and (8) is difficult, 
and has not yet been quite satisfactorily 
accounted for. We miss the preposition ἐν, 
to express the idea of ¢émmanence which is 
evidently intendcd, and to express which ἐν 
is elsewhere found present; as 1 Cor. xvi. 
13; Phil. i. 27; iv. 1; 1 Thess. iii. 8. The 
arrangement given in form (3) is, in addi- 
tion, greatly embarrassed by the “then ” 
standing so far on in the sentence—this 
particle marking, as it does, an inference from 
the sentence in the preceding verse. The 
furthest place in the sentence adducel by 
Winer(‘Gram. N.'l’.,’§ 61)is the fourth word, 
in 1 Cor, viii. 4. The fourth form presents by 
far the easiest construction. It seems strange, 
liowever, if this was the original text, that 
it came to be changed into shapes so much 
more difficult to construe. In the second 
form, the clause, “ with freedom did Christ 
set us free,” scems somewhat strangcly 
phrased; but this iteration of the idea of 
frecdom, marking the apostle’s anxious in- 
eistance upon it, may have led the copyists 
to suspect an error ot transcription, and thus 
have set them upon the endeavour to im- 
prove, as they thought, the text before them. 
The same anxious insistance upon an idea 
leads the apostle to a somewhat similw 
introduction of a clause which is almost a 
parenthesis, in Eph. ii. 5, “By grace have 
ye been saved.” It will be noticed that tie 
variations in the text above noted make not 
the smallest difference in the main contents 
of thought. The same factors of thought 
are present in all. The further remarks 
now to be made will assume for their basis 
the second form of the text. Wherefore, 
brethren, we are not ὦ handmaid’s children, 
bué children of the freewoman. This διό 
(Receptus, ἄρα) gathers up the result of the 
whole foregoing allegorical exposition, not 
that of its concluding portion only, as a 
basis for practical remark. ‘“ We are not a 
handmaid’s children;” that is, “It is not 
a slave-girl that is our mother.” The article 
is wanting before παιδίσκης, not because the 
apostle is thinking, as some imagine, of there 
being other handmaids besides Mosaism, as, 
for example, heathen ceremonialism ; for the 
context points to only one slave-girl that 
can possibly answer to Hagar; but because 
he wishes by contrast to fasten attention 
upon the character of her who ἐξ our mother. 
Hence also there is no ἡμεῖς or ὑμεῖς, as in 
ver. 28. “But children of the {reewoman,” or 
“of her who is free;” not defining what 
individual is our mother, but, who our mother 
is being now assumed as known, marking 
GALATIAN® 


what her condition is. With freedom did 
Christ set us free (τῃ ἐλευθερίᾳ ἡμᾶς Χριστὸς 
ἠλευθέρωσε). This cluuse both justifies and 
explains the word “freewoman.” Our mother 
is a freewoman, because all her children 
have been emancipated by Christ; and the 
nature of her freedom is likewise defined by 
the nature of his work. This sense is more 
directly asserted in the fourth form of the 
Greek text—* children of the freewoman by 
the freedom with which Christ set us free ;” 
but it is in realily contained in the second. 
Christ’s emancipating work was twofold : he 
at once, by hisatonement, effected our deliver- 
ance from guilt, and by the manner of his 
death (ch. iii. 13) disconnected his people 
from the ceremonial Law. ‘The former aspect 
of his work is essential to the beneficial effect 
of the latter. The clear realization of the 
fact that he has effected our perfect recon- 
ciliation with God cuts up from its roots all 
desire even, that we should ourselves strive, 
either tomake or to keep ourselves acceptable 
with God by obedience to a Law of positive 


| ordinances; while we also must sce that, as 


connected with a Crucified One, itis impossible 
that we can be in harmony with the Mosaic 
ritual. A desire to Judaize cannot coexist 
with true fuith in our crucified Redcomer. By 
affirming that Christ lath set us free, the 
apostle points, not merely to our release from 
real or fancicd obligation to obey the Law 
of Moses, but also to our “ joy in God through 
our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom we have 
received reconciliation ” (Rom. v.11). Stand 
fast, therefore. According to this reading, 
στήκετε standing alone receives its colour of 
reference from the context. So 2 Thess. ii. 
15. Here it means the steadfast holding to 
a whole-hearted assurance that in Christ 
Jesus our freedom is complete. And do not 
again get held in a yoke of bondage. The 
verb évéyoum is used (Herod., ii. 121) lite- 
rally of being caught and held fast by a 
man-trap; also figuratively of being en- 
tangled with perplexities (ἀπορίῃσιν, Herod., 
i. 190), with a curse, or with guilt, or with 
arbitrary dicta of a teacher (see Liddcll 
and Scott). The condition of a slave is 
described by the word “ yoke,” 1 Tim. vi. 1, 
“Ὅσοι εἰσὶν ὑπὸ ζυγὸν δοῦλοι, “ AS many as 
are bond-servants under the yoke.” And it 
was probably with this particular shade of 
meaning that St. Peter used the term at the 
conference at Jerusalem respecting the cere- 
monial Law (Acts xv. 10)—“a yoke which 
neither we nor our fathers had strength 
enouzh to bear;” referring to it, we may 
suppose, as slavery, not merely because 
obedience to it was difficult, but as being 
observed from a legalistic anxiety to approve 
one’s self thereby to the Divine acceptance 
or to escape the Divine displeasure, This 
view of the passage explains how the apostle 


210 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


Lou. rv. 1—31. 


was able to use the word “again” of these 
Galatian converts. They had been once 
under the yoke of an “ evil conscience ;” but 
Christ had come to them also, who were “afar 
off” in Gentile guiltiness, preaching peace, 
as he had come to them that were “nigh” 


to the Father” save through conformity with 
Mosaic ceremonialism, then their “freedom’”’ 
was forfeited; they sank back .again into 
their former state of boudage. But see also 
the note on ver. 9. ‘I'his exhortation to 
“stand fast”? presupposes that they had not 


in the Israclite covenant (Eph. ii. 17). But 


yet lapsed, but were only in dauger of it 
if they could not have “ peace ” and “ access 


(comp. the μετατίθεσθε of ch. i, 6). 


HOMILETICS, 


Vers. 1—3.— The Church of God in its minority. The apostle now passes to a new 
phase of argument. He has used the similitudes of a testament, a prison, a school- 
master, to mark the condition of believers under the Law; he now uses the similitude 
of an heir in his nonage. The Galatians are here taught that the state of men under 
the Law, so far from being.an advanced religious position, was rather low and infantile. 
Mark— 

I. THE HEIR’S POTENTIAL POSITION. He is “lord of all.” He is such by birth and 
condition ; and, if his father is dead, he is actual possessor, though he may not in the 
years of his minority enjoy his property or assert his complete mastery over it. This 
passage implics that saints under the Law had experience of blessings enjoyed by saints 
under the gospel, though their dispensatioual privileges were fewer and their knowl dge 
far less perfect. There is but one inheritance in which the saints of all dispensations 
share alike—they are all “ Abraham’s seed” by faith in Christ Jesus. 

II. ΠῊΞ PERIOD OF DISCIPLINE AND SUBJECTION. “ The heir, as long as he is a 
child, differeth nothing from a bond-servant.” 1. The infantile period. The apostle 
does not refer to childhood in the physical sense so as to imply any weakness of under- 
standing or immaturity of judgment, but childhood in its legal aspect. He refers to 
the lifetime of the Church. ‘he pre-Christiin state was childhood; the Christian 
state was ripe age in full possession. The heir in his nonage thus represented the state 
of the world before the gospel, when both Jews and Gentiles were under tutelage ; 
Lecause he had said in the third chapter that all, both Jews and Gentiles, were heirs 
and children of God. 2. Its d/scipline. The heir is “ under guardians and stewards,” 
This subjection is necessary to ensure that he should not misapply his powers or waste 
his property. The discipline is manifest in two or three respects. (1) The heir is nc 
better than a bond-servant, who is secured in food and clothing such as his master may 
allow him, but he has no more power of independent action than the bond-servant. 
He can do no act except through his legal representative. The guardian watches over 
his person; the steward over his property. ‘The Law is here represented as filling this 
double place in relation to Old Testament believers. (2) The heir is under training, 
for he is “in bondage under the elements of the world.” (α) It was a burdensome 
condition; for the Levitical ordinances “gendered to bondage;” “a yoke,” says Peter, 
“which neither we nor our fathers were able to bear ”—very exacting in its demands 
and ineffvctual in the result. Every duty was minutely prescribed, and nothing left to 
the discretion of worshippers, as to worship, labour, dress, food, birth, marriage, war, 
trade, tax, or tithe. (ὁ) ‘he education was limited to “the elements of this world ;” 
to elementary teaching through worldly symbols—the fire, the altar, the incense, the 
blood-shedding—having reference to things material, sensuous, and formal, rather than 
to things spiritual. Thus the Church in its minority had outlines of spiritnal truth 
suited in a sort to its capacity. The elements in question were “weak and beggarly,” 
though those of the Jews were much superior to those of the Gentiles, because they were 
appointed by God. 

Π|. THe PERIOD OF DISCIPLINE WAS TO BE TEMPORARY, “'T'll the time appointed 
of the father.” The father’s will was to be supreme in the whole transaction. The 
Church was not always to be under Law. The fulness of time was to end the nonage 
of the Church. Believers were not, therefore, to be always children. “This is a 
powerful battery,” says Calvin, “against Roman Catholic ceremonies: they are to aid 
tie ignorant, in sooth; but it was during the nonage.” “Are Roman Catholics,” he 


on. Iv. 1—31.} THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS 211 


asks, “children or full-grown men?” It also condemns the Judaists for going back 
to “elements of the world,” which had their place and use only in a condition of nonage. 
“Yet the pope and Mahomet have tried to bring back the race, free and of full age, 
to its minority again.” 


Vers. 4, 5.—The fulness of time with its biessings. This corresponds with “ the time 
appointed of the father.” The nonage of the Church was past. The world bad 
arrived at mature age. A new dispensation was at hand. ; : 

I. THe FITNESS OF THE TIME. ‘The new dispensation was no abrupt phenomenon, 
for it came at the fittest time in the world’s history. 1. When all the prophecies of the 
Oli Testament centred in Jesus Christ. When the whole economy of type had done 
its work in preparing a certain circle of ideas in which Christ’s person and work would 
be thoroughly understood; when the Law had worked out its educational purpose. 
2. When a fair trial had been given to all other schemes of life. Not only art and 
education, culture and civilization, but Divine Law itself, had done their utmost for 
man, yet notwithstanding the knowledge of the true God was almost lost among the 
heathen, and true religion had almost died out among the Jews. The necessity of a new 
provision was thus demonstrated. 3. 10 was an age of peace, in which the world had 
a breathing-space for thinking of higher things, in which the communications of the 
Roman empire facilitated the progress of the gospel, and in which the Greek language, 
being all but universal, was ready to become the vehicle of the new revelation, Thus 
the fulness of time was the turning-point of the world’s history, in which Jesus Christ 
became its true Centre. Thus, as Schaff says, the way for Christianity was prepared 
by the Jewish religion, by Grecian culture, by Roman conquest; by the vainly attempted 
amalgamation of Jewish and heathen thought; by the exposed impotence of natural 
civilization, philosophy, art, political power; by the decay of old religions; by the 
universal distraction and hopeless misery of the age; and by the yearning of souls after 
the uuknown God. 

II. THe mission or tHE Son. “ God sent forth his Son.” These words imply the 
pre-existence as well as the Divine nature of Christ. The Son existed as a Divine 
Person with God before he came to be made of a woman. He was the eternal Son 
of God, as God the Father is the eternal Father. They are two distinct lersons, else 
the one could not send the other. He came, not without a commission, for the Father 
sent him; and he came to do the Father’s will, and became “ obedient unto death, even 
the death of the cross.” His mission was not the ransom, but the presupposition 
of the ransom, the possession of the Divine nature giving it an infinite value. 

Ill. THE TRUE HUMANITY oF THE Son. “Made of a woman.” This language 
implies the possession of a higher nature; for if the Son possessed no other than mere 
humanity, where would have been the necessity of saying that he was “made of a 
woman”? The phrase points significantly to his supernatural conception, for there 
is an exclusion of human fatherhood. The apostle teaches his true humanity. It is 
a significant fact that Mary is here called simply, not “virgin,” or “ mother of God,” 
but “woman;” just as John in the phrase, “the Word became flesh,” ignores the 
virgin-mother. There is nothing in Scripture to sanction the Mariolatry of the Church 
of Rome. The incarnation of the Lord is here represented as the deed of God the 

Father, as it is elsewhere spoken of as the Redeemer’s own act (2 Cor. viii. 9). 
~ Without his sharing in our humanity he could possess neither the natural nor the 
legal union with his people which is presupposed in his representative character. Thus 
he becomes the second Man of the human race, or the last Adam. 

IV. His puack unpER Law For man. “Made under the Law.” This clause 
affirms that he was made under the Law for the sake of those under Law, and therefore 
not from any personal obligation of his own. We were born under Law as creatures ; 
he took his place under Law for the ends of suretyship. The phrase does nct signify 
merely that he was born a Jew. His subjection to the Law, as well as his mission, was 
in order to our redemption; the one was the way to the other, as appears from the 
particle which connects the last clause of the fourth verse with the first clause of 
the fifth. Both Jews and Gentiles were under Law as the condition of life by the 
fact of birth (Rom. ii. 14; iii 9). The meaning of the phrase is that he placed 
himeelf under Law with a view to that meritorious obedience by which we ara 


212 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. {cit 10, 1-81, 


accounted righteous (Rom. v. 19). Thus he fulfilled all the claims of the Law for 
us, both as to precept and penalty. 

V. THE DESIGN OF THE MISSION oF THE Son. “To redeem them that were under 
the Law.” His object was to redeem buth Jews and Gentiles from the curse of the 
Law, and from subjection to it. He was visited with the penal consequences of sin, 
with its curse and wages (ch, iii. 13), from the day he entered into humanity by 
incarnation. The deliverance wrought for us was the result of purchase. Thus we 
are entitled to regard the cross of Christ as the fulfilment of the Law, the expiation 
of sin, the ransom of the Church, the sacrificial blood which brings us near to God 
in worship. 

VI. THE ULTIMATE RESULT OF THE REDEMPTION. “That we should receive the 
adoption of sons.” This does not mean sonship, but son-position. Believers were even 
in Old Testament times true sons of God, but they were treated as servants. Now 
they emerge into the true condition of sons. The adoption has three foundations. It 
is by free sovereign grace; for “we are predestinated to the adoption of children ” 
(Eph. i. 6). It is by incarnation, according to the text; it is by resurrection. Jesus, the 
Son, is the Form, the Fountain-head, the Fulness from which they all proceed, We 
are chosen to be sons in him who is the eternal Son; we are regenerated by his Spirit ; 
the basis and example of the work of sanctification is the Son of God, born into our 
nature by the same Spirit; and “the resurrection of the just,” which the apostle 
himself atrives to attain (Phil. iii. 11), and which is limited to the “sons of God” 
(Luke 2x. 36), has its type in Jesus, the First-begotten from the dead. 


Ver. 6.—The evidence of sonship. ‘And because ye are sons, God hath sent forth 
the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father.” The presence of the 
Spirit was the witness of their sonship (Rom. viii. 15). 

I. THE mission or THE Spirit. “ God sent forth the Spirit of his Son.” Here are 
the three Persons of the blessed Trinity. ‘God manifests himself in the Son, but 
communicates his life by the Holy Ghost” (Oosterzee). 1. He is called the “ Spirit 
of his Son,” just as he is called the “ Spirit of the Father.” The title applies to the 
Son, not in his Messiahship, but in his Godhead. He is often described as the Spirit 
of Christ; and, if that were all, it might imply that he is simply related to Christ in 
his office as Mediator, either given to Christ or given by Christ. But he is called the 
Spirit of God’s Son, which is not a title derived by Christ from his office, but from 
necessary and eternal relation. It cannot be supposed that he is the Spirit of the 
Father in one sense and to one effect, and the Spirit of the Son, who is also God, 
in another sense and to another effect. It is this eternal and necessary relation which 
is the ground of his coming forth in the free interpositions and covenant operations 
of his grace. 2. The mission of the Spirit. Just as in the fulness of time the Son 
was sent forth, so in the fulness of time the Spirit was sent forth to apply and witness 
the redemption purchased by Christ. It is the Spirit who unites us to Christ in our 
effectual calling, and makes us “sons of God by faith in Christ Jesus.” 3. The sphere 
of his operations. “In your hearts.” It is thus an inward, sanctifying, saving work; 
for it has its seat in the heart, in which the habits of grace are implanted, and out 
of which are all the issues of life. ‘I will put my Spirit within them.” 

II, THE OFFICE WHICH THE SPIRIT PERFORMS IN THE BELIEVER’s HEART, ‘“ Cry- 
ing, Abba, Father.” 1, The crying is the earnest importunate prayer of the believer, of 
which he is the organ and the Spirit the agent. The intensity of feeling in prayer is due 
to the Holy Spirit, who enables us to realize our nced and the fulness of sup; ly in Christ 
Jesus. 2. The cry finds voice in the tender accents of “ Abba, Father.” The two word:—= 
one Aramaic, and the other Greek—are a fitting type of the union of Jew and Gentile 
in Christ. ‘the dearest conception in Christianity is the fatherhood of God. ‘The 
belicver is enabled by the Spirit of the Son to realize the tenderness as well as the 
dignity of the new relation in which he stands by adoption. : 

III. THE coNCLUSION OF THE WHOLE MATTER. ‘“ Whercfore thou art no more a 
slave, but a son; and if a son, then an heir of God through Christ.” Thus the apostle 
corroborates the closing verse of the third chapter: “And if ye be Christ’s, then are 
ye Abraham’s seed, and heirs according to the promise.” The slave is not an heir; the 
gon enters on his father’s inheritance, which comes to him, not by merit, but by promise 


eH, ιν. 1—31.] THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 213 


Ver. 8.—An appeal tothe Gentile Galatians. “ Howbeit then, when ye knew not 
God, ye did service unto them which by nature are no gods.” The apostle here seems 
to turn to the Gentile portion of the Church, and impresses upon them the folly of 
placing themselves under the yoke of Mosaic Law. 

1. CoNsIDER THEIR FORMER IGNORANCE OF Gop. “ When ye knew not God.” The 
apostle gives no hint here of that self-satisfied agnosticism of our day, which says 
either we cannot or we do not know anything of God, but simply asserts the fact that 
they did not as Gentiles know God. God is not unknowab'e. ‘I'he apostle explains, 
in the first chapter of Romans, how the knowledge of God died out of the minds of 
men. It occurred through a deliberate perversion of the moral powers of man. They 
kuew not God, and were thus in a terrible sense “ without God in the world.” Yet 
they were not without religion. Religion is a necessity of man’s nature, and hence its 
universality. It may be dimmed by superstition and ignorance and sin; it may be 
left to rust by disuse, till it has all but disappeared ; yet it is never wholly lost. 

11, ConsIDER THE SUPERSTITION THAT WAS BUILT UPON THIS IGNoKANCE. “ Ye 
did service unto them which by nature are no gods.” 1. The objects of their super- 
stitious worship were no gods. He says elsewhere they were demons: the gods had 
no real existence. They were either evil spirits or dead men, or the lights of heaven 
dvified by human ignorance and folly. It is fearful to think of the widespread delusions 
of the heathen. 2. Their worship was a degrading bondage. It was full of labour and 
fear and suffering. “The bondage of the Jews was pedagogic; the bondage of the 

- Gentiles was more wretched, for they did not know God atall.” The Gentile bondage 
was terrible with its sacrifices, its mutilations, its orgics, its cruelties. It degraded thc 
mind, fettered the imagination, cramped the heart, of its votaries, 


Ver. 9.—A protest against relapse. ‘“ But now, after having known God, or rather 
were being known of God, how are you turning again to the weak and beggarly 
elements, whereunto ye desire again to be in bondaze ?” 

I. Mark THEIR NEW POSITION OF KNOWLEDGE AND PRIVILEGE. The Galatians had 
come to know God through the preaching of the gospel. 1. This was their high 
privilege. “This is life cternal, to know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ, 
whom thou hast sent.” 2. I¢ was a sign of Divine fellowship. “Tam the good Shepherd, 
and know my sheep, and am known of mine.” ὃ. It came through Christ. “No man 
knoweth the Father, save the Son, and he to whomsvever he will reveal him.” But 
there is another side to this truth. They were “rather known of God,” as if to obviate 
any possible inference that.the reconciliation implied in this knowledge may have been 
the effect of man’s action. It was an affectionate and interested knowlelge on God’s 
part which made knowledge of God possible on their part. “In thy light shall wo 
see light.” God knew them ere they knew him. 

Il. THE INCONSISTENCY OF A RETURN TO WEAK AND BEGGARLY ELEMENTS. They 
had been slaves to the “ elements ” under the forms of heather idolatry ; they were now 
going back into bondage to elements under the form of Judaism. 1. This threatened 
relapse implied that they had no true understanding or appreciation of the simple 
gospel of salvation. ‘The seeds of defection and apostasy lie in almost every heart. 
2. The apostle’s surprise at their inconsistency: arising partly from his knowledge 
of their full and cordial reception of the gospel at the beginning, and partly out of the 
character of the religion for which they were parting with “the truth of the gospel ”—- 
“ weak and beggarly elements.” This language of contempt applies to tte legal rites of 
the ceremonial Law, which were, of course, of Divine appointment, and as such to be 
regarded with due honour. But the elements became “ weak and beggaily ” by their 
misapplication in the hands of Pharisaic men. ‘hey were “ weak,” because they had 
no power to justify or promote salvation (Rom. viii. 8); “ beggarly,” because they 
could invest no sinner with “the unsearchable riches of Christ.” ‘lhe worshippers, 
after all their drudgery, found themselves none the better. The apostle might well 
express his surprise to find Christians going back upon mere elements which the 
guspel had for ever superseded. 


Ver. 10.— dhe observance of duys. The apostle now gives a specimen of this 
bondage. “ Days ye are observing, and months, and seasons, and years.” The days 


514 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. (cn. τν. 1---8) 


were the Jewish sabbaths, with other times of religious observance; the months were the 
new moons, always exactly observed; the seasons were annual festivals, as Passover, 
Pentecost, and Feast of Tabernacles; and the years were the sabbatical year and the 
year of jubilee. 

1. THE GROUNDS OF THE APOSTLE’S CONDEMNATION OF HOLY DAYs. 1. Not that they 
were not of Divine appointment. God expressly appointed them all, The Judaists, 
after all, had more to say for themselves than the Ruman Catholics for their fasts and 
festivals, which were not appointed by God. 2. Not that Jewish converts were wrong 
in observing them; for he himself observed some of them, and thcre was a liberty 
allowed in this transition period of the gospel. ‘One man esteemeth one day 
above another: another esteemeth every day alike. Let every man be fully persuaded 
in his own mind” (Rom. xiv. 5). Thus the Jewish converts were in the habit of 
“keeping the days unto the Lord.” 3. He condemns the Galatians, as Gentiles, 
for observing days which, as Jewish, had no relation to them, and most of which, as 
Jewish, applied only to the conditions of society in the Hvuly Land. The Galatians 
are accordingly condemned: (1) Because they attached importance to ecclesiastical days, 
“like children who were in bondage to the elements of the world,” suited, it might 
be, to the infancy of the Church, but no longer applicable to a state of spiritual 
manhood. Similarly in Col. ii, 16 he says, “Let no man judge you in meat or in 
drink, or in respect of a holy day, or of the new moon, or of the sabbath days.” 
(2) Because they regarded the observance of these days as essential to salvation. This 
was a still more fatal error. 

11. THe conDEMNATION IN PRINCIPLE STILL ABIDES IN CurisTIANITy. 1. Zt cannot 
apply to the observance of the Lord’s day, because (1) the apostle has not such a day in his 
thoughts at all when he censured their observance of days; (2) because, so far as we 
know, the Lord’s day was a fully accepted observance in the Church from the very 
first, both by Jews and Gentiles ; (3) because a day of rest existed before the establish- 
ment of the Jewish economy, and could not, tlerefore, be affected by the downfall of 
Judaism. 2. It cannot apply to the case of individuals voluntarily observing days of 
fasting and thanksgiving for their own spiritual edification, while they do not 
attempt to make them obligatory on others. 3. /¢ cannot apply to the right of the 
Church, by its own authority, to appoint such days of fasting or thanksgiving as public 
emergencies may suggest as necessary to the highest interestsof man. This idea 
excludes the thought of any special holiness attaching to the day itself. 4. But τέ 
does condemn the appointment by the Church of stated and permanent days which take 
their place, as a religious service, with all the regularity of the weekly sabbath itself. 
The apostle displaces all the Jewish days of observance without exception as belong- 
ing “to the rudiments of the world,” and allows to the Gentiles no day of regularly 
appointed worship but the Christian sabbath. The tendency of holy days is, not to 
spiritualize the week, but rather to secularize the sabbath. This, at least, is manifest 
in Roman Catholic countries. 


Ver. 11.—The apostle’s apvrchensions for his converts. ‘Tam apprehensive of you, 
lest I have bestowed upon you labour in vain.” 

I. Tae GaALATIANS COST THE APOSTLE MUCH LaBouR. He was their spiritual 
father; he had paid them a second visit which was full of effort and anxiety ; and this 
Epistle represented effort and anxicty in a very extreme form, The apostle never 
spared himself. He laboured more abundantly than all the apostles. 

II, His UNCERTAINTY AND CONCERN FOR THEM. It was doubtful whether he would 
succeed after all in repelling the attack of the Judaists and rescuing his converts from 
their injurious influences. But, though he labours in uncertainty, he works in hope. 
“ Other work-folks find their work as they left it, but a minister hath all marred many 
times between sabbath and sabbath” (‘Trapp). Yet it is manifest that it is not his 
own interest, but that of his converts, which is his supreme anxiety at this moment 
of crisis in Galatia, 


Ver. 12.—An affectionate call to liberty. ‘ Brethren, I beseech you ”—as if he would 
redouble his tenderness to converts so dearly loved—stand in your true Christian liberty 
apart from the weak and beggarly elements of Judaism, 


oH. Iv. 1—31.] THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 218 


I. He Asks THEM TO STAND ON THE SAME PLLATTORM OF LIBERTY WITH HIMSELF, 
“Become ye as lam ”—free yoursell from the bondage of ordinances as I have done— 
“for I also have become as ye are,” standing in your Gentile freedom, that I might 
preach the gospel to you Gentiles. I became “as without Law to them that were 
without Law, that I might save them that were without Law” (1 Cor. ix. 21). He had 
abandoned the legal ground of righteousness as well as the ceremonial formalism of the 
Jews, and he now invites the Gentiles to stand beside him in this position of freedom 
and privilege, : 

IL ‘THE QUESTION BETWEEN HIM AND THEM HAS NO PERSONAL ELEMENT WHATEVER, 
“Ye did me no wrong.” Though they were led to deny or doubt his apostleship, he 
ΤῊΣ no personal ground of complaint against them. The interest at stake was far 

eeper. 


Vers. 13—16.—A retrospect with its lessons, The apostle seeks an explanation of 
their changed attitude toward himself, 

I. He RECALLS THE CIRCUMSTANCES OF HIS FIRST RELATIONS WITH THE GALATIANS. 
“ Ye know how on account of an infirmity of the flesh I preached the gospel unto you 
at the first.” 1. His visit was not designed, but accidental. He was travelling through 
their country on his way to regions beyond, when he was seized with illness and detained 
ΒΟ long that he found an opportunity to preach the gospel. Precious infirmity to the 
Galatians! It was an opportunity providentially created, 2. //is preaching was 
therefore in a sense compulsory ; a circumstance which greatly enhanced the enthusiastio 
welcome of the Galatians. His infirniity might not admit ef travel, but it was com- 
patible with a considerable evangelistic activity. 

11. THe narure or ais ἹΝΕΊΒΜΙΤΥ, 1. Jé was sharp physical distress, (2 Cor. xii.) 
2. It must have been humiliating to himself ; for it was designed as a check to spiritual 
pride: “ Lest I should be exalted above measure.” 3. It must have been a severe trial to 
&@ man with such sleepless zeal; for it threatened to hinder. his activity as an apostle. 
4. It could not be concealed from others, 5. It had a tendency to cause loathing in those 
who had intercourse with him. Perhaps it accounted for “his speech being con- 
temptible ” and “his presence weak.” 6. Jt was chronic. It is impossible to know 
what it was, though learned opinion gravitates between the theory of falling sickness 
and that of disease of the eyes. It had the effect, at all events, of checking him in his 
travels at a momentous period, when the Galatians became his debtors for the gospel. 

III. Tae syMPaTHETIO TEMPER OF THE GALATIANS. 1. They did not treat him 
with either indifference or loathing. ‘“ And your temptation which was in my flesh, ye 
despised not nor loathed.” His bodily ailment might have led them to the rejection of 
his preaching. 2. They conferred upon him unusual honour and affection, “ But received 
me as an angel of God, even as Jesus Christ.” Angels are the highest of created beirgs, 
and it is good “to entertain angels unawares.” But Christ is higher than angels. ‘I'he 
passage implies the Galatian attachment to Christ, for they received Paul as they would 
have received Christ. “He that receiveth you receiveth me.” 8, They would have 
undergone personal suffering on his account. “I bear you record, that, if it had been 
possible, you would have plucked out your own eyes, and have given them to me.” An 
extraordinary mark of affection! But it is merely a proverbial mode of speech taken 
from the indispensableness of the eyes. ‘We owe more than the eyes of the body to 
those who have given us the eyes of the soul.” 4, They had conyratulated themselves 
upon their unspeakable privilege in having such a teacher. ‘“ Where is then the blessed- 
ness ye spake of ?” 

IV. SuGGESTED CAUSE OF THE GALATIAN oHANGE. “So then am I become your 
enemy by speaking the truth to you?” The apostle refers not to the plain-speaking of 
the Kipistle nor to the occasion of his first visit, but to a second visit which brought to 
light the incipient action of Judaist principles. 1. Enmity created by truth-speaking 
implies α grave departure from the truth, The truth-teller is disliked because he 
inflicts pain, but the pain shows there is something wrong within. Pcople generally 
dislike to think that others know their particular faults. ‘Truth breeds hatred as the 
fair nymphs the ugly fauns and satyrs” (Trapp). 2. The truth-speaker is our best 
friend. “Faithful are the wounds of a friend, but the kisses of an enemy are 
deceitful” (Prov. xxvii. 6). 8, Think of the courage of the apostle. He tells the 


216 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. (cu. rv. 1—13 


Galatians the truth at the sacrifice of their personal friendship and love. Truth was 
a more precious thing than man’s esteem. It was the very truth of the gospel, with 
man’s salvation hanging upon it, and therefore incapable of heing betrayed or sur- 
rendered through any spirit of unworthy compliance or men-pleasing. 


Vers. 17, 18.—The tuctics of the false teachers. The apostle is naturally led from the 
thought of the Galatian alienation to speak of the seductive arts by which it was 
caused. 

I. Turi arts or sEDUcTION. “ They are paying court to you, but not honestly.” 
They manifested an anxious zeal to win over the Galatians to their own party. They 
tried with fair words and fine specches to scduce them, professinz, no doubt, a deep 
interest in their welfare, as well as great zeal for the glory of God; but their mtives 
were not “ honest.” 

If. THe Design oF THESE ARTS. ‘Nay, they desire to exclude you in order that ye 
may zealously affect them.” They aimed at isolating their converts from the sounder 
portion of the Church that they might thus be led to throw themselves completely into 
the hands of their seducers. They wished to form them into a separate clique. The 
first object of errorists is usually to undermine the confidence of converts in their old 
tvachers, and then to get themselves regarded as alone worthy to fill their place. 

III. THe cHARACTER AND AIM OF TRUE ZEAL. “ But it 1s good to be courted fairly 
at all times, and not only when I am present along with you.” 1. Christian zeal must 
spring from a Christian motive—love to Christ, love to the truth, love to the souls of 
wien, Zeal must be according to knowledge. 2. Lt must be exercis:d toward Uhristian 
ends. Not like the zeal of inquisitors, for the destruction of heretics, but for the glory 
of God and the advancement of truth. 3. J¢ must be permanent, and not fitful, in tts 
influence, “ Always.” There are many difficulties to check zeal, such as the perpetual 
antagonism between the Church and the world, the friction of human effort, and the 
law of the members in believers themselves. But the zeal of believers ought to he as 
lasting as the realities of religion are permanent. 4. /t ought to be independent of 
external guidance or suggestion ; whether faitliful teachers are present or absent. 


Vers. 19, 20.—A tender appeal to his converts, The Epistle alternates from reproof 
to argument and from argument to entreaty. 

I. THE APOSTLE’S EARNEST DESIRE FOR THEIR GROWTH INTO SPIRITUAL, MANHOOD. 
“ My little children, of whom I travail in birth azain till Christ be formed in you.” 
1. Mark the tenderness of his address, “ My liltle children;” implying (1) that he bad 
been the instrument of their conversion, he had “ begotten them through the Word’ 
(Jas. i. 18); (2) that they were still little children, with much of the fecbleness and 
simplicity of childhood. 2. Mark his deep anaiety on their account. “ Of whom I 
travail in birth again.” The idea not being so much that of pain as of long-continued 
effort ; it was a renewal to him of the birth-pains that accompanied their regeneration. 
8. Mark the end of all his anxiety. “Till Christ be formed in vou.” This refers, not 
to their regeneration, but to their progressive sanctification. ‘The false teachers had 
tried to form a new shape in their hearts—not Christ, but Moses—but he aimed at the 
complete development of their spiritual manhood, at the fully formed results of Christ 
within them. 

11. His PERPLEXITY ON THEIR account. “1 am perplexed about you;” as to their 
actual spiritual condition as well as how to recover them to the truth of the gospel. If 
the apostle had doubts about the Galatians, they might well have doubts about them- 
selves—a proof that faith may consist with doubts of our personal salvation. 

111. His DEstrE FOR A PERSONAL INTERVIEW. “I could, indeed, wish to be present 
with you now and to change my voice.” 1. A personal interview would necessarily 
dissipate many misapprehensions. 2, It might revive the old affection in its entireness. 
8. It would give him an opportunity of changing his tone. He had been severe in his 
rebukes, but if present with them he might deal with them with all the softness and 
tenderness of a mother. “A letter is a dead messenger, for it can give no more than it 
hath.” But the living voice can adapt itself closely to all times, occasions, and persons 


Vers, 21—23.—An appcal to Bible history. “Tell me, ye that desire to be under 


On. Iv. 1---1.} THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 217 


the Law, do ye not hear the Law?” The apostle makes a fresh appeal to convince the 
Galatians of the essential difference between the Law and the promise. The reasoning 
is conveyed in language of affectionate remonstrance. Consider— 

. I. Tae IMPoRTANCE OF HIS ARGUMENT. The Law itself, upon which the Galatians 
laid such stress, showed that they were not meant to be under it. If he could prove 
from the Law of Moses that Abraham’s children by faith were free from the bondage of 
the Law, no further argumeut was needed to show that obedience to the Law was not 
necessary to salvation. 

II. THE ARGUMENT ΑΒ EMBODIED IN THE HIsTorY. “ For it is written, that Abraham 
had two sons, one by the bondmaid, the other by the freewoman; howbeit, he who 
was of the bondwoman was born alter the flesh, but he of the freewoman was of the 
promise.” Here we have: 1. Two sons of Abraham—Ishmacl and Isaac, Ishmael being 
mentioned first, because he was born first. Abraham had other sous by Keturah, but 
they had no relation to the particular illustrations desired by the apostle. 2. Two 
different mothers—the boudmaid Yasar whom Sarah gave to Abraham that he might 
nut be without offspring; and the frrewoman, Sarah. 3. Two entirely different condi- 
tions of birth. Ishmael was born in bondage and in the common course of nature ; 
Isaac was born in freedom and against nature, when Sarah was old, according to “ the 
promise.” ‘These are the simple historic facts which form the basis of the apostle’s 
allegorical explanation. 4, They are Scripture facts. “Tt is written,” as if to show 
that God’s Word is decisive upon the question. 


Ver, 24.—Allegorized interpretation of the facts. ‘Which things are to be alle- 
gorically treated.” 

J. THE FACTS ARE CAPABLE OF THIS TREATMENT. The apostle does not mean to 
signify that the facts are not historical; nor docs he mean to explain them away as if 
they were allegory like Bunyan’s ‘ Pilgrim’s Progress;’ nor does he mean that Moses 
shaped his narrative in Genesis with a view to this allegorized treatment. It is more 
correct to say that the lives of these real personages were so shaped by Divine provi- 
dence as to afford a striking illustration of other events or objects. The two covenants 
were prefigured in the Old Testament under the image of the two wives of Abraham 
ard their seed respectively. There is nothing in the apostle’s usage to justify the 
allegorizing methods of Origen and the rabbis, which destroy the true sense of Scripture. 
If we admit the apostle’s inspiration, we cannot reject his allegorical interpretation of 
the ancient facts. 

Il. THE CONTRAST BETWEEN THE Two covenants. “ For these”—that is, the two 
women—“ are the two covenants.” Hagar and Sarah represent the two covenants in 
three important points of contrast. 1. Jn the historic origination of the covenants. 
(1) One dates from Mount Sinai—“ one, indeed, from Mount Sinai; ” “ which is Hagar ; 
for this Hagar is Mount Sinai in Arabia.” This was the covenant of Law, which finds its 
{rue representative in the religious attitude of “the Jerusalem which now is.” (2) 
The other jates from the promise made by God to Abraham. ‘This was the covenant 
of promise, which finds its representative in “ the Jerusalem which is above ”—the idcal 
metropolis of Christ’s kingdom, “the heavenly Jerusalem.” 2. In their religious effects. 
(1) The covenant of the Law “ cendereth to bondage,” and answers to “ the Jerusalem 
which is in bondage with her children.” The apostle had already described this very 
bondage under the Law, under schoolmasters, under stewards and tutors, under 
“elements of the world.” (2) ‘lhe covenant of promise involves freedom and corre- 
sponds to “ Jerusalem which is free, the mother of us all,” whether Jews or Gentiles. 
Believers are therefore “to stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made his 
people free.” 3. In their future expansion. Both Hagar and Sarah were to have sarge 
posterity, but Sarah was to have the larger family, according to Scripture prophecy 
itself. The original promise— In thee and in thy seed shall all families of the earth 
be blessed ’’—implied this pregnant fact. But a voice from Isaiah sets it forth in an 
impressive light, “Rejoice, thou barren, that bearest not,” that is, Sarah, or the 
Abrahamic covenant; “ break forth and cry, thou that travailest not: for the desolate 
hath many more children than she” (Hagar) “ which hath the husband” (Abraham). 
‘Thus Sarah was to become “the mother of nations.” Thus Abraham was to become 
the heir of the world, and Jaws and Gentiles were to enter into his wide inheritance, 


218 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. (cx. rv. 1—31, 


Vers. 28—31.—Conclusion of the whole matter. The apostle points to a further 
coincidence between the type and the antitype. 

I. Mark THE uIsTorio racy. “ He that was born after the flesh persecuted him that 
was born after the Spirit.” He refers to Ishmael’s mockery of Isaac. As the elder son, | 
with the right of primogeniture, he ridiculed the feast given in honour of Isaac as the 
heir. The spirit of persecution was iu that mockery that sprang out of jealousy and 
ill feeling. 

IL Marx 118 aALLEGORIO ΒΙΟΝΙΡΊΘΑΝΟΒ. “Even so it is now.” The persecutors of 
Paul were Judaists “‘ born after the flesh,” for they claimed to inherit the blessings of 
the covenant by virtue of carnal ordinances, They were adroit in all the arts of cruel 
mockery. Scripture tells the vivid story of persecution directed against the Christianily 
of the first age by the fanaticism of the Jews. The apostle might well say in his first 
epistolary writing concerning the Jews, “who both killed the Lord Jesus, and the 
prophets, and drove out us; and please not God, and are contrary to all men” 
(1 Thess. ii. 15). 

ITI. ‘Tne INHERITANCE AN EXCLUSIVE Possession. ‘“ Nevertheless what saith the 
Scripture? Cast out the bondwoman and her son: for the son of the bondwoman shall 
in no wise be heir with the son of the freewoman.” ‘The apostle adopts the words of 
Sarah addressed to Abraham ; not giving any hint of the nearness of the destruction of 
Jerusalem and its whole ecclesiastical polity, but emphasizing the importance of the 
Galatians standing clear of the doomed system. As there could be no joint heirship 
between Ishmael and Isaac, so there could be no fusion or amalgamation of Law and 
gospel. Judaism could not be combined with Christianity. It was to be utterly cast 
out, though it then tenaciously held its ground side by sile with Christianity even 
within the Church of God itself. 

IV. InvereNcE FROM THIS WHOLE ALLEGORIO Lesson. “So then, brethren, we are 
not children of a bondwoman, but of the free.” ‘‘We, as Isaac. was, are children of 
promise.” Let us, therefore, recoguize our true position with its blessed immunities 
and privileges. Let us forsake the dangerous fellowship of those who are children of 
the bondwoman. The Galatian tendency was false and evil; for it involved their losing 
what they had and getting nothing better in its place. Their true attitude was that 
of freedoms 


HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS, 


Vers. 1—7.—Majority through the gospel. Paul, having spoken of the Law-school 
in the preceding sections, and of the participation of believing Gentiles in the privi- 
leges of the Abrahamic family, proceeds in the present section to speak of the times 
before Christ’s advent as infantile, of the advent as the fulness of times, and of the 
majority which is realized by believers through the gospel. Four leading thoughts are 
thus presented, 

I. Tux rmverrect timzs. (Vers. 1—3.) The Old Testament times represent the 
experience of ali men before the reception of the gospel. They were the minority of 
humanity. The soul was then like a child who is placed under stewards and guardians, 
and is not allowed to take charge of itself. It lived by law and rule, and had not 
entered upon proper self-government and independence. Now, all the world was in 
this legal condition as well as the Jews. Nay, we are all before conversion in it; we 
are legalists by nature, we do what is prescribed with more or less fidelity, and con- 
gratulate ourselves upon the doing of it. It is the “infantile” stage. It is the 
imperfect times, as contrasted with the riper experience the gospel brings. And yet it 
is better that the soul should be at the school of Law than wandering waywardly after 
its own devices. Better be under restraint than be utterly spoiled by getting our own 
way. We ought not to under-estimate the discipline which the Law-school secured. 

IL Tue apvent or THE Son. (Vers. 4, 5.) It was Christ’s coming which brought in 
the fulness of times. He came to put an end to the world’s minority and to secure the 
world’s redemption. He did so by being “born of a woman,” by being “born under 
the Law,” and undertaking all his brethren’s responsibilities. Having obeyed the Law 
in its penalty of death for disobedience as well as in its precepts, he redeemed men 


oH. Iv. 1—31.] THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 219 


from the condemning power of Law, and secured their adoption as sons. The world at 
the advent of the Son must have looked differently to the eye of God the Father. For 
milleniums he had been looking anxiously down to see if there were any that did under- 
stand and seek God. But, alas! the verdict had to be that “they are all gone aside, 
they are all together become filthy: there is none that doeth good, no, not one” (Ps. 
xiv. 2,3). But at the advent of Christ a new example presented itself, a new type 
arose—a sinless Being appeared upon the stage, with all the interest around him of sin- 
lessness. A breach of continuity took place when the babe was born in Pethlehem, 
Instead of the world being now condemned wholesale, it possessed for the Divine mind 
a deep attraction. The drama of sinlessness amid temptation was being carried on, 
and a repulsive world became the centre of moral and spiritual power. A new age 
thus dawned upon humanity. Man’s minority was over and his inheritanca was at 
hand, 5 

TIL. Tue apvent or ΤῊΒ Spirit. (Ver. 6.) The magnificent panorama of sinlessness, 
however, mizht have passed impressively before the eye of God, and have given fresh 
interest to the problem of humanity, without at all affecting men themselves. But 
the advent of the Spirit secured men in their spiritual inheritance. The cry of the 
human heart, which had been so indefinite before, became definite and pathetic. It 
became the cry of children who had learned at last to feel at home with God. The 
converted Jew and the converted Gentile began to cry to the one Father in heaven, 
and to feel “ orphans” no more (cf. John xiv. 18). The Holy Spirit as the Spirit of 
adoption enables human hearts to look up hopefully to heaven, and to realize that it is 
no longer empty, but filled with the presence of an infinite and all-merciful Father, 
who desires above all things the welfare of his children. It is this marvellous arrange- 
ment of the advent of an infinite Spirit of adoption which ensures the reality of 
adoption, and makes all the sons feel at home. Poets doubtless wrote about man being 
“ God’s offspring ” (Acts xvii. 28), but the fancy of the poet could only become a fact 
of human experience when the indwelling Spirit prompted the cry, “ Abba, Father,” 

IV. THE HEIR THEREBY ENTERED UPON HIS MAJonITY. (Ver. 7.) The termination of 
slavish fear, and the advent of a sense of sonship, is what we call conversion. But we 
hardly realize at once the meaning of our inheritance. How magonificent it is! To 
realize that Gud no longer is angry with us, but looks down with ineffable tenderness 
as our heavenly Father; to realize that, though we have nothing of ourselves, we 
have become heirs of all things, and find that all things are being made to work 
together for our good (Rom, viii. 28); to realize that we are “heirs of God through 
Christ,’—is surely glorious! There is happiness when noble heirs reach their majority. 
What feasting and good will and congratulation goes on in the baronial halls! Poets sing 
of it, and artists paint the scene. But no joy of majority on earth can compare with 
the joy which attends the sense of our spiritual majority before God. The baron’s heir 
is filled with mingled feelings if his heart beat true, for he knows that the condition of 
his inheritance is, alas! his father’s death. He must be base indeed who can contemplate 
such a condition without emotion. But when the Spirit of adoption comes within us 
it is to enable us to realize that, not only is our majority come, but also our inheritance 
as sons of God; into this inheritance we may enter at once. The Father never Cies, 
and his presence, instead of keeping us out of our enjoyment, consecrates and enlarges 
it to a heavenly fulness. “ All things are ours, if we are Christ’s” (1 Cor. iii. 20—23), 
May we no longer live as bond-servants before God, but enter by adoption into the 
privileges of sons |—R. M. E. 


Vers, 8—11.— The return of the legal spirit, Having spoken of the majority which 
it is intended we should realize through the gospel, Paul proceeds next to speak about 
the return to legalism which had characterized the Gauls. Before Paul’s advent to 
Galatia and his gospel message, they had been idolaters, but his preaching had brought 
them face to face, so to speak, with God. Into this Divine knowledge they had dipped, 
but, alas! it had only been a swallow-flight, for, after tasting the liberty of the gospel, 
they had flown back to bondage. They had skimmed the surlace of saivation, and had 
winged their way back to the old legalism which had characterized their idolatrous 
days. Here, then, we have suggested— 

I, Tue LEGALISM WHICH NECESSARILY CHARACTERIZES IDOLATRY. (Ver. 8.) The 


220 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. fou. rv. 1-31, 


philosophy of idolatry is a most’ interesting inquiry. Nowhere is it more succinctly 
set before us than in Ps, cxv. The idols are there shown to be after the image of their 
makers (ver. 8), and, conversely, their worshippers become assimilated to them. The 
stolid idols which the poor artists make are simply copies of the stolid life around 
them; and the worship of the idol makes the stolidity perpetual. It is the apotheosis 
of inaction and of death, Hence it will be found that idolatry can secure nothing 
higher than ritualism, that is, the performance of rites and ceremonies for the sake of 
achieving a religious reputation, and not for the sake of communion with the object of 
worship. For in the case of the idol there can be no communion of mind with mind 
or of heart with heart. The form consequently is everything and the fellowship is 
nothing. If there be no self-righteousness promoted by the ceremony, it promotes 
absolutely no interest at all. Hence the whole genius of idolatry is legalism. If men 
are not achieving some religious reputation, they are achieving nothing at all, Paul 
consequently was looking back to the idolatrous life of the Galatians, and carefully 
analyzed it when he recognized in it the expression of a purely legal spirit. : 

Il. THE GOSPEL PROMOTES ACQUAINTANOESHIP WITH Gop. (Ver. 9.) It seeks to bring 
about an interview with God. Paul’s experience on the way to Damascus is typical. 
He there became acquainted for the first time with Jesus Christ as his Divine Saviour. 
He there felt that it was nearer the truth to say that Jesus had found him than that 
he had found Jesus, It was true that he had come to know God in Christ, but this 
was the consequence of God in Christ in the first instance knowing him. Now, Paul’s 
niissionary life was to promote the same acquaintanceship among men. He wanted 
these Galatians to know God through realizing that God previously knew them. And 
he had hopes that they had entered the charmed circle of the Divine acquaintance- 
ship. He hoped that they had experienced the truth, “ Acquaint now thyself with God, 
and be at peace.” This is the essence of the gospel. “ This is life eternal, to know 
[é.e. to be acquainted with] thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou - 
hast sent.” - 

TI. THe return To LeGauism. (Vers. 9,10.) The false teachers had come from 
Jerusalem to preach up the virtue of Jewish rites and ceremonies, Heuce the fickle 
mountaineers of Galatia fell into their superstitious observances, and fancied that, if 
they kept carefully the Jewish calendar, with its weekly, monthly, annual, and sep- 
tennial feasts and fasts, they must hereby propitiate the Supreme. Accustomed as 
idolaters to the making of religious reputations, they could enter the more easily into 
the legal spirit for which the false teachers called. And indeed there is nothing so 
insidious, because there is nothing so palatable to the natural heart. To be in a 
position to achieve a religious reputation, to win by our own hands certain characters 
and certain rights, is wonderfully flattering and grateful to human pride. We need to 
be constantly on our guard against the temptation. 1. One way is by remembering 
how “ weak,” as Paul here puts it, the elements out of which we would manufacture 
our reputation are. They do not bear analysis. Once we touch them with honest 
thought they stand in felt helplessness before us. Ceremonies which do not lead to 
communion with God, ceremonies which are simply to add to human pride and toster 
self-righteousness, are weak as water, and can only harm us. 2. We should remember 
also how “ beggarly ” they are. They can minister no wealth of thought or feeling to 
the superstitious soul. They are merely the instruments of bondage. 

IV. THE DANGER OF THE LEGAL spirit. (Ver. 11.) If Paul’s preaching only resulted 
in such an outbreak of legalism, then he would regard his mission among them*as 
“ Jove’s labour lost.” There is no difference between the legalism of Judaism and the 
legalism of idolatry. Both are mere phases of self-righteousness. The gospel has 
missed its aim altogether if it leave people in legal bondage. The gospel is the great 
scheme for overthrowing self-righteousness. It emancipates the soul from the delusive 
hope of establishing any claim before God. It shuts us up to the acceptance of sal- 
vation as God’s free gift. It deposes self and makes free grace supreme. Hence Paul’s 
anxiety to see the Galatians brought back from legal bondage to gospel liberty. Unless 
they gave up their hope from ceremony, and betook themselves to hope in the Saviour 
alone, then they must be lost. It is most important that the exceeding danger of the 
legal spirit should be constantly kept in view, that we may maintain our standing on 
the footing of free grace.—R. M. E. 


oH. Iv, 1—31.] THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 221 


Vers, 12—20.— The appeal of the suffering apostle. To render Paul’s appeal more 
emphatic, he proceeds next to remind them of the tender relations in which he had 
stood to them when he preached the gospel to them the first time. He had been 
suffering from the thorn in the flesh; he was consequently a very weak specimen 
when as a preacher he stood before them; but the message was so emancipating to their 
souls that they would have done anything for him in their gratitude. They would 
have even plucked out-their own eyes and have given them to him. Why, then, should 
they turn against him when he seeks to tell them the truth? It is consequently the 
pathetic appeal of the apostle to those who had once been so interested in him. 

I, Pavi’s EXAMPLE OF CHRISTIAN LIBERTY. (aa 12.) He wants the Galatians to 
te as he is, for he is as the Gentiles are so far as legalisin is concerned. How did Paul 
act among the Gentiles? Not certainly as Peter had done at Antioch, in a vacillating 
spirit. He sat down deliberately at the tables of the heathen and carried no Jewish 
scruples into Gentile society. ‘The ceremonial Law did not bind him to keep his 
converts at arm’s length or to insist on their submission to Jewish scruples. He felt 
that Jesus had fulfilled for him all righteousness, and that he was consequently free 
from the ceremonial yoke. Hence with the greatest breadth of view and consistency, 
Paul acted the free and social part among the heathen. 

II, Pavw’s APPEAL FOR SOMETHING LIKE THE OLD SYMPATHY. (Vers. 13—15.) He 
had appeared among them in a suffering condition, ‘The “thorn in the flesh,” which 
had been sent to buffet him and keep him humble, had manifested itself in full force. 
There is every reason to believe that it consisted in weak eycs, which never recovered 
the shock on the way to Damascus, But the weak-eyed, despicable-looking preacher 
(2 Cor. x. 10) had got an admirable reception in Galatia, His hearers so sympathized 
with his message as to forget his outward weakness, nay, rather to so sympathize with 
him in it as to be ready to pluck out their own eyes and give them to him, if it had 
been possible. The poor preacher was in their estimation an angel of God, and was 
received with the same consideration as they would have extended to Christ Jesus him- 
self, ‘Chis was admirable. And Paul wishes them to revive this sympathy for him 
and lead them along the path of liberty he himself is treading. How deep and pathetic 
the true sympathy between pastor and people ought to be! 

Il]. THE UNREASONABLE CHARACTER OF THEIR PRESENT ANTIPATHY. (Ver. 16.) 
Because of Paul’s faithfulness they are inclined to resent his interference with their 
le-alism as a hostile act. But he would have them to analyze their antipathy fairly 
and to own how unreasonable it is. And yet this has been the fate of faithful men 
in all ages. ‘They are hated because they tell the truth. The unreasonableness of 
antipathy to a man who tells us (iod’s truth may be seen in at least three particulars. 
1. Because the truth sanctifies (John xvii. 19). 2. Because the truth makes men free 
(John viii. 82). 8. Because the truth saves (1 Tim. ii. 4). 

IV. ATTENTION MAY BE MISINTERPRETED. (Vers. 17,18.) The false teachers were 
assiduous in their attentions to Paul’s converts. They could not make enough of 
them. But Paul saw through their designs. Hence he declares, “ They zealously seek you 
in no good way ; nay, they desire to shut you out, that ye may seck them” (Revised 
Version). It was a zeal to get the Galatians under their power; it was to make them 
ritualists of the Jewish type, and so amenable to their Jewish authority and direction. 
Young converts require warning against the designs of zealots whose prerogative it is to 
curtail Christian liberty and put the simple under bondage. Now, Paul had paid all 
sorts of attention to the Galatians. He compares himself toa mother who had travailed 
with them and would consequently nurse them with the utmost tenderness. He courts 
comparison between his attentions and those of the false teachers. He more than 
insinuates that they are receiving different treatinent at their hands than they did 
when he was present with them. It is only fair and right that attention should be 
weighed in the balances carefully, anda selfish fuss not be confounded with an unselfish 
and disinterested enthusiasm. i 

VY. A PASTOR’S SPIRITUAL ANXIETIES ABOUT HIS PEOPLE. (Vers. 19, 20.) Panl had 
been in agony for their conversion when in Galatia. But their legalism has thrown 
him into perplexity about them. His agony, like a woman’s travail, has to be 
repeated. He will not be content till Christ is formed within them as their true Hope 
of glory. THe wishes he were present with them once again and were able by tender, 


.----...-...-. 


222 THE EPISTIE TO THE GALATIANS. [cu. rv. 1—31. 


maternal tones to convince them of the unselfish interest he has in them. The whole 
case is instructive as showing how painful is the interest of a true pastor in his flock 
and to what straits their waywardness may reduce him. A mother’s anxieties should 
summon a pastor to an enthusiasm of affection for those committed to his charge— 
R. M. E. 


Ver. 21—ch. v. 1.— The children of the bondwoman and of the free. Paul now passer 
from a personal appeal to an allegorical argument from the Law. As legalirts, they are 
asked if they will not hear the Law which in its history really condemns them as 
children of the bondwoman and not children of the freewoman. For such an allegorical 
interpretation we are content with Paul’s authority, since he was inspired of God in his 
handling of Scripture as well as in writing additions to it. His rabbinical education 
would incline him to allegory; but we would not in consequence take any liberties 
with Scripture on the same track. Still, as we face the history as given in Gen. xxi. 
with Paul’s hejp in our hands, it gives ἃ very interesting and beautiful application of it. 

I. Ler Us CONSIDER THE CHILD OF THE BONDWOMAN IN HIS EARLY YEARS. (Ver. 23.) 
Ishmael, as the child of Abraham, had for thirteen years a happy and interesting lite. 
He was the issue of a union promoted by Sarah in her own despair. Upon him the 
patriarch looked with all an old man’s pride; and, had not God expressly forbidden it, 
Abraham would have looked no further than Ishmael for a son and heir. Hagar naturally 
played the haughty part before her mistress and despised the beautiful woman because 
of her barrenness, But as soon as Isaac came to gladden the aged pair, Hagar and 
Ishmael fell of necessity into the background. In due time therceis the weaning fcast. 
“ Hagar and her sou heard the merriment,” says Robertson, “and it was gall to their 
wounded spirits; it looked like intentional insult; for Ishmael had been the heir pie- 
sumptive, but now, by the birth of Isaac, had become a mere slave and dependant; and 
the son of Hagar mocked at the joy in which he could not partake.” Now, Ishmael all 
these years was the type of the legalist who prides himself on his observance of the 
ceremonies. Just as the boy thought that he was son and heir by undisputed right and 
title, so the legal spirit imagines that in God’s house his rights cannot be disregarded. 
In the pride of self-satisfaction he sees no rival in the house and is disposed to brook 
none, And yet a touch of fate will make him realize at once his slavery and outcast 
condition. 

II, ConsIDER NEXT THE BON OF PROMISE. (Ver. 23.) But for the promise of God, 
Tsaac never would have been born, He belonged consequently to a different order from 
Ishmael. Ishmacl was the son of nature; Isaac was the product of grace. In this 
Tsaac is the type of the son of the gospel, as Ishmael is the type of the son of the Law. 
Isaac is born to freedom, to honour, to inheritance; while Ishmael is cast out as the 
slave who has no recognized rights in the household. So is it with the free-born son 
of the gospel as contrasted with the legalists of Paul’s time. The believer is God’s son 
through the freewoman; he has his inalienable rights in Gou’s household ; he may he 
persecuted and mocked by the Ishmaels who are but bondslaves; but he is destined to 
keep the field of privilege in spite of foes and triumph over them at last. 

111. LEGALISM AND GOSPEL FREEDOM ARE INCOMPATIBLE. (Vers. 24—30.) One 
house could not hold both Ishmael and Isaac. ‘They could not get on together. No 
more can the legal and the gospel spirit. Self-righteousness and faith in Christ are 
irreconcilable, Hence the war between the legalists and the apostle. It was war to 
the bitter end. ‘I'he principles are antagonistic, and the one must triumph over the 
other. And liberty is sure to triumph over legalism in the end, as Isaac triumphed 
over Ishmael. ; 

IV. THE CONSEQUENT DUTY OF MAINTAINING OUR CHRISTIAN LIBERTY. (Ch. v. 1.) 
Paul calls upon the Galatians not to go back to bondage, but to maintain the freedom 
which Christ has given them. If he has fulfilled the ceremonies, why should they go 
back to the bondage of observances? If they are born as childrer of promise, why go 
back to the birth of boudslaves? “It is like emancipated slaves insisting on surrender- 
ing their freedom. What the liberty bestowed by Christ is in its length and breadth 
may be realized from the close and climax of one of Liddon’s masterly sermons, “ It 
is freedom from a sense of sin, when all is known to have been pardoned through the 
atoning blood; freedom from a slavish fear of our Father in heaven, when conscienca is 


cH. Iv. I—31.] THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 228 


offered to his unerring eye morning and evening by that penitent love which fixes it: 
eye upon the Crucified; freedom from current prejudice and false human opinion, whet 
the soul gazes by intuitive faith upon the actual truth; freedom from the depressing 
yoke of weak health or narrow circumstances, since the soul cannot be crushed whicl: 
rests consciously upon the everlasting arms; freedom from that haunting fear of death, 
which holds those who think really upon death at all, ‘all their lifetime subject to 
bondage,’ unless they are his true friends and clients who by the sharpness of his own 
death ‘ opened the kingdom of heaven to all believers.’ It is freedom in time, but also 
αὐ beyond freedom in eternity.” May we realize our rights as children of the free ! 
—R. M. Ε. 


Vers. 1—11.—Majority and minority. I. THE cHILD COMING TO HIS MAJORITY. 
Analogy. ‘But I say that so long as the heir is a child, he differeth nothing from 
a bond-servant, though he is lord of all; but is under guardians and stewards until the 
term appointed of the father.” At the close of the preceding chapter Christians were 
described as Abraham’s seed, heirs according to promise. It is with regard to this that 
the apostle now makes use of an analogy. It is a very simple and well-known case on 
which he founds. It is that of an heir, while he isa child or is a minor, as we say, ἴ.6. has 
the paternal control yet exercised over him. He may be the heir of a kingdom ; but, so 
long as he is in his nonage, he differeth nothing from a bond-servant, though he is lord 
of all. He is better in some respects, but not better in respect of subjection to control. 
He is under guardians of his person and stewards of his property. When the Prince 
of Wales in his childhood on one occasion refused submission to his governess, appealing 
to his dignity as heir of the throne, Prince Albert very pertinently read him this 
passage out of the New Testament. The supposition is that a minor has not yet 
wisdom to guide him; his will therefore, meanwhile, is a cipher. He can only act 
through guardians and stewards, who are understood to carry out the father’s will. 
This arrangement continues in force until the term appointed of the father. It has 
been a question whether Paul contemplates the father here as dead. It is enough to 
say that he is regarded as in tie background, while his will is operative. In the case 
to which the analogy applies the Father is alive. Objection has been taken to Paul 
describing the limit of dependence as appointed of the father, when in most countries 
it is fixed by statute. The infancy of a Roman child ended at seven; he donned the 
virile gown at seventeen ; he was not entirely emancipated from tutelage until he was 
twenty-five. There is this to be said, that the limit was not necessarily fixed by statute ; 
that when it was so fixed it was in name of the father, and that there was discretionary 
power within the statute. 1. The Church’s minority. ‘So we also, when we were 
children, were held in bondage under the rudiments of the world.” The minor here is 
generally supposed to be both Jews and Gentiles. But it is scarcely a Puuline idea 
that the heathen compared with Christians were as children compared with men, heirs 
in their minority compared with heirs come to full rights. Certainly their religions 
were not the rudiments which God taught them. The reference is to be determined 
by the way in which the analogy is introduced by the apostle. He points back to his 
description of Christians as Abraham’s seed, heirs according to promise. He must oe 
understood, therefore, as pointing now to those who were formerly Abraham’s seed, 
heirs according to promise. These were the children over whom God placed guardians 
and stewards. The instruction he gave them was of a rudimentary nature. ‘lhey 
were not taught religion in its perfect form (which is Christianity), but only the 
rudiments. These were true so far as they went; still, they were only religion in a 
form suitable for children. They were rudiments of the world, #e. of the owtwurd and 
sensible ; for the world in an evil sense cannot be brought into connection with the Father 
teaching his children. 10 is by the outward and sensible that abstract truth is intro- 
duced into the minds of children. So, while the Church was in its childhood, God 
carried forward its education by outward services and sensible representations. This 
was inconceivably better than being left to themselves, as the heathen were; but it 
was bondage in comparison with the spirituality which was to be brought in with a full 
revelation. ‘“ It was a yoke,” said Peter, “ which neither we nor our fathers were able 
to bear.” The amount of bodily service required by Jews, in their frequent washings 
and journeys to Jerusalem, wis very great. And even the types, in their keeping back 


224 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, (en. rv. 1—31 


the plain meaning, confined the spirit. This was the Church in its state of minority. 
2. The Church's majority. It is matter for thought that the Church came to its 
iuajority in connection with the greatest manifestation of Godhead. (1) Time of the 
Christian manifestation. ‘ But when the fulness of the time came.” The fulness of 
the time was the moment in which time received its full significance. It was that 
toward which all that went before was moving, and from which all after-time is dated. 
It corresponds to “the term appointed of the father.” It was the time appointed 
in the counsels of the Father. But the appointment was founded on the fore- 
seen fitness of circumstances. It would not have been a fitting time, we may 
understand, if Christ had appeared immediately after the Fall. As the nature of sin 
had only very partially been manifested at the first, there would have been no proper 
appreciation of redemption. Neither would it have been a fitting time, we may under- 
stand, if Christ had appeared at the commencement of the Jewish nation. It would 
aave been as if some high work of art were submitted for criticism to novices. Christ 
appeared when circumstances were so prepared that the deepést, most lasting imipression 
of his work could be produced on men. Even heathenism was a preparation for 
Christianity. It was so chiefly in a negative way. It was, as it is represented in the 
Bible, the wild olive tree. It was humanity left to itself, It was an experiment on a 
vast scale as to what man unaided could or could not do. And, though there was a 
feeling after God, and weak longing for redemption, yet, as the result of the experiment, 
it was conclusively proved that the world by wisdom knew not God. When Christ 
came great Pan was dead. The old religions were manifestly powerless to impart any 
spiritual consolation, or to check sin which came to its full manifestation. The chosen 
eople were sinful humanity with Divine helps. And, though they greatly pointed the 
esson of what man could not do, yet there was not a little drilling of them into the 
idea of the Divine unity, the idea of an overruling Providence, the reality of sin, 
the conception of righteousness, the certainty and mode of redemption. And there 
were some who had so entered into the preparatory Jewish system that, at the time 
of Christ’s appearance, they were waiting for the consolation of Israel. In the outward 
state of the world, tov, there was a conspiring of remarkable providences: The whole 
world was included in one empire. There were facilities of intercourse between nations, 
such as had never existed before. The great Roman roads were the prepared means by 
which the gospel was to be carried to all quarters of the earth. There was very much, 
too, one language. With the victories of Alexander commenced a movement toward 
the general use of the Greek language, the most expressive of all languages. There 
was also @ cosmopolitizing of the Jews. They were to be found in all the great centres, 
with their monotheism and Messianic hopes. And lastly, it wus a time of universal 
The whole world was quiet and at rest. The temple of Janus was shut. Such 

was the time chosen by God for the appearance of Christ. . (2) Manner of the mani- 
festation. (a) The Divine Messenger. ‘God sent forth his Son.” The pre-existence 
of Christ is implied. God sent forth from himself—from his own immediate presence. 
It was not an archangel whom he sent forth, but his own Son. As the Son of God, 
Christ was eternally pre-existent—the equal in every respect of the Father. In the 
Son, the Father saw himself perfectly reflected. And yet he was in a mysterious way 
subordinated as the Son to the Father. To him, then, it essentially belonged to be sent 
forth, as on creation, so on redemption. On his part there was a perfect response. For, 
in the volume of the book of the Divine counsels it was written that he was prepared 
at the fitting time to speed forth to do the Father’s will. (6) His birth of humanity. 
“Born of a woman.” Though unborn 88 the Son of God, he was subjected to the 
ordinary law of human birth. ‘ Man that is born of a woman,” said Job; and go also it 
was true of Christ that he was born of a woman. He was not a separate creation from 
humanity, without father, without mother. But he was brought into the closest 
relation to humanity by having a human mother. Even from the first he was looked 
forward to as the Seed of the woman. © His birth of the Jewish race. “ Bora under 
the Law.” Historically he was connected with the Jewish race. It has been said that 
what the Jewish nation provided was the mother of our Lord. His surroundings 
were Jewish. He was subjected to the rite of circumcision. He was placed under 
obligation, not only to the Law of God generally, but to the Mosaic Law in particular. 
It is not to be inferred that he was mercly Jewish. For the singular thing is that, 


ou. Iv. 1—81.] THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 228 


though. brought up a Jew, in his teaching and life he did not give the impression of 
belonging to one nation more than to another, Still, the Mosaic system had authority 
over him, and had to do with his training as the Messiah. (3) Twofold aim of the 
manifestation. (a) Deliverance from the Mosaic system. “That he might redeem 
them which were under the Law.” It is true that God sent forth his Son to redeem 
from the curse of the broken Law generally, and from the curse of the Mosaic Law in 
particular; but it is also true that, in connection with that, he had a subsidiary design 
to which prominence is given here. It was that, by his Son discharging all the obli- 
gations of the Mosaic Law, and answering its ends, it should no longer continue a 
burden on the conscience. And it is well to have this subsidiary design connected with 
the great sending furth of the Son. (6) Instuting of Christians as sons, “That we 
might receive the adoption of sons.” “We” is to be taken in the wider sense here, ag 
it was taken in the narrower sense in the third verse. The reference is Abraham’s 
seed, heirs according to promise. As these were, in the minority of the people of God, 
Jews, so now are they Christians.. The design of the sending forth of the Son was to 
bring up the people of God into the position of sons. Not only does the time of his 
being sent forth rule the time of their becoming sons; but the fact of his being Son 
seems to rule their getting the position of sons, The Son goes forth, and it is sons he 
brings with him to glory. Such was the twofold aim of the manifestation. He proceeds 
to show how God did not stop short at giving us the position of sons. He followed it 
up by giving us the qualification of sons, The Spirit of the Son our qualificution as 
sons. “ And because ye are sons, God sent forth the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, 
crying, Abba, Father.” Our qualification was the Spirit of his Son, ze. the Spirit who 
was sent forth on the Son, and who fitted him for his work. He was within him as 
the Spirit of the true Son. In the darkest hour Christ conquered by being true to the 
Father. ‘The Spirit proceeds from Christ upon us. He is also within us as the Spirit 
of the true Son. He draws us to God as our Father. That is the congenial element 
of his working. The word “Father” is the outcome. His is the language of filial con- 
fidence. His is the language of filial affection. His is the language of filial obedience. 
His is withal the language of earnestness, He is represented as crying, 4.e. impor- 
tunately calling. And he is represented as crying, “ Abba, Father.” The idea is empha- 
sized by repetition, And it is expressed in two languages, Aramaic and Greek, 
strikingly showing the fusion of Jew and Greek in Christ. According as the Spirit of 
Christ thus dwells in us are we qualified and have the realization of our freedom as 
sons. General conclusion regarding heirship. “So that thou art no longer a bond- 
servant, but a son; and if a son, then an heir through God.” He individualizes what 
he says by changing from the plural to the singular. Even the Gentile had not to 
pass through Judaism into the kingdom of God. The fact of sonship having been 
formerly arrived at is simply stated here as the basis on which a conclusion is drawn 
regarding heirship. If thou hast the position of a son, and the qualification of a son, 
through God’s infinite love, art thou not certainly an heir through the same love? 
Thus it is made out that the people of God have attained to their majority. They 
have the heirship, not of mere children, #e. without rights, but of sons, ze. with full 
rights, ᾿ 

II. Tae ΒΟΝ FALLING BACK INTO HIS MINORITY. So he represents the Galatians. 
1. Their idolatrous past. ‘“Howbeit at that time, not knowing God, ye were in 
bondage to them which by nature are no gods.” It was their disadvantage that they 
were ignorant of God. That being the case, it was not to be wondered at that they did 
service to idols. The religious instinct, if it does not find the true, will find the false. 
If we have not God to fill up the vacuum of our nature, we must have idols, These 
Galatians had done service to them which by nature were no gods. Paul’s idea in one 
piace (1 Cor, x. 20) is that they were devils whom the heathen worshipped. They 
certainly were only Divine in their own imagivation, They had not the nature of 
God; they disputed for power; they were not even moral. What bondage to be in 
error regarding the greatest of all objects! What fearful bondage to think of him 
as not only imperfect, but as swayed by the vilest passions! 2, Their relapse. “ But 
now that ye have come to know God, or rather to be known of God, how turn ye back 
again to the weak and beggarly rudiments, whereunto ye desire to be in bondage over 
again? Ye observe days, and months, and seasons, and years. I am afraid of you, lest 

GALATIANS, ᾷ 


226 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. (on. rv. 1—81 


by any meaus I have bestowed labour upon you in vain.” They had come to know 
God, fe. when the gospel was preached among them. It was then that they first 
knew God in his unity and in his real character as a God of love. But, having said 
this, he corrects himself. It was rather that they had come to be known of God ; for 
it was purely of God that the gospel came to them. They were not thinking of it; 
even Paul was not thinking of it; for it did not lie within his plan to preach the gospel 
to them. By a singular providence, to which he refers in the next paraxraph, he was 
constrained to turn aside to Galatia. It was God, then, that had given them the 
advantage. The relapse from Christianity into Judaism as affecting the position of the 
Christian sabbath, How are we to understand the language which is employed in this 
place and in Col. ii. 16,17? Are we to infer from the teaching of the apostle (for it | 
is no more than an inference, and a startling thing it is to be left to inference) that, 
as Christians, we are relieved from obligation to keep sacred one day in seven? It is 
not unnecessary, in view of all that has been written on these passages, to guard against 
an understatement of the difficulty. For instance, it is said by Ridgeley and others 
that certain feast days, being withdrawn from a common to a sacred use, were called 
sabbaths, and that the apostle alludes exclusively to these, Unless the difficulty is 
fairly admitted and mastered, it is sure to leave doubt on the mind, and to be 
ever coming up for settlement in exegesis, There is really only one difficulty, 
but it is presented under different forms. The passages in question are similar; 
so much so that the same writer can readily be detected in both. There are 
two statements in Galatians, and these correspond to two statements in Colossians. 
Taking, then, the parts which correspond as one, we have to deal with two state- 
ments. (a) There is a statement about distinctions of times. The statement made by 
the apostle in this Epistle is that Christians, by observing days, and months, and 
seasons, and years, were returning to bondage, and that, on that account, he was afraid 
of them, lest he had bestowed labour upon them in vain. In the preceding context 
his teaching is that they have the liberty of sons, and are not as under tutors and 
governors. It is to be noted that the bondage referred to was in making distinctions 
as to times. His order of classification is to begin with the more frequent and to 
proceed to the less frequent observances. There are first days, or weekly observances ; 
then there are months, or observances connected with the new moon; at a longer 
interval are the seasons, or great festive occasions, of which there were three in the 
year; and, at the longest interval, are the years, in which the reference is to the 
sabbatic year and the year of jubilee. The corresponding statement in Colossians is 
that Christians are not to be judged in meat or in drink (or, in eating and drinking), 
or in respect of a feast day, or a new moon, or a sabbath day (Revised Version), on the 
ground, as given in the context, that the handwriting which contained these things has 
been put out of the way, being nailed to the cross. Under the head of distinctions 
there is a sub-classification having reference to distinctions in meats and drinks, As 
to meats, there were some that were appropriated to holy uses, and numerous 
prohibitions are mentioned in Lev. vii. 10—27. As for drinks by themselves, wine was 
forbidden to the Nazarites and also to the priests during the time of service. The 
apostolic teaching is that Christians are entitled to disregard such distinctions. 
The classification of times in Colossians (years being omitted) proceeds in the reverse 
order from the less frequent to the more frequent, beginning with the feast day, and 
ending with the sabbath day. What meaning is to be attached to the sabbath day 
will be seen; but the apostolic teaching is plainly this—that, as Christians are freed 
from the observance of the three principal feasts, and freed from the observance 
connected with the new moon, so also are they freed from the observance of the 
sabbath day. In reference to the passage in our Epistle, Alford remarks, “ Notice 
how utterly such a verse is at variance with any and every theory of a Christian 
sabbath, cutting at the root, as it does, of all obligatory observance of times as such.” 
And similar remarks are made by him elsewhere. But: (a) In that view of tt, the 
conclusion ts @ much wider one than can consistently be admitted. It is not merely 
that we are under no obligation to observe a Christiav sabbath, or, in other words, that 
we are free to observe it or not as we see fit; but τὺ gees further, and is this—that the 
observance of a Christian sabbath implies fault. We accept Alford’s remark on the 
word translated “observe.” There does pot seem to be any meaning of superstitious 


cH, Iv. 1—81.] THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 227 


or inordinate observance, but merely a statement of the fact. The view, then, is that 
the ordinary observance of a Christian sabbath supposes the making of distinctions 
as to days which are all done away with under Christianity. How, then, is this 
observance of one sacred day in seven recarded by the apostle? It is condemned by 
him as a bondage from which we need to be freed. Nay, more, ft is held as affording 
ground for fears being entertained with regard to our very Christianity, “I am afraid of 
yuu, lest by any means I have bestowed labour upon you in vain.” If that, then, was 
really the view of the apostle, should we not have expected of bim that, in his own 
practice, he would have disregarded all distinctions of days? But how does that consist - 
with what is recorded of him? If we turn to Acts xx. 6, 7, we find what his practice 
was, upon which Alfurd thus suitably comments: “ We have here an intimaticn of the 
continuance of the practice, which seems to have begun immediately after the Resur- 
rection, of assembling on the first day of the week for religious purposes.” If we turn 
next to 1 Cor. xvi. 2, we find him issuing a general order to the Churches connected 
with the first day of the week, upon which Alford again suitably remarks, “ Here 
there is no mention of their assembling, which we have in Acts xx.7; but a plain 
indication that the day was already considered as a special one, and one more than 
others fitting for the performance of a religious duty.” If, then, the apostle thus 
recognized a distinction in time, how can he escape from the condemnation which he 
passed upon these Galatian Christians? Was he not in bondage in so distinguishing ? 
and have we not reason to be afraid of him? It is either this or the conclusion drawn 
is too wide. And what are we to make of the consisteucy of the writers who take this 
view? They no sooner make out the language of the apostle to have reference to all 
digtinctions of time whatsoever, than forthwith they search about for reasons for the 
observance of a sacred day. Alford upholds the observance of the Lord’s day as an 
institution of the Christian Church, analogous to the ancient sabbath, binding on us 
from considerations of humanity and religious expediency, and by the rules of that 
branch of the Church in which Providence has placed us, And Frederick William 
_Robertson-says, “So far as we are in the Jewish state, the fourth commandment, even 
in its rigour and strictness, is wisely used by us; nay, we might say, indispensable.” 
Aud further he says, “ Experience tells us, after a trial, that those Sundays are the 
happiest, the purest, the most rich in blessing, in which the spiritual part has been 
most attended to—those in which the business letter was put aside and the profane 
literature not opened, and the ordinary occupations entirely suspended.” That is to say, 
the apostle was afraid of the Galatian Christians for making a distinction of one day in 
seven; and yet the Galatian Christians were right after all, A modification of so wide 
a conclusion as is supposed is suggested by the passage in Colossians. It is there 
stated that we are not to be judged in meats and drinks; that is, we are freed from all 
such distinctions in meats and drinks as existed under the Law. But yet it is the case 
that, under the New Testament dispensation, there exists a distinclion of meat and 
drink, For in the Lord’s Supper we have bread and wine appropriated to holy uses 
and placed under certain restrictions. And, if it does not follow from the apvstle’s 
language that all distinctions of meats and drinks are done away with under Christianity, 
so neither does it necessarily follow that all distinctions of time are done away with. 
(8) We are to understand the language of the apostle to have reference to Jewish insti- 
tutions asa whole. It is not as though there had been before him the one point—Js 
it right to observe one day in seven? ‘Then his argument would have been—The Jews 
did that; we as Christians are relieved from it, or rather are to be condemned, if we 
countenance such a distinction. But, instead of that, the apostle is giving a characteristic 
of Jewish institutions as a whole. There was a multiplying of distinctions in them, 
both in respect of meats and drinks and in respect of times. And what the Gulatian 
Christians were chargeable with was their abiding by all such distinctions as were 
made under the Law. Nay, they probably added to them by adopting gospel distinctions 
or symbols as well. ΤῸ circumcision they added baptism ; to the Passover they added 
the Lord’s Supper; and to tha observance of the seventh day they added the observance 
of the first. It was a legalistic spirit which possessed them. They were making the 
gospel more complicated, more burdensome in its outward prescriptions, than the Law, 
whereas it is characterized by simplicity and freedom. No wonder, then, that the 
apostle was afraid of them because of their making so many distinctions, They were 


228 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. (ox. rv. 1—31, 


endangering the gospel; they were forgetting their privileges as sons. (y) We are ta 
understand the language of the apostle to have reference to Jewish institutions in so far 
as they were Jewish. The sabbath was not a purely Jewish institution; it existed 
from the beginning. The essential idea of it was a proportion of time devoted to God 
in acknowledgment of his sovereign right to all our time. The proportion was 
sovereicnly fixed at one-seventh, and there is reason to believe that it was fixed 
in relation to our physical constitution. Under the Law the sabbath, while retaining 
its original character, received certain ceremonial adjuncts. It was numbered among 
‘the moadeem, or feasts; and was, indeed, placed at the head of them. “ Concerning the 
feasts of the Lord, which ye shall proclaim to be for holy convocations, even these are 
my feasts. Six days shall work be done; but the seventh day is the sabbath of rest.” 
The special services appointed for the sabbath in the sanctuary were these: first, the 
doubling of the daily burnt offering—two lambs instead of one, with a corresponding 
increase in the meat offering; and then the presenting of the fresh loaves of shewbread 
on the Lord’s table. When, then, the apostle says that we are not to be judged in 
respect of the sabbath day in the same way in which we are not to be judged in respect 
of the feast day and in respect of the new moon, this meaning is plainly suggested—tnat 
we, as Christians, are freed from all the ceremonial adjuncts of the sabbath. But, more 
than that, there was a practical question as to the observance of what was called the 
sabbath as distinguished from the Lord’s day—the observance of the seventh day as dis- 
tinguished from the first. ‘The connecting uf God’s time with the seventh was from the 
beginning, but it had been very much bound up with the Jewish ceremonial. It also 
came to be regarded as the Jewish day as distinguished from the Christian day; and it 
had a certain position as such during the period of transition, The apostle, then, may 
be understood as deciding for the Christian Church that they were under no obligation 
to observe two sacred days in the week. Now that they observed the Lord’s day they 
were freed from the observance of the sabbath. But at the same time, the sabbath had 
a broad human aspect. This Christ declared when legalism was expiring, and not 
certainly as though the sabbath were expiring with it. He said that the sabbath was, 
made for man. It lies embedded in our deepest nature. It is needed under all earthly 
conditions and dispensations; and is not certainly to be numbered, like the feast day 
and the observance zonnected with the new moon, among things Jewish, from which 
as Christians we are freed. Whether it is the seventh day or the first is matter 
of Divine arrangement for the time being ; but underneath both there is the obligation 
laid in our nature, from which we cannot be freed, to devote a proportion of our time 
to God. (Ὁ) There ts a statement made regarding the transitory nature of cere- 
monial institutions in which the sabbath is included, There is not much difficulty 
presented by the statement in this Epistle, that ceremonial institutions are weak 
and beggurly elements, This language is to be applied to them in respect of their 
having served their purpose. They had been, with certain drawbacks, very helpful 
and rich in blessing to God’s people. They may have been once so to some of these 
Galatian Christians, but, now that the Divine authority had been removed from them, 
now that the gospel had come in their place, to turn to them was indeed to turn to the 
weak and beggarly elements, So it was with the sabbath, or seventh day. It once had 
the Divine sanction. It once was one of the channels through which the Divine blessing 
flowed. But, now tkat it was no longer to be observed as the sacred day, now that the 
Lord’s day had come in its place, to turn to it was to turn to one of the weak and 
beggarly elements. Nor is there much difficulty presented by the corresponding state- 
ment in Colossians that ceremonial institutions are the shadow of things to come, 
whereas the body is of Christ. That does not exclude the possibility of there being a 
sign to represent the substance, the reality, after it had come. We know that circum- 
cision represented regeneration, the putting away of the sin of the flesh. Aza the 
Divine blessing accompanied it as the shadow of the coming reality. But when the 
reality came that corresponded to circumcision, it was put by Christ’ into the New 
Testament institution of baptism. In the context here the two ordinances are closely 
interwoven in the apostolic thought. “In whom ye were also circumcised” (the 
reference, says Alford, being to the historical fact of their baptism) “ with a circumcision 
not made with hands, in the putting off of the body of the flesh, in the circumcision of 
Christ: having been buried with him in baptism.” We know, too, that the Passover 


cn. Iv, 1—31.] THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 229 


pointed forward to a sacrifice to be offered for sin. And it was # nourishing ordinance 
as the shadow of the coming sacrifice. But when Christ, our Passover, was sacrificed 
fur us (and it happened at the very time of the offering of the paschal lamb), the great 
reality was put by Christ into the New Testament institution of the Lord’s Supper. 
And so it svems to be with regard to the sabbath. It pointed forward to the reality of 
a rest in Christ, and as such it was refreshing. But when the reality came, and needed 
no longer to be shadowed, it was put into the institution of the Lord’s day. And we 
have reason to think that it will remain there for us until its full disclosure in heaven. 


Vers, 12—20.—Personal uppeal. 1. He asxs reciprocity. “I beseech you, brethren, 
te as Iam, for 1 am as ye are.” Borna Jew, in accommodation to them he had taken 
up the Gentile position, ze. in respect of freedom from Jewish ordinances. Let them, 
as brethreu, show reciprocity. Let them give up their adopted Jewish practices and 
occupy the Gentile position along with him. 

11, HE RECALLS WITH PLEASURE THEIR RECEPTION oF HIM. 1. Negatively. “ Ye did 
me no wrong.” He was free to confess that he had no ground of personal complaint 
against them. 2, Positively. (1) Jt was an infirmity of the flesh that was the occasion 
of the first of his two visits to them. ‘ But ye know that because of an infirmity of the 
flesh I preached the gospel unto you the first time.” This infirmity of the flesh is not 
mentioned by name, and has given rise to conjecture, with which subjective feeling has 
mingled. When the Church was persecuted, it was supposed to be persecution. The 
monks supposed it to be carnal thoughts. Luther supposed it to be a temptation of the 
devil. The languaze plainly points to a bodily malady. Regarding the first visit of 
Paul to Galatia we read, “And they went through the region of Phrygia and Galatia, 
having been forbidden of the Holy Ghost to speak the Word in Asia.” It may be 
understood that it was by means of the bodily malady that the Holy Ghost forbade his 
preaching in Asia and at the same time directed his way into Galatia. And it was 
while detained by the malady that he preached the gospel to the Galatians, (2) His 
infirmity proved no hindrance to them. ‘And that which was a temptation to you in 
my flesh ye despised not, nor rejected; but ye received me as an angel of God, even as 
Christ Jesus.” That which was in his flesh was a temptation to them. It was some- 
thing which made trial of them. While it did not wholly silence him, it interfered 
with him as a public speaker. It might have led him to be despised or rejected (the 
latter word, literally ‘“‘ spit out,” pointing to a more active form of contempt). It is 
a wrong thing to despise any one because of what God has made him; but want of 
good feeling might have led them to turn his infirmity into ridicule; or their ignorance 
as barbarians might have led them to think that he was spurned of the gods, and there- 
fore to be spurned of them. Instead of yielding to the temptation, however, and 
throwing contempt upon him because of his infirmity, they received him as though he 
had been an angel sent to them from heaven; nay, they received him as though he 
had been Christ himself. ‘Their Celtic emotionalism came out in the reception they 
gave him. It gave, as we have seen, a peculiar vividness to the message. It was aa 
though Christ had been actually crucified before their eyes. So it threw a peculiar 
halo round the preacher. They warmed toward him and heaped kinduesses on him, 
as though it had been the Master himself. 

Il. He conrrasts THEIR PRESENT WITH THEIR PAST FEELING TOWARD HIM. “ Where 
then is that gratulation of yourselves? for I bear you witness, that, if possible, ye 
woud have plucked out your eyes and given them to me.” There was no more gratu- 
lation of themselves because by a singular providence Paul had found his way among 
them with the gospel. Their Celtic realism was gone. That realism had gone to a 
great leugth.. If it had been possible they would have plucked out their eyes to have 
given them to Paul. This language seems to point to an affection of the eyes as the 
malady from which Paul sufforad, This supposition agrees with the conditions. It was 
just such a malady as would interfere with his comfort and effectiveness as a speaker, 
while not reducing him to silence. It was just such an occasion as the Celtic nature 
would seize and work upon. To make the gospel messenger freer for his work, they 
would gladly have parted with their very eyes, to make up for his deficiencies. And it 
was only the impossibility of thus serving Paul that kept them back from the sacrifice 


230 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. (ou. rv. 1—31L 


The thorn in the flesh, as following upon Paul being in the third heavens, and as 
pointing to something acute, agrees with the supposition of his being a sufferer from an 
affection of the eyes. Whether we interpret the words here as deriving point from a 
weakness of Paul’s eyes or not, they are manifestly expressive of a very warm feeling 
toward him, which now seems to him to have fled. 

IV. HE coNTRASTS HIS CONDUCT AND THAT OF THE FALSE TEACHERS TOWARD THEM. 
1. His fidelity. “So then am I become your enemy, because I tell you the truth?” He 
had told them the truth on the occasion of his second visit. He had also been telling 
them the truth, with a certain sharpness, in this letter. That showed that he was no 
flatterer of them to gain his own ends. He did not believe in friendly relations being 
maintained unless on a basis of reality. Was it, then, a reasonable thing that he should 
be regarded by them as their enemy, as standing between them and their good, because 
he expressed himsclf according to the demands and under the restraints of truth ? Was 
there any ground which could be stated for their change of feeling? 2. The dishonour- 
ableness of the Juduizing teachers. ‘They zealously seek you in no good way; nay, 
they desire to shut you out, that ye may seek them.” He refers to the false teachers, 
whom, with a certain fecling of disnity, he does not name. They made the Galatians 
the objects of their zealous attentions, But they did not do this in a disinterested 
manner, ‘I'heir object was to shut the Galatians out, t.e. to isolate them from Paul and 
the Christian circle, so as to become themselves the exclusive objects of the zealous 
attentions of the Galatians, They were thus mere flatterers, to gain their own ends. 
Instead of placing themselves under the restraints of truth, they gave themselves the 
licence of error. While condemning them on this ground, the apostle makes a twofold 
reservation. (1) He is not to be condemned who makes others the objects of his zealous 
attentions in a good matter. “But it is good to be zealously sought in a good matter.” 
We condemn those who would compass sea and land to make one proselyte. But it is 
to be borne in mind that the zeal is a good thing in itself. What is to be condemned 
is misdirected zeal. And what is to be commended is, not the want of zeal, but zeal 
intelligently directed toward the good, especially the highest good, of others. Let the 
soul be on fire with a desire to do good. Let there be a compassing sea and land, not 
to make proselytes, but to bring souls to Christ. And we are not certainly to resent, 
but to welcome, the zealous attentions of others in the matter of our salvation, We 
ought to be thankful that we are not let alone, but that there are those who care for 
our souls, (2) He did not lay any claim to exclude others from seeking the good of 
the Galatians. “ At all times, and not only when I am present with you.” If others 
sought the real good of the Galatians in his absence, he had no feeling of jealousy toward 
them. On the contrary, he would bid them God-speed. 

V. HE EXPRESSES A DESIRE TO BE PRESENT WITH THEM. 1. Affectionate address. 
“ My little children, of whom I am again in travail until Christ be formed in you.” He 
addresses them, not as children, but, more tenderly, as little children, after the manner 
of John. He was not as a father to them (according to the conception here), but, more 
tenderly, as a mother. He had endured-much in prayer and thought and service on 
their account. And he had thought that his motherly endurance had been rewarded 
in their spiritual birth. But it was as if he had been disappointed in them, And there 
was the recurrence of the same motherly endurance,on their account. The object for 
which he endured was their spiritual birth. This is not thought of as the development 
of self, even of their true self. Nor is it thought of as a Pauline development, the 
accepting of a Pauline doctrine, the being recipient of Pauline influences. But it is _ 
thought of as the development of the Christ within them. Christians are those who 
have Christ as the Germ and Norm of their development. 2. Reason for his presence. 
“Yea, I could wish to be present with you now, and to change my voice ; for I am per- 
plexed about you.” He wished to be present with them, in the hope that he ould ts 
able to bring back the old relations between them. In that case he would be able to 
change his voice, to adopt a gentler tone, which was more congenial to him and would 
be more pleasant to them. Meantime, he could not be all gentleness, for his informa- 
tion led him to be perplexed about them. He had not given up all hope of them, but 
the ἴδ οι τὰ sometimes made his voice to grate on them, as it was nut pleasant to 
himself.— ° 


on. Iv. 1—31.] THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 231 


Ver. 21—ch. v. 1.— Allegory of Hagar and Sarah, To them that desired to be under 
the Law he proposes to read a lesson out of the Law. “Tell me, ye that desire to be 
under the Law, do ye not hear the Law?” He conceives of them as men who could not 
do without the bondage of the Mosaic Law, and he will read their condemnation out of 
the Pentateuch, in which that Law is contained. 

I. Hisrory ON WHICH THE ALLEGORY Is FOUNDED. “ For it is written, that Abrahaw 
had two sous, one by the handmaid, and one by the freewoman. Howbcit, the son 
by the liandmaid is born after the flesh ; but the son by the freewoman is born through 
promise.” ‘The two sons, Ishmael] and Isaac, had the same father. They differed in 
two respects. 1. Ishmael was by the handmaid, Hagar ; Isaac was by the freewoman, 
Sarah. 2, Ishmael was born after the flesh, ie. according to the ordinary course of 
nature, That there is not excluded from “flesh” a certain ethical meaning is scen 
lrom its being opposed in the twenty-ninth verse to the Spirit. Isaac was born through 
pr eee ze. through the Divine efficiency present in the promise, surmounting natural 
obstacles. 

II, AtLegory. ‘“ Which things contain an allegory.” By “ which things” we are 
to understand, not merely those which have been mentioned, but the whole class of 
things pertaining to Hagar and Sarah. Allegorizing is explaining one thing by another. 
In this case there is the plain historical meaning to begin with. Upon that there is 
imposed a second meaning. We are not to understand that the apostle evolved this 
second meaning out of his own thoughts. But God really meant more than the bis- 
torical meaning. It is true that God thinks through. all history; especially does he 
make known his thoughts through sacred history. More particularly in his dealings 
with Hagar and Sarah he intended to indicate what his dealings were to be with others, 
represented by them. “ For these women are two covenants.” 1. Hagar. (1) She 
represented the Sinatlic covenant, “One from Mount Sinai, bearing children unto 
bondage, which is Hagar.” Hagar was an Egyptian bondwoman in the household of 
Abraham. To the mind of God, she represented the Sinaitic covenant. As Hagar 
bare children unto bondage, so the Sinaitic covenant bare children unto bondage. A 
remark is made regarding the locality of Sinai. “ Now this [the thing] Hagar is Mount 
Sinai in Arabia.” Mount Sinai is situated in Arabia. This country is inhabited by 
the descendants of Hagar, The Arabs to this day regard themselves as the sons of 
Hagar. It was a country with which Paul had been made familiar during his residence 
in it for three years after his conversion. Once, in its ligtnings, and thunderings, and 
blackness, and darkness, and tempest, Mount Sinai had been made to body forth the 
terrors of the Law. As Paul had felt it in its oppressive blackness and ruggedness, 
it seemed to body forth sufficiently the despair of the Law. It was a fit locality for 
bondmen. (2) Zhe Sinaitic covenant answered to the Jewish Church, “ And answereth 
to the Jerusalem that now is: for she is in bondage with her children.” The Sinaitic 
covenant answered to the literal Jerusalem that was then standing, te. the Jewish 
Church. What was true regarding the Sinaitic covenant was true also regarding the 
Jewish Church, which was its embodiment. The bondwoman represented both. The 
Jewish nation at that time was a mother whose children were born to pass under the 
Roman yoke. So viewed ecclesiastically it was a mother whose children were born to 
pass under a yoke more grievous than the Roman. 2. Sarah, “ ‘The other is from 
Mount Zion, bearing children unto freedom, which is Sarah. Now this Sarah is Mount 
Zion in the Holy Land, and answereth to the Jerusalem that is above, for she is free 
with her children.” ‘That, we may suppose, is how the allegory would have run if it 
had been fully drawn out. It has already been stated that Sarah represents the other 
covenant, t.e. the gospel covenant. And it may be regarded as implied that, as Sinai 
breathed the spirit of despair, so Zion breathed the spirit of hope. But all that the 
apostle does here, is at once to oppose the Christian Church to the Jewish Church. 
“But the Jerusalem which is above.” Opposed to the literal Jerusalem, which was 
then undestroyed, was the spiritual and indestructible Jerusalem, of which even now 
we are regarded as citizens. (1) Zhe Christian Church regarded as a mother. It has 
three marks. (a) It ts free. “Is free, which is our mother.” We are taught to think 
of the Church as our mother, We are the Church’s sons, through the efficiency of 
Christ in the Church and its servives. All our well-springs are in the Church. It is 
of Zion that it is said, “This man and that man was born in her.” The Church of 


232 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. (ow. rv. 1—31 


Christ is represented by the freewoman. We are taught to regard it as the home of 
freedom. We feel free in our covenant position before Gud, in our immediate relation 
to him, and in our vlorious prospects. (Ὁ) Jt has .a numerous offspring. “For it is 
written, Rejoice, thou barren that bearest not; break forth and cry, thou that travailest 
not: for more are the children of the desolate than of her which hath the husband.” 
This is a quotation from Isa. liv. 1. In the same prophecy (li. 2) use is made of 
God giving Abraham and Sarah a numerous offspring. In this language the prophet 
makes use of Sarah having a more numerous people descended from her than Hagar. 
And what the apostle does in quoting it is to give the fact another application. ‘lhe 
Church represented by the desolate Sarah is to have a more numerous offspring than 
the Church represented by the favoured Hagar. (6) Zé has an offspring according to 
promise. “Now we, brethren, as Isaac was, are children of promise.” We are not 
certainly children according to the course of nature, or in virtue of influences that 
belong to our nature. We are children through the Divine influences that are efficient 
in the gospel surmounting great natural obstacles. We are miraculously, supernaturally 
born. (2) An instructive parallel added. (a) The persecutors. “But as then he 
that was born after the flesh persecuted him that was born after the Spirit, even so it 
is now.” It is said, in connection with a festival in honour of the weaning of Isaac, 
that Sarah saw the son of Hagar, which she had born unto Abraham, mocking, This 
little circumstance is referred to here, not so much for what it was in itself, as for its 
foreshadowing the bearing of the Arab tribes toward the Israclites. As the descendants 
of Ishmael persecuted the descendants of Isaac, so in the apostle’s day did the Jews 
persecute the Christians. It was a well-known fact that they were the bitterest 
enemies of the Christians and were the principal instigators of persecution against 
them. (6) Their fate foreshadowed. ‘* Howbeit what saith the Scripture? Cast out 
the handmaid and her son; for the son of the handmaid shall not inherit with the son 
of the freewoman.” Ishmael could not be allowed to live in the same house with 
Isaac. He had to be cast out and wag no sharer of the inheritance with him. So the 
Jewish Church and the Christian Charch could not coexist. Jews could only be in 
the Church as Christians. As Jews they were cast out of the special covenant position, 
the stern reality of which was soon to be made evident in the destruction of Jerusalem 
and the breaking up of the Jewish nationality. (3) General conclusion regarding our 
state of freedom. ‘ Wherefore, brethren, we are not children of a handmaid, but of 
the freewoman.” Ehortation founded on it. (a) To maintain our freedom. “With 
freedom did Christ set us free: stand fast therefore.” We owe our freedom to Christ. 
And it can be said that with a great price have we obtained our freedom, that price 
being his blood. We are not, therefore, to treat lightly what has been so dearly won. 
We must show our sense of it by maintaining it in its entirety. (Ὁ) To eschew bondage. 
“ And be not entangled again in a yoke of bondage.” ‘They had formerly been 
under the yoke of heathenism ; they were not to put themselves under the similar yoke 
of Judaism. A slave who has been liberated does not voluntarily put himself into 
the hardships he has left. So they who had experienced the swects of Christian liberty 
were not to go back to bonds.—R. F. 


Vers, 4, 5.—The advent in redemption. We naturally ask the question which forms 
the title to Anselm’s famous book, ‘Cur Deus Homo?’ Why could not God effect his 
gracious purposes without the incarnation of his Son? The verses before us throw light 
on this question. Ver. 4 indicates the two leading points of the humiliation of our 
Lord—the personal and the moral. Ver. 5 shows the object of these respectively. 
“The Son of God was born a man, that in him all men might become sons of God; 
he was born subject to Law, that those subject to Law might be rescued from bondage” 
(Lightfoot). 

I. CaRIsT BECAME A SON OF MAN THAT WE MIGHT BECOME SONS OF Gop. “ He was 
born of a woman” “ that we might receive the adoption of sons.” His humanity was 
real; he had a natural body and soul, and he entered the world by birth. His humanity 
was a humbling of himself (see Phil. ii. 7, 8). It was the emptying himself of 
primeval glory ; the subjecting himself to earthly limitations of knowledge, power, etc., 
even down to the unconscious helplessness of infancy; the endurance of the toil, the 
weariuess, the distress of a hard life, ending in that horror and mystery which we call 


on. Iv. 1—31.} THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 233 


“death.” Consider how this incarnation of Christ leads to our adoption. 1, Tt ia the 
secret of his influence over us. Attraction is in proportion to nearness. To influence a 
man you must descend to his level. ‘There the power of sympathy is most felt. So 
Christ stooped to us that he might lift us (see Heb. iv. 15). 2. It is the source of his 
power to conquer our great foes, sin and death (see Heb. ii. 14). Sin and death chain 
us down from the glory of the Divine life, To conquer these Christ faced them. 3. It 
is the ground of his atonement with God. God could not welcome us while all right 
and justice opposed. Christ, as the representative Man and for his brethren as both 
Priest and Sacrifice, spened the way back to God (see Heb. ii. 17). Hence the great 
privilege—Divine sonship. He became as we are that we might become as he is; he 
joined himself to us that we, united with him, might rise to his glorious life, 

11. Cunist wa8 MADE suBJECT TO LAW THAT HE MIGHT FREE US FROM THE BONDAGE 
or Law. 1. He was born subject (1) to the Levitical Law—as a Jew; (2) to the 
social law—subject to his parents, etc. (Luke ii. 51); (8) to the civil law (Matt. xvii. 
24—27); (4) to the moral law—not only to that pure morality which God and all 
holy beings follow, but to the definite precepts of morality which accompany the 
limitations of human life. 2. He was also subject to the penalties of the Law though 
himself sinless: (1) to the shame and trouble of the world generally which he shared 
in entering it; (2) to death, the distinctive doom of sin. 3. How does this lead to 
our liberation? (1) By facing the death-doom of the Law Christ conquered this for us. 
(2) By obedience to the Law he triumphed over the Law. ‘The largest liberty is in 
obedience. The Law is made for evil-doers; it is powerless against the good. Christ 
makes his people righteous (Rom. viii. 3), and so frees them from Law. (3) By rising 
from obedience to the letter of the Law, to the higher obedience of the Spirit, he leads 
us also to that freer service of love which is the emancipation from Law.—W. F. A. 


Ver. 6.—‘“ Abba, Father.” 1, Trust IN THE FATHERHOOD OF GOD I8 A PECULIARLY 
ΟΠΕΙΒΤΙΑΝ arace. 1. Christ revealed the fatherhood of God. Mohammedans think of 
“ Allah” as an omnipotent autocrat, and Jews regard “the Eternal” as a righteous 
Lord, but Christians know God as “our Father in heaven.” It is not that the idea of 
the fatherhood of God was not conceived before the time of Christ, for Hebrew psalmists 
found comfort in it (Ps. ciii. 18), and even Homer sang of “the father of gods and 
men.” But (1) Christ gave prominence and supremacy to an idea which before was 
only co-ordinate with, or even less regarded than, other Divine attributes; and (2) he 
revealed for the first time the richness and tenderness of this the inmost character of 
God. 2, The fatherhood of God is to Christians a relationship of Jove and gentleness. 
God is not regarded, like the Roman father, as one who might be a terror to his children. 
The “ Abba, Father” in the old home language—the language of the nursery—sugvests 
the feelings of little children to their father, and may we not say their mother (see 
Isa, xlix. 15)? The type of the citizen of the kingdom of heaven is a little child; a 
little child’s affection for his parents is the pattern of the purest Christian devotion. 
Nevertheless, this childlike confidence does not conflict with ‘the rightful authority of 
God. ‘he father is not weak because heis gentle. The trust of love is an obedient 
trust. 3, From trust in God’s fatherly love the Christian life grows iuto a habit of 
aspiration. The yearning of the soul for God is met only to be deepened and intensi- 
fied, so that the Christian learns to press on ever nearer and nearer to God, the burden 
of his heart's desire finding utterance in the cry, “ Abba, Father.” 

11. THIs GRACE GROWS OUT OF AN INSPIRATION OF THE Spirit or Gop’s Sov. 
Christ reveals the fact of the fatherhood of God; but the mere knowledge of that fact 
which we may derive from studying the words and life of Christ will not enable us to 
realize the spirit of trustful sonship. It is little to know that God is @ Father if we 
do not experience the love and close relationship of his fatherhood. So great a change 
is required before we can do this that nothing short of a Divine inspiration can make it 
possible. Indeed, it is Christ’s Spirit in us that utters the cry, “ Abba, Father.’ Thus 
the yearning of the soul for God is itself the result of God’s visit to the soul. All 
aspiration springs from inspiration. Because Christ lived in trust and communion with 
God, his Spirit entering us enables us to do the same. He is the true Son, and therefore 
his Spirit gives to us the grace of sonship. 

TIL Tue Divine ΙΝΒΡΙΒΑΤΙΟΝ DEPENDS ON OUR BELATION OF SONSHIP wITH Gop. 


234 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. (ca. rv. 1—38L 


Though God is naturally the Father of all, it is not every one who can cry, “ Abba, 
Father.” The wingled trust and aspiration of such a cry are only possible to those who 
are sons indced, reconciled to God aud restored to the family home, The Spirit that 
inspires the cry is not given to all. We must be receptive if we are to receive it. The 
Spirit of Gud’s firstborn Son is given to the true sons of God. The sonship, St. Paul 
teaches, is the cousequence of our own faith, and the inspiration follows. Therefore 
the consciousness of trust/ul aspiration towards God as our Father is a proof of sorship. 
The Spirit thus bears witness with our spirit that we are sons of God.— W. F. A. 


Ver. 7.— The son and the slave. The Christian is compared to the son, the Jew to 
the slave. The gospel brings sonship, Law inflicts bondage. The sonship of the new 
order involves liberty and heirship. Consider some of the privileges herein implied. 

I. INTELLIGENT PRINCIPLES SUBSTITUTED FOR SPECIFIO'COMMANDMENTS. 186 slave 
is ordered to do this or that without his master condescending to tell hin the reason 
for his mandates. He is bound to a blind, implicit obedience. Nothiug is done to 
develop his understanding and to help him to choose and decide on his own judgment. 
But the son is admitted to his father’s counsels, and educated so as to reason for himself 
and to act on the dictates of his own conscience. The Law keeps men as slaves. It 
commands, it does not explain. Christianity (1) enlightens so that we see the prin- 
ciples of righteousness, understand their inherent rightness and discern their appli- 
cability to specific cases ; (2) liberates by allowing us treedom to apply these principles 
according to our own conscientious convictions, instead of forcing upon us a rigid course 
of conduct. 

11. Love ΑΒ A MOTIVE INSTEAD OF COMPULSION. The slave may hate his master 
and only obey in fear of the lash. The true son is above this abject, servile obedience. 
He has learnt to love his father, and from love to seek to anticipate his father’s 
wishes and willingly to endeavour to please him. The Law commands, threatens, 
drives, compels. ‘The gospel persuades and attracts. The Christian obeys God 
because he first loves God. The secret is that Law cannot change our hearts, while 
the gospel does “create a new heart within” us, so that we no longer need the 
restraints of Law, but earnestly desire to please God. 

IIL. FamMILy FELLOWSHIP IN PLACE OF SERVILE INFERIORITY. The slave is kept at 
a distance from his master, holds an inferior position, and is excluded from fami.iar 
intercourse. The son tives at home in the presence of his father and enjoys close 
companionship with him. Law keeps us at a distance from Gol. Jews were made to 
feel a sense of separation caused by their Levitical system. Christians are brought 
near through Christ and belong to the family of God. 

IV. A RICH INHERITANCE IN EXCHANGE FOR HELPLESS POVERTY. The slave cin 
own nothing. All he earns and his very person are the property of his master. Sons 
are heirs. Law allows us to gain nothing—it is a hard master; but the gospel offers 
the richest gifts. Christians, being God’s sons, become fellow-heirs with Christ.— 
W. Ἐν Α. 


Vers. 8, 9.---“ Beggarly rudiments.” J. THe oLD HEATHENDOM. St. Paul needs to 
remind the Galatians of the evils of the condition from which they have been liberated. 
We are all inclined to gild the past with false glories, looking back with fond regret to its 
lost delights, while we forget the things that,troubled it. Note three charaeteristics of this 
evil past. 1. Iynorance of God. The heathen were without the light, the joy, the gnidance, 
and the help that come with the true knowledge of God. All men who are spiritually 
dead to God are thus heathen at heart. The heathenism that was congenital was some 
excuse for moral failure ; for men cannot serve the God they donot know. Conduet which 
is pardonable in the ignorant, however, is inexcusable in those who know God. 2. The 
worship of those who areno gods. Man must worship. The monstrosities of heathenism 
are a pathetic witness to our religious nature, which, if it has not light for its healthy 
development, will exercise itself in the most distorted manner rather than be suppressed. 
But such religion is based on a delusion. The worshipper prays to what does not exist. 
So do all who erect their own notions of divinity and do homage to them instead of 
learning to serve the God of revelation. 3. Spiritual bondage. The Galatians seem to 
have been entangled in the toils of a mongrel religion, which combined the terrible 


oH. Iv. 1—31.] THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS., 235 


superstitions of their Celtic forefathers with the immoral mysticism of their Phrygian 
neighbours. The result was a bondage at once of fear and of lust. But all heathen 
religions keep their devotees in subjection. Religious liberty is a fruit of Christianity. 

11. Tue new Curisrianiry. ‘This was in all respects ἃ deliverance, au advance, and 
an elevation. It involved great spiritual acquisitions. 1. The knowledge of God; 
always the first essential, We cannot trust, love, or serve a God of whose character 
and will we are ignorant. Any faith that precedes this knowledge is faith in the 
priest, not faith in God. 2. Being known of God. The apostle corrects himself. It 
was not enough to speak of knowing God. ‘Though that was the first essential ster 
towards the new life, it is not now the most characteristic feature of that life. We 
must not rest in the knowledge of God alone. Knowledge is not redemption. The 
further step is to receive the grace of sonship from God and the inspiration of the Spirit 
of Christ wherewith we breathe the aspiration to God as to our Father (ver. 6). 
Such an experience shows that we are acknowledged by God—“ known of God.” 

III. Tue revapsz. Is it possible that any should consciously and wilfully choose 
to fall from such privileyes as those of the new Christianity to such bondage as that 
of the old heathendom ? Jt was important that the Galatians should see that their 
perversion to Judaism was essentially such a relapse. ‘lhe startling point of the 
apostle’s argument lay just in this—that, with the insight of inspired genius, he saw the 
identity of the religion of Law which his converts regarded as a more progressive stage 
of Christiauity with their old discarded heathenism. At first sight it might appear 
that austere Mosaism could have nothing in common with corrupt Phrygian orgies and 
gloomy Celtic sacrifices. Yet the bondage was essentially the same. They had three 
points in common. 1. Their rudimentary character. Both were mere beginnings, 
Christianity had left both behind. The advanced scholar should not waste time over 
the alphabet ; the graduate need not matriculate afresh. 2. Their weakness. For the 
purpose of creating righteousness and regenerating character the Levitical Law with all 
its lofty morality was as impotent as the impure and horrible rites of the old Galatiaa 
cult. 3. Their poverty. Both were “beggarly.” After holding the pearl of great price, 
it was strange that any should turn from such riches of Divine love to any other 
religion which, lacking the wondrous grace of the gospel, was by comparison as a 
beggar to a prince. Yet all make this mistake who forsake the grace and liberty of 
the gospel for the bondage of rites and holy days and priestly authority.—W. F. A. 


Vers. 10, 11.—Obdserving seasons. St. Paul considers the observing of days, and 
months, and seasons, and years as so gross an instance of relapse to the weak and beg- 
garly rudiments that he fears on that account that he may have bestowed labour in 
vain on the Galatians, So grave a judgment on the observance of seasons may startle 
us if we do not consider what the apostle really is condemning. 

I. THERE 18 A RIGHT REGARD FOR SEASONS. The sabbath was made for man, and it 
is therefore good for man that he should make use of the one day in the week that is 
set apart for rest and worship. Clearly if other seasons, such as Christmas, Easter, 
the coming of the new year, the harvest, etc., can be utilized profitably, the recog- 
nition of them may be justified on good grounds. 1. The profitable arrangement of 
time. There is a time for everything. Christ did not utter his parables of judgment 
at the wedding feast in Cana. We need time for worship. Though we should ever live 
in the spirit of prayer, we must still have distinct seasons of undistracted devotion if 
our relivious life is to be deep and vigorous. It often happens, moreover, that what can 
be done at any time is not done at all. As it is well to set aside a definite portion of 
one’s income for charitable purposes, lest too little or even none should be left after 
satisfying innumerable personal claims—though really if we love our neighbour as our- 
selves we shall count nothing wholly our own—so, while God demands all our time, and 
while any season is suitable for devotion, some time must be set aside for worship, or 
the busy work of life will absorb the whole. 2, The exigencies of public worship. 
The social requirements of worship make set seasons necessary when all the worshippers 
can mutually agree to assemble themselves together, The same principle requires 
definite places of worship. 3. The influence of association. We are all more or less 
affected by sentiment. Birthdays, wedding-days, and death-days, days of joy and days 
of sorrow, are chronicled in our almanacs, and the recurrence of them naturally raises 


236 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. [cu. rv. 1—81 


sympathetic emotions, The same applies to the great Christian anniversaries, and the 
power of association may help us to profit by the lessons of the Incarnation at Christmas 
and of the Resurrection at Easter. 

11. THERE IS A DANGEROUS OBSERVANCE OF SEASONS, 1. Regarding the mere odserv- 
ance of the scasons as a virtue on its own account, The means receives the credit due 
only to the end. Mere “sabbath-keeping” is no good thing, The question is, “ What 
good do we do or gain through use of the privileges of theday?” 2. The idea that the 
holy season sanctiies what would be otherwise common. 8, Making the sanctity of 
the day an excuse for neglecting duty. This was the fault of hypocritical Pharisees in 
the time of our Lord. Charity was sinned against that the sabbath might be respected. 
4. Treating the religious observance of the holy season as an excuse for irreligion at other 
seasons, How many in Roman Catholic countries seem to think that attendance at 
Mass in the morning gives an indulgence for attendance at the theatre in the evening! 
How many Protestants seem to think that cessation from business on Sunday shows 
so much respect for religion that all the work of the week may be carried on in utter 
worldliness! Surely it is best not to put up the shutters on the first day of the week, 
if this act is only a piece of hypocrisy intended to cover the sin of using false weights 
and measures and selling adultcrated goods on the other six days. 

In conclusion, let us remember that each man must draw the line between the harm- 
less use and the dangerous observance of seasons for himself. It depends much on 
natural constitution and on early habits. Ifsome Christians seem rather over-observant 
of days, those who with St. Paul regard all days, the sabbath included, as in themselves 
equally holy, are not to judge their weaker brethren, but to reverence their devotion 
and to be charitable to their failing (Rom. xiv. 5, 6).—W. Ε΄, A, 


Ver, 11.—Labour bestowed in vain, I, AN APOSTLE MAY BESTOW LABOUR IN VAIN, 
If St. Paul might thus fail, we are not to be surprised when we do not meet with success. 
We are not responsible for the results of our work, but only for the faithfulness of our 
efforts, 

II, A TRUE WORKMAN WILL BE ANXIOUS NOT TO BESTOW LABOUR IN VAIN. Christian 
work is not mere treadmill drudgery. It is labour of interest, of sympathy, of love. 
‘The servant of Christ will be anxious, not only that he may be saved, though, perhaps, 
‘so as by fire,” but that his work may be preserved (1) for the honour of Christ; (2) 
for the welfare of men; (3) for the personal interest occasioned by self-sacrificing toil, 
If we care nothing for the results of our work, this is a manifest proof that our heart is 
not in it, and therefore that the werk will be ill done. We must earnestly desire a 
good harvest if ever we are to be rewarded with the sight of the ripe golden ears. 

III. THe ῬΕΟΒΡΕΟῚ OF FAILURE IN WORK WILL LEAD AN EARNEST MAN TO DO ALL RE 
CAN TO PREVENT 1T. It was the dread of such failure that called forth the whole Epistle 
to the Galatians from St. Paul. 1. Failure, though in prospect, may often be obviated by 
improved methods, for we may be ourselves to blame for the want of success that we 
attribute to the stubbornness of the soil. It is a mistake to be wedded to any one 
method. The slavery of routine is fatal to success. New emergencies demand new 
plans. Beware of sacrificing the work to the machinery. 2. Failure may be avoided 
by more earnest efforts. St. Paul expostulates with the Galatians. He exhibits some- 
thing of the long-suffering of God. It is foolish and weak and wrong to despair at the 
first lack of success, God despairs of no soul. If we were more hopeful and more 
patient we should be more fruitful. 

IV, Iv 18 LAMENTABLE TO BE IN THE CONDITION OF THOSE UPON WHOM LABOUR HAS 
BEEN BESTOWED IN VAIN. They who thus fail are without excuse. All that has been 
done for them will rise up in judgment against them. How terrible to have been 
privileged with the ministry of an apostle, of a St. Paul, and, in spite of all his eloquence, 
his geal, his self-sacrificing devotion, his inspiration, to make shipwreck at last! 
We who have the New Testament in our hands have that ministry for our benefit. If 
after enjoying the privileges of living in a Christian country and receiving Christian 
teaching we fail of entering into the Christian life, all the labour spent in vain upon us 
will condemn us. The responsibility rests on each individual soul. It is a delusion to 
throw the blame on the preachers. The highest influences, even up ¢o the preaching of 
a St Paul, will fail, unless we yield our own hearts in obedience to the truth.—W. F. A. 


on. tv. 1—831.] THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 237 


Ver. 16.—A friend mistaken for an enemy. On his first visit to Galatia, St. Paul 
was received, so he tells us, “‘as an angel of God, even as Christ Jesus.” He paid, it 
appears, a second visit to the province, and then the fickle people treated him with 
coldness and suspicion because he found it necessary to point out their faults and the 
danger of them, as though he had become their enemy solely because he told them the 
truth. This narrow and unfair conduct of the Galatians is only too common to human 
nature. The causes of it are worth examining, and the evil of it being detected as 
ἃ warning against a repetition of the same egregious blunder, 

I. Iv Is soMETIMES THE DUTY OF THE PREACHER TO TELL UNPLEASANT TRUTHS, It is 
a mistake to suppose that because he has a gospel to declare he must let only honied 
phrases fall from his lips. Jeremiah set up the prophesying of smooth things as the 
one sure test of a false prophet (Jer. xxviii. 8,9), John the Baptist prepared for the 
gospel by denouncing the sins of his fellow-countrymen. Christ uttered some of 
the most terrible words ever spoken (eg. Matt. xxiii. 33). The Church has been too 
much pampered with comforting words. We need more preaching to the conscience. 
1. There are unpleasant truths. Nature is not all roses and lilies; nettles and vipers 
exist. The page of history is blotted with tears and blood. There are many ugly facts 
in our own past experience. 2. The great ground on which the preacher is required to 
utter unpleasant truths is that we are all sinners. ‘The doctor who describes the cases 
in a hospital must say much about terrible diseases. ὃ. The purpose for which it is 
necessary to utter painful truths is to lead to repentance. It is not done merely to give 
pain nor to drive to despair. ‘The lightning flash reveals the precipice that the unwary 
traveller may start back from destruction. Until we know ourselves to be in the wrong 
way we shall not turn to a better. 

II, THE PREACHER OF UNPLEASANT TRUTHS MUST EXPECT TO BE TREATED AS AN ENEMY 
BY THE VERY MEN HE I8 TRYING TO HELP, This has been the case all the world over 
with the prophets of Israel, John the Baptist, the apostles, reformers in every age, and, 
above all, Christ himself, who was crucified simply because he told truths that stung 
the Jews to madness. ‘The noblest heroes of the “noble army of martyrs” suffered on 
this account, It is well to understand and be ready for such treatment even in the 
inilder form which it generally assumes in our own day. [Ὁ can be explained, though 
of course it cannot be justified. It may be traced to the following causes:—1l. The 
influences of association. The messenger of ill tidings is hated for his message. Milton 
calls the bird that foretells “a hapless doom” “a rude bird of hate.” 2. Misinterpreta- 
tion. It is assumed that the preacher wishes trouble because he predicts it, that he has 
pleasure in humiliating us by revealing our faults. 8, A corrupt conscience. Men often 
refuse to admit unpleasant truths about themselves, treat them as libels and the 
preachers of them as libellers of the race, 

III. Iv 18 A GREAT BLUNDER TO TREAT THE PREACHER OF UNPLEASANT TRUTHS AS AN 
enemy. 1. It is foolish. Truth is not the less true because we are blind to it. The 
revelation of its existence is not the creation of it. 2. It is wnjust. The faithful servant 
of Christ, like his Master, will wish nothing but good to those whose guilt he denounces. 
He is the enemy of the sin just because he is the Friend of the sinner. 8, It is 
ungenerous. It is always a thankless task to tell unpleasant truths, Fora aan of 
kindly disposition it is a most painful task. He undertakes it for the good of his 
friends. It would have been much more pleasant for St. Paul to have retained his 
popularity at the expense of the Church’s welfare. He is an ungrateful patient who 
treats as an enemy the surgeon who hurts only that he may heal.—W. F, A. 


Vers, 21--31.—The allegory of Hagar. Writing to men who were unduly subservient 
to the Jewish Law, St. Paul clenches his argument with an appeal to what he regards 
as the typical meaning of the history contained in that very Law. This was an argu- 
mentum ad homines. It is important, when possible, to convince men on their own 
ground, Among believers in Scripture, arguments are naturally drawn from Scripture. 
Only it is necessary to bear in mind that there are different “views” of Scripture ; so 
that we must not be impatient if the dogmatic assertion of our own interpretation as 
Scripture itself is not acquiesced in. To many the allegory of Hagar seems to be an 
illustration rather than anargument. A reference to it is chiefly useful to move our 
sympathies, It needs to be. preceded by solid reasoning founded on direct statements of 


238 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, [σπ. v. 1—26 


Scripture. Thus St. Panl argues from the history of Abraham (och. iii. 6) before making 
use of the typical significance of Hagar, 

L Born Saran AND HaGAR WERE OF THE HOUSEHOLD OF ABRAHAM. The very 
honours conferred upon Hagar led to her ultimate rejection from the home through the 
spirit of insubordination they bred in her. The Law was given by God. We must not 
assume that all things of Divine origin possess equal value, nor because 8 thing is only 
intended for some lower use and is set aside when that use has been made of it, that it 
is therefore inherently bad and cannot have come from God. 

11. Hagar was ONLY A BONDWOMAN, WHILE SARAH WAS A WIFE AND A FREEWOMAN. 
Herein is a type of the fundamental distinction between the Law and the gospel. 1. 
The Law imposes bondage (1) to constraint and compulsion ; (2) to definite precepts and 
irksome details ; and (3) to the burden of past transgression and omissions, 2. The 
gospel brings freedom (1) in forgiveness of the past and justification by faith for the 
future; (2) in revealing general principles of righteousness and viving us liberty to apply 
them for ourselves; and (3) in infusing love as the motive of obedience. 

III. ΙΒΗΜΑΒΙ, was A SLAVE, WHILE Isaac was FREE. The children took the status 
of their mothers, We enjoy only the privileges of the religion under which we live. 
The Law cannot develop liberty. As it isa system of bondage, all who follow it lose 
their freedom, whether they will or no. The gospel confers liberty on all who accept 
it—even on those who at first have not faith, or hope, or desire to be free. 

IV. Isaao ONLY RECEIVED THE PROMISE. God’s blessing comes to the free soul. If 
we cling to our fetters we lose the grace of God. Liberty is the parent of innumer- 
able good things, politically, socially, religiously. As we free ourselves from super- 
stition and needless restraints we rise into the healthy atmosphere where the largest 
Divine blessings flourish, 

V. IsHMAEL WA8 FINALLY oast out. The Law, having done its part, is discarded. 
The Jews lost their peculiar position as the central spiritual light of their age when their 


mission was completed. 


The tutelage of Law may be useful for a time, but to dwell] 


in it perpetually will be to become ultimately castaways.—W. F. A, 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER V. 


Ver. 1.—(See p. 209.) 

Ver. 2.—Behold, I Paul say unto you (ἴδε, 
ἐγὼ Παῦλος λέγω ὑμῖν); lo, I Paul say unto 
you. The adverbial exclamation ἴδε, found 
in St. Paul’s writings only here (in Rom. 
ii. 17 it should be εἰ δέ), seems to be more 
abrupt than ἰδού, pointing to the immense 
importance and yet possibly unexpected 
character of what follows. The Galatians 
might be surprised to hear it; but that 
which they seemed disposed to take in hand 
was fraught with utter ruin. “I, Paul:” 
he thus puts forward his personality, as 
solemnly gaging his whole credit and re- 
sponsibility upon the truth of that which 
he is about to affirm. The turn of thought 
is somewhat different in 2 Cor. x. 1 and Eph. 
iii. 1. There is no reason to suppose that 
he is glancing at the use which might have 
already been made or might be made of 
the fact of his having himself circumcised 
Timothy. That if ye be ciroumoised (ὅτι ἐὰν 
περιτέμνησθε); that if ye set about having 
yourselves cireumcised. The present tense 
18 used also in the next verse and in ch. vi. 
12, 13; 1 Cor. vii. 18. Compare the present 
tense, δικαιοῦσθι, in ver. 4. In Acts xv. 1 


the περιτέμνησθε of the Textus Receptus is 
rep'aced by recent editors by περιτμηθῆτε, 
which is better suited to the posture of mind 
of those Pharisee Christians who had in 
view the abhorrent uncleanness attaching, 
as they considered, to those described as ἀκρο- 
βυστίαν ἔχοντες (Acts xi. 3); upon whom 
themselves the Jews fastened the epithet 
of ἀκροβυστία, not as a mere colourless anti- 
theton to περιτομή, but as a selected term of 
reproach as objects of offence and disgust. 
The apostle, on the other hand, is here not 
thinking of outward corporeal condition; for 
he presently (ver. 6) affirms that in Christ 
Jesus it mattered nothing whether a man 
were in περιτομὴ or in ἀκροβυστία, as indeed 
he proved to be his feeling by circumcising 
Timothy (Acts xvi. 3). It is the posture of 
mind that the apostle is thinking of exclu- 
sively, What was this? The very warning 
of this verse shows, that, in wishing for cir- 
cumcision, these Galatians did not intend to 
withdraw from Christ; and it appears from 
the next verse that they did not, either, con- 
template the doing of the whole Law. But 
then,too, the fourth verse, in which apparently 
the apostle means to explain and justify the 
assertion of this second verse, indicates that 
they sought circumcision with the view of 


on. v. 1—26.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


239 


being justified by the Law; not, as has just 
been remarked, by obeying the whole Law, 
but by submitting themselves to the Law so 
far as undergoing this one rite prescribed 
by it. The conclusion to be drawn from 
these premisses is that what the apostle 
means is this: If ye have yourselves circum- 
cised with the view of thereby obtaining 
righteousness before God, ye forfeit all hope 
of receiving benefit from Ohrist (see note on 
ch. iv. 10). In comparing the present passage 
with ch. vi. 12,13, we observe that, while here 
heis dealing with those who sought circum- 
cision with the view of assuring their right- 
eousness before God, he is there referring to 
persons actuated by an altogether different 
set of motives, Christ shall profit you no- 
thing (Χριστὸς ὑμᾶς οὐδὲν ὠφελήσει). “The 
future tense marks the certain result of their 
veing circumcised: ‘Christ (as you will 
find) will never profit you anything’” 
(Bishop Ellicott). The future time is not, 
in particular, for example, the time of Christ’s 
second coming; but that which follows upon 
their receiving circumcision—the hour in 
which their distrust in Christ eventuated 
in the overt act of having themselves cir- 
cumcised for the purpose of gaining right- 
eousness thereby, would decisively cut them 
off from Christ. Their circumcision would 
be for them the sacrament of excision from 
Christ. We may compare with this the 
awful pasgage referring to the consequences 
accruing to Jewish Christians from their 
relapsing to Judaism, in Hcb. x. 26—30. It 
is difficult to overestimate the importance 
of this passage, in determining the relation 
between trust in Christ’s atonement and par- 
ticipation in the benefits of that atonement. 
It is at his extreme peril that a Christian 
allows himself in misgivings as to whether 
Christ’s mediation is all-sufficient for the 
securing of his peace with God and his part 
in God’s kingdom. It is by reliance upon 
Christ’s work that his salvation through 
Christ is secured; by distrust in it his 
salvation ig brought into peril; by definite 
unbelief his salvation is forfeited. This is 
in perfect accordance with the apostolic 
doctrine in general; but rarely is it 80 
strongly and incisively asserted as it is here. 

Ver. 3.—For I testify again (μαρτύρομαι δὲ 
πάλιν) ; I protest again. In using the word 
μαρτύρομαι, pro teste loquor, “I speak in the 
presence of a witness,” the apostle intimates 
that he is making his affirmation with » 
definite sense of the Lord being his Witness 
(cf. Eph. iv. 17, * This I say and testify in 
the Lord”). The original construction and 
force of the verb are shown in Judith vii. 
28, Μαρτύρομαι ὑμῖν τὸν οὐρανὸν καὶ τὴν γῆν. 
The apostle is wont to use it with a distinct 
sense of its emphatic import (see Acts xx. 
26; 1 Thess. ii. 11). The word “again” 


points, not to the substance of the subsequent 
affirmation, as if it were a repetition of that 
made in the preceding verse, which in fact 
it does not appear to be, but to the solemnity 
with which he makes this fresh affirmation. 
For the phrase, “I Paul say unto you,” was 
one form of solemn affirmation which in 
effect gaged his personality as Christ’s 
apostle and as acting in his name; and this 
“T protest” is another of equally solemn 
import. To every man that is circumcised 
(παντὶ ἀνθρώπῳ περιτεμνομένῳ) ; to every man 
that is having himself cir ised. St. Paul’s 
statements elsewhere, and his own proceed- 
ing in ciroumcising Timothy, as well as the 
present context, make it certain that, however 
absolute and universal his affirmation at first 
sight seems to be, it is nevertheless meant to 
be takon as made with reference to certain 
understood conditions, Thus: “I protest to 
any one of you Gentiles, who, being already 
baptized into Christ, has himself circumcised 
with the view of winning righteousness 
and favour with God, by obeying this one 
prescription of the Law—that,” ete. The 
conjunction δὲ is most probably the δὲ of 
transition (metabatic), introducing a fresh 
particular merely; and in this instance, as 
often, it nceds not to be represented in 
translation at all. Certainly “for” is not 
its meaning. Possibly, as De Wette sup- 
poses, it points back, as an adversative, to 
the words, “ Christ shall profit you nothing,” 
as if it were “ but on the contrary.” That 
he is a debtor to do the whole Law (ὅτι ὀφει- 
λέτης ἐστὶν ὅλον τὸν νόμον ποιῆσαι) ; that he is 
under obligation (Greck, is a debtor) to do the 
whole Law. By having himself circumcised, 
he adopts the token of the Lord’s covenant 
(Gen. xvii. 11, 13) made with those who 
were his people after the flesh; he enrolls 
himself with them to share with them their 
obligations. And to them the Lord had 
given the Law of Mount Sinai to be their 
appointed pedagogue till the Christ should 
come. “ By being circumcised” (he means) 
“you of your own accord put yourself back 
afresh under this pedagogue, and just his bid- 
ding you must do. And for what? All the 
ordinances and ecremonies he puts you upon 
observing will leave you as fur off as ever 
from remission of sins and justification with 
God! And this self-surrender to the peda- 
gogue God has not asked for at your hands ; 
while what he does require, that you with- 
hold, even faith in him whom he hath sent: 
nay, not merely withhold your belief, but by 
open act and deed testify your disbelief in 
him.” Under all that the apostle is here 
writing there appears to lie the principle, 
which, however, he has not distinctly stuted, 
but which we see to be true, that ciroum- 
cision was the peculiar badge of “ Israel 
after the flesh,” appertaining to them alone 


240 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


[ou. v. 1—26, 


and not to be meddled with by any who did 
not mean to become naturalized as fellow- 
citizens with them. (For the use of ὀφειλέτης 
éorly,comp. Rom. viii. 14.) The noun more 
commonly points to a debt incurred, or 
guiltiness; but here it simply denotes 
obligation. 

Ver. 4.—Christ is become of no effect unto 
you (κατηργήθητε ἀπὸ τοῦ Χριστοῦ); or, ye 
have disconnected yourselves from Christ. 
The verb καταργεῖν is a favourite word with 
St. Paul, occurring twenty-seven times in 
his Epistles, including twice in the Hebrews, 
whilst in the rest of the New Testament it 
occurs only once, and that in the Pauline 
St. Luke (xiii. 7). Its proper meaning is “to 
make inoperative,” “make of no effect,” as 
above (ch. iii. 17), The phrase, καταργεῖσθαι 
ἀπό, ete., occurs Rom. vii. 2, “ If the husband 
die (κατήργηται ἀπό), she is discharged from 
the law of the husband;” it ceases to have 
any effect upon her; so ibid., ver. 6, “ Now 
we have been discharged from the Law 
(κατηργήθημεν ἀπὸ τοῦ νόμου); it has ceased 
to have any operation towards us. The 
phrase combines the two ideas—separation 
suggested by the ἀπό (comp. Rom. ix. 8), 
and the cessation of a work (ἔργον) or an 
effect till then wrought by one upon the 
other of the two parties: the two parties 
have nothing more to do with each other. 
The sense given in the Authorized Version 
is perfectly justifiable; only, perhaps, here 
the passive takes, as it sometimes does, the 
reflective sense of the middle verb; but it 
may be that the apostle means simply to 
express the result which has accrued. The 
aorist tense of κατηργήθητε, a8 well es of 
the ἐξεπέσατε, expresses the certainty and 
promptness with which the result followed 
upon the (supposed) act. Whosoever of you 
are justified by the Law (οἵτινες ἐν νόμῳ 
δικαιοῦσθε); euch of you as go about to he jus- 
tified by the Law. “ By the Law;” literally, 
in the Law; seek to find in the Law the 
means of justification (cf. ch. iii. 11, and 
note). The present tense is the present of 
design or endeavour ; the result in tlis case 
being, in fact, unattainable (ch. iii. 10, 21). 
Ye are fallen from grace (τῆς χάριτος ἐξεπέ- 
care); ye have fallen from the state of grace. 
“Grace ” denotes the condition of acceptance 
with God into which faith in Christ brings 
us. Cf. Rom. v. 2: “Through whom we 
have had our access by faith into this grace 
wherein we stand.” The verb ἐκπίπτω is 
used as in 2 Pet. iii. 17,“ Lest—ye fall from 
(exréonre) your own steadfastness.” So 
πίπτω, Rev. ii. 5, “ Remember whence thou 
hast fallen [πέπτωκας : Receptus, ἐκπέπτω- 
κας}" In classical Greek the verb was 
frequently used as a set term to describe 
those who, in the alternating success of 
adverse factions in the several independent 


cities of Greeco, were compelled by a more 
powerful adverse party to submit to exile; 
its correlative verb being ἐκβάλλω. This 
fact leads Bishop Lightfoot, having an eye 
to the ἔκβαλε of ch. iv. 30, to render ἐξεπέσατε 
here, “are driven forth and banished with 
Hagar your mother.” But this very idio- 
matic colour of meaning it seems very pre- 
carious to give tothe word in the Greek of 
St. Paul. The more general signification of 
the term is amply sustained by its use in 
Plutarch as cited by Wetstein, 

Ver. 5.—For we through the Spirit (ἡμεῖς 
“γὰρ πνεύματι); for we for our parts by the ᾽ 
Spirit. “We” who abide in Christ, and 
continue steadfast in the grace into which 
Christ has brought us; that is, we believers 
in Christ, as such. Not, “I and those who 
go along with me,” as eg. in Phil. iii. 17. 
“By the Spirit.” Πνεῦμα can hardly here 
mean, as in ch. iii. 3, the element of spiritual 
life; but much more probably the personal 
Spirit of God, referred to as inspiring and 
prompting the action of the believer's mind. 
The presence of this Spirit has been already 
described as the distinguishing blessing of 
believers in Christ (ch. iii. 2—5, 14; iv. 6); 
while presently after (ver. 18, πνεύματι: 
22—25) the apostle dwelle on the work of 
the same Divine Agent in regulating the 
Ohristian’s habits of feeling and action 
(the dative as in vers. 16, 18; Rom. viii. 13) 
It is here referred to as evincing the Divine 
sanction which attaches to the particular 
action of faith and hope now to be described 
(comp. Rom. viii. 15—17; Eph. i. 13). 
Wait for the hope of righteousness by faith 
(ἐκ πίστεως ἐλπίδα δικαιοσύνης ἀπεκδεχόμεθα); 
from the ground of fatth do wait for the hope 
of righteousness. The term which has the 
principal accent in this clause is ἐκ πίστεως, 
“ὁ from the ground of faith.” This appears, 
both from the preceding context, in which 
the opposed idea of “justification by the 
Law” holds the foremost place, requiring 
here the confronting mention of “faith,” 
end also from the next verse, which sub- 
stantiates the statement before us by affirm- 
ing the all-importance of “faith.” In point 
of construction, ἐκ πίστεως docs not appear 
to qualify “rightcousness,” although, from 
the classical text Hab, ii. 4 (Septuagint), it 
is so often connected with δίκαιος and 
δικαιοῦσθαι: but rather the whole clause, 
“wait for the hope of righteousness.’ 
What the apostle is now concerned to say is 
that it is by virtue of our faith that we look 
forward to hereafter receiving the hope cf 
righteousness. This, of course, includes our 
being by faith justified. The word “hope” 
here designates the object hoped for, and 
not the sentiment itself. So Rom. viii. 24, 
“hope that is seen;” Col. i. 5, “the hope 
which is laid up for you in the heavens ; ἢ 


68. v. 1—26.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


241 


Titus if. 18, “looking for the blissful hope.” 
The genitive, “of righteousness,” may be 
(1) the “genitive of apposition,” the hope 
which is, or which consists of, righteousness, 
similar to the genitives in the phrases, “the 
earnest of the Spirit,” “the sign of circum- 
cision,” “the leaven of malice,” “the 
recompense of the inheritance,” “the peace- 
eble fruit of righteousness”? (2 Cor. v. 5; 
Rom, iv. 11; 1 Cor. v. 8; Col. iii. 24; Heb. 
xii. 11); or (2) “the hope of righteousness” 
may mean the hope that Spperinine unto 
righteousness, which would be the “in- 
heritance” spoken of in ch. iii, 18, 22, as 
accruing, not “from the Law,” but to those 
who are justified by faith. The apostle is 
not wont to speak of justification as a 
blessing to be received αὖ the day of final 
decision, to which he evidently here refers, 
but as a blessing received at once by those 
who believe in Christ as the fruit even here 
of their faith. Thus Rom. v. 1, “ Being 
Justified (S:cow@évres) by faith, we have 
peace with God ;” ibid., ver. 11, “ We have 
now received the reconciliation.” Thus 
also in this Epistle (ch. iii. 24—27) it is 
declared that, in consequence of being jus- 
tified by faith, we are clothed with Christ 
and God's adopted sons (see also ch. iv. 6, 7). 
There can surely be no question of the 
already received justification of those in 
whom the Spirit testifies that they are sons. 
Nor does Phil. iii. 9 (“ That I may be found 
in hia, having ... the righteousness which 
is through faith in Christ”) speak a different 
language: he aspires (he there says) to be 
in that final judgment found in possession 
of a righteousness which he had received in 
this life through the faith which he had in 
this life exercised. As Bengel here observes, 
“Paul, in mentioning things beyond, includes 
and confirms things present.” Of Judaical 
legalism it was true that it did not think 
iteelf already possessed of righteousness, 
but with an ever-unappeased conscience 
was always still striving after it; whereas 
it is the privilege and glory of faith that it 
can enjoy the assurance of being even now 
justified and at peace with, “at one” with, 
God. Most ccrtainly, what the apostle here 
calls “hope ” is not the sentiment which we 
so often thus name when we intend thereby 
an imperfectly assured expectation of some 
probably coming good. In the apostle’s 
vocabulary it denotes a confident anticipa- 
tion unclouded by doubt (comp. Rom. viii. 
23-25; Heb. xi.1). In fine, this is what 
the apostle means: We Christians, as led 
by the Spirit of adoption, do rest in the 
confident anticipation of receiving the in- 
heritance which is the future award of the 
righteous, on the ground of our faith in the 
Lord Jesus. The verb ἀπεκδέχομαι, in all 
the six other passages in which it is found, 
GALATIANS, 


is used with reference to objects or events 
pertaining to the close of the present dis- 
pensation: Rom. viii. 19, 23, 25; 1 Cor. i 
7; Phil. iii. 20; Heb. ix. 28. The pre- 
position ἀπὸ in this compound verb is 
probably intensive, expressing thorough- 
goingness; an entirely assured, steadfast 
expectation, persistent to the end. 

Ver. 6.—For in Jesus Christ (ἐν γὰρ Xpr- 
org ᾿Ιησοῦ); for tn Christ Jesus. “For;” 
to prove that it is from the ground of faith 
that we look for the final awards due to 
righteousness, and not from obedience +o 
any ceremonial law. “In Christ Jesus” 
means more than in Christ’s religion. We 
had the phrase above, ch. iii. 28, “ All ye 
are one man in Christ Jesus.” It occurs 
frequently in St. Paul’s writings; remark- 
able instances are supplied in Rom. xvi. 17, 
“who were in Christ before me;” ibid., 11, 
“which are in the Lord;” 1 Oor. i. 30, 
“of him [.9. of God] are ye in Christ 
Jesus.” It is, perhaps, best illustrated by 
our Lord’s own parable of the vine in John 
xv. 1—4. The spiritual union with Christ 
therein portrayed is maintained and opera- 
tive through the action of the soul habi- 
tually cleaving to and depending upon him, 
and constantly receiving from him respon- 
sive gifts of spiritual vitality and power. 
Neither circumcision availeth anything, 
nor uncircumocision; but faith which worketh 
by love (οὔτε περιτομή τι ἰσχύει, οὔτε ἀκρο- 
βυστία, ἀλλὰ πίστις δι᾽ ἀγάπης ἐνεργουμένη); 
neither circumcision availeth anything, nor 
uncircumeision ; but faith operative through 
love. In two other passages the apostle 
makes a very similar statement. One is 
below, ch. vi. 15, “For neither is circum- 
cision anything, nor uncircumcision, but a 
new creature.” The other is 1 Cor. vii. 19, 
which with its context runs thus: “ Was 
any one called being circumcised ? let him 
not become uncircumcised (μὴ ἐπισπάσθω). 
Hath any been called in uncircumcision ? 
let him not be circumcised. Circumcision 
is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing; 
but the keeping of the commandments of 
God.” The comparison of these three pas- 
sages suggests: (1) That the “availeth not 
anything” now before us is tantamount to 
the “neither is anything” and to the “is 
nothing” of the other two passages; and 
that the meaning in each case is that 
neither circumcision nor uncircumcision 
has any effect for good ; for since the anti- 
thetic affirmation in all three cases states 
what is effectual for good, it is obvious to 
infer that it was of a beneficial effect only 
that the apostle was thinking in the fore- 
going statement. (2) This leads to the 
question why “uncircumcision” should be 
thus repeatedly affirmed, twice to the Gala- 
tians, to be of no beneficial effect. More 


R 


242 THE EPISTLE TO 


THE GALATIANS. ἴσα. v. 1-26 


must be meant than a mere completing of 
the sentence by adding to the mention of 
“circumcision” the mention of its opposite. 
It is clear that there were those who ima- 
gined that uncircumcision mado a favour- 
able difference in men’s religious condition, 
just as there were others, like these Gala- 
tian reactionaries, who imagined that cir- 
cumcision did. That there were persons to 
be found in the Church who held the former 
view is put beyond doubt by the exhorta- 
tion, “ Let him not become uncircumcised,” 
which immediately precedes 1 Cor. vii. 19, 
now under review with the passage imme- 
diately before us; with reference to which 
exhortation comp. 1 Mace. i. 15; Josephus, 
‘Ant. xii. 5.1, It was in no such ways, 
the apostle tells them, that the Divine 
approval was to be either gained or secured ; 
and only mischief would result from enter- 
ing upon them. (3) The antithetic affirma- 
tion of what really ἐδ effectual for our 
spiritual well-being varies in the three 
passages; but it is natural to infer that 
that which in all three is declared to be the 
thing of vital importance, either is at bottom 
one and the same thing, or at least neces- 
sarily involves it. ‘“ Faith operative through 
love” must be identical with, or involve, 
“the keeping of the commandments of 
God,” and “a new creature.” <A close exa- 
mination of the first of these three sentences 
will show that it is so. The participle évep- 
γουμένη cannot be a passive, as Estius 
maintained; who even asserted a passive 
sense for the verb ἐνεργεῖσθαι in all the 
eight other passages in which it is found 
(Rom. vii. 5; 2 Cor. i, 6; iv. 12; Eph. 111. 
20; Col. i, 29; 1 Thess. ii. 13; 2 Thess. ii, 
7; Jas. v.16, In perhaps not one of these 
passages is a passive meaning probable; 
while in some of them, as Eph. iii. 20; Col. 
i. 29; 1 Thess. ii, 13, it is palpably in- 
admissible. In the case before us, if a pas- 
sive sense were admitted, we should have 
the expression, “faith wrought in us by 
love;” an account of the genesis of faith 
which must be judged to be in the strictest 
sense of the word preposterous. Faith does 
indeed grow and become perfected through 
love; but it is not in the first instance 
wrought in us by love, except indeed it be 
God’s love to us (Eph. ii. 4). In those pas- 
sages of the New Testament in which the 
verb ἐνεργεῖν occurs in the active voice 
(Matt. xiv. 2; Mark vi. 14; ch. ii. 8, twice; 
1 Cor. xii. 6, 11; Eph. i. 11, 20; ii. 2; 
Phil. ii. 13), the subject of the verb is a 
personal agent, or one which, as in Matt. 
xiv. 2 and Mark vi. 4, is probably spoken of 
as such. It is most commonly followed by an 
accusative of “Ὡς thiag wrought, which, 
however, is sometimes ieft te the reader to 
supply The middle voice appears in St. 


Paul always to have for its subject an im- 
personal agent (Winer, ‘Gram. N. T.,’ § 88, 
6); and such an agent is said ἐνεργεῖσθαι in 
the sense always of “ proving, acting out, 
its vitality and power,” and never of simply 
“doing” such and such things. It is no- 
where followed by an accusative. It is thus 
distinguished from ἐργάζομαι, which either 
is followed by an accusative of the work 
done or is used absolutely of “doing work,” 
asin Matt. xxi. 28; Rom. iv. 4,5; 1 Cor. 
iv. 12. The apostle, therefore, by the words, 
πίστις δι ἀγάπης ἐνεργουμένη, means, not 
“faith through love doing works of bene- 
ficence,” but “faith evincing its vitality 
and power through the love which it begets 
in us;” “faith by love operative and in- 
fluential.” Love ts not contemplated as a 
separate acting of the Spirit, added on to 
faith as it were by an extrinsic effort of the 
soul, but as a product of faith itself, by 
whiel: faith exerts its own internal energy. 
The apostle’s meaning becomes clearer if 
we consider the object on which the justify- 
ing faith of the Christian fastens. This 
the apostle describes in this Epistle δὲ 
Christ, ‘‘ who gave himself for our sins;” 
“who loved me and gave himself for me” 
(ch. i. 4; ii. 20). When this marvellous 
exhibition of Divine compassion and love is 
through faith in very deed caught sight of 
and realized, it naturally becomes a truth- 
power, exercising over the man an influence 
imperative and supreme. This was the 
apostle’s own experience; so much so that he 
seems to struggle with language while com-~ 
pelling it to describe the intensity of self- 
devotion with which it animated him. In 
this Epistle we may cite the passages ch. ii. 
20; vi. 14. And in other Epistles he writes 
in a similar strain. Let it suffice to cite 
2 Cor. v. 14, 15: “The love of Christ con- 
straineth us; because we thus judge, that 
one died for all, therefore all died; and he 
died for all, that they which live should no 
- longer live unto themselves, but unto him 
who for their sakes died and rose again; ” 
adding, in ver. 17, “ Wherefore if any man is 
in Christ, he is a new creature; ... all things 
are of God, who reconciled us to himself 
through Christ”—words which show what 
he meant by the “ new creature” mentioned 
below, ch. vi. 15. Thus the apostle evinces 
how in his own case faith through love be- 
came operative and influential. Christ’s 
love to himself, on being realized by him, 
awakened in his soul a sentiment of grateful 
affection to his Redeemer, which was so 
strong and influential as thenceforward to 
sway and regulate the whole of his life. To 
complete, however, our estimate of the 
apostle’s view of this matter, we must not 
forget to take account of the words “by the 


Spirit” in the preceding verse. The Spirit 


on. V. I—26.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


243 


alone can make even the love of Christ thus 
influential with our souls, which but for his 
quickening grace remain, even in sight of 
the cross, still numbed and cold. The accord- 
ance of the notion of “faith through love 
operative and influential” with tliat of a 
* new creature” has been already indicated ; 
and no other principle than this can enable 
us for the “keeping of the commandnients of 
God ;” and this does, and even constrains 
the soul to keep them. “ But,” it may be 
asked, “does the ordinary experience of 
Christian men and women as we see them 
bear out this representation? Is faith in their 
case thus operative and influential?” It 
would be foolish to say that it is; with the 
average, even of those Christians who make 
a religious life their most serious concern, 
itis not. And the case was no doubt the 
same with the average of Christian believers 
in the apostle’s own time. But this we can 
affirm: in proportion as our faith in Christ’s 
being our reconciling Redeemer is vivid 
and real, in that proportion is it energizing 
and transforming. It is in its own nature 
essentially love-inspiring and consecrating. 
It argues a miserable defect in our faith 
when we have to supplement, as we so often 
must, its vitalizing ‘power by injunctions 
and restraints of “the letter” and “the 
Law ;” so far as it is so with us, so far we 
live as “ bondmen” and not as “free.” If 
“the Son makes us free, then are we free 
indeed ;” and this is how he makes us free— 
he imparts to us the gift of love to himself; 
and that makes obedience to be uo longer a 
constrained service, but a very instinct of 
our nature. 

Vers. 7—12.—In these verses the language 
is remarkably curt and disjointed. Their 
atyle seems to betoken, either the mind of 
the writer musing in painful enbarrassment, 
uncertain how best to grapple with the case 
before him through imperfect knowledge of 
the circumstances (“ Who did hinder you?”); 
or, possibly, the painful effort which it cost 
the apostle to “ write with his own hand.” 
In ver. 13 he at length takes up a line of 
thought which he is able to follow on with 
fulness and fluency. 

Ver. 7.—Ye did run well (érpéxere καλῶ); 
full well ye were running. “To run” is a 
favourite figure with St. Paul, drawn from the 
foot-races of the Isthmian Games or other 
public games common throughout the Roman 
empire, and applied above (ch. ii. 2) to his 
own course of apostolic service, but here, as 
in 1 Cor. ix. 24—27; 2 Tim. iv. 17; and 
Phil. iii. 14, in a wider reference to the 
course of general Christian obedience. In 
vers. 5, 6 the apostle has indicated the 

roper character of w Christian believer's 
for as one which is animated by a faith 
om ‘gizing through love, and by the antici- 


‘love in believing (ch. iv. 14, 15). 


pation of attaining hereafter the awards to 
be rendered to the justified. Compare the 
general strain of thought, strikingly similar 
to that in the present context, pursued in 
Phil. iii. 12—14. Obviously, one important 
element in the comparison is the Christian’s 
forward advance in self-improvement, as 
well as his continuing prosecution of work 
for Christ’s cause. ‘These characteristics 
had, and not long before, marked the manner 
of life of the Galatian Christians. Upon 
the recurrence of this recollection, here 
again, as in ch. iii, 1—4; iv. 13—16, the 
apostle bewails the change that had tuken 
place. They had been so full of joy and of 
But now 
an incipient relinquishment of their hope in 
Christ had left them cheerless, and, in con- 
sequence, ready to look abroad in quest of 
other grounds of assured confidence; while 
also the thence ensuing conflicts of con- 
troversy and faction had marred their once 
happy mutual concord (ver. 15). The form 
of Christian life which the Galatian Church- 
men had in those days presented to view 
was apparently similar to that which at an 
earlier date he had described as marking 
the Thessalonian Church (1 Thess. i. 3), 
and at a later time applauds in the Colossian 
(Col. i, 4—6,8). Who did hinder you; or, 
who did drive you back (τίς ὑμᾶς ἐνέκοψε 
[Receptus, ἀνέκοψε)). The ἀνέκοψε of the 
Textus Receptus would mean, as in the 
margin of our English Bibles, “ Who has 
driven [or, ‘ beaten, struck’] you back,” and 
would be illustrated by the use of the verb 
in Wisd. xviii. 23, “Standing between, he 
beat back the wrath,” as Aaron did. But 
ἐνέκοψε is the reading of all recent editors. 
The precise meaning of ἐγκόπτω does not 
seem to be, as some suppose, “to stop,” but 
rather “to hamper, shackle, impede.” It 
occurs Acts xxiv. 4, “be tedious;” 1 Thess, 
ii. 18, “Satan hindered;” Rom. xv. 22 and 
1 Pet. iii. 7,‘ hindered.” So the substantive 
ἐγκοπή, 1 Cor. ix. 12, “That we may cause 
no hindrance to (clog the success of] the 
gospel.” Possibly this sense is derived 
from the hindrance caused to the traveller 
by the road being “cut into” or cut up 
before he goes over it. Bnt it is more 
probably connected with the use of κόπτω 
in the sense of “ worry,” as in Demosthencs, 
‘Olynth.,.’ ii. p. 22, Worried from time to 
time by these expeditions up and down.” So 
here, “ Who was it that clogged your steps 
in running your race?” Not positively 
“arrested your steps:” this digastrous 
result, it was to be hoped, waa not yet 
brought about; they were only as yet lagging 
in their course. This interrogation “ who’ 
does not so much demand that the evil 
worker shall be named and brought to 
light, as express the pity of it, that any one 


244 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


(ca. v. 1—26. 


should have been able to work them so much 
mischief; as in ch. iii. 1. Nevertheless, the 
author of the mischief had cause to tremble 
(sce ver. 12, and note). That ye should not 
obey the truth} (τῇ ἀληθείᾳ (T. Tr., Light- 
foot, omit the τῇ} μὴ πείθεσθαι;); that ye 
should not be hearkentng unto the truth (or, 
unto truth)? “The truth” directly cites the 
gospel; that is, the gospel which proclaims 
righteousness as theirs who believe in Clirist, 
apart from works of the ceremonial law; 
comp. ch. iii, 5, “That the truth of the 
gospel might continue with you,” the par- 
ticular phase of the gospel there intended 
being clearly evinced from the circumstances 
referred to. “Truth,” without the article, 
denoting “that which is true,” cites the 
same by implication. The verb πείθομαι, 
frequently rendered in the Authorized Ver- 
sion by ‘‘obey,” as Rom. ii. 8 and Heb. xiii. 
17, properly means to lend a compliant ear 
to advice or persuasion; “ to hearken,”’ as 
Acts v. 36, 37, 40; xxiii. 21; xxvii. 11. 
The apostle means that they were turning 
their ears away from the truth to listen to 
pernicious counsels or teaching. The verb 
is in the present tense with reference to the 
continued attention which they ought to be 
now giving to the gospel. 

Ver. 8.—This persuasion cometh not of 
him that calleth you (ἡ πεισμονὴ οὐκ ἐκ τοῦ 
καλοῦντος buas); this ρογϑααδίοη, or the mind to 
hearken to this doctrine, is not from him that 
calleth you. The exact force of the word 
πεισμονή, Which 80 far as has been noted 
does not eccur in any earlier writer, is dis- 
puted. We may group it with ἐπιλησμονή, 
forgetfulness; φεισμονή (sparingness), cle- 
mency; πλησμονή, fulness, satiety; which 
are likewise verbal nouns formed from the 
perfect passive (ἐπιλέλησμαι, etc.). And the 
comparison favours the conclusion that 
πεισμονή Genotes the disposition, state, or 
habit of mind evinced in being persuaded 
in the way now thought of. So the Greek 
commentators Cicumenius and Theophylact 
understand it of their having been persuaded 
to Judaize. The explanation of the noun 
as an active verbal, as if it were the per- 
suasion which was soliciting them from 
without, does not seem to be so well borne 
out by its etymological formation, but 
appears nevertheless to be that accepted by 
Chrysostom, This noun, seumingly not often 
used, appears to have been selected by the 
apostle to brand the belief in the truth of 
Judaizing views which the Galatians were 
imbibing as being in nature diverse from 
the πίστις, faith, which realizes the truth 
of the gospel; it is the product of over- 
persuasion, of cozenage even, rather than an 
acceptance of the plain setting forth of the 
simple truth, while “ faith” is “the gift of 
God” (Eph. i. 19,20; ii. 5,8). As Chryeos- 


tom observes, “It was not men’s persuasion 
(πεισμονὴ ἀνθρωπίνη), but the power of God, 
which persuaded the souls of those who 
believe.” By “him that calleth you” ia 
plainly meant God (comp. 1 Thess. ii. 12; 
v. 24), “The present participle is preferred 
here to the aorist, because the stress is laid 
on the person rather than the act” (Bishop 
Lightfoot), That persuasibleness of the 
Galatians was not from God; at the best it 
was from the world (comp. Col. ii. 20); but 
was it not, rather, from Satan, whose emis- 
saries those false teachers were (comp. 
2 Cor. xi, 15)? The apostle makes this 
assertion categorically, knowing it to be 
true. The gospel which he had brought to 
them had been sealed by the gifts of the 
Spirit accompanying its reception; while 
the doctrine they were now in danger of 
listening to was another thing altogether 
(ch. i. 6)—a thing with an anathema upon it. 

Ver. 9.—A little leaven leaveneth the 
whole lump (μικρὰ ζύμη ὅλον τὸ φύραμα 
(upot); ὦ {{{{16 leaven leaveneth the whole 
kneading. This proverb is cited again in 
precisely the same words in 1 Cor. v. 6, with 
the words prefixed, “know ye not that.” 
In both passages the leaven is an element 
of evil, and so also in Matt. xvi. 11; but our 
Lord applied it also to an element of good, 
which was to penetrate (apparently) the 
whole mass of humanity (Matt. xili. 33). 
What has the apostle precisely in his view 
as the leaven in the present instance? In 
1 Cor. v. 6 it is unchastity, which, if once 
tolerated in a Church, especially amid so 
licentious a population as that of Corinth, 
would be but too likely to impregnate bale- 
fully the sentiment of the whole community. 
And here likewise, as there, the leaven does 
not appear to denote, as some have supposed, 
the individuals in whom some noxious ele- 
ment was conspicuous, but that noxious 
element itself; namely, to judge from the 
colouring of the immediate context, the 
“readiness to hearken’’ to “ another gospel,” 
which was promising comfort and sense of 
acceptance, more or less, in the practice 
of at least some of the outward ordinances 
of Judaism. This leaven had already begun 
to work, embodying itself in the observance, 
pedantically and ostentatiously, of the days 
and feasts of the Jewish calendar (ch. iv. 
10). Now, a movement of mind manifesting 
itself in some form of extcrnal religionism, 
when once it begins to show itself in a 
Christian community, has a great tendency 
to spread. For always, in every Church, 
there are unstable souls, too often not a few, 
never able to come to the knowledge of the 
truth; which have never truly discerned 
Christ’s all-sufficiency for their spiritual 
needs, or have lost any superficial persuasion 
of it once enjoyed; and which, consciously 


ou, v. 1—26.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


245 


unsatisfied with what they as yet possess, 
and nevertheless only toying with spiritual 
things, are ready to adopt almost any novelty 
of religious behaviour offering itself for 
their acceptance. The particular form in 
which the external religionism of seekers 
after another gospel clothes itself varies 
according to varying tastes or circumstances. 
Among the Galatian Christians such persons 
were now beginning to feel attracted by 
that venerable kind of outward piety ex- 
hibited by devout or professedly devout 
Jews; but in their own practice committing 
the fatal blunder of mistaking the external 
shows of saintliness for the reality of saint- 
liness, and but too willing to make the 
former serve in lieu of the latter. The danger 
-of the leaven spreading was, in the ‘present 
ease, increased by the instability of character 
and the quick impulsiveness belonging to 
the Celtic temperament. The true antidote 
to this “leaven” is in every age the same; 
namely, that which the apostle in this 
Epistle strives to administer—the gospel of 
the righteousness and Spirit of Christ 
erucified. 

Ver. 10.—I have confidence in you through 
the Lord (ἐγὼ πέποιθα εἰς ὑμᾶς ἐν Κυρίῳ); I 
for my own part have confidence with respect 
to you in the Lord. The pronoun ἐγὼ pre- 
fixed to the verb, perhaps, distinguishes the 
writer from some about him, particularly 
those who had just before brought that un- 
favourable report of the state of affairs in 
Galatia which had prompted the writing of 
this letter. The apostle has himself a vivid 
remembrance of their warm-hearted accept- 
ance of his message (ch. iv. 13—15), and of 
their sufferings in the good cause (ch. iii. 4). 
“ Have confidence with respect to you.” The 
prepcsition εἰς is used as in 2 Cor. viii. 22, 
equivalently with ἐπὶ in 2 Cor. ii. 3 and 2 
Thess. iii. 4; in which last passage (“We 
have confidence in the Lord touching you”), 
as well as in Phil. ii. 24 (“1 have confidence 
in the Lord that I myself shall come 
shortly”), the phrase, “in the Lord,” ex- 
presses, not the object of trust, but the 
sphere of consciousness in which he is able 
to feel this confidence. So also here, in the 
realized presence of the Lord Jesus, the 
apostle feels that his care for his people, 
and his faithfulness towards those in whom 
“he has begun a good work” so conspicu- 
ously as in their case, warrant him in 
entertaining 8. strong assurance that, after 
all, they would not disappoint his hopes 
(comp. Phil i. 6; 1 Thess. ν. 24). This ex- 
pression of confidence implies, of course, a 
measure of underlying apprehension; while 
it is also in effect an admonition, couched 
in an affectionate form, designed to rally 
them back to thcir true allegiance. The 
phrase, “with respect to you,” separates 


their case from that of any who wera 
“troubling them;” kindly implying that, in 
the main, they were still unperverted. That 
ye will be none otherwise minded (ὅτι οὐδὲν 
ἄλλο φρονήσετε); that is, that your senti- 
ments will continue, or will be found to be, 
such as I have been setting forth as those 
inspired by the gospel, and such as you 
once manifestly entertained. The future 
tense of the verb seems to point forward ta 
the time when his appeal should have 
reached them, and have led them to bethink 
themselves as to what, in spite of perhaps 
some momentary superficial wavering, their 
sentiments at bottom really were. (or the 
sense of the verb φρονεῖν, comp. Acts xxviii. 
22; Phil. iii. 15.) But he that troubleth you 
(ὁ δὲ ταράσσων ὑμᾶς); but he that is troubling 
you. “But:” indicating that, even if such 
@ person’s machinations proved abortive, 
through their steady adherence to the 
gospel, that man should receive his deserts 
none the less. In ch.i. 7 we had “There 
are some that trouble you.” Comparing the 
two expressions, the one in the singular 
number, the other in the plural, we may 
conclude, either that the phrase ὁ ταράσσων 
designates any one who shall be found 
falling under the description of a ταράσσων, 
f.e, any one of those referred to in the 
plural number ; or that it points to one par- 
ticular individual on whom the apostle had 
his eye as the prime ringleader of the rest. 
If we adopt the first view, the clause, “ who- 
soever he be,” appears to mark the absolute- 
ness of the resolve expressed by the apostle, 
while leaving in indefiniteness the individual 
to whom it would apply. With the second 
view, the same clause would offirm that no 
circumstances attaching to the offender, 
such as (suppose) a mission from leading 
Churchmen in Jerusalem, or official eminence 
in a Galatian Ohurch, or any other, should 
shield him, as he or others might suppose 
that it would, from the effect of the sentence 
to be pronounced upon him. The second 
seems the more probable view; and, in 
unison with it, it appears supposable that 
the hypothetical case stated in ch. i. 7 (“if 
we or an angel from heaven”) had an eye 
to the eminent position held by the person 
here alluded to, This individualization of 
the threatening would make it the more 
telling when the letter should arrive—a 
thunder-clap bursting forth upon the head 
of that arch-troubler, Shall bear his juds- 
ment, whosoever he be (βαστάσει τὸ κρίμα, 
ὅστις ἂν ἢ). With the phrase, βαστάζειν 
κρίμα, compare λαμβάνειν κρίμα in Luke xx. 
47; Rom. xiii. 2; Jas. iii. 1. “Shall bear,” 
as a heavy burden (comp. ch. vi. 2, 5). The 
κρῖμα shall be laid upon him, and carry it 
he shall, whether he will or no. The κρίμα, 
judgment, is the “sentence;” the deci 


248 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 


Lou. v. 1—26 


sion of the judge upon his conduct, and 
the consequent punishment, The apostle 
threatens that he will bring into exercise 
the “power” which, as he says in 2 Cor. xiii. 
10, the Lord had given him for the edifi- 
cation of his people, and the use of which 
would be accompanied by consequences 
proving that “ Christ was speaking in him” 
(ibid., 2, 8). Instances of its exercise are 
seen in 1 Cor. v. 4, 5; 1 Tim. i. 20; Acts 
xiii. 11. How grievous was this offender’s 
guilt has been strongly declared by the 
“anathema” of ch, 1. 7—9. 

Ver. 11.—And I, brethren (ἐγὼ δέ, ἀδελ- 
gol); but tn respect to myself, brethren. The 
personal pronoun is again accentuated. It 
seems that it had been affirmed by some one, 
most probably that individual “ troubler” of 
the preceding verse (on which account the 
point is just here mentioned), that the 
apostle did himself “ preach circumcision.” 
The compellation “ brethren” has a tone of 
pathos in it: it appeals, not merely to their 
kuowledge of his experience of persceution, 
but to their eympuathy with him under it. 
He is grappling to himself, as it were, the 
better-minded of those he is writing to. If 
I yet preach ciroumcision (εἰ περιτομὴν ἔτι 
κηρύσσων); €f I am still preaching circum- 
cision. The phrase, “ preach circumcision,” 
ie like that of “preaching the baptism of 
repentance” in Mark i.4; it denotes openly 
declaring that men should be circumcised. 
The force of ἔτι is best explained by suppos- 
ing that the apostle is quoting the assertion 
of this gainsayer—‘“ Why, Paul himself up 
to this hour still preaches circumcision, just 
as he did when he followed Judaism.” And 
taking it thus, we may discern a shade of 
irony in the apostle’s repeating the ἔτι in 
his reply: “Why, then, am 1 still per- 
secuted up to this hour?” He had begun 
to be the object of persceution as soon as he 
began to preach Christ, as he pathetically 
reminds the Corinthians (2 Cor. xi. 32; cf. 
Acts ix. 24). In trying to imagine how this 
gainsayer could have given the least colour 
of probability to so audacious an assertion, 
we may suppose that he would point to St. 
Paul’s behaviour at Jerusalem, and no doubt 
elsewhere, when he “ to the Jews became as 
a Jew; to those under the Law as under 
the Law” (1 Cor. ix. 20); and in alk pro- 
bability, as Chrysostom and others have 
observed, cited the well-known fact of his 
cireumcising Timothy; and there doubtless 
were other facts of a similar complexion, 
all which, with a little distortion, might 
enable an unscrupulous or a merely very 
eager opponent to dress up a statement like 
that ‘before us with a certain amount of 
plausibleness. Why do I yet suffer per- 
secution? (τί ἔτι διώκομαι ;); why am 1 still 
persecuted? The apostle distinctly implies 


(1) that his persecutions were mainly oe- 
easioned by the hostility of the Jews; and 
(2) that the hostility of the Jews mainly 
originated in his teaching the doctrine that 
the cross of Obrist put circumcision, toge- 
ther with the observance of the Law of 
Moses, aside as terms of acceptance with 
God. The first point is fully borne out by 
the history of the Acts and various allusions 
in the Epistles, showing that the fact waa 
so, both before and after the time when this 
letter was written. The second is perfectly 
consistent with the history, and alone fully 
explains it. Then is the offence of the oross 
ceased (ἄρα κατήργηται τὸ σκάνδαλον τοῦ 
σταυροῦ); then the stumbling-block of the cross 
hath been done away. ‘Uhe stumbling-block 
of the cross is that which makes the cross 
a stumbling-block. In 1 Cor. i. 23 “ Christ 
erucified” is designated as “to the Jews a 
stumbling-block ;” while to Gentilcs it sim- 
ply seemed “folly.” Then” follows up 
an argument ex absurdo, as in 1 Cor. xv. 14, 
18. The apostle means that the cross 
would not be to Jews the stumbling-block 
that it was if it had been preached in con- 
junction with the obligatoriness of cireum- 
cision together with the observance of the 
ceremonial law, upon those who believed 
in Christ. If, then, he had preached Christ 
crucified thus, he could not have been so 
offensive to the Jews. But it was all uther- 
wise. It has been supposed that the notion 
of a crucified Messiah was offensive to 
Jewish feeling, merely because it ran 
counter to their conception of the Christ as 
a secular king and conqueror. St. Paul’s 
words show that this was not the case. 
That preconception of the Jews no doubt 
made it dificult to them to believe in the 
Jesus whose worldly career had been closed 
by an early violent death; even as before 
our Lord’s passion it had made it difficult 
to the apostles to believe that he was thus 
to die. But after the question whether the 
Christ was predestined to beasuffering Christ 
(Acts xxvi. 23) had been discussed, and it 
had been shown from the Old Tvstament 
that the Messiah was to suffer before he 
should reign, it had yet to be determined in 
what relation the particular form of Jesus’ 
death stood with respect to the Mosaic Law. 
Gentiles would naturally think ot the cross 
chietly, indeed solely, as a sign of extremest 
ignominy; they thought scorn ef the Chris- 
tians who looked for life from “ this Master 
of theirs, who was crucified” (Lucian) 
But to Jews, with the habits of feeling to 
which they had been trained in the school of 
Moses’ Law, the cross was more than a sign of 
extremest ignominy—to them it was a sign 
also of extremest pollutedness. Now, to the 
Apostle Paul it had been given to see, with 
more distinctness than the general body of 


cu. v. 1—26.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


247 


believers at Jerusalem appear to have seen 
it, the inference to which the finger of 
Divine providence pointed in the particular 
form of death which, in the counsels of God, 
had been selected for the Christ to suffer 
(cf John xviii. 32). He had seen that faith 
in the crucified Saviour, by just consequence 
and in the Divine purpose, disconnected 
those, who embraced it as the supreme 
element of spiritual life, from all obligation 
to the ceremonial law as viewed in relation 
to their acceptance with God (ch. ii. 19, and 
note). And because he held forth this truth, 
‘and insisted upon its vital importance in 
determining the mutual relations of Jew 
and Gentile in the Christian Church, there- 
fore it was that he drew upon himself the 
peculiar unrelenting enmity with which the 
Jews pursued him. They could manage to 
live on terms of peace with their fellow-Jews 
at Jerusalem who held that the Christ 
predicted in the Old ‘Il'estament was to be, 
in the first instance, a suffering Christ, and 
trusted in Jesus as fulfilling those pre- 
dictions; for they saw that they, while 
believing in Jesus, continued, as St. James 
told St. Paul all of them did, to observe and 
to be zealous for the Law (Acts xxi. 20); 
they were able, therefore, in some degree to 
tolerate their “heresy.” But St. Paul was 
led by the Saviour of all the world to adopt 
a different line. The truth, which lay 
wrapped up in the manner of Christ’s death, 
and which at Jerusalem was left, so to 
speak, in its latency, it became necessary 
for the welfare of mankind that Paul should 
bring forth into view, and apply for the 
doing of the work which it was designed to 
accomplish. The cross annihilated the 
obligatoriness upon God’s people of the Law 
of Moses. And, by teaching this, this apostle 
revived against himself the animosity which 
had flamed forth so fiercely upon St. Stephen, 
who was charged with saying that “Jesus the 
Nazarene was to chanve the customs which 
Moses had delivered unto them.” It illus- 
trates the economy which marks the Holy 
Spirit’s development of revealed truth in 
the consciousness of the Church, that this 
consequence of the crucifixion of our Lord 
was for a while left so much in abeyance in 
the mother Church in Judea. ‘I'he fact 
stands on the same footing as the develop- 
ment of the doctrine of the ésxential Godhead 
of the Lord Jesus; for this too would seem 
to have been not at once and by an abrupt 
illumination brought distinctly home to the 
eonsciousuess of the Hebrew Church, but to 
have been deposited like a seed in its bosom 
to unfold itself gradually. It seemed meet 
to the Divine Wisdom to cradle the infant 
faith tenderly, that it should not be ex- 
posed to too great risks through want of 
sympathy on the part of its first nursing 


mother towards these two of its most impor- 
tant elements, By-and-bye, when circum- 
stances allowed, the same great apostle, who 
in his Epistle develops the doctrine of the 
cross in relation to Mosaism, could with 
advantage address the Hebrew Church, 
either himself or through another whom he 
inspired with his thoughts, that Epistle, in 
which the Godhead of Jesus is proclaimed 
with as much clearness and emphasis as the 
dissolution of the Mosaic institute in face of 
the new spiritual economy. ‘The Epistle to 
the Hebrews, however, in proving that the 
new covenant was superseding the old, docs 
not lay the chief stress of the argument upon 
the Crucifixion, but upon tho utter unavail- 
ingness of the Mosaic priestly functions for 
the clearing of the conscience as compared 
with the efficacy of Christ’s one offering. 
Nevertheless, the other point is not altogether 
neglected ; at least, a Kindred argument is 
suggested in Heb. xiii. 10—13, in which 
passage contact with Clrist as suffering 
without the camp is spoken of as inferring 
a pollution which was incompatible with 
“serving the tabernacle.” The “cross” is 
definitely named only once, and that with 
relation to extreme “ shame” attaching to it 
(Heb. xii. 2). In other Epistles which are 
certainly of St. Paul’s own composition, the 
“eross” is mentioned in connection with 
the abrogation of the ceremonial law, in 
Eph. ii. 16; Col. i. 20; ii. 14; but the 
manner in which it brought about this result 
is nowhere so plainly indicated as in this 
Epistle to the Galatians, in which “the 
cross” is the very key-note of the whole 
discussion, The flashing out of resentful 
feeling which we read in the next verse was 
probably in part evoked by the clear glimpse 
which the apostle this moment caught of 
the eonscious insincerity of those seducera, 
shown in their making or adopting such an 
assertion respecting himself as he here re- 
nee which facia proved to be so glaringly 
alse. 

Ver. 12.—I would they were even out off 
which trouble you (ὄφελον καὶ ἀποκόψονται 
oi ἀναστατοῦντες ὑμᾶς); would to God they 
would make themselves even as the apocopi of 
Cybele (Greek, would even mutilate them- 
selves), who are casting you out of country 
and home! The word ὄφελον, originally a 
verb, had got, thus stripped of its augment, 
to be a mere particle of wishing. Its sense 


. with an indicative aorist is seen 1 Cor. iv. 8, 


“Operdy ye ἐβασιλεύσατε, “Would to God ye 
had come to your kingship [which is far 
from being really the case yet !];” Exod. xvi 
3; Numb. xiv. 2; xx. 3(Septuazint),“Ogeror 
ἀπεθάνομεν, “ Would to God we had died!” 
with an indicative imperfect, 2 Cor. xi. 1, 
Ὄφελον ἀνείχεσθέ μου μικρὸν ἀφροσύνης, 
“Would to God ye were [ἐ.6. could be}tolerant 


248 THE EPISTLE TO 


THE GALATIANS. (on. v. 1—26, 


of a little foolishness of mine! [might I hope 
for it?];” Rev. iti. 15,”Operov ψυχρὸς ἧς, eto, 
“ Would that thou wert cold,” ete. With an 
indicative fetwre (an extremely rare com- 
bination), it may still be regarded as ex- 
pressing a longing that something might bo 
locked forward to, which in reality is not 
to be anticipated; different from a simple 
desire that a thing may be, unaccompanied 
by the feeling that it cannot be, which is its 
force with an optative, as in Ps. cxix. 5. 
The tone of especially fervid aspiration, the 
vivacity, which usually marks wishes intro- 
duced by ὄφελον, is perhaps unduly tamed 
down by the rendering “I would that.” 
In respect to the verb ἀποκόψονται, Greek 
scholars are pretty well agreed that the 
passive rendering of our Authorized Version, 
“were cut off,” cannot be defended. There 
is no certain instance (Bishop Ellicott 
remarks) of a similar interchange of the 
middle voice with the passive. The sense 
of the verb is shown by the Septuagint 
rendering of Deut. xxiii. 1, Οὐκ εἰσελεύσεται 
θλαδίας καὶ ἀποκεκομμένος eis ἐκκλησίαν Θεοῦ : 
where the word ἀποκεκομμένος answers to the 
Hebrew kerith shdphkah, rightly rendered 
in the Vulgate and in our English Bible 
(cf. Gesenius’s ‘ Thesaurus,’ and First, under 
shdphkah). “This meaning is assigned to 
é&roxdpoyvra,? observes Bishop Lightfoot, 
“by all the Greek commentators, I believe, 
without exception (the Latin Fathers, who 
read ‘abscindantur’ in their text had more 
latitude), and seems alone tenable.” (See 
Grotius, in Poole’s ‘ Synopsis.’) This inter- 
pretation gives its full force to καί (“not 
only circumcise, but even,” etc.) : it explains 
the form of the aspiration as one not likely 
to be realized; whereas the excision from 
the Church of these extremely aberrant 
members, falling nearly if not quite under 
she anathema of the first chapter, was a 
thing quite within the apostle’s own power: 
it harmonizes with the intense resentment 
which colours the phrase, of ἀναστατοῦντες 
ὑμᾶς (sce below). ‘The sentiment, it is 
true, seems one which it would be impos- 
sible for ἃ public speaker, or even a writer, 
amongst ourselves to give such open ex- 
pression to. Nevertheless, when viewed 
as framed in amid the surroundings which 
environed it at the time, it wears none of 
that aspect of coarseness which would 
eonfessedly be felt to attach to it under the 
conditions of modern life. That the worship 
of Cybele at Pessinus, one of the principal 
cities of Galatia, was deformed by the 
practice of such self-mutilation on the part 
of some of its devotees, was a matter of 
universal notoriety, and we may confidently 
assume that the apostle, when in the neigh- 
bourhood, heard frequent mention of those 
apocopt as they were called, and thus was 


led now to allude to it as he seems to do 
in this malediction. For it 78a malediction, 
as Chrysostom describes it; a malediction, 
however, which in severity falle far short of 
the anathema which has been previously 
pronounced. Good were it (he means) for 
the Church, and even perhaps themselves, if 
they would have the rashness to goa little 
further with what they call “ circumcision,” 
which in their case is mere concision (Phil. iii. 
2), and make it clear to all men how 
purely senseless and unchristian their action 
in this matter is. “Casting you out of 
country and home.” The verb ἀναστατοῦν 
occurs besides only in Acts xvii. 6 (“ turned 
upside down”) and Acts xxi. 38 (“madest 
an uproar”). It is not found in classical 
Greek, in which we have in its stead 
ἀναστάτους ποιεῖν or τιθέναι : the verhal ad- 
jective ἀνάστατος, when it is applied, as 
it frequently is, to populations, meaning, 
“made to rise up and depart,” “driven 
from house and home;” applied to cities, 
“ruined,” “laid waste” (Liddell and Scott). 
Chrysostom observes, ‘ Well does he say, 
ἀναστατοῦντες ὑμᾶς : for they compelled 
them to abandon their own proper country 
end liberty and heavenly kindred, and to 
seek an alien and strange one; casting 
them out of ‘Jerusalem which is above and 
free,’ and forcing them to wander abroad 
as captives and perforce emigrants.” The 
present tense of the participle points to 
the action of these perverters as one which, 
if successful, would have this result; which 
(ver. 10) the apostle hopes to defeat. The 
selection of this particular verb, which goes 
far beyond the ταράσσοντες before used, 
and which the word “unsettle” adopted 
here by the Revisers, does not, as commonly 
used, completely represent, betokens the 
apostle’s intense feeling of the ruinous 
consequences of the proposed Judaizing 
reaction. It shows that he adds the words 
stiologically, that is, to justify his strong 
words, ὄφελον ἀποκόψονται. The energy of 
both expressions suggests the feeling that 
probably the apostle would not have written 
as he has here done except for his burning 
resentment on behalf of Christ’s people 
threatened with so great a hurt. In 1 Cor. 
vi. 4 indignant feeling carries him away 
beyond himself to an utterance which in 
the next verse he virtually retracts, remark- 
ing, “I say it to move you to shame.” 
Perhaps we have here something of the 
same kind. 

Ver. 13.—For, brethren, ye have been 
called unto liberty (ὑμεῖς γὰρ ἐπ᾽ ἐλευθερίᾳ 
ἐκλήθητε, ἀδελφοί) ; for ye, brethren, were 
called unto (Greek, for) freedom. The 
“for” points back to the elosing words 
of the preceding verse, which implied a 
settled state of well-being from which those 


cu. vw. I—26.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


249 


troublers were driving his readers; that 
happy state (the apostle says) was the very 
glory and essence of their “calling.” ‘This, 
of course, was that condition of free men 
described at the end of the foregoing 
chapter, and summarized in the first verse 
of this chapter. This is again, even more 
briefly, recapitulated in the first clause of 
the present verse. As the summary in the 
first verse supplied a starting-point for the 
warnings against the Judaizers which have 
taken up the foregoing twelve verses, 80 
this new summary furnishes the starting- 
point for exhortations designed to guard 
the evangelical doctrine against antinomian 
perversion, by insisting upon the moral 
behaviour required of those who enjoy the 
freedom which Christ gives. These ex- 
hortations occupy the remainder of this 
chapter and a part of the next. “Ye,” 
being what ye are, believers baptized into 
Christ. The verb “ were called” expresses 
a complete idea, meaning of itself without 
any adjunct, “called by God to be people 
of his own” (cf. “calleth,” ver. 8, and the 
passages there cited). The words, “ unto,” 
or “ for, freedom,” supply an adjunct notion; 
as in Eph. iv. 4, the clause, “in one hope 
of your calling,” does to the same verb. 
So again 1 Thess. iv. 7,“ For God called us, 
not unto (or, ‘for’] uncleanness, but in sancti- 
fication.” The preposition ἐπί, both in the 
passage last cited and in the present verse, 
denotes the condition or understanding 
upon which God had called them: they 
were “called” upon the understanding 
that they should be in a state of liberty. 
So Eph. ii. 10, “Created in Christ Jesus 
unto [Greek, ‘for’] good works.” God calls 
us in Christ to be free in these three 
respects: (1) free from condemnation and 
conscience of guiltiness; (2) free from pupil- 
age to a ceremonial institute of positive, 
carnal ordinances, and from bondage to a 
letter-Law; (3) free, as consciously his 
children, knit to him by his adopting Spirit, 
which makes us partakers of his nature. 
Only use not liberty for an occasion to the 
flesh (μόνον ph τὴν ἐλευθερίαν εἰς ἀφορμὴν 
τῆς σαρκό5); only, no freedom which shall be 
an occasion to the fiesh! or, only, make not 
your freedom into an occasion for the flesh. 
The noun ἐλευθερίαν, being in the accusative, 
cannot be taken as simply a resumption of 
the ἐλευθερίᾳ immediately before. In his 
eagerness to at once bar the antinomian’s 
abuse of the gospel, the apostle omits the 
verb which should account for this accusa- 
tive; and the result is a sentence which 
may be taken as grouping with various 
passages in classical Greek authors, being 
in fact quite a natural way of speaking in 
any language; such as in Demosthenes, 
‘Phil, i p. 45, “ No ten thousand. . . mer- 


cenaries for mo! (μή μοι μυριόυς ... ξένους); 
Sophocles, ‘ Ant.,’ 573, “ No more loiterings! 
but... (uh τριβὰς ἔτ᾽ ἀλλά... .); ” Aristo~ 
phanes, ‘ Ach..,’ 326, “ No false pretences for 
me, but... (μή μοι πρόφασιν, ἀλλά...) In 
such cases it simply weakens the vivacity of 
the style, if we supply any verb. he alter- 
native rendering supplies δῶτε, which is in 
fact found in two uncial manuscripts, F, G, 
or ἀποχρήσησθε, proposed by CGaicumeniug 
In the former way of construing we have 
in thought to supply a second τὴν after 
ἐλευθερίαν, as in 1 Cox. x. 18, Βλέπετε τὸν 
Ἰσραὴλ κατὰ odpra: 2 Cor. vii. 7; Col. i. 8; 
Eph. ii. 15. The preposition εἰς is used as 
Rom. xi. 9; 1 Cor. xiv. 22, ete. The 
sense of the noun ἀφορμή, starting-point, is 
well illustrated by its use, in the military 
language of. Greece, for a ‘ basis of opera- 
tions” (cf. Rom. vii. 8, 11; 2 Cor. v. 12; 
1 Tim. v. 14). Reflection at once shows us 
that a “freedom” which allows a man to 
obey the behests of his lower nature is only 
by a false use of the term capable of being 
grouped with that freedom wherewith Christ 
makes us free. It adopts out of the latter 
the single element of emancipation from 
ceremonial law and lotter-Law, and lets 
go altogether the concomitant notions of 
spiritual emancipation which are of ils 
very cssence. Such an emiancipation hands 
its victim clean over to the thraldom of sin 
(John viii. 34; 2 Pet. ii, 18, 19). St. 
Peter, in his First Epistle, addressed to a 
large group of Churches founded by St. 
Paul, including those of Galatia, has a 
number of passages which apparently take 
up sentiments and even expressions found 
in St. Paul’s writings (see 1 Pet. v. 12), as 
it were, ratifying them; and possibly he has 
an eye tothe present verse when he writes 
(1 Pet. ii. 16), ‘as free, and not using your 
freedom for a cloak of wickedness, but as 
bond-servants of God.” “ The flesh” is nut 
to have its own way, but is to own the 
mastery of the Spirit. But by love serve 
one another (ἀλλὰ διὰ τῆς ἀγάπης δουλεύετε 
ἀλλήλοις); but through love be in bondage to 
one another; i.e. let love make you bond- 
servants to one another. The verb δουλεύω 
also means “do acts of bond-service,” as 
Eph. vi. 7 and 1 Tim. vi. 2. This sense 
is included in the “being in bondage” here 
spoken of. In the present posture of affairs 
in these Churches, the apostle sees occasion 
for selecting just here one particular branch 
of Christian goodness to enforce upon their 
observance. Presently after (vers. 16—21) 
he enlarges the field of view; though even 
there still giving much prominence to the 
vices of malignity and to the benignant 
virtues. Just now he has his eye especially 
on the evils of contentiousness (ver. 15), 
and upon love as their corrective. We may 


250 THE EPISTLE TO 


THE GALATIANS. [ow. v. 1—26. 


suppose such evils were now especially 
rife amongst the Gulatians, whose natural 
character, commonly described as quarrel- 
some, wus apparently evincing itsclf in 
connection with the disputes which the 
teaching and yet more the outward action 
of the Judaizers were giving rise to. In 
fact, a loving temper of mind, along with 
other benefits, is recommended also by this, 
that it guards Ohurches from corrupting 
innovitions in doctrine and Chureh practice; 
checking our self-will and our obtrusive 
vanity, it leads us to avoid giving uneasi- 
ness to others by thrusting upon them new 
notions or new modes of conduct, and makes 
it our ambition to keep the unity of the 
Spirit in the bond of peace. The pattern 
aet by our Lord (John xiii, 15), both in 
washing his disciples’ feet and indeed in 
his whole incarnate life (Phil. ii. 7), was 
grandly imitated by the apostle himself 
(1 Cor. ix. 19—22), who in outward things 
habitually sacrificed the pride of inde- 
pendence and self-assertion, and the pride 
of apparent self-consistency, in his devotion 
to the spiritual welfare of men. He here 
preaches just what he himself practised. 
Ver. 14.—For all the Law is fulfilled in 
one word, even in this; Thou shalt love thy 
neighbour as thyself (ὁ yap πᾶς νόμος ἐν ἑνὶ 
λόγῳ πεπλήρωται [Receptus, πληροῦται], ἐν 
τῷ, ᾿Αγαπήσεις τὸν πλησίον σον ὡς σεαυτόν 
(Receptus, ἑαυτόν) ; for the whole Law hath 
tn one word been fulfilled, even in this, Thou 
shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. Thus is 
very briefly enunciated what in the Epistle 
to the Romans (xiii. 8—10), written a 
short while after, the apostle more fully 
develops thus: “Owe no man anything, 
save to love one another for he that loveth 
his neighbour hath fulfilled (πεπλήρωκε) the 
Law. For this, Thou shalt not commit 
adultery, Thou shalt not kill, Thou shalt 
not steal, Thou shalt not covet, and if there 
be any other commandment, it is summed 
up (ἀνακεφαλαιοῦται) in this word, namely, 
Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. 
Love worketh no ill to his neighbour: love 
therefore is the fulfilment (πλήρωμα) of the 
Law.” This passage of the Romans may be 
regarded es a lengthened paraphrase of 
tle one now before us. From the com- 
parison of the two, several things are made 
clear. We see from it what is meant by the 
πεπλήρωται, “hath been fulfilled.” Some 
have been disposed to regard it as equivalent 
to ἀνακεφαλαιοῦται, “it is summed up.” Not 
to urge that it is very doubtful whether the 
verb admits of this sense, it is enough to 
okserve that in the parallel passage the 
verb πληροῦν, both in πεπλήρωκε, hath ful- 
filled, and the verbal πλήρωμα, fulfilment, 
means to fulfil in actual obedience; and that 
the perfect tense of the κεπλήρωται of this 


passage reappears in the πεπλήρωκε of the 
other, The sentence in Romans, “ He that 
loveth his neighbour (τὸν ἕτερον) hath ful- 
filled the Law,” that is, as the context 
shows, “the whole Law,’ makes it clear 
that, by the words before us, “the whole 
Law hath been fulfilled in one word,” is 
meant that the whole Law hath been ful- 
filled in the fulfilling of the one word, “Thou 
shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.” The 
whole Law is regarded as couched in that 
“one word.” In the larger passage the 
Law, so far as it is explained, is represented 
as regulating our behaviour to our neigh- 
bours, for the apostle cites exclusively com- 
mandments of the “second table;”’ in addition 
to which, we observe that the immediately 
preceding context (vers. 1—7) is taken up 
with the discussion of duties to our fellow- 
men, sliding into what follows through the 
words, “ Owe no man anything, save to love 
one another.” This suggests the inference 
that when the apostle says, “‘ He that loveth 
hath fulfilled the Law;” and at the close 
of the paragraph, “ Love is the fulfilment of 
the Law,” he has in view that part only of 
the Law which enforces the duties apper- 
taining to human relationships, and not the 
whole Law as enforcing, together with these, 
the duties we owe to God; for “love,” he 
says, “is the fulfilment of the Law, because 
it worketh no evil to his neighbour.” And 
this might seem further to justify the like 
inference with reference to the passage 
before us; and here also the immediate con- 
text (ver. 13) points only to relations be- 
tween man and man, making no reference 
to our relations towards God. And this 
inference we secm warranted in accepting. 
Only, we have to bear in mind that the 
apostle Has already taken account of our 
spiritual relations to God, in stating (ver. 6) 
that in Christ Jesus the all-important and 
only thing is faith working through love, 
For the faith which he means is plainly the 
principle which unites the soul to Christ 
Jesus, and in him to God as our reconciled 
Father, through the vitalizing and actuating 
power of the Spirit of adoption. And pre. 
cisely the same consideration presents itself 
with respect to the parallel passage in the 
Romans; for there, too, the apostle has been 
previously engaged in building up the gos- 
pel doctrine of Christ’s redeeming us from 
the control of a condemning Law, which is 
also mere “etter,” and can give no spiritual 
life; and of his handing us over to the law 
of the Spirit of life, whereby the require- 
ment of the Law is fultilled in them who 
walk, not after tlie flesh, but after the Spirit 
(Rom. viii. l1—4). The apostle takes it for 
granted that it is with these views in their 
minds that his readers will receive what he 


here writes. Further, account is to be 


cu. v. 1—26,] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 


261 


taken of the spiritual sense in which the 
apostle uses the terms “law” and “ love.” 
Under the term “law” he no longer in- 
tends the Law of Moses, either as a cere- 
monial institute or as a letier-Law regulating 
moral behaviour; but that higher and 
spiritual law, of which the precepts of the 
letter-Law are only incomplete hints or 
adumbrations—the good and acceptable and 
perfect will of God (Rom. xii. 2). Likewise, 
by the term “love” he designates a very 
different thing from that principle of kind- 
ness, good nature, benevolence, which an 
Aristotle or Cicero, an Epictetus or Plu- 
tarch, could conceive and describe, and in 
their-own practice exemplify; with St. 
Paul, as with St. John, it is a fruit of the 
Spirit, an emanation of Christ’s life in the 
soul, orvanically and vitally ramifying out 
of filial love to God. They that were in the 
flesh could not please God. In order that 
we may fulfil the Law, the prime and in- 
dispensable requisite is that the Spirit of 
Christ be dwelling in us and leading us, 

Ver. 15.—But if ye bite and devour one 
another, take heed that ye be not consumed 
one of another (εἰ δὲ ἀλλήλους δάκνετε Kad 
κατεσθίετε, βλέπετε μὴ ὑπὸ GAAR wy ἄναλω- 
θῆτε); but éf ye be biting and eating up one 
axother, take heed that 
another utterly destroyed. “ Biting” and 
“euting up” are images drawn from car- 
nivorouy animals furiously fighting with 
each other. The verb κατεσθίειν, eat up, 
which in 2 Cor. xi. 20 and Matt. xxiii. 14 15 
applied to the eating up of a neighbour's 
gvods, is here employed in its more literal 
sense, in order to furnish a figure describing 
that intense desire to vex and damage an 
antagonist, which but too often disgraces 
the so-called religious controversialist or 
partisan. The verb ἀναλίσκω, utterly de- 
stroy, occurs besides only in Luke ix. 54 and 
2 Thess. ii. 8, of destruction by fire or light- 
ning; so the compound κατανάλισκον, Heb. 
xii. 29. It points to another sphere of hurt 
than that referred to in the two foregoing 
verbs; for while these latter describe the 
eager endeavour to sting and “run down” 
a theological opponent, the former de- 
scribes the utter laying waste of the inward 
life of piety. The orthodox opinion may 
survive, and perhaps be even made clearer 
and more accurate; but the kernel of filial 
love and joy in God, and of love towards our 
brethren, may by the φιλονεικία, the bitter 
antagonism, of controversy have got to be 
altogether eaten out. A Christian disciple 
who has ceased to love, Christ teaches us, is 
salt which has lost its savour—utterly refuse 
and hopeless of recovery (Mark ix. 50). 

Ver. 16.—This I say then (λέγω δέ). Like 
τοῦτο δὲ λέγω ἴῃ oh. 111. 17, and λέγω δὲ in ch, 
iv. 1, the phrase, λέγω δέ, here introduces a 


ye be not one of 


further illustration of a point already referred 
to. It points back to the line of remark com- 
menced in ver. 13 in the words, “ No freedom 
to be an occasion to the flesh! but through 
love be in bondage one to another.” The 
voluntary bondage of love is one most im- 
portant part of the spiritual life; as in- 
dulgence in malignant passions is also a 
leading branch of the working of the flegh. 
The mention, therefore, of these two points 


‘in vers. 14, 15 naturally leads up to the 


more general exhortation of the present 
passage. Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall 
not fulfil (or, fulfil not) the lust of the flesh 
(Πνεύματι περιπατεῖτε, καὶ ἐπιθυμίαν σαρκὸς ob 
μὴ τελέσητε); walk by the Spirit, and ye shall 
not fulfil the lust (or, desire) of the flesh. The 
precise meaning of the several words and 
statements in this verse, as also in the two 
which follow it, have been much disputed. 
It must suffice here briefly to explain and 
justify what appears to the present writer 
the true view. The word “spirit,” it seems 
most natural to understand in all three in 
the same sense, To take it in the first two 
verses as meaning that part of our composite 
being which has the nearest affinity to the 
higher moral and spiritual life (wether as 
in a state of nature or as informed by the 
Spirit of God), whilst in ver. 18 its import 
is determined by comparison with other 
passages to be the Divine Spirit, appears to 
be an arbitrary variation of its sense, which 
there is no necessity for adopting. The 
“Spirit” is mentioned alongside with “ the 
flesh,” not bicause it belongs to the like 
category of being ἃ part of our nature, but 
because he has been graciously sent forth 
by God to contravene in us that evil prin- 
ciple which else we should be unable to 
overcome. This evil principle is termed 
“the flesh;” not as being merely sensual 
corruption, though vices of that class are 
mentioned in vers. 19 and 21 as leading 
instances of its working; for we see in vers. 
20 and 21-vicious works of the flesh speci- 
fied, which are to be referred to malignity 
(comp. 1 Cor. iii. 3), or to a perversion of 
the religious element, rather than to sen- 
suality. It appears, therefore, to denote the 
principle of corruption which taints our 
moral nature in general—that which in 
the ninth of the 'hirty-Nine Articles of the 
Ohurch of England is defined under thehead- 
ing of “ Original or Birth-Sin.” The word 
“flesh” may be supposed to have been se- 
lected to denote this, because the depravation 
of our sensuous beings into sensuality consti- 
tuted the most prominent and noticeable 
form in which the general degradation of 
our state from its proper nobler life in God 
manifests itself. The dative caseof Πνεύματῳ 
marks—either the sphere, element, path, in 
which we are to walk, which is intended by 


gem 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 


(cH. v. 1—26, 


the rendering in our Authorized Version, 
“in the Spirit,” as the dative is used with 
πορεύεσθαι (Authorized Version, “ wallx”) in 
Acts ix. 81; xiv. 16, and with περιπατεῖν, 
walk, in Acts xxi. 21; 2 Cor. xii. 18; or 
the rule according to which, together with 
the enabling power by which, our daily 
behaviour is to be regulated, so as to be 
synonymous with the phrase, ‘ walking after 
(κατὰ) the Spirit,” in Rom. viii. 4. The 
meaning at all events secms to be, Let the 
prompting of the Spirit be your guide, and 
the grace of the Spirit your strength, in the 
course of your life continually. This is 
afterwards expressed as being “led by the 
Spirit” (ver. 18), and as an “ orderly walk- 
ing by the Spirit” (ver. 25). The exhorta- 
tion implies two things: first, that the 
Christians addressed, had had the gift of 
the Holy Spirit imparted to them (comp. 
ch. iii. 2; iv. 6, where “ our hearts ” includes 
the persons addressed ; 1 Cor. xii. 18); and 
next, that this gift would not avail for the 
actual sanctification of their life without 
diligent endeavours after self-improvement 
on their own part. Comp. Phil. ii. 12, 13, 
“ Work out your own salvation [¢.e. by your 
own endeavours work out your salvation] 
with fear and trembling; for it is God which 
worketh in you both to will and to work, 
for his good pleasure.” The generality of 
the form in which the exhortation is couched 
intimates that they were to endeavour to 
live in compliance with the Spirit’s prompt- 
ings in all the branches of spiritual activity 
proper to their Christian calling; not only 
in that of “love” already adverted to, but 
in those others also which the apostle 
preseutly after counts up in vers. 22, 23. It 
inculcates, therefore, the cultivation of a 
joyous spirit of filial love towards God, as well 
as @ high strain of virtuous conduct towards 
their fellow-wen and in relation to their own 
selves. In the next clause, the words, od μὴ 
τελέσητε, “ye shall not fulfil,’ are by many 
(see margin of our Authorized Verion) taken 
in an imperative sense; as if it. were, walk 
by the Spirit, and by no means fulfil the 
desire of the flesh. It is, however, with 
much force objected to this view that, 
although the future with οὐ is often used for 
an imperative, 88 od κλίψεις, οὐκ ἐπιορκήσειςν 
etc., there is no instance adduced of οὐ μὴ 
being used in the New Testament in this 
sense. We are led, therefore, to adopt the 
other view, that the passage belongs to that 
form of sentence in which an imperative 
clause is followed by a clause denoting the 
result which will ensue in case the direc- 
tion before given has been complied with; 
as e.g. “Come unto me... and I will give 
you rest.” In place of the simple οὐ τελέ- 
cere, we have the more emphatic form, οὐ μὴ 
τελέσητε, “OF ἃ surety ye will not,” etc. 


By writing thus the apostle strongly ac- 
centuates the statement that walking by 
the ae is absolutely incompatible with 
en indulgence in the inclinations prompted 
by the flesh. There is probably a twofold 
doctrinal inference couched under this em- 
phatic statement; namely, Ye will of a 
surety not fall under the Law’s condemnation 
(comp. Rom. viii. 1—4); and, Ye will not 
need the Law’s restraints (1 Tim. i. 9). But 
it is pregnant also with a hint of rebuke 
and of practical direction, not unneeded by 
the Galatians (ver. 15). The article is 
wanting before ἐπιθυμίαν, probably because 
it is wanting before σαρκός, as in καταβολῆς 
κόσμον, Luke xi. 50; ἀρχῆς κτίσεω», Mark 
x. 6; ἔργων νόμου, Rom. 111. 20, cte.; so that 
ἐπιθυμίαν σαρκὸς is put for τὴν ἐπιθυμίαν τῆς 
σαρκός. The verb τελέσητε is selected in 
preference to ποιήσητε (cf. Eph. ii. 2, 
ποιοῦντες) to express the idea that it is 
impossible for one walking by the Spirit to 
carry into full effect any desire of the flesh. 
For this is the proper force of the verh 
τελεῖν, of which the ever-memorable Teré- 
Aeorat, “It is finished ” (John xix. 30), is a 
typical illustration, This meaning obtains 
even in Rom. ii. 28 and Jas. ii. 8. The 
apostle seems to concede that the desire of 
the flesh may be felt by one who is walking 
by the Spirit; nay, even in at least an 
inchoate degree, given way to; but this 
much he affirms, that it will be impossible 
for such a one to carry it out into full 
accomplishment. This qualified representa- 
tion of the Christian’s holiness is intimated 
in the next verse more explicitly. 

Ver. 17.—For the flesh lusteth against 
the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh 
(ἡ γὰρ σὰρξ ἐπιθυμεῖ κατὰ τοῦ Πνεύματος, τὸ 
δὲ Πνεῦμα κατὰ τῆς σαρκός); for the flesh 
doth lust (or, hath desires) against the Spirit; 
but the Spirit likewise against the flesh. The 
first clause, “for the flesh hath desires 
against the Spirit,” justifies the mention of 
“the desire of the flesh” in ver. 16, as 
being an experience which Christians in 
general have still to deal with; as if it 
were, “For the flesh really is present still, 
originating within you desires contrary to 
those prompted by the Spirit.” Then the 
apostle adds, “but the Spirit likewise [or, 
‘hath desires’) against the flesh;” intimating 
that, although the flesh was still at work 
within, prompting desires tending away 
from holiness, that nevertheless was no 
reason for their giving way to such evil 
inclinations; for the Spirit was with them 
as well, originating desires after what was 
holy aud good; and he would help them 
against those other inclinations towards 
evil, if only they would surrender them- 
selves to his guidance. That this is the 
proper way of construing these two passages 


cH. v. 1—26.] 


TUE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


253 


seems betokened by the δέ. If the apostle 
had just here meaut to say, “ There are two 
mutually opposing principles at work within 
you,” for the purpose of justifying by ex- 
plicit statement the tone of ver. 16 which 
implies this fact, he would have written, 
ἥ τε γὰρ σὰρξ ἐπιθυμεῖ κατὰ τοῦ Πνεύματος, 
καὶ τὸ ΥἹνεῦμα κατὰ τῆς σαρκός: οἵ, ἡ μὲν 
γὰρ σὰρξ. .. τὸ δὲ Πνεῦμα, ete.; “ For both 
hath the flesh desires against the Spirit 
and the Spirit against the flesh ;” or, “ for 
on the one hand the flesh hath desires... 
and on the other,” eto. But the adversa- 
tive δὲ standing alone tends to disjoin the 
two clauses rather than to conjoin them so 
closely together as the Authorized Version 
leads us to suppose. We need supply no 
other verb than ἐπιθυμεῖ, “hath desires,” 
with the words, “but the Spirit ;” for this 
verb is used in a good sense as well as in a 
bad; as eg. Luke xxii. 15, ἐπιθυμίᾳ ἐπι- 
θύμησα, “with desire did I desire;” 1 Pet. 
i. 12, “the angels desire (ἐπιθυμοῦσιν) to 
look into;” Phil. i, 23, “the desire (ém- 
θυμίαν) to depart.” In fact, the verb pro- 
perly implies a simply strong wish, not 
necessarily an ill-governed one. - And these 
are contrary the one to the other (ταῦτα yap 
ἀλλήλοις ἀντίκειται [Receptus, ταῦτα δὲ 
ἀντίκειται ἀλλήλοις7); for these oppose them- 
selves the one to the other. Taking the 
former two clauses as has been proposed 
above, we can discern the force of the “ for” 
introducing this new clause. ‘The apostle 
having been by two several turns of thought 
led to state, first that the flesh prompts 
desires or action in opposition to the Spirit, 
and then, as a distinct sentence, that the 
Spirit prompts desires or action in oppo- 
sition to the flesh, he now coujoins the two 
several notions in the affirmation of the 
mutual antagonistic agency of these two 
principles; “For these oppose themselves 
the one to the other.” The verb ἀντίκειμαι 
always denotes opposing action, and not 
mere contrariety of nature; being used as a 
participial noun for “adversaries” or “ op- 
ponents” in Luke xiii.17; xxi.15; 1 Cor. xvi. 
9; Phil. i, 28; 1'Tim.v. 14; and as a verb 
in 2 Thess. ii.4 and 1 Tim.i.10, to denote set- 
ting one’s self in opposition to. This clause, 
therefore, describes the continual endeavour 
of the flesh and of the Spirit to thwart and 
defeat each other’s action in the hearts of 
the persons spoken of. So that ye cannot 
do the things that ye would (iva μὴ ἃ ἂν 
θέλητε, ταῦτα ποιῆτε); to the end that what 
things soever ye fain would do, those ye shall 
not do. This last clause describes the result 
aimed at by each of those conflicting prin- 
ciples, namely, to thwart each of them the 
volitions prompted by the other. The 
words remind us of Rom. vii. 15, Od γὰρ ὃ 
θέλω, τοῦτο πράσσω, “ For not, what thing I 


fain would, that doI practise;” ibid., 16,*O οὐ 
θέλω, τοῦτο ποιῶ, “ What thing J fain would 
not, that Ido;” ibid., 19, Οὐ yap ὃ θέλω ποιῶ 
ἀγαθόν, ἀλλ᾽ ὃ οὐ θέλω κακόν, τοῦτο πράσσω, 
“For not what good thing I fain would, do 
Ido; but what evil thing I fain would not, 
that I practise.’ The comparison of the 
indefinite relative, ‘what things soever ye 
fain would do (ἃ ἂν θέλητε), in the present 
passage, with the more definite “ what 
thing I fain would do,” or “fain would not 
do (ὃ θέλω, ὃ οὐ 6€Aw),” in the Romans, points 
to the conclusion that by the clause, “what 
things soever ye fain would do,” is meant, 
“whichever be the kind of your volitions, 
whether they be those prompted by the 
flesh or those prompted by the Spirit.” In 
comparing the two passages, it is important 
to notice that in the seventh chapter of the 
Romans the apostle is concerned exclu- 
sively with the frustration of our good voli- 
tions, which, there, are not ascribed to the 
prompting of the Holy Spirit, but to the 
peering of our own moral sense quickened 

y the voice of the Law’s commandment. 
Such good volitions he represents as over- 
powered by the controlling influence (“law”) 
of the evil principle, “tle flesh;” a con- 
dition of miserable thraldom, out of which, 
the apostle (ibid., 25), with triumphant gra- 
titude, alludes to believers in Christ being 
delivered—delivered by the coming in upon 
the scene of a new agent, “the Spirit of 
life:” whereas, in the passage before us, 
he is describing the condition of believers 
in Christ, to whom now has been imparted 
this new power for doing what is good. In 
these, “the mind ” (Rom. vii. 25), powerless 
before to overcome the law of sin, is suc- 
coured by the prescnce of a mighty Ally, 
through whom, he intimates elsewhere, the 
believer has it within his power to do all 
things (Phil. iv. 13). Many expositors, in- 
cluding Bishop Lightfoot, take ἵνα in the 
present clause as denoting simply the result 
actually brought about; thus the Autho- 
rized Version, “so that ye cannot do the 
things that ye would.” Whether this 
sense, of result actually produced, can be 
shown ever to attach to ἵνα fullowed by the 
subjunctive, is a question which has been 
much debated. In 1 Thess. v. 4, “Ye are 
not in darkness that (ἵνα) that day should 
overtake you as a thief,’ the particle 
“that” points to the ordering of Divine 
providence spoken of in the two preceding 
verses, that they who are in darkness should 
be taken by surprise by the coming of the 
day of the Lord. It is certainly possible so 
to understand the particle here; the mu- 
tually thwarting agency of the flesh and 
the Spirit may be understood as latently 
attributed to Divine providence ordering 
that thus it should be. But this view would 


254 THE EPISTLE TO 


THE GALATIANS. (on. v. 1—26. 


hardly seem to harmonize, either with the 
almightiness of the Divine Agent engaged 
in the conflict or with the triumphant lan- 
guage of Rom. viii. 1—4. In actual ex- 
perience, it does indeed seem to be but too 
often almost a pay} ἰσόρροπος, ἃ drawn 
battle; so greatly is the Spirit’s agency 
clogged and hampered by the weakness of 
human faith and the inconstancy of human 
purpose. But it does not need to be so. In 
the case of St. Paul himself,as we may infer 
from all that he says of his own career sub- 
sequent to his conversion, and in perhaps 
not a few cases besides, the Spirit has been 
completely and persistently triumphant. It 
therefore appears inconvenient to suppose 
that the apostle means to ascribe such a 
result to the ordering of Divine providence 
making it inovitable. Certainly such a 
construction of the passage is not necessary. 
We escape from it altogether by ascribing 
the notion of purpose latent in this ἵνα, “to 
the end that,” to the nisus severally of the 
two agents. Taken so, the passage affirms 
this: Will whatever you may, whcther good 
or evil, you will be sure to meet with an 
adverse agency, striving to bar the complete 
accomplishment of your desire. There ap- 
pears to be no good reason for limiting the 
application of this statement, as some pro- 
pose our doing, to the case of immature 
Christians, in whom Christ is as yet imper- 
fectly formed (ch. iv. 19). With every 
Christian, to the very last, the life of holi- 
ness can only be a fruit of conflict; a con- 
flict on the whole, even perhaps persistently, 
successful; yet a conflict still, maintained 
by the help of the Spirit against an evil 
principle, which can never, as long as we 
live, cease to give occasion for care and watch- 
fuluess (sce 1 Cor. ix. 24—27; 1 Tim. vi. 
12; 2 Tim. iv. 7), Why, it may be asked, is 
the apostle concerned to refer to this con- 
flict here? Apparently because the Gala- 
tians showed by their behaviour that they 
needed to be stirred up and put upon their 
guard. They were, as the apostle (1 Cor. iii. 
38) told the Corinthian believers they were, 
“carnal, walking as men.” They had fore- 
gone the sense of thcir adoption; they were 
worrying one another with contentions, 
The flesh was in their case mauifestly 
thwarting and defeating the desires of the 
Spirit. ‘Therefore the apostle here reminds 
shem of the conditions of the Christian life; 
it is to stimulate them to that earnest en- 
deavour to walk by the Spirit, without 
which (ver. 24) they could not be Christ’s. 
Ver. 18.—But if ye be led of the Spirit, ye 
are not under the Law (εἰ δὲ Πνεύματι ἄγεσθε, 
οὐκ ἐστὲ ὑπὸ νόμον); but if ye are led by the 
Spirit, ye are not under the Law. The sense 
of Πνεύματι a3 denoting the Spirit of God is 
put beyond question by the parallel passage 


in Romans (viii. 14), “As many as are led 
by the Spirit of God (Πνεύματι Θεοῦ ἄγονται), 
these are sons of God.” The dative case with 
ἄγομαι in both passages is illustrated by 2 
Tim. iii. 6, “silly women laden with sins, 
led away by divers lusts (ἀγόμενα ἐπιθομίαις 
ποικίλαις). In all three cases the dative 
muat be the dative of the agent, there being 
in 2 Tim. iii. 6 ἃ slight personification. 
This use of the dative is not in prose writers 
a@ common construction with passive verbs, 
though not altogether unknown (Wiuer, 
“Gram. N.T.,’ § 31, 10). In the present 
case its harshness is perhaps relieved by the 
circumstance that the noun does not repre- 
sent an agent whose personality is markedly 
conspicuous ab extra, but rather an inter- 
nally swaying influence, whose personality 
is a matter of faith. Hence in 2 Tim. iii. 6 
wo render, “led away with divers lusts.” 
This shade of sense might be represented by 
rendering, “led with the Spirit.” In Luke 
iv. 1, “led by the Spirit,” we have ἤγετο ἐν 
τῷ Πνεύματι. In all these passages the 
passive, “ being led,” must, from the nature 
of the case, include the voluntary self-sub- 
jection of those led. In Romans, “ being led 
by the Spirit” stands instead of “ walking 
after the Spirit” in ver. 4; “being after 
the Spirit” in ver. 5; “by the Spirit 
mortifying the deeds of the body” in ver. 
13. Similarly, here it is tantamount to the 
“walking by the Spirit” mentioned above 
in ver. 16. The phrase cannot be fairly 
understood of merely having that presence of 
the Holy Spirit, which is predicated of the 
whole “ body of Christ,” even of those mem- 
bers thereof whose conduct is plainly not 
regulated by the sacred influence (comp. 1 
Cor. xii. 18; νἱ. 19); it must be understood 
as describing the case of such as recognize 
its presence and yield themselves to its 
guidance. The sense of the phrase, “ being 
under the Law,” is illustrated by ch. iii. 23, 
“we were kept in ward under the Law;” 
ch. iv. 4, “made to be under the Law;” 
ibid., 5, “to redeem those which were under 
the Law;” ibid., 21, “ ye who would fuin be 
under the Law;” Rom. vi. 14, 15, “ not 
under the Law, but under grace;” 1 Cor. 
ix. 20, “ to those which are under the Law 
as under the Law, that I might gain those 
who are under the Law.” These are all the 
passages in which the expression occurs. 
The inference is clear that the apostle 
designates by it the condition of rach as are 
‘subject to the Law of the old covenant, 
viewed as a whole, in its ceremonial aspect 
as well as its moral; his meaning would not 
be exhausted by the paraphrase, “ subject to 
the condemnation of the Law.” What he 
affirms here is this: If in the course of your 
lives you are habitually swayed by the in- 
ward motions of the Spirit of God, then you 


on. %. 1-26.) 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


468 


are not subject to the Law of the old cove- 
nant. The connection between the premiss 
and the conclusion has been clearly shown 
by the apostle above (ch. iv. 5—7); it is 
this, that the possession of the Spirit of 
adoption proves a man to be a “son”—one 
who has attained his majority and is no 
longer subject to a pedagogue. This aphor- 
ism of the apostle, that ¢f they were led by 
the Spirit they were not under the Law, 
suggests the inquiry—But how was it with 
those Christians who were not led by the 
Spirit? Would the apostle teach, or would 
he allow us to say, that Gentile Christians 
(for it is to such that he is writing), and 
‘Jewish as well, if not guided by the Spirit, 
were bound to obey the Law of the old 
covenant? With reference to this point we 
are to consider that the apostle has else- 
where clearly stated, for example in Rom. 
xi, that the Church of God forms, in soli- 
darity with Israel of old, one ‘Israel of 
God,” as he speaks in the sixth chapter of 
this Epistle (ver. 16); Gentiles, being 
“ praffed in” upon the original stock, have 
thus become branches (σύμφυτοι) having one 
common life and nature therewith; or, in 
the language of anothcr figure, “ fellow-heirs, 
and fellow-members of tlie body, and fellow- 
partakers of the promise in Christ Jesus,” 
with those who originally were heirs and 
forming the body and partners in the pro- 
mised blessing (ph. iii. 6). This leads us 
to the view that God’s Law, the revelation 
of his will relative to his people’s conduct, 
given in successive developments—patri- 
archal, Mosaical, prophetical—is, with such 
modifications as have been made by the 
crucifixion and the priesthood of Christ, and 
by the mission and work of the Holy Spirit, 
God’s Law relative to his people’s conduct 
still. The cross and priestly work of Christ, 
as we are taught by this Epistle and the 
Epistle to the Hebrews, do for all Christians 
eliminate from this Law its ceremonial pre- 
scriptions altogether; but its moral prescrip- 
tions, more fully perfected by the moral 
teaching of Jesus and his apostles, are still 
incumbent upon them. Those Obristians 
who really give themselves up to the Spirit 
to be taught and animated by him, who are 
as St. Paul says (ch. vi. 1) “spiritual,” these 
use this Law (as Calvin phrases it) as a 
doctrina liberalis ; the Law of the Spirit of 
life within them leads and enables them to 
recognize, and so to speak assimilate, the 
kindred import of the Law embodied in the 
letter; which thus ministers to their instruc- 
tion and consolation (Rom. xv. 4; 2 Tim. 
iii. 16; 1 Oor. ix. 10). The letter of the Law 
is now their helper, no longer their absolute 
rigid rule; asa rule it is superseded by the 
law written in the heart (2 Cor. iii, 6—1] ; 
Heb. viii. 8—11). Aa Chrysostom writes in 


his note on the present passage, “ They 
are raised to a heizht far above the Law’s 
injunction.” But in the degree in which 
they are not spiritual, but natural (ψυχικοί, 
1 Cor. ii. 14—16; Jude 19), in that degree 
must they use the letter of the Law, in the 
New Testament as well as tlie Old, as the 
rule of their conduct. We, those who have 
been sacramentally brought into covenant 
with God, cannot be left to ourselves; either 
we must be sweetly, persuasively, instinc- 
tively, swayed by the Spirit of God within, 
or else own the coercing dominion of the 
written Law. In fact, the same individual 
Christian may at different times be subject 
to alternation between these two diverse 
phases of experience, passing over from one 
to the other of them according to his fluctu- 
ating needs. Christians may, therefore, be 
broadly divided into three classes: (1) the 
spiritual (ch. vi. 1; Rom. viii. 1—4); (2) 
those who are as yet in bondage to the 
letter; (3) those who are living after the 
flesh—* carnal” (1 Cor. iii. 3). The above 
statement of the case commends itself as in 
accordance with what the apostle writes in 
1 Tim. 1. 8—11, “ We know that the Law is 
good [καλός : cf. Rom. vii. 12] if a man use it 
lawfully [vouluws, according to the manner 
in which God has directed us to use it in his 
gospel (ver. 11)], knowing this [having his 
eye upon this], that the Law is not made 
(οὐ κεῖται) for a righteous man, but for the 
lawless and disobedient, for,. . . according 
to the gospel of the glory of the blessed 
God.” In contrast with this Law, coercing 
impiety and immorality wherever it is found, 
whether in the world or in the Church, the 
apostle has before in ver. 5 declared that its 
function is superseded in the case of the 
spiritual believer: “Tho end of the com- 
mandment [see Alford] is charity, out of a 
pure heart and a good conscience, and faith 
unfeigned.” ‘The perpetual obligation of the 
Law given under the old covenant, subject 
to the qualifications noted above, appears to 
be emphatically affirmed by our Lord: “I 
came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfil: 
for verily I say unto you, till heaven and 
earth pass away, one jot or one tittle shall 
in no wise pass away from the Law, till all 
things be accomplished ” (Matt. v. 17, 18). 
And the recognition of this principle under- 
lies all his moral teaching; as, for example, 
in the sermon on the mount; in his contro- 
versies with the Jewish rabbins; in such 
passages as Mark x. 19; Matt. xxii. 37—40. 
The moral Law given in the Old Testament 
amalgamates itself with that given in the 
New, forming one whole. 

Ver. 19.—Now the works of the flesh are 
manifest (φανερὰ δέ ἐστι τὰ ἔργα τῆς σαρκός). 
The apostle’s purpose is here altogether one 
of practical exhortation. Having in ver. 13 


25u 


THE EPISTLE TO 


THE GALATIANS. [σπ. v. 1—26, 


emphatically warned the Galatians against 
making their emancipation from the Mosaic 
Law an occasion for the flesh, and in ver. 
16 affirmed the incompatibility of a spiritual 
walk with the fulfilment of the desire of the 
flesh, he now specifies samples of the vices, 
whether in outward conduct or in inward 
feeling, in which the working of the flesh is 
apparent, as if cautioning them; adduc- 
ing just those into which the Galatian con- 
verts would naturally be most in danger of 
falling. Both in the list which he gives 
them of sins, and in that of Christian graces, 
he is careful to note those relative to their 
Church life as well as those bearing upon 
their personal private life. Instances of 
enumeration of sins which may be compared 
with that here given, are found, with respect 
to the heathen world, in Rom. i. 29—31; 
with reference to Christians, Rom. xiii. 13; 
1 Cor. vi. 9,10; 2 Cor. xii. 20, 21; Eph. v. 
8—5, followed by a brief indication of fruits 
of the Spirit in ver. 9; Col. iii.5—9; 1 Tim. 
i. 9, 10; 2 Tim. 111. 2—4. “Manifest;” 
namely, to our moral sense; we at once feel 
that these are the outcome of an evil nature, 
and are incompatible with the influence of 
the Spirit of God. “ Works of the’ flesh ” 
means works in which the prompting of the 
flesh is recognizable. The phrase is equiva- 
lent to “the deeds or doings of the body,” 
which we are called to “mortify, put to 
death, by the Spirit” (Rom. viii. 13). In 
Rom. xiii. 12 and Eph. v. 13 they are styled 
“works of darkness,” that is, works belong- 
ing properly to a state in which the moral 
sense has not been quickened by the Spirit, 
or in which the light of Christ’s presence 
has not shone. Which are these (&rivd ἐστι); 
of which sort are. Adultery, fornication, un- 
cleanness, lasciviousness (πορνεία [Receptus, 
μοιχεία, πορνεία), ἀκαθαρσία, ἀσέλγεια). This 
is the first group, consisting of offences 
against chastity—sins against which the 
Church has to contend in all ages and in all 
countries; but which idolatry, especially 
such idolatry as that of Cybele in Galatia, 
has generally much fostered. The first in 
our English Bible, “adultery,” is rejected 
from the Greek text by the general consent 
of editors. But in fact, “fornication” 
{πορνείαν may be taken as including it (Matt. 
vy. 32), though it may also stand at its side 
as ὦ distinct species of unchastity. “ Un- 
cleanness” covers a wider range of sensual 
sin (“ all uncleanness,” Eph. iv. 19); solitary 
impurity, whether in thought or deed; un- 
natural lust (Rom. i. 24>, though it can 
hardly be taken as meaning this lust alone, 
“ Lasciviousness,” or ‘“wantonness,” ia 
scarcely an adequate rendering of ἀσέλγεια 
in this connection; it appears to point to 
reckless shamelessness in unclean indul- 
gences, In classical Greek the adjective 


ἀσέλγης describes a man insolently and 
wantonly reckless in his treatment of others; 
but in the New Testament it generally ap- 
pears to point more specifically to unabashed 
open indulgence in impurity. The noun is 
connected with “ uncleanness” and “ forni- 
cation” in 2 Cor. xii. 21; with “unclean- 
ness” in Eph. iv. 19; is used of the men of 
Sodom in 2 Pet. ii. 7; comp. also 2 Pet. ii. 
18; 1 Pet. iv. 3; Jude 4 (cf. 7). Only in 
Mark vii. 22 can it from the gronping be 
naturally taken in its classical sense. 

Ver. 20.—Idolatry, witchcraft (εἰδωλο- 
λατρεία, φαρμακεία); tdolatry, sorcery. These 
two form a second group—sins of irreligion; 
and such as would be likely greatly to beset 
new converts from idolatry. We may com- 
pare, in respect to the former, the temp- 
tations which the apostle recoxnizcs the 
danger of in the case of the Corinthians (1 
Cor. viii. and x.). “Sorcery.” The word φαρ- 
μακεία, originally denoting the use of drugs 
merely, means, sometimes, their use for po1- 
soning; but this sense would not be very 
suitable here. But the nouns φαρμακός, 
φαρμακεύς, and φαρμακεία, like vencficus and 
venefictum in Latin, are also often used with 
reference to the employment of drugs in 
charms and incantations; and thence of the 
employment of black arts in general—magie, 
sorcery, witchcraft; cf. Rev. ix. 21; xxi. 8; 
xxii. 15; where the Authorized Version 
gives “ sorceries,” “sorcerers;” and in the 
Septuagint, Exod. vii. 11, 22; viii. 18 
(Authorized Version, “ magicians”); Isa. 
xlvii. 9, 12 (“enchantmeuts”). See also 
μαγεύων, μαγείαις (“sorceries”), Acts viii. 
9,11. The claim to the possession of such 
powers, common at Ephesus (Acts xix. 19; 
2 Tim. iii. 18, γόητες), and rife, perhaps, 
universally among heathens, certainly so 
in the Roman empire round the Mediter- 
ranean, had no doubt been a snare also to 
the Galatians. Bishop Lightfoot adverts 
to a very stringent canon of the Council of 
Ancyra (the capital of Galatia), ap. 314, 
condemning φαρμακεῖαι. It may be doubted 
whether the apostle himself would regard, 
or had reason to regard, pretensions to such 
supernatural arts as merely delusive or 
superstitious. Expericnces such as that 
recorded in Acts xvi. 16—18, would hardly 
permit him to do so. Hatred, variance, 
emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies 
(ἔχθραι, ἔρις [Receptus, zpers], ζῆλοι, θυμοί, 
ἐριθεῖαι, διχοστασίαι, αἱρέσει5); enmities, strife, 
Jjealoustes, wraths, factions, divisions, heresica 
(or, parties). This third group, to which 
belongs also the envyings (φθόνοι), togetho- 
with the probably not genuine myra-rs 
(φόνοι) of the next verse, is bound together 
by the common characteristic of malignity. 
This vice of our nature, so inveterate in our 
fallen state—the antithesis to the love which 


on, Vv. 1—26.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


257 


τ 


is the essence of goodness—is, strangely 
enough as it at first sight seems, most 
readily stimulated into rancour by differ- 
ences in religion. As at this very same time 
at Corinth, so here in Galatia likewise, the 
“flesh” displayed its malignity in “jealousy, 
strife, and divisions (ζῆλος καὶ ἔρις καὶ 
διχοστάασίαι)," originating from this cause 
(1 Cor. iii. 3). “ Enmities;” manifestations of 
aversion openly displaying itself. “ Strife;” 
the outward mutual conflict of persons ani- 
mated with such sentiments. ‘Ihe plural 
number of épes, strifes, given by the 
Textus Receptus, as well as, perhaps, the 
plural of (ῆλοι, jealousies, which not 
improbably should also be read in the 
singular, ζῆλος, jealousy, may have owed 
its introduction by the copyists to the 
plural number of ἔχθραι, which is not ques- 
tioned. The precise import of ζῆλος, ren- 
dered “jealousy,” is not easily determined. 
It is spoken of as a virtue in John ii. 17, 
“the zeal of thine house;” Rom. x. 2, “zeal 
for God;” Phil. iii. 6, “touching zeal, per- 
secuting the Church;” 2 Cor. vii. 7, “ your 
fervent mind (or, ‘your zeal ᾽ for me;” ibid., 
ver. 11, “what zeal.” But in perhaps all 
these cases, the ardent favouring of what is 
good is thought of as either rcady to take, 
or actually taking, the aspect of boiling 
resentment against its assailants; thus also 
Heb. x. 27 (“fiery indignation,” Authorized 
Version), literally,‘ zeal of fire.” Soinch.i.14, 
“zealous ;” comp. Exod. xx. 5, Θεὸς ζηλωτής, 
“jealous God” (Authorized Version); Heb. 
él ganna. To this:line of meaning is to be 
referred Acts v. 17, “filled with indig- 
nation ((#Aov).” In another class of pas- 
saves the word denotes a wrong state of 
feeling, where in the Authorized Version 
it is uniformly rendered “envy ” or “envy- 
ing.” These are Acts xiii. 45 (Revised 
Version, “ jealousy ”), where it surely means 
the resentment which the Jews felt at the 
supposed invasion of their own theocratic 
prerogatives. In the remaining passages of 
the New Testament in which it occurs it is 
linked either with “strife,” as it is here; 
namely, Rom. xiii. 13; 1 Cor. iii. 3; 2 Cor. 
xii. 20; or with ép:defa, as Jas. iii. 14, 16. 
In these passages there does not seem any 
reason on the face of them for supposing that 
it means “envy,” that is, grudging to an- 
other some advantage; this in Greek is 
φθόνος. A more probable view is that ζῆλος 
denotes eagerness to find in another some 
ground for hot resentment against him. 
Perhaps we have no single equivalent word 
in our language, “jealousy” being the 
nearest approach. In the Epistle of Cle- 
ment of Rome to the Corinthians, ch. 4—6, 
we have a long list of instances given of 
persons who have suffered through being 
objects of ζῆλος : in many of them “ envy,” 
GALATIANS. 


or “rivalry,” would seem to be the more 
prominent notion iu the word; but in others 
it appears to mean rather “jealousy ;” in 
some the same as in Acts v. 17 or xiii. 45. 
The next word θυμοί, wraths, denotes 
violent ebullitions of passionate anger; the 
plural pointing to different occasions prompt- 
ing such. The following term, ἐριθεῖαι (ren- 
dered “ factions”), was formerly imagined 
to be etymologically connected with ἔρις, 
strife—a notion which is now generally 
abandoned. The verb from which it is de- 
rived, ἐριθεύω, is to act the part of an ἔρϊθος, 
day-labourer, the noun signifying “labour 
for hire;” then, scheming or intriguing 
for a post of employment; and next, “ party- 
action,” “the contentious spirit of faction.” 
In the New Testament it occura six times 
besides here. In Rom. ii. 8, τοῖς δὲ ἐξ 
ἐριθείας (Authorized Version, “them who 
are contentious’’), it appenrs to denote those 
who set themselves in factious opposition to 
the truth, the apostle having no doubt 
especially in his eye Jewish gainsayers of 
the gospel. In Phil. i. 16, “some preach 
Christ ἐξ ép.efas,” it points to factious oppo- 
sition to Christ’s divinely appointed heralds. 
In Phil. ii. 3, “let nothing be done κατ᾽ 
ἐριθείαν,᾽" the same sense of factious oppc- 
sition to others is quite suitable. In the 
remaining passages, 2 Cor. xii. 20, where 
(λοι, θυμοί, ἐριθεῖαι, come together as they 
do here, and Jas. iii. 14—16, where, as 
above noted, it is conjoined with ζῆλον, the 
notion of “factiousness,” or “ faction,” per- 
fectly satisfies the context. In the present 
passage the plural, ἐριθεῖαι, denotes factions 
feelings roused on behalf of this cause and 
that; such sentiments as are likely to even- 
tuate in διχοστασίαι, divisions, that is, 
more distinctly formed parties “ standing 
apart” from each other; whilst these again 
culminate in αἱρέσεις. The noun διχοστα- 
σίαι occurs also in 1 Cor. iii. 3, where they 
are spoken of as indicative of a fleshly mind, 
and in Rom, xvi. 17, “Mark them which 
cause divisions and (σκάνδαλα) occasions of 
stumbling.” We may regard this word es 
standing in the same relation to αἱρέσεις as 
the σχίσματα, “divisions,” or “schisms,” de 
which are mentioned in 1 Cor. xi. 18, “ When 
ye come together in the Church, I hear that 
divisions exist among you; and I partly 
believe it; for there must be also heresies 
among you.” In endeavouring to ascertain 
the exact import of this last werd (αἱρέσεις), 
“heresies,” we must first ascertain the sense 
in which αἵρεσις was currently used befure 
it was employed to describe phenomena 
appearing in the Church. The proper sense 
ot “choice” was in this word otten limited 
to the specific sense of “choice of views,” 
particularly in philosophy or religion; that 
is, it meant “ ways of thinking;” and then, 
am 


258 


THE EPISTLE ΤῸ THE GALATIANS. 


[ott. v. 1—26. 


by an easy transition, “those who followed 
a particular way of thinking ”’—‘a school 
of thought.” Thus it occurs in Dionysius 
of Halicarnassus, ‘ De Dem. et Arist.,’ 7, etc. 
(see Liddell and Scott). This sense was so 
current in Dionysius’s time as to appear in 
Latin in the contemporary writings of 
Cicero; thus, in ‘Prom. Parad.,’ Cicero 
writes, “Cato in ca est heresi (sc. the Stoic], 
que nullum sequitur florem orationis ;” 
‘Ad Famil.,” xv. 16; ‘Ad Att.,’ xiv.°14. 
Similarly Vitruvius writes, ‘Pref, 5, 
“Pythagorwa hresin sequi.” It is not 
always easy to discriminate whether the 
“school of thought” so designated means 
the way of thinking itself or the set of men 
who held it. In this sense the word is uscd 
in the New Testament. Thus Acts v. 17, 
“ the high priest and all they that were with 
him, which is the heresy (αἵρεσις) of the 
Sadducees;” where it means the sect, and 
not their views. So again, Acts xv. 5, 
“certain of those of the heresy of the Pha- 
risees;” ibid., xxiv.5,“ringleader of the heresy 
of the Nazarswans,” where Tertullus plainly 
meant those who held the views of the 
Nazarwans, and not the views tlemselves. 
But, on the other hand, in the same chapter 
St. Paul in bis reply (ver. 14), when he says, 
“ After the way which they call a heresy, so 
serve I the God of our fathers,” evidently 
uses the term as applying to “the Way” 
itself (comp. Acts ix. 2), and not to the 
people who followed it. In Acts xxvi. 5, 
“after the straitest heresy of our religion 
(θρησκείας) I lived a Pharisee,” the word 
may be taken either way. In Acts xxviii. 
22, “concerning this heresy, it is known to 
ua that everywhere it is spoken against,” 
it seems, of the two, to be rather the more 
obvious way to take it of “what Paul 
thought,” than of the persons so thinking. 
Tf, however, it be taken of persons, it is of 
course to be taken of them as holding and 
representing such views. In 2 Pet. ii. 1, 
“false teachers, who shall privily bring in 
heresies of perdition,” the qualifying geni- 
tive, “of perdition,” would seem to favour 
our understanding the “heresies” of the 
doctrines of these false teachers, rather than 
of the parties following their teaching. On 
the whole review of these passages, it is of 
the utmost importance to note the manner 
in which, in Acts xxiv. 14, etc, St. Paul 
treats Tertullus’s application of the term to 
the Christian faith. ‘I confess,” he says, 
“that after the way which they call αἵρεσις, 
so serve I the God of our fathers, believing 
all thiigs which are according to the Law, 
and which are written in the prophets: 
having hope towards God, which these also 
themselves look for, that there shall be a 
resurrection, both of the just and unjust.” 
In thus speaking, the apostle repudiates the 


application of the term αἵρεσις to the Chris- 
tian faith; not, however, on the ground that 
the term denoted a flagrantly erroneous and 
vicious form of doctrine; for there is no- 
thing to show that this was the idea which 
Tertullus meant to convey to Felix’s mind, 
in so designating either Christians or their 
faith : what, indeed, should Felix care about 
the soundness or unsoundness of their doc- 
trines? The apostle rather repudiates the 
term, because, as signifying “choice,” it im- 
plied that the views referred to were adopted 
on the prompting of individual opinion or 
liking. That it was not this, he shows by 
referring partly to the broad basis of Divine 
revelation in general as propounding the 
doctrine of the resurrection, which lay at 
the foundation of the Christian faith; and 
partly to the fact that his accusers them- 
selves admitted that doctrine. Christians 
believed that Jesus was raised from the 
dead, not because they “ chose ” to think go, 
but because God’s Word taught them so to 
believe. We are thus landed at the con- 
clusion that, antecedently to its introduction 
into the language of the Church, the term 
αἵρεσις denoted a school of thought or a set 
of opinions; sometimes the opinions them- 
selves; sometimes the people holding them ; 
but that it was understood to do so with 
reference to points on which there did not 
appear to be any decisive authority to de- 
termine men’s convictions, and respecting 
which, therefore, men might choose their 
own opinions as they thought themselves 
best able. This conclusion will help us to 
understand its import in 1 Cor. xi. 19, in the 
passage before us, and in 2 Pet. ii. 1, as well 
aa the passage in Titus iii. 10, 11, in which 
the case of “a man that is an heretic (ἄν- 
Opwros αἱρετικός)» iy dealt with. It is clear, 
from ch. i. 6—9, that the apostle regarded 
the “gospel” which had been delivered to 
the world (Jude 3) by himself and his fel- 
low-apostles, as being a revelation so certain 
and authoritative that any teacher intro- 
ducing doctrine seriously infringing upon 
its substantial import would subject himself 
to the extreme malediction of God. The 
whole tenor of this Epistle shows that its 
author considered the Churches of Galatia 
as at this very time in danger of either pro- 
ducing from their own bosom, or else admit- 
ting from the teaching of others, doctrine 
which would be thus fatally subversive of 
the truth, Was it not, then, extremely pro- 
bable that, when here enumerating, with an 
especial eye to the case of the Churches he 
was addressing, ‘‘the works of the flesh,” 
which would cut off those who gave them- 
selves up to their practice from the inhe- 
ritance of the kingdom of God, he would 
specify this particular “ work” of propound- 
ing, or embracing when propounded by 


oR. v. 1-26. 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


269 


others, doctrine which should vitally deprave 
the truth which God had revealed? Any 
doctrine which thus tampered with the gos- 
pel would, of course, be a afpecis—views of 
men’s own devising and “choosing.” The 
term, as has been seen, might also describe 
a body of adherents to such false doctrine. 
But in the passage before us, in which the 
works of the flesh are recited, and not the 
doers of such works, the term must describe, 
not persons, but acts—acts, that is, of con- 
ceiving or propounding in the Church views 
subversive of the gospel, and gathcring 
adherents to such views; such adherents 
would, among Christians, form a ἀΐρεσις 
antagonistic to the doctrine of Christ received 
in the Church. “Caballings” and “ divi- 
sions,” ἐριθεῖαι and διχοστασίαι, might arise 
among Christians who still held fast to the 
substanee of the gospel; fatal to the spiritual 
life, it might be, of those indulging in them; 
but yet essentially different from “ heresies,” 
because not involving departure from the 
faith once for all delivered to the saints, or 
conscious rebellion against the accredited 
organs of revelation. Here the apostle has 
in view the more hateful phenomena, of man- 
conesived dogmas taking the place of God’s 
gospel—dogmas so alien to the gospel that 
adherents to them would be marked 
among Christians as forming “ sects,” which 
in their spiritual genesis were apart from 
the Church and incapable of being amalga- 
mated with it, For the Church is the pro- 
duct of the truth, “the Word of God” (1 
Pet. 1. 23—25; Jas. i. 18); whilst these 
“sects” are products of merely human 
notions or even of “doctrines of devils” (1 
Tim. iv. 1; cf. Col. ii. 8,19). That same 
Juduizing spirit which was now working 
among the Churches of Galatia proved, 
very early indeed, largely prolific of such 
“heresies,” especially in Asia Minor; those 
“heresies” in particular which are known 
by the name of Gnostic. The apostle knew 
that such evils were coming, and it is cer- 
tain that he anticipated their development 
with dread (see the later First Epistle to 
Timothy (iv.); the contemporaneous First 
Epistle to Corinth (xi. 18); the earlier 
Second Epistle to the Thessalonians (ii.) ; 
also Acts xx. 29, 30); not without cause, as 
history shows; for in truth it was only 
after a terrible, indeed an internecine con- 
flict, that the Church in the second and 
third centuries succeeded in treading this 
serpent-brood underfoot. By the time that 
St. Paul deputed Titus to take the over- 
sight of the Churches of Crete, “ heresies” 
were so far developed that he is careful to 
direct Titus (iii. 10,11) how to deal with 
any man who attached himself to them 
“ἄνθρωπον aiperixdy). He is to admonish 
bim once and again; if the warning proved 


fruitless, he was thenceforward to decline 
having anything to do with him (παραιτοῦ); 
for that he might be sure that, being such. 
he was already completely wrenched off 
from vital union with the body of Christ 
(ἐξέστραπται), and was doing what was 
wrong, “ self-condemned ;” either (that is) 
condemned by the very nature of his pro- 
ceeding, or condemned in his own conscious- 
ness. It seems that the apostle regards 
the simple fact of his giving himself to a 
“heresy ” as proving all this; for he makes 
no reference to any other pravity shown by 
the offender; he has an eye, evidently, to the 
consideration that the man who forsakes 
the teaching of Christ, given through his 
accredited organs, to follow a αἵρεσις, 
knows that he does so; knows that he is no 
longer “holding the Head” (Col. ii. 19), but 
is following a mere “ tradition of men” (ibid., 
8). With such a one Titus had no com- 
mon ground. It is of prime importance in 
estimating the nature of this “work of the 
flesh,” with a practical view to our present cir- 
cumstances, that we bear in mind this feature 
of it—that it is a relinquishment, a conscious 
relinquishment of the teaching of Christ, a 
breaking off from “the Head” The above 
view is precisely that given by Tertullian, 
‘De Prescriptionibus Hereticorum, 6. 
Bishop Lightfoot, in{his Introduction to hie 
Commentary on this Epistle, pp. 30, 81, 
writes thus: “It is not idle, as it might 
seem at first sight, to follow the stream of 
history beyond the horizon of the apostolic 
age. The fragmentary notices of its subse- 
quent career reflect some light on the tem- 
per and disposition of the Galatian Church 
in St. Paul’s day. To Catholic writers of a 
later date, indced, the failings of its infancy 
seemed to be so faithfully reproduced in its 
mature age, that they invested the apostle’s 
rebuke with a prophetic import. Asia Minor 
was the nursery of heresy: and of all the 
Asiatic Churches it was nowhere so rife as 
in Galatia. The Galatian capital [Ancyra] 
waa the stronghold of the Montanist revival, 
which lingered on for more than two cen- 
turies, splitting into diverse sects, each 
distinguished by some fantastic or minute 
ritual] observance. Here, too, were to be 
found Ophites, Manicheuns, sectariana of 
all kinds.” 

Ver. 21, —Envyings, murders (φθόνοι [Re- 
ceptus adds φόνοι, rejected by most 
editors]). These belong properly to the 
third group, and should have been placed 
in the same verse with them. We have the 
like alliterative combination of the Greek 
words in Rom. i. 29, φθόνου, φόνου. Judging 
from the evidence of manuscripts, the 
genuineness of φόνοι is extremely doubtful. 
Regard being had to the particular circum- 
stances of the Galatian Churches, which the 


260 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


[cn. v. 1—26. 


apostle no doubt had in his eye in this 
enumeration, “ murders” seems too strong a 
word to be appropriate; and this consider- 
ation seems to prove the word here not au- 
thentic. Drunkenness,revellings (ué0a1,n@p01); 
drunkennesseg, revellings. We have the same 
two plural nouns in Rom. xiii. 18, κώμοις καὶ 
μέθαις. This fourth group represents sins 
of excess. Here, too, tue apostle touches a 
form of vice, to which abundant testimony 
shows the Galatians, as well as other 
branches of Celts, to have been especially 
prone. It was, perhaps, this marked feature 
of the Galatian nationality in particular 
that led St. Peter, in addressing the 
Churches of “ Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, 
Asia, and Bithynia,” to speak (1 Pet. iv. 3) 
of their having formerly walked in “lasci- 
viousness, lusts, wine-bibbings, revellings, 
carousings (οἰνοφλυγίαις, κώμοις, πότοις), and 
abominable idolatries.” And such like (καὶ 
τὰ ὅμοια robras); and those (works) which 
are like to these. Of the which I tell you 
before, as I have also told you in time past 
(& προλέγω ὑμῖν, καθὼς [Receptus, καθὼς καὶ] 
προεῖπον) ; of the which I forewarn you, even as 
Idid forewarn you. The construction of the 
accusative ἅ is precisely similar to that of ὅν 
in John viii. 54, “Ov ὑμεῖς λέγετε ὅτι Θεὸς 
ὑμῶν ἐστι. The πρὸ in προλέγω, as also in 
the προεῖπον which follows, has reference to 
the time when it shall actually be proved 
who are to enter into the kingdom of God. 
“As I did forewarn you;” this previous 
warning was probably given at his very 
first preaching of the gospel to them: he 
would no doubt at once speak plainly to 
people, very commonly sunk in vice and 
excess, of the awards of the “ judgment to 
come.” That they which do such things 
(ὅτι of τὰ τοιαῦτα πράσσοντεΞ5); that they 
which practise such things. The present 
tense of πράσσοντες is more suitable than 
the aorist, as being the language of warn- 
ing with reference to future conduct (cf. 
Rom. ii. 2, 3, 7—10). Shall not inherit the 
kingdom of God (βασιλείαν Θεοῦ οὐ κληρονομή- 
σουσιν). The apostle uses the same words 
in writing to the Corinthians with reference 
to the sins to which they were the most 
prone (1 Cor. vi. 9,10). So Eph. v. 5, “No 
fornicator, nor unclean person, nor covetous 
man, which is an idolater, bath any inheri- 
tance in the kingdom of Christ and God.” 
This “kingdom” is also referred to in 
1 Thess, ii. 12, “Walk worthily of God 
who callcth you into his own kingdom and 
glory” (“His own!” Astonishing pro- 
spect!); 2 Thess. i. 5, “That ye may be 
counted worthy of the kingdom of God, for 
which ye also suffer;” 2 Tim. iv. 18, “ will 
save me unto his heavenly kingdom.” ‘The 
like designation of the future felicity is 
given by St. Peter (2 Pet. i. 11), “entrance 


into the eternal kingdom of our Lord and 
Saviour Jesus Christ,” and by St. James 
(ii. δ), “heirs of the kingdom which he 
[God] promised to them that love him.” It 
is derived from our Lord’s own teaching, as, 
eg. Matt. xxv. 34, “Inherit the kingdom 
prepared for you;” Luke xii. 32, “It is 
your Father’s good pleasure to give you the 
kingdom.” It is the manifestation and con- 
summation of “that kingdom of heaven,” 
or “kingdom of God,” heralded by Christ 
and his forerunner as “at hand,” which the 
Prophet Daniel had pointed forward to 
(Dan. ii. 44; vii. 13, 14, 18). Bondage to 
“the flesh” in this life is constantly de- 
clared throughout the New Testament to 
form an insuperable bar to an entrance into 
that exalted state. And what is the alter- 
native prospect? This the Apostle Paul 
does not here specify, though elsewhere he 
does so with awful emphasis; as e.g. Rom. 
ii. 8. 

Ver. 22.—But the fruit of the Spirit (ὁ δὲ 
καρπὸς τοῦ Πνεύματος). As it was with a 
hortatory purpose, to warn, that the apostle 
has before enumerated the vices into which 
the Galatian Christians would be most in 


“danger of falling, so now with an answering 


hortatory purpose, to point out the direction 
in which their endeavours should lie, he 
reckons up the dispositions and states of 
mind which it was the office of the Holy 
Spirit to produce in them. In the Epistle 
to the Colossians (iii. 12—15), written 
several years after, most of the features here 
specified reappear in the form of direct ex- 
hortation (“kindness, meekness, long-suficr- 
ing, love, peace, thankfulness ᾽)- joy ” 
being there implicitly represented by 
“thankfulness.” The word “fruit” here takes 
the place of “works” in ver. 19, as being a 
more suitable designation of what are rather 
states of mind or habits of feeling than 
concrete actions like most of those previously 
enumerated “works.” The word “fruit,” 
moreover, describing in the vegetable world 
a matured product, is very commonly used 
in the New Testament with reference to 
such product as is not only of a pleasant 
but also of a useful kind; thus, “ fruits mect 
for repentance; ” the fruit of the True Vine 
in John xv. 2—16 which glorifies God; the 
abundant fruit of wheat (John xii. 24); the 
fruit of righteousness (Phil. i, 11; Heb. xii. 
11); the fruit gathered by an evangelist 
(John iv. 36; Rom. i, 13); so that it was no 
doubt introduced here, as also in Eph. v. 9, 
with the intended suggestion, that the 
graces here specified are results answering 
to the design of the great Giver of tle 
Spirit’s influences. and are in their own 
nature wholesome ond grateful. The sin- 
gular number of the noun is employed in 
preference to the plural, which ia found eg. 


on, v. 1—26.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


261 


Phil. 1. 11 and Jas. iii. 17, in consequence 
robably of the feeling which the apostle 
[πὰ that the combination of graces de- 
scribed is ἐπ ¢ts entirety the proper outcome 
in each individual of the Spirit’s agency; 
‘the character which he will fain evolve in 
every soul subject to his dominion, comprises 
all these features; so that the absence of 
any one mars in a degree the perfection of 
the product. The relation expressed by the 
genitive case of the noun, “of the Spirit,” 
is probably much the same as is expressed 
by the corresponding genitive, “of the 
flesh ;” in each case meaning “belonging 
to,” or “due to the operation of;” for the 
agent who in the one case does the works is 
not the flesh, but the person acting under 
the influence of the flesh; so here, the fruit- 
bearer is not “the Spirit,” but the person 
controlled by the Spirit. Comp. Rom. vii. 
4, “that we might bring forth fruit unto 
God;” John xv. 8, “that ye bear much 
fruit.” These fruits do not appear upon 
us without strenuous endeavour on our own 
part. Accordingly the apostle exhorts the 
Philippians (ii. 12, 13) to work out their 
own salvation with fear and trembling, 
because they have so august a co-Agent 
working with and in them. Indeed, it is 
for the very purpose of prompting and 
dirsoting such endeavour that this list of 
gracious fruits is here given (comp. ver. 25). 
The enumeration does not expressly men- 
tion such dispositions of mind as have God 
for their object. These, however, may be 
discerned as lying couched under the three 
first named, “love, joy, peace,” and possibly 
under “faith;” certainly joy and peace 
are the proper products of our hearty ac- 
ceptance of the gospel, and of that alone; 
they presuppose the establishment of a con- 
scious state of reconciliation with God. But 
just here the apostle seems more especially 
concerned to show how blessed, under the 
Spirit’s guidance, the Christian’s state will 
be, and in what manner Christians as thus 
led will act towards one another (ef. vers. 
15 and 26). The Christian life is habitually 
regarded by the apostle much more as a cor- 
porate, fellow-Christian, life, than, owing to 
various causes, some of which we may hope 
are now in course of removal, we modern 
Christians, and especially English Church- 
men, are in the habit of regarding it. Is 
love (ἔστιν ἀγάπη). We cannot separate this 
braneh of Christian character from those 
which follow, as in essence distinct from 
them ; it is organically connected with them, 
and in fact, as stated above (ver. 14), in- 
volves them all, being “ the bond of perfect- 
ness” (Col. iii. 14). In the “dithyramb of 
love,” chanted in 1 Cor. xiii., the apostle 
triumphantly proclaims this truth; as also 
on the other hand in 1 Tim. i. 5 be affirms 


that true Christian love has its root in“a 
pure heart, a good conscience, and genuine 
faith.’ The soul cannot be free for the 
activity of genuine love, towards fellow- 
believers and towards fellow-creatures in 
general, as long as it is restrained in its 
emotions toward the supreme common 
Father of all; the inward vice of mind, 
whatever it may be, which darkens the 
spirit towards heaven must inevitably 
cramp and benumb benevolent action uni- 
versally (comp. 1 John vy. 2). In truth, 
ἀγάπη means a loving temper of mind which, 
like the love which God bears towards us, 
is in a degree irrespective of merit, welling 
forth towards all being, so far as circum- 
stances permit; though with greatest in- 
tensity towards God and those in whom it 
can recognize the image of God. Hence St. 
John is able to reason as he does in 1 John iv. 
20, “ He that loveth not his brother whom 
he hath seen, cannot love God whom he hath 
not seen.” Joy (χαρά). It is impossible to 
accept Calvin’s notion, that this means a 
cheerful carriage towards fellow-Christians, 
though it includes it; it must mean the 
glad-heartedness produced by entire faith in 
God’s love to us (comp, Rom. xiv. 17; xv. 
18). The exhortation which is here im- 
plied, that euch sentiments should be care- 
fully cherished, is elsewhere given explicitly 
and with reiteration ; as e.g. 1 Thess. v. 16; 
Phil. iv. 4. There is thus much ground for 
Calvin’s view, that the inward feeling of 
satisfaction and joy, which is the proper 
fruit of a true Christian’s faith in the gospel, 
cannot fail to manifest itself in his behaviour 
towards his fellow-men by a sacred species 
of light-heartedness and hilarity which it is 
impossible for us to manifest or to feel, as 
long as we have within a consciousness of 
estrangement from God, or a suspicion that 
things are not well with us in relation to 
him. It is probable that the apostle, in 
writing down this word, did it with a con- 
sciousness of tle contrast which is presented 
by the coldness and severity of feeling to- 
wards others which are begotten by the 
bondage of legality (comp. 1 Pet. i. 22). 
Peace (εἰρήνη. This is conjoined with 
“joy” in the two passages of the Romans 
just before cited (xiv.17): “The kingdom 
of God [.6. its great blessedness] is not 
eating and drinking, but righteousness and 
peace and joy in the Holy Spirit;” (xv. 
13), “ The God of hope fill you with all joy 
and peace in believing, that ye may abound 
in hope, in the power of the Holy Spirit; ” 
in both which passages the “peace” re- 
ferred to is the serenity of soul arising from 
the consciousness of being brought home to 
the favour of God and to obedience to his 
wil). On the other hand, the term as here 
introduced seems likewise intended to stand 


262 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 


Lon. ¥, 1-26, 


in contrast with those sins of strife and ma- 
lignity noted before among the works of the 
flesh, and therefore to point to peacefulness 
in the Christian community. ‘The two are 
vitally connected: the Spirit produces 
peaceful harmony among Christians by pro- 
ducing in their minds, individually, a peace- 
ful sense of harmony with God and a 
compliancy in all things with his provi- 
dential appointments. This resigned trust- 
fulness towards God quells at their very 
fountain-head those disturbances of passion 
and that inward fretting and impatience in 
reference to outward things, including the 
behaviour of others, which are the main 
causes of strife. The interdependence be- 
tween inward and outward peace is in- 
dicated in 2 Cor. xiii. 11; Col. iii. 14, 15. 
If “the peace of God rules, is arbitrator 
(BpaBeve:), in our hearts” individually, if 
it “holds guard over our hearts and our 
thoughts” (Phil. iv. 7), it cannot fail to 
produce and maintain harmony amongst us 
towards one another. Long-suffering, gentle- 
ness, goodness (μακροθυμία, χρηστότης, aya- 
θωσύνη); long-suffering, kindness, goodness. 
These are actings of the all-comprising grace 
of “love.” For the two first, comp. 1 Cor. 
xii. 4, “Love suffereth long, is kind 
(μακροθυμεῖ, xpnarevera);” while the third, 
“ goodness” sums up the other actings of 
love enumerated in vers. 5 and 6 of the 
same chapter. It is difficult to distinguish 
between χρηστότης and ἀγαθωσύνης, except 
so far.as that the former, which etymo- 
logically means “usableness,” seems to 
signify more distinctly “swectness of dis- 
position,” “ amiability,” “a compliant will- 
ingness to be serviceable to others.” It is, 
however, repeatedly used by St. Paul of 
God’s benignity (Rom. ii. 4; xi. 22; Eph. 
ii. 7; Titus iii. 4), as ἀγαθωσύνη also is by 
many thought to be in 2 Thess. i. 11, which 
last point, however, is very questionable. 
This latter term, ἀγαθωσύνη, occurs besides in 
Rom. xv. 14 and Eph. v. 9, as a very wide 
description of human goodness, apparently 
in the sense of active benevolence. Faith 
(alors); fatth or faithfulness. It is dis- 
puted in what precise shade of meaning 
the apostle here uses this term. The sense 
of “fidelity,” which beyond question it 
bears in Titus ii. 10, seems out of place, 
when we consider the particular evils which 
are now in his eye as existing or in danger 
of arising in the Galatian Churches. Belief 
in the gospel euits this requirement per- 
fectly, and preseuts us with the apparently 
needed contrast to the “ heresies ” of ver. 20. 
If this sense seems not to be favoured by the 
immediate neighbourhood on one side of 
“ kindness ” and “ goodness,” it is, however, 
quite coherent with the “ meekness” on the 
ether, if we understand by this latter term 


a tractable spirit, compliant to the teaching 
of the Divine Woid; comp. Jas. i. 21, “re- 
ceive with meekness the implanted word,” 
and Ps, xxv. 9, “The meek (Septuagint, 
πρᾳεῖς} will he guide in judgment, the meek 
(πρᾳεῖς) will he teach his way.” In Matt, 
xxii. 23, “judgment, mercy, and faith,” 
the term seems (comp. Micah vi. 8) to refer 
to faith towards God. In 1 Ttm. vi. 1], 
“righteousness, godliness, faith, love, 
patience, meekness,” there is no reason for 
interpreting it otherwise than as faith in 
God and his gospel; and if so, its colloca- 
tion thero with “love, patience, meekness,” 
countenances us in taking it so here, where 
it stands in a very similar collocation. Comp. 
Eph. vi. 23, “ Peace be to the brethren, and 
love with faith, from God the Father and 
the Lord Jesus Christ.” 

Ver. 23.—Meekness (πρᾳότης). (On this, 
see last note.) The humble submissiveness 
to the teachings of Divine revelation, to 
which this term probably points, stands in 
contrast with that self-reliant, headstrong 
impetuosity which in the temperament of 
the Celt is apt to hurry him into the adop- 
tion of novel ideas which he has ncttaken the 
trouble seriously to weigh. It may, how- 
ever, stand in antithesis to self-reliant arro- 
gance in general. Temperance (ἐγκράτεια); 
or, self-control. This stands opposed both to 
the “fornication, uncleanness, lascivious- 
ness,” and to the “drunkenness and revel- 
lings” before mentioned. Against such there 
is no Law (κατὰ τῶν τοιούτων οὐκ ἔστι νόμος}; 
against such things as these the Law is not ; 
or, there is no Law. As the apostle does not 
write “against these things,” it seems that 
he viewed tho foregoing list of graces as one 
of samples only and not as exhaustive; 
which fact is likewise indicated by the 
absence of the copulative conjunction (cf. 
Matt. xv. 19); so that κατὰ τῶν τοιούτων 
represents “and things the like to these; 
against which,” ete. If we render, with the 
Authorized Version, “there is no Law,” we 
must suppose still that the apostle means 
that the Law which all along he has been 
speaking of is in particular “not against 
them.” “Against;” asinch.iii21. The Law 
finds nothing to condemn in these things, 
and therefore no ground for condemning 
those who live in the practice of them; the 
same idea as is more explicitly brought out 
in Rom. viii, 1—4. ‘There is a tone of 
meiosis, of suppressed triumph in this sen- 
tence. “Who shall lay anything to tho 
charge of God’s chosen ones?” 

Ver. 24.—And they that are Christ's (οἱ δὲ 
τοῦ Χριστοῦ ᾿Ιησοῦ [Receptus omits Ἰησοῦ]; 
now they that are of the Christ Jesus. The 
expression, 6 Χριστὸς Ἰησοῦς is not acommon 
one. It occurs besides in Eph. iii, 1, τοῦ 
Χριστοῦ ᾿Ιησοῦ, where, however, as indeed 


on, v. I—26.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


263 


here, editors are not quite unanimous in 
retaining Ἰησοῦ : and Ool. ii. 6, τὸν Χριστὸν 
᾿Ιησοῦν τὸν Κύριον. Χριστὸς ᾿Ιησοῦς without 
the article is continually met with. The 
presence of the article seems to betoken 
that the word “ Obrist” is introduced as an 
οἵα] description rather than as a proper 
name, “the Christ Jesus” being thus a 
phrase similar to “the Lord Jesus.” Not 


being so familiar to us as this latter, it 


appears at first more uncouth than it really 
is. To understand the precise force of the 
conjunction δέ, we must review the foregoing 
context, In vers. 16, 17 the apostle puts in 
contrast with each other, “walking by the 
Spirit” and “fulfilling the desiro of the 
flesh.” In the three following verses (19— 
21) he points out what kind of life the 
flesh prompts men to pursue, and its fatal 
consequences; in vers. 22, 23 the character 
formed by the Spirit’s influence, and its 
blessed immunity from the censure of the 
Law. He is now concerned to show how 


these considerations apply to Christians. A- 


Christian (he says) by becoming such puts 
away the flesh; is alive, therefore, if at all, 
by or to the Spirit; this being so, he must 
in all reason by the Spirit’s direction rule 
his conduct. It results from this review 
that the δὲ turns the course of remark upon 
8 uew topic, namely, the essential character 
of a Christian’s profession as a premiss to 
in.troduco the practical conclusion stated in 
ver. 25. The use of the possessive, “of the 
Christ Jesus,” is similar to that in 1 Cor. 
iii. 23, “ ye are Christ’s;” Rom. viii. 9, “he 
is not his;” ibid., xiv. 8, ““we are the 
Lord’s.” Comp. also 2 Tim. ii. 19; Titus ii. 
14, “a people for his own possession ;”” Eph. 
i. 14. We are made Christ’s people, out- 
wardly and in covenant, by baptism; but 
we cannot be his very own, really and 
vitally (Rom. viii. 9), unless through faith 
we recognize him as our Lord and of our 
own free will and deed attach ourselves 
,beartily to his discipleship. In that hour of 
renunciation of sin we in truth “ fasten the 
flesh to the cross.” Have crucified the flesh 
(τὴν σάρκα ἐσταύρωσαν). That is, have put 
it away from them, as a thing to be abhorred, 
that it might die the death. These three 


several particulars of thought appear com- | 


bined in the mixt mode embodied in the 
word “crucified.” The verb, denoting 
simply i espa to the cross, and not putting 
to death by crucifixion, intimates the linger- 
ing character of the death which the flesh 
was to undergo. It was, indeed, put away 
at once, by a final decisive act of the will; 
but it would still for a while continue to 
live. Viewed thus, the notion represented 
by the image harmonizes with the statement 
in ver. 17 of the continued conflict which 
is being waged within us between the flesh 


and the Spirit. The time when the Christian 
did thus affix the flesh to the cross is indi- 
cated by the form of expression, of being 
“of Christ;” there can have been no time 
since he has been Ohrist’s at which this 
thing had not been already done. It is, 
alas, but too possible to take the flesh still 
living down from the cross and clasp it 
afresh to our bosom; but cherishing that as 
our friend, we are Christ’s no longer. Above 
(ch. ii. 20) the apostle wrote, “ Iam hanging 
on the cross with Christ: but I live;” but 
with a different application of the image. 
There he was thinking of the relation into 
which his union with the crucified Jesus 
brought him with respect to the Mosaical 
Law. Here he has in view the renunciation 
of sin which accompanies the a:ldiction of 
ourselves to Christ’s service. There he 
himself is crucified; here, the flesh. The 
cross once more recurs in ch. vi. 9, with yet 
another reference. The description here 
given by the apostle of Christian conversion 
tallies well with that given by him in Rom. 
vi. 3—11. There, however, the change 
through which a man becomes a Christian is 
couched under a different image—that of a 
death and resurrection, analogous to and 
founded upon the death and resurrection of 
Jesus Christ, which, in baptism, administered 
according to the original primitive mode, 
are represented by tlie immersion in and the 
emerging from the watcr. While illustrating 
this image, the apostle further says (ver. 6), 
“ Our old man was crucified with him (cuve- 
σταυρώθη), that the body of sin might be 
done away, that we should no longer 
be in bondage to sin;” where the Greek 
word rendered “was crucified with (him) ἢ 
again denotes being affixed to the cross, in 
sympathy with him “ who was made sin for 
us,” with the view of bringing to nought 
“ the body of sin”—which phrase, “ body of 
sin,” is noarly equivalent to “ flesh,” being 
the sum total of the vicious activities in 
which the flesh manifests itself; this bring- 
ing to nought or doing away (xardpynots) of 
the body of sin, being the result ultimately 
to follow from the crucifixion, and not 
identical with it. In the passage in the 
Romans now referred to, the apostle brings 
to view, not only the just now cited deserip- 
tion of the negative side of our regeneration, 


| but also its positive side, of a passing into 


«a new sphere of activities “walking in 
newness of life,” and “living unto God in 
Christ Jesus.” In our present passage the 
negative phrase is alone definitely stated. 
Tho difference is probably due to the fact 
that the figure of crucifying the flesh sup- 
plies the illustration of only the negative 
aspect; whereas baptism, with its watery 
burial and resurrection, represents the posi- 
tive aspect as well. With the affections ang 


264 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


(cx. v. 1—26, 


lusts (σὺν τοῖς παθήμασι καὶ ταῖς ἐπιθυμίαι5) ; 
with its affections and its lusts. The differ- 
ence between “ affections” and “lusts” may 
be probably assumed to be this—that the 
former denotes disordered states of the soul 
viewed as in a condition of disease, well 
represented in the Authorized Version by 
“affections ;” while the latter points to the 
goings forth of the soul towards objects which 
it is wrong to pursue. In Phil. iii. 10; 
1 Pet. i. 11, and a number of other passages 
the noun παθήματα means “ sufferings.’ 
Only once besides is it used in an ethical 
sense; in Rom. vii. 5 we read, “The παθή- 
ματα of sius which were through the Law 
wrought in our members to bring forth fruit 
unto death;”’ and in vers. 7,8 the apostle 
instances “ coveting” (ἐπιθυμία) as wrought 
by sin in his soul, by occasion of the com- 
mandment, “Thou shalt not covet.’ We 
seem led to conjecture that he meant 
that a sinful condition of the soul (πάθημα 
ἁμαρτίας) was by the commandment stimu- 
lated into a mere aggressive action. We 
have πάθος in Col. iii, 5 and 1 Thess. iv. 5, 
and the plural πάθη in Rom. i. 26; in each 
case of exorbitant sexual desire. But in the 
apostle’s use of παθήματα in its ethical sense 
we seem to have neither the notion of 
extreme intensity nor the limitation to one 
particular class of desire, which are both of 
them apparent in his use of πάθος. This 
clause, “ with its affections and its lusts,” 
adds nothing to the substantial sense of 
“the flesh.” The apostle seems led to sub- 
join the words by a pathetic remembrance of 
the moral miseries appertaining to “the 
flesh ””—“ those affections and those desires 
thereof which are so hard to control, and 
which are at the same time so fatal to our 
welfare.” 

Ver. 25.—If we live in the Spirit (εἰ ζῶμεν 
Πνεύματι); tf we live by, or to, the Spirit. 
Exact critics have commonly recognized the 
difficulty of precisely determining either the 
sense in which the dative case of Πνεύματι ia 
used, or the meaning of the verb “live.” 
This verb is here distinguished from the 
verb of the next clause (στοιχῶμεν) in much 
the same way as it is distinguished from the 
verb “ walk” (περιπατεῖν) in Col. iii. 7, “In 
the which ye also walked aforetime when ye 
lived in these things.” In both passages it 
denotes the moral sphere of existence in 
which it is our ruling choice to live. In 
Col. iii. 7 the apostle says that their chosen 
sphere of existence was once worldliness and 
vice; and, when it was so, then they had 
followed in detail those different forms of 
degrading sin which he has specified in 
ver. 5. ‘The verb “live” is used in the 
same sense of the general setting of our 
moral habits viewed as a whole in Ool. ii. 
20, “Lf ye died with Cliist from the rudi- 


ments of the world, why, as though living 
in the world, do ye subject yourselves to 
ordinances, Handle not, etc.?” So, likewise 
Rom. vi. 2, “ We who died to sin, how shall 
we any longer live therein?” also Rom. viii. 
13, “If ye live after the flesh,.ye must die ; 
but if by the Spirit ye make to die the 
deeds of the body, ye shall live; ” in which 
last passage the changed sense of the verb 
in the second sentence is noticeable. In the 
passage before us, the “ we” of the verb ζῶμεν 
are of course the same persons as are recited 
by the phrase, “ they who are of the Christ,” 
in ver. 24. These persons have fastened the 
flesh to the cross; by a final, professedly 
irrevocable resolve, they have renounced 
sin. The purpose that was the proper, 
necessary concomitant of this, was to make 
the domain of the Spirit thenceforward 
their sphere of existence; their life was now 
to be in the Spirit; as the aposile writes 
(Rom. viii. 9), “ Ye are not in (ἐν) the flesh, 
but in (ἐν) the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit 
of God dwelleth in you;” for in this last 
passage the phrase, “in the Spirit,” is con- 
trasted with “in the flesh,” each denoting 
the sphere of moral habits; in which sense 
“the flesh” is often uscd, as well as at other 
times of the vitiated nature itself, the in- 
dulgence in which characterizes that sphere. 
So probably “according to the Spirit of 
holiness,” in contrast to “according to the 
flesh,” in Rom. i. 8, 4. Now, as in Rom. 
viii. 9 the apostle uses the word “ Spirit” 
in two senses, first of the sphere of moral 
habits determined by the Spirit’s influence, 
and then of the Holy Spirit itself, so he 
would appear to do here. In respect to 
the relation expressed by the dative case, 
although the ἐν of Rom. viii. 9 is here 
wanting, it admits of being taken of the 
sphere of being in which Christians as such 
live; for so we find the dative used in 1 
Pet. iii. 18, “put to death (σαρκί) in the 
flesh, but quickened (Πνεύματι) in the Spirit,” 
aa also the dative σαρκὶ is constructed in ch. 
iv. 1 of the same Epistle. Tho relation ex- 
pressed by the case, however, may be that 
which it denotes in Rom. vi. 2, 10, “die 
(ἁμαρτίᾳ) unto sin;” ibid., 11, “dead unto 
sin, alive unto God;” Rom, xiv. 6, “live 
unto the Lord, die unto the Lord;” 2 Cor. 
v. 15, “live unto him that died for them:” 
thus Bishop Lightfoot takes it. The “if” 
is logical rather than conditional ; they ὙΠῸ 
are Christ’s have no life but in the Spicit, 
and are thus bound in the details of their 
conduct to act accordingly. Let us also 
walk in the Spirit (Πνεύματι καὶ στοιχῶμεν); 
by (or, unto) the Spirit let us also walk. The 
dative is here most naturally understood of 
the rule according to which we should walk 
If the relation intended by the dative in the 
preceding clause is expressed by “to,” it 


ou, Vv. 1—26.] THE EPISTLE TO 


THE GALATIANS. 265 


might be most convenient to render it simi- 
larly here; but even so, it must mean with 
reference to the Spirit as our rule and guide. 
The verb στοιχεῖν, “to move in a (στοῖχος, 
i.e.) line or row with others” (see Liddell 
and‘Scott), is no doubt chosen in place of 
περιπατεῖν, the more usual word for “ walk,” 
as denoting an orderly, well-regulated way 
of behaviour. This tinge of meaning is 
discernible in the uther instances of its use 
in the New Testament, as ob. vi. 16; Rom. 
iv. 12; Phil. iii. 16. 

Ver. 26.—Let us not be desirous of vain 
glory (μὴ γινώμεθα κενόδοξοι); let us not be 
vatn-glorious, The communicative form of 
exhortation in which the speaker conjoins 
himself with those whom he addresses in 
order to soften the tone of superiority im- 
plied in exhorting them, connects this verse 
closely with the preceding one, in which 
also it is employed. LTudced, as in outward 
form of expression this verse coheres with 
ver. 25, so also in substance it coheres 
strictly with the whole passage beginning 
with ver.13; for this is throughout levelled 
against a spirit of contentiousness then rife in 
the Galatian Churches. One cause to which 
the apostle thinks this ill state of things to 
be especially due was the spirit of vain- 
glory or self-vaunting—a weakness to which 
the Celtic race has ever been markedly 
prone (see Lightfoot’s ‘ Introduction,’ p. 14). 
The soitened form of exhortation visible in 
the use of the first person plural has been 
traced also by many critics in the use of the 
verb γινώμεθα, as if the writer meant to 
imply that they were not as yet really vain- 
glorious, but were in danger of becoming so. 
This, however, is not so clear. This verb is 
often used when there is no reference at all 
intended to passing out of a former state 
into a new one, but simply as meaning “show 
one’s self,” “be in act, so and so.” Thus 
Rom. xvi. 2, “she hath been (ἐγένετο) a 
succourer of many;” Phil. iii. 6, “found 
(γενόμενος) blameless ;” 1 Thess. i. 5, “ what 
manner of men we showed ourselves (ἐγενή- 
θημεν) ;” ibid., ii. 7; Jas. i. 25. Very often 
is this verb so used in exhortations, and 
especially in the present tense; as Rom. xii. 
16, “ΒΘ not (μὴ γίνεσθε) wise in your own 
coneeits;” 1 Cor. iv. 16, “ Be (γίνεσθε) imi- 
tators of me; ” (so ibid., xi.1; Phil. iii. 17); 
1 Cor. x. 32, “Be giving no ocvasion for 
stumbling (ἀπρόσκοποι γίνεσθε) ;᾽" xiv. 20, 
“ Be (γίνεσθε) not babes in understanding, 
but in understanding be (γίνεσθε) full-grown 
men;” and go often. In many of such cases 
there can be no reference to preceding con- 
duct, whether in the way of approval or dis- 
approval, but simply an exhortation to be 
or not to be so and so. The Authorized 
Version, therefore, is quite right in here 


rendering, “ Let us not be,” etc. The adjec- 


tive κενόδοξος occurs only here in the New 
Testament, as the substantive κενοδοξία is 
only found in Phil. ii. 3. ‘Ihe δόξα from 
which it is derived may be either “ notion,” 
“opinion,” or “glory.” Accordingly in 
Wisd. xiv. 14, and Ignatius, ‘Ad Magnes,’ 
11, κενοδοξία appears to mean the following 
of vain, idle notions with which we may 
compare the words ὀρθόδοξος, ἑτερόδοξος. 
But here κενόδοξοι is considered by most 
critics to mean “affecting, desirous of, empty 
glory ;” so the Authorized Version, ‘‘desirous 
of vain glory,” where “ vain glory” are two 
words, not one. Such empty glory would 
mean glory founded on distinctive qualities, 
which either are merely imaginary, not 
existing at all, or which, if there, give no 
real title to honour. Perhaps, however, the 
δόξα of this compound is always “ notion,” 
“opinion,” only varying so far in meaning as 
sometimes to denote opinions respecting our- 
selves; 88 Suidas says, “ κενοδοξία, a vain 
thinking respecting one’s self;” at other 
times, notions about other matters. The best 
interpretation of the word as here used is 
suggested by the apostle’s own words in the 
next chapter (ver. 3), “if a man thinketh 
himself to be something when he is nothing, 
he deceiveth himself.” As again in Phil. ii. 
3,“ Doing nothing through faction or through 
vain glory ;” the sense of the second noun is 
illustrated by the converse, “ But in lowli- 
ness of mind each counting other better than 
himself,” suggesting its meaning to be the 
disposition to claim a superiority over others 
which we are not entitled to. “ Wise inour 
own conceits” (Rom. xii. 16) is one form of 
this vicious quality; but there are others, 
all, however, fundamentally and intensely 
inimical to a spirit of loving sympathy with 
other men. Provoking one another, envying 
one another (ἀλλήλους προκαλούμενοι, ἀλλή- 
λοις φθονοῦντες); challenging one another, 
envying one another. Here again are two 
Greek words found nowhere else in the New 
Testament—mpoxadodua: and φθονῶ, The 
rendering of the first in the Authorized 
Version, “ provoking,” is perhaps not meant 
in the sense in which this English verb is 
now commonly used, and in which it also 
frequently occurs in our English Bible, of 
“making angry,” but in the proper sense of 
the Latin verb provocantes, “challeng- 
ing,” 6.8.5» to legal controversy, or to battle, or 
to mutual comparative estimation in any 
way. Any superiority, real or imaginary, in 
gifts spiritual (as chartems) or natural, 
in eloquence, in theological acquirements, in 
qualification for office, in public estimation, 
even in moral consistency (for what follows 
in ch. vi. 1 seems to point in this last direc- 
tion), might be among the Galatians either 
an occasion for self-vaunting or a subject of 
envy on the part of those who felt themselves 


266 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. (cu. v. 1—28, 


east in the shade. What it was in actual | and the “ envying” on the part of those who 
facts which gave the apostle occasion for | found themselves weak; both faults being, 
administering this implied reproof, it is im- | however, traceable to one and the same 
possible to conjecture. There is an evident | root—the excessive wish to be thought 
correlation between the “challenging” on | much of. 

the part of those who felt themselves strong, 


HOMILETICS. 


Ver. 1.—The importance of standing by Christian liberty. “Stand. firm, therefore, 
in the liberty for which Christ hath made us free, and be not entangled again with the 
yoke of bondage.” The apostle hopefully assumes that the Galatians had not yet 
surrendered their liberty. 

I, JUDAISM WAS A YOKE OF BONDAGE. It might well be described in such terms by 
the Apostle Peter at an earlier period (Acts xv. 10). The bondage consisted in the 
number, complexity, and variety of its rites and ceremonies, associated with days, and 
weeks, and months, and years; in the burdensome repetition of sacrifices; in the 
expensiveness of the old ritual; in the time and labour consumed in purifications and 
washings; and in the place which every trivial or important transaction of life, such 
as marriage, burial, ploughing, sowing, reaping, held in the religious economy of a 
theocratic people. The Gentiles in Galatia had had experience of the degrading yoke 
of heathen bondage. Were‘they to be “entangled again” with a yoke, even that of 
Judaism ? 

11. ΤῊΒ LiperTy won By Curist. The liberty here referred to is exemption from 
the rites and requirements of the ceremonial Law, including circumcision itself. But 
that liberty implies a great enlargement in Christian blessing. 1. I¢ sets the bedsever 
free from the terrors of the old economy. ‘ We have received, not the spirit of bondage 
again to fear, but the spirit of adoption.” Christ has freed us from many fears that 
must have marred the peace of Old Testament saints, 2. He destioys the physical 
drudgery of religion. His yoke ia easy as his burden is light. 3. His liberty lifts 
us out of the state of spiritual childhvod in which the Jews dwelt, that we may have 
a larger comprehension of the mysteries of the kingdom (Heb. vi. 2). 

IIL Tae ΙἹΜΡΟΚΤΑΝΟΒ OF STANDING BY OUR NEWLY ACQUIRED LIBERTY. 1. Jt would 
be an insult to Christ, who bought it, if his followers were to surrender it. 2, A man 
may bear an unjust burden, but not a burden upon conscience. 3. It is our interest to 
stand in the full liberty of the gospel. ‘“ As free, yet not using our liberty as a cloak 
of maliciousness, but as the servants of God” (1 Pet. 11. 16). 4. Our firmness will 
encourage others to α resolute assertion of Christian liberty against all soris of ritualistic 
priesthoods, 


Ver. 2.—A solemn and emphatic warning. The apostle assumes a severer and a 
more authoritative tone—“I Paul”—and shows that there is something worse than 
folly in turuing aside to the Law, for it is to take an absolutely destructive course, It 
is absolutely impossible to reconcile circumcision with Christ. “If ye be circumcised, 
Christ shall profit you nothing.” 

I. THIs DOES NOT WARRANT THE CONDEMNATION OF OIRCUMCISION IN ITSELF. For 
it was a Divine appointment, not only a national rite to distinguish Jews from Gentiles, 
but “a seal of the righteousness of faith” (Rom. iv. 11). Nor does it condemn circum- 
cision as a past act on the part of a Jew born under the ancient economy, nor as a 
mere prudential act as giving a more ready access to the Jews, for the apostle himself 
circumcised Timothy (Acts xvi. 3). 

Il. He conDEMNS CIRCUMCISION REGARDED ΑΒ A BITE NECESSARY TO SALVATION. 1. 
This position involves the rejection of Christ, as if he had not wrought out a complete 
salvation. Those who support it imply that they have entered upon another mode of 
justification, 2. As circumcision was one of the types or shadows that was to pass 
away with the death of Christ, its continuance seemed a constructive denial that he had 
come at all. 8. Circumcision was utterly meaningless to Gentiles, who were not of 
Abraham’s race. If, therefore, they were circumcised, it meant that they found the rite 
necessary to their salvation, 4. The declarition of the apostle, “ Christ shall profil 


oH. v. 1—26.] THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 267 


you nothing,” emphatically applies to the rites and ceremonies of the Romish Church, 
which are not even of Divine appointment like circumcision. Trapp says, “ Pharisaical 
and popish justiciaries are entangled in the fond conceits of their own righteousness.” 
But Christ will profit none but those who, “not having their own righteousness,” 
desire to be found in Christ, having the righteousness of God by faith. 


Ver. 3.—The obligations involved in circumcision. The Judaizing teachers did not, 
perhaps, allow their converts to realize the full extent of the obligation involved in 
circumcision. 

I, THE APOSTLE BEITERATES THE EXTENT OF THIS OBLIGATION IN THE CASE OF THE 
CIRCUMCISED. They are “debtors to do the whole Law.” Circumcision was not a 
mere badge of Jadaism, as baptism is of Christianity, but it involved a profession of 
obedience to the whole Jewish Law. It was not competent to select a few precepts for 
obedience ; for the circumcised was a debtor to do “the whole Law.” The false teachers 
did not observe it themselves (ch. vi. 18), yet it was their duty, on their own prin- 
ciples, to observe it unremittingly, completely, and without external help, in every 
department of it. 

11. THE DANGER OF THIS OBLIGATION. Circumcision could only profit on one suppo- 
sition, “It verily profiteth if thou keep the Law” (Rom. ii. 25). But, in case of 
failure, it had no power to save from the curse. Circumcision in that case becomes 
uncircumcision—that is, it will not save you from being treated as a transgressor or 
treated as if you had never been circumcised. 


Ver, 4.—The logical results of the Judaistic position. Christ profits only those 
united to him, and a soul departed from him is undone for ever. 1818 would be the 
exact risk of such Galatians as, following Judaistic guidance, sought to be “justified by 
the Law.” Consider— 

1. THEIR DOCTRINE INVOLVED SEPARATION FRoM Curist. “Christ is become of no 
effect unto you;” rather, “you are done away from Christ.” Representing circum- 
cision as the bond of connection with the Law, the apostle declares circumcision to be 
a de jure separation from Christ, in whom all legal engagements were fully met. 
Justification by grace and justification by Law are mutually exclusive. If we can be 
saved in any other way than by Clirist, we do not need him, and the adoption of that 
other way is a renunciation of him. To be “without Christ” is the most miserable 
as well as the most fatal position in life. 

11. THEIR DOCTRINE INVOLVED A DEPARTURE FROM THE SYSTEM OF SALVATION BY 
crace. “ Ye are fallen from grace.” The clause has no bearing upon the doctrine of 
the perseverance of saints, for the grace here spoken of is not personal religion, but the 
system of salvation by grace. Law and grace are opposites; that is, the dispensation 
of Law and the dispensation of grace. The justified person in the one case works 
out salvation by his own obedience; in the other he simply receives it. ‘The apostle 
declares the mode of justification by personal obedience as involving the rejection of 
the mode of justification by Christ. 


Ver. 5.— The blessed prospects involved in the true doctrine of grace. “ For we through 
the Spirit wait for the hope of righteousness by faith.” ‘This passage is not to be 
understood as saying merely that believers have no other hope of justification but by 
faith in Christ, or that believers wait for the hope of being justified by faith, The 
righteousness was, in fact, already theirs, and therefore not an object of hope at all. 
The apostle means that we are enabled by faith, in the power of the Spirit, to wait for 
the hope that is lodged in the heart of the righteousness that “is of God by faith in 
Christ Jesus.” : 3 

I, THE CENTRAL POINT 18 THE RIGHTEOUSNESS TO WHICH FAITH AND HOPE ALIKE 
cLInc. They have, in fact, no fulcrum, or point of support, apart from this righteous- 
ness, which is itself independent of all our graces, and therefore in no way affected by 
our varying frames or feelings. The Judaistic heart would cling to a righteousness by 
works, because it seemed to think it could understand a bargain between God and man, 
but it saw no absolute security in mero grace, Yet ‘‘it is of faith, that it might be 
of grace; to the end the promise may be sure” (Rom. iv, 16). 


268 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. [eu. v. 1—26 


II. ConsipER THE HOPE THAT IS WRAPPED UP IN THIS RIGHTEOUSNESS. We “ wait for 
the hope of righteousness;” that is, not the hope of being righteous or attaining righteous- 
ness, but the hope that belongs to the righteousness already described. In possession 
of this righteousness, what may you not hope for? All the blessings of the new ana 
better covenant which Christ sealed with his precious blood; all things necessary te 
our preseat well-being and our future blessedness, 

ILI. Farr ENABLES US TO WAIT FoR THIS HOPE, It is itself “ the substance of thingr 
hoped for.” ‘The hope leans upon the faith. Hope is the eldest-born daughter of faith 
(Rom. v. 1—3). Apart from faith there can be no hope. The necessity of faith is 
evident. The believer finds that when he becomes righteous by faith he becomes ἃ 
stranger and a pilgrim on earth, his path through the wilderness one of tears and toils 
and conflict, and he is disappointed to find that difficulties with the world arise from 
the moment his difficulties with God are ended. It isa great perplexity. He forgets, 
however, that he has to walk by faith, not by sight. Faith is not fruition. It is not 
heaven, οἷ is, after all, “ but the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things 
not seen. 

IV. Constper How THE SPIRIT ENABLES US TO WAIT FOR THE HOPE OF RIGHTEOUSNES# 
By FAITH. 1. He strengthens faith, As it was the Spirit who first imparted faith, in 
the act of regeneration, so it is the Spirit who sustains it in exercise through all the 
stages of Christian destiny. 2. He gives a glorious view of the hopes wrapped up in 


the righteousness. 8, He acts upon our power of waiting as being the Spirit of prayer 
(Rom. viii. 26). 


Ver. 6.— The essential principle of Bible Christianity. After condemning circumcision 
he qualifies his statement to the extent of making it neither better nor worse than 
uncircumcision. But then he reduces them both to the one level of religious inept- 
ness. Consider— 

I. THz rowER oF CHRISTIANITY CONSISTS NOT IN DISTINCTIONS LIKE THOSE WHICH 
SEPARATE JEW AND GenTILE. “In Christ Jesus neither circumcision availeth any- 
thing, nor uncircumcision.” A man is not saved because he is circumcised, nor lost 
because he is not. Circumcision does not introduce a man into union with Christ, and 
the mere absence of it does not lead to a deeper fellowship with the Saviour. It is, 
therefore, a mistake to have the form of godliness without the power. 

1. THE TRUE POWER OF CHRISTIANITY LIES IN FAITH WORKING BY LOVE. 1. 
Faith is fundamental in Christian life, at least on man’s side, as regeneration is funda- 
mental on God’s side. This fact is not inconsistent with the fact that Christ himself 
is the only Foundation, for he is the Foundation absolutely, whether we believe in him or 
not; but faith is the foundation which we lay when weare enabled through the Divine 
Spirit to place ourselves on the true Foundation laid in Zion. 2. 7ὲ is not a mere his- 
torical faith, nor a speculative belief in doctrines, which may be allied with a cold and 
unloving heart; for “it worketh by love.” It is not, therefore, a “dead faith.” 8. It is 
justifying farth, for it is the instrument of our justification; and it is perfect in itself 
so far as it apprehends the righteousness of Christ. The Romish idea, that it is “ faith 
made perfect by love,” is founded ona mistranslation, for the verb is not the passive, but 
the middle, as always in the New Testament, and is opposed to the doctrine of the 
apostle, which is that faith is not a work and has no merit, and by its very relation to 
justification protests agaiust the merit of all human works. 4. Jt is at the same time 
an operative faith ; for “it worketh by love.” It is, indeed, a mighty power. “It 
overcomes the world.” Love is the channel in which faith flows forth to bless the 
world. (1) It is evident that love does not work of itself; it works in the strength of 
faith. No man loves a Saviour whom he cannot trust. All who are united to Christ 
by faith become partakers of his Spirit, one of whose fruits is love (ver. 22); and 
this love is the principle of all obedience (Rom. xiii. 10). (2) Love is faith’s metal, for 
into the mould of love does faith pour love itself. (3) Love flourishes exactly as faith 
flourishes. If, through distress, you begin to doubt the Lord’s goodness and wisdom, 
there is a fear that the heart will become cold toward him. The faith and the love will 
increase or diminish together. (4) Though faith worketh by love, the love reacts upon 
faith and adds to its power, Love leads to admiration, for it sees Christ’s love, faithful- 
uess, and power; and faith says at once, “1 can trust him more than ever.” But love 


cH v. 1—26.] THE EVISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 269 


likewise forbids unbelief. Was there ever true love in man or woman that it did not 
forbid distrust? The want of mutual confidence in the marriage relation is the death 
of love. (5) Faith and love are the great allied principles of Christian life. A Puritan 
divine says, “ Faith and love are the two arms and the two eyes without whick 
Nhrist can neither be seen nor embraced.” Another says, “ Faith and love are the two 
conduits lain from the Christian soul to the Fountain of living waters, fetching in 
from thence a daily supply of such grace as will certainly end in a fulness of glory.” 
(6) The pregnant statement of the apostle condemns alike all hypocrites and legalists, as 
well as all who are careless or slothful in the Lord’s service, 


Vers. 7—9.—The sudden swerve of the Gulatians from the truth. They had been 
making a hopeful progress in the truth, when they suddenly started aside through the 
influence of the Judaists, to the deep sorrow and unfeigned astonishment of the apostle. 
Mark— 

I, THe CHRISTIAN LIFE IS A 6000 RacE, “ Ye did run well.” An old divine says, 
“To run in religion is well, to tun well is better, and to accomplish the race is the best 
of all.” It is well in its beginning; so it was emphatically in Galatia: it is well in its 
progress, and the apostle gives us a fine example of running in his own case—‘ he 
pressed to the mark, for the prize” (Phil. iii. 14): and it is well in its end (Heb. xii. 
1). There are three things here to be considered. 1. The course. “To obey the truth.” 
This the Galatians were ceasing to do under alien influence. The truth of the gospel 
already hinted at (ch. ii. 5, 14), as opposed to every perversion or modification, was the 
clearly marked course for the believer’s race; and it was truth, not merely apprehended 
with the intellect or admired by the imagination, but obeyed from the heart, realizing, 
in fact, “‘ the obedience of faith.” 2, The condition. ‘Looking to Jesus, the Author and 
Finisher of our faith ” (Heb. xii. 2), for guidance, strength, acceptance, comfort, and 
eternal life (Jude 20, 21). ‘To use a phrase of old Berridge, “‘ Galatian anvils might 
be used to hammer the doctrines of grace as thin as possible,” soas eventually to check 
the progress of the gospel altogether; for salvation is entirely of grace, and that 
grace through Jesus Christ. 8, The prize is a crown of life (Rev. ii. 10), a crown of 
righteousness (2 Tim. iv. 7, 8), an unfading crown (1 Cor. ix. 25; 1 Pet. v. 4). 

11. Hinprances IN THE CHRISTIAN RACE. “ Who did hinder you?” The fact is 
instructive that such hindrances arise; but they ought to teach us the lesson of our 
entire dependence on Christ for strength and protection (John xv. 4), and the necessity 
of constant watchfulness (Mark xiii. 87). The apostle’s mode of asking the question, 
“Who did hinder you?” 1. Implies astonishment at the sudden perversion of the Gala- 
tians. 2. It asserts that it did not spring from any Divine call: “ 10 cometh not from him 
that calleth you” (Rom. ix. 11, 24; 1 Cor. i. 9; vii. 15); it is, indeed, inconsistent 
with all the purposes included in the effectual call of God. 3. The question has a 
conciliatory aspect; for he does not, at least primarily, charge the perversion upon 
themselves, but upon their Judaistic seducers. 4. Its answer pointed to these seducers, 
concerning whom we may infer that: (1) They were few. He does not ask the question 
to ascertain the name of the individual who had led them astray ; but it is significant 
that twice over he speaks of him as an individual person, “ Who (τίς) did hinder you ?” 
“He that humbleth you.” It is true that the seducers are also spoken of in the 
plural number: “I would they were even cut off which trouble you.” ‘I'he two forms 
of phraseology imply that they were few, but that there may have been some one man 
of commanding influence among them. (2) Their influence was not grounded in 
argument, but in “‘ persuasion ;” for they dexterously flattered the pride of the Galatians 
and worked upon their devotional feelings. Religious seducers have a wonderful art of 
“beguiling” unwary souls “with enticing words” (Col. ii. 4). Christians ought, 
therefore, to beware of credulousness in spiritual things. (8) Their influence, as well a: 
their doctrine, was essentially evil, though at present it might be but “a little leaven.” 
“ Leaven” is here used in a bad sense for the principle of corruption. ‘Beware of the 
leaven of the Pharisees.” But the apostle here refers to persons, not to doctrines, for 
he could never speak of the Judaistic heresy as “a little leaven” since it superseded 
Christ. (4) Their influence threatened to grow. Leaven was infectious. “A little 
leaven leaveneth the whole lump.” The Judaists, by their arts and their fatteries, might 
yet debase the entire Christianity of Galatia. 


270 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. (cu. v. 1-26, 


ID. THE NECESSITY FOR INQUIRING INTO THE CAUSES OF RELIGIOUS BAOKSLIDING. 
1. The question of the apostle implies this necessity. 2. There is danger in neglect- 
ing the inquiry. The “little leaven” would thus have time to work unhindered. 
8. Our inquiry ought to bear practical fruit. If we have been hindered from runnirg 
well, let us seek the cause, and apply for restoring grace by prayer, repentance, and 
faith (Hos. xiv. 1,8, 8). If we have been restored from falls or preserved from 
hindrances, let us caution others of their danger (Heb. iv. 1) and concern ourselves 
about their welfare (Luke xxii. 82) and restore the fallen in a spirit of meekness (ch. 
vi. 1), ‘Vhus it will be manifest that to run well must be conducive to our present 
comfort, to our abiding usefulness, and to our future happiness. 


Ver. 10.—The apostle’s sanguine hopes of Galatian recovery. The swerve toward 
ritualism was in its mere incipiency, Therefore he assumes a hopeful tone in dealing 
with the Galatians as a Church. “ He fears the worst, but hopes the best.” 

1. THE GROUND OF HIS HOPEFUL CONFIDENCE. “In the Lord.” It is good to be of a 
hopeful temperament, and good to have good men to think well of our state, as their 
judgment will be according to truth and charity. The ground of the apostle’s confidence 
was not (1) that there would be any change in the temper or arts of the seducers; for 
“they always wax worse and worse” (2 ‘Lim. iii. 13); (2) nor in the force of his own 
argumentative expostulations, nor in a mere return of that affection for him which was 
once so ardent and so self-sacrificing; but (3) “in the Lord” himself, who had power to 
recover them out of their error. “ Paul may plant, and Apollos water ; but it is God who 
giveth the increase” (1 Cor. iii. 7). It is he, and he only, who can make the Galatians 
“like-minded” with the apostle, by blessing his reproofs, his arguments, his tender 
urgencies of appeal. 

II. Tue UNSETTLING TENDENCY OF FALSE TEACHERS. The Greek word is very 
expressive—‘ he who excites tumults among you,” or who “disturbs you.” Perhaps the 
apostle had in view a particular teacher who was specially dangerous. Such teachers 
(1) shake old principles from their firm foundations; (2) shake the hearts of men by 
unsettling doubts and distracting conflicts ; (3) and shake the stability of Churches, 
often scattering the flock as sheep without a shepherd. 

Il]. ΤΉΞΕΒΕ 1s A JUDGMENT FOR RELIGIOUS SEDUCERS. He“ shall bear his judgment, 
whosoever he be.” 1. It will be a just judgment. It will be according to his works, 
His end will be, as the apostle implies, a sure condemnation. 2. The judgment will 
not be averted by the hivh opinion seducers entertain of themselves, nor by their 
high position in the Church, nor by the high esteem in which they may be held by 
man. 


Ver. 11.—A false imputation repelled. Perhaps one of the false teachers might say 
that the apostle was himself one of the subverters of the gospel, for he had circumcised 
Timothy. “And I, brethren, if I yet preach circumcision, why do I yet suffer perse- 
cution ? then is the offence of the cross ceased.” 

I. 11 18 RIGHT FOR GOOD MEN TO REPEL FALSE ACCUSATIONS AGAINST THEIR OHARACTER. 
There are ultra-spiritual people in our day who decline to notice attacks upon them- 
selves, because, as they say, the Lord will preserve their character; and yet they are 
often found to do unlovely and uncharitable things condemned both by the Church and 
the world. ‘The apostle could well say, at one time, that for him it was but a small 
matter that he should be judged by man’s judgment; but he as pointedly says, * Let 
not your good be evil spoken of ;” “Let your moderation be known to all men;” and he 
counsels ‘Timothy that deacons “‘ must have a good report from them that are without.” 
He himself always resolutely defended his moral consistency. 

11. ConsiIDER THE SOUNDNESS AND RELEVANCY OF HIS ANSWER. 1. He makes no 
allusion to the case of Timothy, because that could not justify the Judaistic doctrine of 
circumcision. It was not because he deemed the rite necessary for Timothy’s salva- 
tion, but to meet the scruples of weak Christian Jews, that he became for the time “as 
a Jew to the Jews.” 2. He asks, “ If I preach circumcision still, why do you persecute 
me?” IfI preached circumcision, 1 should not be persecuted. I should be exactly 
where you are. 3, But that position would imply that “ the offence of the cross had 
ceased.” The cross was 8 stumbling-block to the Jews, because their Saviour wae 


on. v. 1—26,] THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 271 


presented to them in circumstances of humiliation, as a crucified Man. But it waa 
doubly so when it appeared as the very means of atonement, so that a Jew, by simply 
be.ieving in Christ, might, without legal observances, be saved. The cross is still an 
offence to more than Jews or Greeks, for it humbles the pride of man, it dethrones al! 
priesthoods, and makes the sinner directly dependent for salvation upon the Lord himself. 
It humbles man’s pride; yet, “‘whosoever believeth in him shall not be ashamed.” The 
gospel is throughout the religion of a crucified Saviour and of a ruined sinner; not a 
mere system of morals, nor a mere revelation of truth, but a scheme of remedial mercy. 
We cannot alter it or shape it in accordance with the false philosophizings of the 
world, ‘ Blessed is the man whosoever shall not be offended in me.” 


Ver. 12.—A fierce stroke of apostolic irony. The apostle had been so profoundly 
stirred by the false accusations of the Judaizers and their fanatical zeal for circumcision, 
which was, after all, a mere “ glorying in the flesh,” that he throws out a wish that 
those who were trying to unhinge Galatian Christianity would themselves exemplify 
this “ glorying” to the extent that was so familiar among the worshippers of Cybele at 
Pessinus, one of the towns of Galatia. His readers would have no difticulty in under- 
standing the allusion. If circumcision was good, the priests of Cybele had something 
better to offer, It was a piece of contemptuous sarcasm, which exhibits the passionate 
feeling of the apostle caused by their unceasing efforts to undermine the gospel for the 
sake of a mere mark in the flesh, 


Ver. 13.—The meaning of Christian liberty. The false teachers descrve this severity 
of treatment, for they would deprive you of your liberty. 

I. Tus CuRIsTIAN CALLING 18 TO LIPERTY. He had already counselled them to stand 
fast in the liberty wherewith Christ had made them free (ver. 1}—a liberty which lifted 
them out of legal bondage, and, above all, destroyed the yoke of ancient ceremonialism ; 
and now these Judaizers were attempting to strike at the root of their calling, 

11. THE DEEP AND UNCHANGEABLE DISTINCTION BETWEEN LIBERTY AND LICENTIOUS- 
ness. “ Only use not liberty for an occasion to the flesh.” This counsel was specially 
aceded for a Celtic people emerging out of the old immoral paganism. It shows: 1, 
That duty ts not destroyed by liberty. Their escape from legal bondage did not involve 
the annihilation of all moral restraints or the abrogation of the moral Law. In fact, 
the gospel brings believers under a weightier obligation to duty than the Law possibly 
ean do, for it brings upon the believer the mighty constraint of Divine love (2 Cor. v. 
14). They were no longer justified by the Law, but the Law was still a rule of life. 
The Antinomians of Germany and England held that believers were under Law in 
no sense; that they were under no obligations to obedience; and therefore were ready 
enough to use their liberty under the gospel “for an occasion to the flesh.” It is still 
very necessary to emphasize the obligations of Christian people under the gospel, for 
gross immoralities have been committed by men with an extravagant view of gospel 
Jiberty. Christ came to call sinners to repentance, not to licentiousness; to take his yoke 
upon them, and yield their members instruments of righteousness unto holiness, 2. 
Christian people ought to use their liberty wisely, There is a margin left for human 
discretion in the application of gospel principles. Perhaps a too free use of our Christian 
liberty has often become an occasion of sin. Therefore a Christian divine suggests that 
Ἢ matters of duty we ought to do too much rather than too little, but in matters of 
indifference we should rather take too little of our liberty than too much, 

ΠῚ. THE ONLY BONDAGE ALLOWABLE IN CHRISTIANITY 18 MUTUAL LovE. “ But by 
love serve one another.” There is an antithetic force in the original, which is not so 
sbvious in the translation : If you must have bondage, let it be the bondage of mutual 
hove. Love is to be the means by which the mutual bondage is to be manifested. 1. 
This bondage is not degrading. Though they were servants of each other, they were 
not masters of each other. “All ye are brethren.” Christ himself is our example in 
this service: “I am among you as one that serveth.” This one fact lifts this duty to 
an incomparable height of dignity and impressiveness, 2. It is this which will keep 
your liberty from degenerating into licentiousness. Their love for one another, grounded 
in their love for God, would set them upon all opportune ways of benefiting each other, 
Thus love is the one debt always to be discharged and always due. “Owe no man 


272 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. fou. νυ. 1—26, 


anything, but to love one another” (Rom. xiii. 8). The counsel of the apostle seems to 
suggest the existence in Galatia of factious quarrels and unchristian isolations. 


Ver. 14.—The spirit of the Law. Mutual service was only possible through mutual 
love, and this love was expressly commanded in the Law, which says, “ Thou shalt love 
thy neighbour as thyself.” 

I. Waat Is THE Law WHICH FINDS ITS FULFILMENT IN Love? It is not the law of 
Christ, nor the law of liberty, nor the law of the Spirit of life, but the very Law of which 
the apostle has been speaking all through the Epistle. His reaaers could not have 
understood him if he had used the term “Law” in a different sense. It follows, therefore, 
that the Law must still be in force, because its essential commandcment, love, remains 
for perpetual fulfilment. Love was always, even in Old Testamext times, the fulfil- 
ment of the Law. The sum of the Decalogue is love (Matt. xxii. 40). The apostle 
says, “ He that loveth another hath fulfilled the Law” (Rom. xiii. 8, 9); but this does 
not imply, as Antinomians say, that if we have love we have nothing to do with the 
Law. Believers are exhorted, in the passage quoted, to love one another on the ground 
of its being a requirement of the Law. It is absurd, then, for the Antinomians to talk 
of love as being higher than Law, for love is just the fulfilling of the Law, and nothing 
more. A perfect love would keep the whole Law. It is, therefore, absurd for Roman 
Catholics to affirm that love justifies as well as faith, because love fulfils the Law. Sin 
hinders the perfection of our obedience, and therefore love cannot perfectly fulfil the 
Law. 

II. How Loving ovk NEIGHBOUR FULFILS THE Law. It is the want of love that leads 
men to commit murder, adultery, theft, false witness. If we rightly loved our neigh- 
bour, these sins would be impossible. But we cannot rightly love our neighbour till we 
have loved God. “ He that loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, how can he love 
God whom he hath not seen?” ‘This is the love of God, that (ἔνα) we may keep his 
commandments.” ‘There is a necessary connection between love to God and love to cur 
neighbour (1 Cor. viii. 1—8). 

IIL Tnere 185 NOTHING HIGHER IN THE SPHERE OF DUTY THAN THIS LOVE. The Posi- 
tivists assume that they have discovered in “altruism” a principle hizher than either 
Law or gospel ever taught. Whereas we are commanded in Scripture to love our 
neighbour as ourselves, the Positivists say that we ought to love him better than 
ourselves. We are to deny ourselves for the sake of others. This is Chrisi’s idea; but, 
if there be no future life, it would be the mark of a fool, and not of a hero, to deny 
myself for anybody. The idea of altruism, however, fails to realize itself in the lives 
of Positivists. Besides, if one’s own happiness ought not to be a good to himself, there 
is no reason why he should secure happiness for another. In a few years it will make 
no difference to me what I have been, whether I have practised altruism or not. The 
world has not yet discovered a principle for regulating human relationship that can 
supersede Christianity. 


Ver. 15.—The evil effects of heresy. “ But if ye bite and devour one another, take 
heed that ye be not consumed one of another.” 

L Heresy GENDERS BITTER DISPUTES. The presence of the Judaists would naturally 
cause constant strife, whether they succeeded or whether they failed, for the Galatians 
would take sides, and be thus launched into endless debate. The strifes, of which 
Church history is so full, are not due to the truth, but to the efforts of errorists to 
Gebase it or to destroy it. Believers are bound to contend earnestly for the faith once 
delivered to the saints. 

II. THE INJURIOUS EFFECT OF DISSENSIONS UPON THE CuuRcH. 1. They put an end 
to Christian peace. Spiritual life is impoverished and all but killed, 2. They injure 
the credit, character, and usefulness of Christian people. ‘“ Hatred, envy, reviling, are 
as the teeth of snakes and lions” (Starke). If Christians appear to bite and devour 
one another, the world will receive an impression of extreme cruelty in the character of 
the followers of the gentle Jesus. 

11. THEY TEND TO SCATTER AND DESTROY THE CHURCH. ~ Ye will be consumed one 
of another.” The contest will not end in a victory to either party, but will end in the 
common extinction of both. he idea is taken from wild beasts which tear their 


JH, ¥. 1-26.) THE EPISTLE TO THH GALATIANS, 218 


victims to pieces till nothing is left. “Dissolution is the daughter of dissension ” 
(Nazianzen), ‘The Gentiles, seeing Christians quarrelling, would be repelled from 
Christianity, converts would go back to their old heathenism or their old Judaism, and 
the Christian community might be entirely broken up. 


Vers. 16—18.—The life and warfare of the Spirit in the soul. This important 
passage suggests a comprehensive view of the Spirit’s work in the believer’s life. 

I, THE work OF THE SPIRIT IN THE BELIEVER. 1. “ Walk in the Spirit.”. Nothing 
sould be more descriptive of the natural effect of the spiritual change produced in 
regeneration. The new-born child soon discovers symptoms of activity. The language 
of the passage reminds us: (1) Of our dependence on the Spirit. It is not enough that 
we begin the Divine life; we must maintain it through all its stages and experienccs, 
The exercises of a believer are only effectual by the Spirit. (2) Zé implies consistency. 
Our life must be in harmony with the mind of the Spirit. His will must be our 
constant guide. “Therefore grieve not the Holy Spirit.” “The fruit of the Spirit is 
in all goodness and righteousness and truth.” Only thus can we walk in the Spirit. 
(8) Jé implies progress. If we walk, we make progress in our journey. “Enoch 
walked with God.” 2. Led by the Spirit. This implies an entire surrender of our- 
selves to the authority and guidance of the Spirit. The traveller in a strange land 
must follow his guide. So the believer is led by the Spirit with the Word, which is 
the chart of his journey through life. The term implies, not an isolated act of the 
Spirit, but a continuous help provided through all parts of a believer’s life. 

11. THE REASONS BY WHICH WE ARE HERE URGED TO MAINTAIN OUR DEPENDENCE 
ὍΡΟΝ Tur Spinir. 1. There will be no fulfilling the lusts of the flesh. This is self- 
evident. The Spirit’s guidance will keep us apart from all sinful indulgences, from all 
earthliness, from all the sins and purposes of the merely natural man. The Spirit and 
the flesh exclude one another. We shall not trust in our own strength, and so we 
shall be kept; we shall consult his will supremely, and he will deliver us from the 
perversities and delusions of our own will. 2. The warfare between the firsh and the 
Spirit demands extreme care on our part to be always in the Spirit’s complete disposal, 
(1) The conflict in question is inevitable. Indwelling sin is the calamity of all the 
people of God. Two powers are at work within one and the same person. If there 
were no such strife, with the irreconcilable antagonism involved in it, there could be 
no grace. “The flesh lusteth against the Spirit.” It uses the senses to mar the 
Spirit’s power. It presents to the eyes what will inflame evil passions; it appeals 
through the ear to appetite; it finds the tongue often too ready to serve its purposes, 
“The Spirit lusteth against the flesh.” He is there entrenched within the soul and 
will not be dislodged. He uses the senses—the eye, the ear, the tongue, the hand, the 
foot—for the purposes of edification, He conveys thoughts, suggests impressions, and 
imparts motives, which restrain, guide, and influence the soul. (2) The effects of the 
conflict. “So that ye cannot do the things that ye would.” This implies that the 
believer would be free from temptation, but he cannot; he would uninterruptedly serve 
God, but he cannot; he would be perfect as God is perfect, but he cannot. It is a 
comfort, after all, to think that on account of the Spirit’s operation a believer cannot 
get doing all the evil he would. (8) This conflict is not without its spiritual advan- 
tages. It humbles the believer, by giving him a better knowledge of his sin; it makes 
him more watchful; it endears the Saviour to him ; it commends the riches of Divine 
grace; it calls into exercise all the graces of the Spirit and all the faculties of nis 
nature. It makes him long all the more for the rest of heaven. 3. The Spirit's 
ghidance exempts us from the Law. “If ye be led by the Spirit, ye are not under the 
Law.” The Galatians were for putting themselves again in subjection to Law and 
forgetting the free rule of the Spirit. “ Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is 
liberty.” It was necessary to remind them that they were now “dead to that in which 
they were held” (Rom. vii. 4), It was no longer to them “a Law of sin and death.” 
“The law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus” made them free from it. How, then, 
does the Spirit’s guidance set them apart from the Law? (1) The Spirit discovers the 
hopelessness of acceptance with God through Law. (2) He enables the believer to 
acquiesce in the blessed discovery that “Chiist is the end of the Law for righteousness 
so every one that believeth.” (8) He enables the believer to regard the Law in a new 

G@ALATIANS. τ 


274 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. [om. v. 1—Z6, 


light. It is now a rule of life. The believer does not tremble before it, because Christ 
fulfilled it. He delights in it after the inward man. It is to him a Law. of liberty, 
now that he is not really under it as a way of justification, 


Vers. 19—21.—Classification of the works of the flesh. The picture here exhibited 
by the apostle is a frightful abyss into which he asks us to look down. We have sin 
in its many varieties pictured in many parts of Scripture (Rom. i. 18—32; 2 Cor. xiii, 2), 
but here we have a most complete account of the works of the flesh. 

I. Tue worus oF THE FLESH. The flesh and the body are not synonymous, The 
apostle usually speaks of the body in terms of respect—unlike ascctics, who regard it as 
an enemy, load it with abusive epithets, and try to weaken it with fasts and vigils and 
penances. He always depreciates and condemns the flesh as a cunstantly evil tendency 
in our actual nature. ‘There are sins in this catalogue of an intellectual nature, which 
cannot be properly ascribed to the body, though they are true works of the flesh. The 
flesh represents, then, the whole system of corrupt nature, as it breaks forth into 
seventeen different forms of transgression. They fall naturally under four heads. 1. 
Sins of sensual passion. “ Fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness:” the first hardly 
reckoned a sin in pagan countries; the second including unnatural sins, which had a 
fearful import in the East; the third, the impure propensity indulged without check of 
reason or shame. All three are grouped together elsewhere (2 Cor. xii. 21). 2. Sins of 
superstition. ‘Idolatry, sorcery :” the first referring to the worship of false gods and 
of images, which was familiar to the Galatians in connection with idol-feasts; the 
second to the occult dealings with the world of spirits, so common in Asia Minor, 3, 
Sins of social disorder. ‘“ Hatred, strife, envy, outbursts of anger, cavillings, divisions, 
factions, envyings, murders.” It has been remarked that there is a climax in this 
catalogue of nine evils, for what begins in hatred ends in murder, after it has passed 
through a whole succession of disturbing and distracting experiences. They are all 
violations of brotherly love, representing the selfish, unyielding, bitter spirit, which too 
often enters into reactionary agitations both in Church and state, 4. Individual 
excesses. “ Drunkenness, revellings:” having exclusive relation to ourselves, not to 
others. The two terms refer to scenes of gay and wanton dissipation, 

II. THE WORKS OF THE FLESH HAVE AN OVERT CHARACTER. They are “ manifest.” 
The flesh, as the sinful principle, breaks out into open acts of transgression, which are 
manifest alike to God and man, manifest by the light of nature and by the Law of 
God. We see the history of the flesh in the whole record of man’s moral degradation 
and his resulting misery. These seventeen sins may not all be equally manifest, for 
some are gross and others more refined; they may not all be equally heinous in the 
sight either of God or of man; and many of them, hateful in God’s sight, carry no 
brand of social reprobation with man. Yet they are all manifest, open, tangible proofs 
of a life at enmity with God. 

III. THE apostotio warnina, “They who practise such things shall not inhent 
the kingdom of God.” 1. ‘The kingdom of God, founded by Christ, is a holy kingdom, 
and consists of those who have entered it by regeneration, who are led by the Spirit, 
who are heirs of the promise, who are “ made meet for the inheritance of the saints in 
light.” 2. Transgressors prove their want of meetness for it; they find no enjoyment 
in it; it has no attraction for them ; for these works of the flesh are altogether incon- 
sistent with the character of the kingdom of God. 

IV. THE NECESSITY THAT EXISTS FOR REPEATED WARNINGS AGAINST SIN. “I tell 
you before, as I have already told you in time past.” We need “ line upon line, precept 
upon precept,” to deepen the impression of the hatefulness of sin. It is well to 
convince sinners of their individual sins, that they may be shut up to fly to the Refuge. 


Vers. 22, 23.—* The fruit of the Spirit.” Here we have the picture of a lovely garden 
with all the choicest growths of the Spirit. 

]. Tae NINE GRACES OF THE Spirit, (1) The apostle speaks of the nize as consti- 
tuting the fruit of the Spirit, as if to imply that it takes all the nine, and no mere 
selection of graces out of them, to form the one fruit of the Holy Spirit. Qhristian 
character must be fully and harmoniously developed. (2) Mark the differenca between 
the works of the flesh and the fruit of the Spirit. Sin is our work; the graces are 


oH. ¥. 1—26.] THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 275 


the Spirit’s growth in us. (3) The nine graces throw themselves naturally into three 
groups, cach group consisting of three—the first group, “love, joy, peace,” touching 
our relations to God ; the gecond group, “ long-suffering, gentleness, goodness,” touching 
our relations to our fellow-men; the third group, “faith, meekness, temperance,” 
touching the regulation and conduct of our own individual Christian life. 1. First 
group. “Love, joy, peace.” They all spring out of the filial relation into which we are 
brought by faith in Christ. Love is the tie that binds our hearts to God as our Father ; 
joy is the glad emotion that springs up after our reconciliation with God ; peace is the 
summer calm that settles down upon the soul that has entered into its rest. Love has 
been called the foundation of the fabric ; joy, the superstructure ; peace, the crown of the 
work, Love has a primary place, for it is “shed abroad in the heart by the Holy 
Ghost.” Joy is dependent upon love, and may well be called “ joy of the Holy Ghost.” 
It is enshrined in the very heart of love. It rises and falls, with love itself, like the 
thin thread of mercury in the thermometer, by the action of the surrounding atmosphere. 
Peace is linked with joy “in believing.” Peace and joy are the two ingredients of the 
kingdom of God (Rom. xiv. 17). It is ‘the peace to which we are called in one body ” 
(Col. iii, 15), which will keep our hearts and. minds in the midst of all worldly 
agitations. 2. Second group. ‘ Long-suffering, gentleness, goodness.” ‘he first group 
blends naturally into the second, for there is a near relation between peace and long- 
suffering, ‘The graces of this group begin with the passive and end with the active, 
for long-suffering is the patient endurance of injuries inflicted by others; goodness is 
an active principle, not a mere kindly disposition; while gentleness or kindness is 
something between the two—a principle, however, which tends largely to promote the 
usefulness and the comfcrt of life, lessening the friction that enters more or less into all 
our intercourse with our fellow-men. 3. Third group. “ Faith, meckness, temperance.” 
These three graces refer to the regulation of Christian life. It is curions to find faith 
seventh, and not first, in this list of graces, Faith is the root-principle of all graces. It 
goes before love itself, for it “‘ worketh by love,” and it precedes joy and peace, which both 
spring from our believing (Rom. xv. 13). It has, therefore, been suggested that faith 
is here taken for fidelity, 'Ihere is no reason, however, for any departure from its usual 
meaning. Faith is here regarded, not as the means of salvation or as the instrument 
of our justification, but as the principle of Christian life, which controls and guides it. 
Thus faith supplies the strength of self-control that is implied in temperance, and is 
the secret spring of that meekness which is an ornament of great price. Temperance 
comes last in the list of graces, because self-control is the end of all Christian life. 
Like the governor in machinery, it adds nothing to the power at work, but it equalizes 
the power so as to produce a uniform type of work. ; 

II, ΜΑΒΚ THE SPECIAL PRIVILEGE THAT ATTACHES TO THESE NINE GRACES. “ Against 
such there is no Law.” There is Law against the seventeen works of the flesh—to 
condemn them ; but there is no Law to condemn the nine graces of the Spirit. There 
is Law to restrain the sinner—it exists for the purposes of this restraint—but in the 
graces of the Spirit there is nothing to restrain. ‘They all chime in with the requirce 
ments of the Law, because they radiate from that love which is the very fulfilling of 
the Law. Thus those who are led by the Spirit are not under Law. 


Ver. 24.—The distinguishing feature of Christianity. It is manifest in the very 
nature of the case that a Christian has crucified the flesh by virtue of his union with 
Christ. Mark here— 

I, THe MOST CHARACTERISTIC DESIGNATION OF TRUE BELIEVERS. “They that arc 
Christ’s.” The expression implies (1) that they are Christ’s by purchase, (2) by 
deliverance, (3) by possession, (4) by dominion. They are not his merely by external 
profession. [Ὁ is natural, therefore, that they should manifest the fruit of the Spirit. 

11. THE MosT CHARACTERISTIC PART OF CHRISTIAN LIFE. “ They crucified the flesh 
with the affections and lusts.” This points to a past act, to their conversion, in which, 
by virtue of their union with Christ, they were baptized into his death (Rom, vi. 4). 
The believer is “crucified with Christ” (ch. ii, 19), but here the flesh, with its seven~ 
teen categories of evil, is crucified likewise: “Our old man has been crucified with 
him” (Rom. vi. 6). Thus the flesh is robbed of its supremacy. ‘Thus union with 
Christ secures alike our salvation from the guilt and the power of sin. “When Christ 


276 HH BPISTLH TO THI GALATIANS. fot. ¥. 1—86, 


came in the flesh, we crucified him; when he comes into our hearts, he crucifies us.” 
The flesh, with its passions and lusts, represents vice on its passive and active sides. 


Ver. 25.— The consistency of the Christian life. If the flesh has thus been crucified, 
we live by the efficacy of the Spirit. “ Crucified: . . . nevertheless I live” (ch. ii. 20). 

L Our Curistian LIFE Is BY THE Spirit. “If we live by the Spirit.” This Ife 
consists in the knowledge of God, in his love, in his favour, in his image, 1. It is 
originated by the Holy Spirit. We are dead in trespasses and sins; it is the Spirit 
which giveth life. He is “the quickening Spirit” (John vi. 63); “a Spirit of life” 
(Rom. viii. 2). 2. It is maintained by the Spirit. “We live by the Spirit.” “He 
abideth with us.” 

II. Our ΟἨΒΙΒΤΙΑΝ WALK Is BY THE Spirit. “ Let us also walk by the Spirit." There 
must be a principle of life before it can become manifest in the outward conversation. 
There must be a correspondence between the outward walk and the inner standard. 
The walk here referred to points to something very orderly and deliberate, like the 
walk of soldiers marching in rank. This walk includes (1) the guidance of the Spirit 
(Rom. viii. 14); (2) the support of the Spirit (Eph. iii. 16); (3) the drawings of the 
Spirit: “So that ye walk after the Spirit” (Rom. viii. 1, 4); (4) the growth of the 
character in all the fruit of the Spirit (ver. 22). 


Ver. 26.—No departure allowed from the spiritual standard. If the Spirit is our 
Guide and Upholder, there ought to be no room for the indulgence of a proud or con- 
tentious or envious dispositien. ᾿ 

I. ΝΑΙΝ-ΟΙΟΕΥ. “Let us not become vain-glorious.” A mild and suggestive 
warning against an evil only in its incipiency. It is vain because it rests on no basis 
of reality; because, like a bubble, it bursts in a moment and is seen no more; because 
it leads to strife and envy. 

11. “ Provoxine one anoTHeEr.” This applies to the habit of challenging others to 
combat, as if Galatian Christianity had not been already sufficiently spoiled by con- 
troversies. 

III. “ Envyine ong anoruer.” The challenges of the strong might excite the envy 
of the weak. How beautifully the gospel calls the saints to peace, not to doubtful 
disputations! 


HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 


Vers. 2—12.—Falling from grace. Paul in the present section exposes the legal 
and ceremonial spirit as a fall from the moral magnificence of grace. It has been well 
said that “it is harder to abolish forms than to change opinions. Ceremonies stand 
long after the thought which they express has fled, as a dead king may sit on hiy 
throne stiff and stark in his golden mantle, and no one come near enough to see that 
the light is gone out of his eyes and the will departed from the hand that still clutches 
the sceptre.” Circumcision was such a form, and against its improper use Paul has 
all through this Epistle to protest. The thought of the present section is elevating and 
sublime. Let us follow the outline 

I, PAUL HERE IMPLIES THE MORAL MAGNIFICENCE OF SALVATION BY GRACE. (Vers. 4, 5.) 
Yor when we consider how this plan of salvation turns our minds away from self ta 
God in Christ, giving all the glory to the Saviour and taking all the blame to self, wa 
see that it is morally magnificent. Self-confidence is destroyed, and confidence in 
Christ becomes all in all. ‘I'he whole sphere of activity is illumined by devotedness 
to him who has lived and died for our redemption. Gratitude thus is the foundation 
of morality, and all idea of merit is put out of sight. The more the gospel is studied 
as a moral system, the more marvellous and magnificent will it appear. This will 
further exhibit itself if we consider what the working principle of the gospel is. It is, 
as Paul here shows, “faith working through love” (ver. 6, Revised Version), And faith 
is the mightiest factor in the world’s progress. Suppose that faith were supplanted 
by suspicion, and men, instcad of trusting one another, lived lives of mutual suspicion, 
the world’s progress would come speedily to an end. ‘he gospel, then, takes thia 
mighty principle of faith and, turning it towards Christ, it secures love as its practical 


on, ¥. 1-26.) THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 21) 


outcome. Love to God and consequent love to men becomes the iaw of our lives, All 
that is lovely is thus evoked, and the system proves its moral magnificence and 
practical power. 

Il. Iv 18 THE CHARACTERIST#H OF LEGALISM TO DEPRECIATE THE oRoss. (Ver. 11.) In 
a scheme of free grace the cross of Jesus Christ is central and all-important. How 
could selfish hearts be emancipated from their selfishness, had not the Holy Spirit the 
tross of Christ to move them? The cross is the self-sacrifice of incarnate love, and 
the grandest appeal of all history for self-sacrifice in return. It is, moreover, a fact 
and not a ceremony; ἃ fact which bears no repetition, and which stands in its moral 
grandeur alone. But legalism comes in to depreciate if possible its moral value. The 
insinuation is thrown out that circumcision is essential to the efficacy of the cross. 
The cross is made out to be a mere adjunct to the Jewish ceremonial. Its offence 
ceases, It is no such instrument of self-sacrifice as it was intended to be. The brave 
apostle who preaches “ Christ crucified ” as the only hope of salvation is persecuted for 
doing so, and the whole legal band arrays itsclf against him. It is thus that the legal 
spirit depreciates and dishonours the Crucified One, 

TIL, ALL THis IMPLIES IN THE LEGAL SPIRIT A FALL FROM GRACE. (Ver. 4.) This is 
the key of the present passage. ‘The soul, which so depreciates the cross as to go away 
and to try to save itself by ceremonies, has fallen from a moral grandeur into deepest 
selfishness. Christ profits in nothing the soul who is bent on saving himself. The 
righteousness of Christ, which is unto all and upon all them that believe, cannot consist 
with the self-seeking and self-confidence which self-righteousness implies. We must 
choose our saviour and adhere to him. If our saviour is to be ceremony, which is 
only another way of saying that our saviour is ourselves, then we may as well renounce 
all hope of salvation by Christ. We sever ourselves from Christ when we seek to be 
justified by the Law (Revised Version). We have descended in the scale of motive ; 
we have taken up the selfish plan; we have “ fallen away from grace.” 

IV. Pavt ANTICIPATES THAT HIS EXPOSURE OF LEGALISM WILL CURE THE GALATIANS 
or it. (Ver. 10.) He believes that legalism will be destroyed and rooted up by laying 
bare its real meaning. The leaven will not be allowed to spread. It is most important 
in the same way to be meditating constantly upon the magnificence of the gospel 
system as a moral system, Thus shall we prize it more and more, and never think of 
surrendering it for any rival and selfish system.—R, M. Εἰ, ᾿ 


Vers. 13—15.—The liberty of love. Having shown the magnificence of the gospel 
system, Paul now proceeds to define that freedom which it secures. It is not licence, 
but love, which it induces; and love not only fulfils the Law, as legalism does not, but 
also prevents the bitter strife which legalism ensures. We have the following points 
suggested :— 

I. THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN LICENCE AND LIBERTY. (Ver. 13.) The grace which 
has freed us from the legal spirit has not endowed us with a liberty to live licentiously. 
The liberty it gives is totally distinct from licence. Licence is liberty to please our- 
selves, to humour the flesh, to regard liberty as an end and not a means. But God in 
his gospel gives no such liberty. His liberty is a means and not an end; it is liberty 
to live as he pleases, liberty to love him and love men, liberty to serve one another 
by love. We must guard ourselves, then, from the confusion of mistaking licence for 
liberty. 

Il. aye 18 THE REAL LIBERTY. (Ver. 13.) As a matter of experience we never 
feel free until we have learned to love. When our hearts are going out to God in 
Christ, when we have at his cross learned the lesson of philanthropy, when we have 
felt our obligation to God above and to man below, then we are [ree as air and rejoice 
in freedom. Then we refuse licence as only freedom’s counterfeit, for we have learned 
a more excellent way. We cannot imagine a loveless spirit to be free. He may 
achieve an outlawry, but he is not, cannot be, free. 

Ili, Love 18 THE REAL FULFILMENT OF THE Law. (Ver. 14.) The lcgalists in their 
little system of self-righteousness spent their strength upon the mint, the anise, and 
the cummin; while the weightier matters of the Law—righteousness, judgment, and 
faith—were neglected. Ceremonies and not morality became their concern, The 
tithing of pot-herbs would entitle them to Paradise, In contrast to all this, Paul showa 


278 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. (cu. v. 1—26. 


that Christian love, which is another name for liberty, fulfils the demands of Law. 
The meaning of the commandments published from Sinai was love. Their essence 
is love to God and love to our neighbour, as well as to our “ better self.” . Hence the 
gospel throws no slight on Law, but really secures its observance. ‘The whole system 
turns on love as the duty and the privilege of existence. While the Law is, therefore, 
rejected as a way of life, it is accepted as a rule. Saved through the merits and grace 
of Christ, we betake ourselves to Law-keeping con amore. We recognize in God the 
supreme object of grateful love; we recognize in our neighbour the object of our love 
for God’s sake and for his own sake; and we honour the Law of God as “holy and just 
and good.” The whole difference between the legal spirit and the gospel spirit is that 
in the one case Law is kept in hope of establishing a claim ; in the other it is kept in 
token of our gratitude. The motive in the one case, being sclfish, destroys the high 
standard of Law. It fancies it can be kept with considerable completeness, whereas 
it is kept by the best with constant and manifold shortcoming. The motive in the 
other case, being disinterested, secures such attachment to the Law, because it has 
been translated into love, that it is kept with increasing ardour and success. Slaves 
will never honour Law so much as freemen. 

IV, Love 18 THE TRUE ANTIDOTE TO STRIFE AND Division. (Ver. 15.) The ritual- 
istic or legal spirit into which the Galatians had temporally fallen manifested itself in 
strife and bickerings. This is, in fact, its natural outcome. For if men are straining 
every nerve to save themselves by punctilious observance of ceremonies, they will come 
of necessity into collision. It is an emulation of a selfish character. It cannot be 
conducted with mutual consideration, Asa matter of fact, organizations pervaded by 
the legal spirit are but the battle-ground of conflicting parties. But love comes to set 
all right again, Its genial breath makes summer in society and takes wintry isolation 
and self-seeking all away. Mutual consideration secures harmony and social progress. 
Instead of religious people becoming then the butt of the world’s scorn by reason of 
their strife and divisions, they become the world’s wonder by reason of their unity and 
peace. It is, love, therefore, we are bound to cultivate. ‘Then shall concord and all 
its sgt ed blessings come into the Church of God and the world be subdued before it, 
—R. M. BE. 


Vers. 16—26.—Christian progress realized through antagontsm. We must not 
suppose, however, that the love which God gives us as our liberty can work out its 
will without experiencing opposition. Opposition we know it will meet in the world 
of selfish men; but Paul here points out the antagonism it meets within our own per- 
sonalities, The flesh antagonizes the Spirit. Love does not get its own sweet way as 
often as we would. Self becomes a battle-ground, and God contends with the flesh for 
the supremacy of the soul. So violent is the contention that the flesh is actually 
“ crucified with its affections and lusts.” We are introduced, therefore, to the law of 
Christian progress which, because of our sinful nature, has to be through antagonizing 
the sinful tendencies in the interest of love. Observe— 

I. Sin LEADS MAN TO FALL OUT WITH HIMSELF. (Ver. 17.) As Ullmann has 
beautifully said, “Man forms a unity, which is, however, only the foundation of that 
higher unity which is to be brought about in him, as a being made in the Divine 
image, by means of communion with God. Now, sin does not merely obstruct this 
unity, but sets up in its place that which is its direct opposite. He who has fallen 
away from God by sin, does, as a necessary consequence, fall out both with himself 
and with all mankind, True unity in man is possible only when that which is God- 
like iz him—that is, the mind—acquiesces in the Divine order of life, and governs 
the whole being in conformity therewith. But when he has once severed himself 
from the true centre of his being, that is, from God, then also does that element 
of his being, his mind, which is akin to God, and which was intended to be the 
connecting and all-deciding centre of his personal life, lose its central and dominant 
position; he ceases to be lord of himself. and of his own nature; the various powers 
which make up his complex nature begin to carry on, each for itself, an independent 
existence; the flesh lusteth against the spirit, and the spirit wages a fruitless war with 
the flesh (ver. 17); sinful desire becomes dominant, and while the man seems to 
be in the enjoyment of all imaginable liberty, he has lost the only true liberty and has 


cH. ν. 1—26.] THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 279 


tecome a slave to himself; for * whosoever committeth sin is the servant of sin’ (John 
viii. 834; Rom. vi. 16—23). He is the dependent of self; and being thus the slave of 
self, he is also the slave of pleasure, and of all those objects which it requires for its 
satisfaction.” Man becomes thus a distracted manifold, instead of a God-centred 
unity. 

11. Tue Spirit oF CHRIST ANTAGONIZES THE DISTRACTING TENDENCIES AND REDUCES 
MAN TO A UNITY AGAIN, The way in which we are united in heart and being is by 
having Jesus Christ pressed resistlessly upon our attention. Faith realizes-in Christ 
uot only a perfect personal Ideal, but also a Saviour on whom man may evermore 
depend. “The Christ of Christendom is not simply a Master to be loved and revered ; 
he is a Saviour to be leaned upon. His followers are to have that profound sense of their 
own weakness and sinfulness which renders them sensitive to the purifying and reforming 
influences that radiate from the personality of Jesus. Without this, their love for the 
ideal would lead to no practical results; it would be merely an esthetic sentiment, 
expending itself in a vague and fruitless admiration, But combine the two and you have 
the most effective reforming influence that the world has ever known.” Christ is not 
only the unifying element in Church life, but in the individual life as well. He fuses 
all the distracted faculties intoa glorious unity, and makes man his own master instead 
of his own slave. Hence, to quote the writer last referred to, “Christianity alone among 
all religions maintains a constant antagonism to the special tendency which controls 
the nature of its followers.” 

III. Bur positIvE FRUIT 18 PRODUCED BY THE ANTAGONIZING SPIRIT 48 A GLORIOUS 
SET-OFF ΤῸ THE WORKS OF THE FLESH WHICH HE DESTROYS. (Vers. 19—24.) Religion 
is not to be regarded as a negative thing, contenting itself with antagonisms, but has 
positive and most important fruits. It is not asystem of severe repressions, but a system 
full of stimulus towards a better and fuller life. It does not merely forbid “ fornication, 
uncleanness,” etc., under the penalty of exclusion from the kingdom of God, but it 
produces “love, joy, peace, long-suffering, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, meekness, 
self-control.” What a catalogue of virtues! What a contrast to the works of the flesh! 
Thus is man restored to something like his true and better self. The gospel of Christ 
is not a weary round of prohibitions, but is a glorious system of positive attainment, in 
a Divine life, which is loving, joyful, peaceful, and humane to its deepest depths. 

IV. AGAINST sUCH SPIRITUALLY MINDED ONES THERE OAN BE NO LAw OF CONDEMNA- 
TION. (Vers. 18—23.) Law, when translated into love, becomes light. God’s com- 
mandments are not grievous to the loving soul. In the keeping of them there is a 
great reward. Hence the Law presses heavily and hardly upou no loving spirit. 
“ There is therefore now no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, who walk 
not after the flesh, but after the Spirit” (Rom. viii. 1), It is tosuch a blissful experience 
we are asked to come.—R. M. Εἰ, ᾿ 


Vers, 2—12.—Circumecision. I, ῬΑΟΤ, SOLEMNLY PUTS BEFORE THE GALATIANS THE 
TRUE STATE OF THE CASE. “ Behold, I Paul say unto you, that, if ye receive circumcision, 
Christ will profit you nothing.” Commencing with an arresting word, he introduces 
lis own name with all the solemnity of oath-taking, witness-bearing. “ Behold, I Paul 
say unto you.” What the weight of his testimony is directed against, is their submit- 
ting to circumcision. This was what the Judaizing teachers were aiming at, and, seeing 
that they were making false representations, he declares to the Galatians, as if their 
destinies were at stake, the real state of the case. For them, Gentiles, and at the 
iustization of the Judaizers, to submit to circumcision would be excluding themselves 
from all advantage by Christ. It was either circumcision or Christ with them. There 
was no middle ground for them to take up. There was no submitting to circumcision 
and clinging to Christ at the same time. If they submitted to circumcision, they must 
make up their minds to forego all that they had hoped for from Christ. 1. How he 
makes it out that circumcision excluded them from Christ. (1) Circumcision implies 
an obligation to do the whole Law. “ Yea, I testify again to every man that receiveth 
circumcision, that he is a debtor to do the whole Law.” Again does he clear his con- 
science by emitting his solemn testimony. This testimony was more particularly 
directed to every. man among them that, under the influence of the Judaizers, had any 
thought +f submitting to circumcision. The apostle, as it were, takes him aside, and 


280 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. (cu. v. 1—26. 


earnestly and affectionately warns him. Let him consider what he is doing. He ia 
bringing himself under obligation to do the whole Law, and that personally, with this 
risk attached, that,'if he fails to do the whole Law, he comes under its curse. (2) Doing 
the whole Law excludes from Christ and grace. “ Ye are severed from Christ, ye who 
would be justified by the Law; ye are fallen away from grace.” The apostle takes the 
doing of the whole Law to be equivalent to the working out of the whole of their justi- 
fication. That was necessarily to the entire exclusion of Christ. There was nothing 
left for him to do. His work was made of none effect. They were severed from Christ 
and all the benefit of his work. They were thus fallen away from grace. Formerly 
they stood upon the merits of Christ, they had their Surety to answer for them; now 
they had themselves, immediately and fully, to answer to God for their Law-keeping. 
2. The case of Christians stated. (1) The expectancy of faith. “ For we through the 
Spirit by faith wait for the hope of rizhteousness.” The thought in its simplicity is 
that we hope for righteousness. This can only be the righteousness on the ground of 
which we are justified. There is a difficulty in this being presented as future, when 
it can be immediately and fully enjoyed. Some attempt to get over the difficulty by 
supposing the meaning to be the hope that belongs to righteousness, ¢.e. the hope of 
eternal life. But that is attaching a not very obvious meaning to the language. If we 
think of justifying righteousness as future, the reference can only be to the vindication 
of its sufficiency on the day of judgment, and further to the establishing of our personal 
interest in it on that day. The latter reference especially seems borne out by the 
associated language. We are represented as in the attitude of expectancy. We wait 
for the hope, t.e. now the realization of the hope of righteousness. This expectancy 
being based, so far as God is concerned, in the work of the Spirit on our hearts, and so 
far as we are concerned, in the exercise of faith, is based in reality, But being based 
at the same time in that which is not completed, it partakes of imperfection. We are 
not so sure as those Judaists were who rested on the fact of their being circumcised. 
We are not so absolutely sure as we shall be when judgment has been pronounced in 
our favour. We are confident that the righteousness of Christ will be shown to be 
all-sufficient as the ground of justification. And we hope, more or less confidently, 
according to the operation of the Spirit in our hearts and the working of faith, that it 
will be shown that we are possessors of that righteousness. (2) The energy of faith. 
“ For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision availeth anything, nor uncircumcision; but 
faith working through love.” The apostle here does not take so high ground with 
regard to circumcision. He had forbidden the Galatians to submit to circumcision, on 
the ground that it would exclude them from Christ. Here he puts circumcision on a 
level with uncircumcision, as availing nothing within the Christian sphere. Neither 
is what avails baptism, which has taken the place of circumcision. The outward form 
is a matter of indifference, unless as it is connected with the inward reality. What 
must ever be demanded is, as the representation is here—faith, and not a dead faith, 
but, according to the conception of Paul as well as according to the conception of 
James, 8 faith that is operative. And the energy of faith goes out in love. There is, 
as we are taught here, a blessed harmony between these two graces. If we believe that 
not only God is, but that he is inexhaustible Goodness, we must be drawn out in love 
towards him, And if we believe that the Son of God condescended to become man 
and devoted himself for us, we must be impelled out beyond ourselves towards the 
good of others. 

TI. CERTAIN BEARINGS OF THE CASE ON THE GALATIANS. 1, They were hindered in 
a good career. “Ye were running well; who did hinder you that ye should not 
obey the truth?” (1) Points in a goodcareer. (a) That it be directed to a right end. 
This is brought out in connection with their obeying the truth. Their career in 
heathenism was vitiated by their being involved in error. The true idea of life had not 
been revealed to them. But when they obeyed the truth they took Christ to be their 
end and undertook to shape their career according to the rules of Christ. And that is 
necessary to the commencement of a good career. (6) That it be commenced early. If 
the Galatians did not commence in early life, yet they commenced as soon as an 
opportunity in providence was presented to them, and so far they can be cited as an 
example of commencing early. It would have been a great advantage to them tc 
have been taught and moulded as Christians in youth, There would nov have beer 


ἡ 


on, v. 1—26.] THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 281 


their heathen education to unlearn and undo. The laws of association and habit would 
have been working all along in their favour. And there would have been more time 
in which to advance to excellence and usefulness. (c) That it be pursued with enthu- 
siasm. In the Galatians the warm Celtic temperament was warmed under the 
influences of the cross, It was this especially that called forth the admiration of the 
apostle. Thoy did run well; among his converts none had displayed greater enthusiasm 
in the Christian race. (ὦ) That it be pursued with steadiness. It was with regard to 
this that there was danger to the Galatians. Would they continue in their ardent 
attachment to the gospel? Would time cool their ardour, or would it be transferred 
to some other doctrine? Especially would they continue steadfast in the face of 
hindrances that made trial of them? It was that which was now being tested. (2) 
Hindrances. There are rocks and weeds which are put as hindrances in the way of the 
farmer cultivating the soil. There are difficulties to be overcome in connection with every 
worldly calling. We need not wonder, therefore, at there being difficulties in connection 
with the Christian calling. It is only by conquering difficulty after difficulty that we 
gain the heights of excellence. The greatest difficulties are those which arise from our- 
selves, from our own weak and treacherous hearts. But we are referred more here to 
hindrances which arise from others. “Ye were running well; who did hinder you?” In 
the word which is used there is an allusion to breaking up roads, by destroying bridges, 
raising barriers, There.is suggested, by opposition, a representation of what our duty 
is to our fellow-men. We are to act as pioneers, clearing the way before others by 
levelling high places, filling up hollows, throwing bridges across rivers. We are to act 
towards them so that they shall have not only no temptation to fall, but every helr 
to well-doing. And when there are those who throw obstacles across our path we are 
not to feel annoyed, as though we had only to deal with them. But we are to feel that 
Ged is making trial of us through them. And therefore we are not to succumb, but 
to persevere in the face of obstacles. Thus out of the eater shall come forth meat; 
out of our hindrances shall come forth the manly virtues. 2, Jé was not God who was 
seeking to persuade them to be circumcised, “This persuasion came not of him that 
calleth you.” Persuasion may mean either the state of being persuaded or the act of 
persuading. The latter seems more in keeping with the context. The course to which 
tbe Judaizers would have persuaded the Galatians would have been, in its consequences, 
disubedience io the truth. They would not attempt, we may suppose, to get them to 
set aside thecross, Their policy was rather to get them to add circumcision to the cross. 
This persuasion came not of him that called them. It was not in accordance, either 
with the idea that was in the Divine mind in calling them, or with the idea that was 
in their own minds in choosing the calling, which was in both cases making Christ 
everything in the road to everlasting happiness. It did not come from above, from the 
God who saved them and called them to everlasting glory, but it came {rom beneath— 
from the enemy of mankind. 38. He was afraid of the spread of error among them, 
“A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump.” On the one hand, the Judaists, in order - 
to gain their point, would be inclined to minimize its importance. On the other hand, 
the Galatians might think the Judaistic teaching had made very little way among 
them. The apostle puts them on their guard by telling them that a little leaven 
_leaveneth the whole lump, This saying also occurs in 1 Cor. v. 6. The reference 
there is to a case of gross immorality in the Corinthian Church. By tolerating such 
immorality, there would be danger of the whole Corinthian Church being lowered in its 
moral tone and practice. So by the introduction of a little Judaistic leaven, such as 
the toleration of the circumcision of a single Gentile convert, there would be danger of 
tne Christian communities of Galatia becoming Judaistic, ¢e. communities upon 
which the blessing of God would not rest, from which the Spirit of God would 
depart. And s0 a little leaven of carelessness in the household, in companionship, 
leavens the whole lump. 4. He had confidence in them that they would remain 
unchanged. “I have confidence to you-ward in the Lord, that ye will be none 
otherwise minded.” He had confidence that they would not change from a Christian 
to a Judaistic way of thinking. His confidence was not founded on reports received 
regarding them. For these, as we have seen, threw him into a state of perplexity. 
But he had confidence to them-ward in the Lord. He had confidence in the use of 
appointed means, He had confidence in the power of prayer. He had prayed to God on 


282 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. (on. v. 1—26. 


their behalf, that they might be none otherwise minded. He had confidence in bringing 
proper representations before their minds, as he had endeavoured to do, He had con- 
fidence especially in the great Head of the Church making use of the means in the 
interests of the Galatian Churches and of the whole Church. 5. The troubler would 
bear his judgment. “ But he that troubleth you shall bear his judgment, whosoever he 
be.” One is separated here, not as ringleader, but for the sake of individualization. Ho 
is represented as a troubler. He acts over the part of Satan who, seeing the happiness 
of Eden, envied our first parents its possession. So he, spying the peace and prosperity 
of the Galatian communities, cannot let them alone; he must introduce his Judaistic 
Ieaven. But this troubler, whosoever he be (thus searched out and held up before 
them), shall bear his judgment. God, indeed, makes use of him in making trial of 
them. And they shall be judged for the manner in which they have dealt with his 
representations—testing them or not testing them. But let him know that he shall 
have the sentence, and the burdensome sentence, of a troubler passed and carried out 
upon him. 6, /t was evident that he was no preacher of circumcision. “ But I, brethren, 
if I still preach circumcision, why am 1 still persecuted? then hath the stumbling-block 
of the cross been done away.” Weare not under any danger of attaching a materialistic - 
meaning to the cross. Whilst the wood to which were nailed Christ’s hands and feet 
has now long ago mouldered away, and has no existence unless in the imagination of the 
superstitious, the spiritual associations of it remain. It is the greatest fact that was 
ever accomplished on earth or ever brought to the knowledge of earth’s inhabitants, 
and which will not decay in time or in eternity—that the adorable Son of God, coming 
down to our human condition, once became obedient unto death, even the death of the 
cross. It is this which is set forth in Scripture as the Divine and only instrument of 
salvation. It was this which Paul made the great burden of his preaching. Whatever 
remedies or methods were proposed or advocated by others, ‘“ We,” says he, who was 
himself a wonderful trophy of the cross—‘ we preach Christ crucified.” But it was said 
in ‘Galatia for a purpose that he preached circumcision, ¢.e. in addition to the cross. 
He could easily have given an explanation of the circumstance on which this charge 
was founded, viz. his having circumcised Timothy; but taking the representation as 
it was—that he was actually a preacher of circumcision—he puts a question and draws 
aconclusion. (1) He puts a question, The very pertinent question he puts is—Why 
was he persecuted? Was it not the fact that it was the Judaizers who led to his 
being a prisoner for the gospel in Rome? Did that not show that they knew very well 
that there was a real and deep antagonism between their preaching and his? (2) He 
draws aconclusion. If this course, falsely attributed to him, were followed, to add cir- 
cumcision to the cross to please the Judaists, aud some other point to please some other 
party; if all parties were thus to be suited, then it strikes the apostle that this result 
would follow, the offence of the cross would cease, and that seems to him a most 
undesirable result, entirely to be deprecated. If the cross gives such satisfaction all 
round, and does not offend, as well, he thinks, stamp it a failure and proclaim abroad 
its utter inefficiency as a means of conversion. Wherein lies the offence, the scanda- 
lizing property, of the cross? It does not lie in its offending any true feeling or principle 
of our nature. In Christianity there is nothing that is wantonly harsh or rude. Its 
language is, “ Giving none offence.” ‘* Woe unto him by whom the offence cometh !” 
But the offence of the cross lies in its running counter to the inclinations of the 
unrenewed heart. It can be seen, then, how it could not be true, but must be a proved 
lie, if it did not offend; it would be giving in to the natural heart, which it is the 
purpose of God not to flatter, but to subdue. (a) The cross is an offence because tt does 
not merely please the imagination. Men are fond of ritualism in religion. Now, the 
cross is singularly simple and unadorned. In this respect it stands markedly in contrast 
with what preceded it. This is not pleasing to many, They would put ornaments 
upon the cross to take away its offensive simplicity. But that is a wrong tendency. 
The most beautiful rites and gorgeous shows, instead of drawing to the cross, as the 
meaning sometimes is, are more likely to usurp its place. The worshipper, instead of 
having his heart reached, is likely to have only his imagination pleased, Let the cross 
be left to its own simple power, though the imagination should be offended. It can do 
without ornaments on it in our day as well as it did in Paul’sday. (0) The cross is 
an offence because tt is humbling to pride of reason. 10 was to the Greeks foolishness, 


on. v. 1—26.] THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 283 


and so it is apt to be to intellectual people still—to the Greeks of the present day, to 
literary men, to the reading portion of the community. That is at least what all such 
have to surmount. The cross seems foolishness to them. They would like a difficult 
problem on which to exercise their intellects. “Now, in one sense, the cross is above 
r.ason, inasmuch as reason could never have found it out. But in another sense it is 
telow human reason; it is a revelation, a doctrine all found out for man, and a doctrine 
whick is level to the meanest understanding. The result of the philosophic craving 
was, at a very early period of the Church, the rise of Gnosticism. It was very much a 
blending of the Greek philosophy with Christianity. It was the religion of mind, those 
θαι δοίην it professing to have a deeper insight into Christian facts than the common 
people, who took them in their obvious sense. And since the disappearance of Gnos- 
ticism, there has been, again and again, and is at present in some quarters, an effort to 
consider the literary and reading class so as to give the cross a philosophic cast, with 
the view of attracting them. Now, there are some ways of speaking to intellectual 
people better than others, and nothing is to be hoped for from irrational or dry 
discourse, yet, if the cross is turned into a philosophy, it may attract some, but it is 
not likely to benefit them. Let the cross be presented as level to the lowest intellect ; 
let it be presented as a simple, divinely revealed fact, speaking to the heart more than 
to the intellect; let there be no fear to offend pride of intellect, which must be humbled 
before the soul can be saved. (c) The cross is an offence because it is humbling to self- 
righteousness. It isa strange infatuation of the natural heart that, with no righteous- 
ness to lay claim to, it is yet so natural to it to flatter itself with having a righteousness, 
The cross, going upon the supposition that we have no righteousness of our own, and 
that all the praise of our salvation is due to God, is an offence. In the Koman Catholic 
system there is a place given to works alongside of the merits of Christ, which is very 
pleasing to the feeling of self-righteousness. We are all apt to construct a theory of 
salvation in which there is a place left for self. Now, the cross must never be presented 
to please self-righteous people; that would be a fatal compromise. Let the cross be 
proclaimed as the impossibility of our own righteousness, as the grace of God in a 
righteousness freely provided for us. That is a doctrine which must offend, but it is 
the only doctrine that can satisfy the conscience. (ὦ) The cross is an offence because of 
its large demands. Jt demands that we forsake cherished sins, And that cuts into 
natural liking, that is painful like a crucifying, and therefore an offence. But the cross 
must be presented as giving no quarter to sin, as the most tremendous proof that sin 
is not to be permitted, as showing how sin is utterly abhorred and condemned of God, 
And to be acknowledging the cross, while tolerating sin in ourselves, is crucifying the 
Son of God afresh and putting him to an open shame. Jt demands self-sacrifice. 
‘he cross-life is characteristically a life of self-sacrifice. Christ was sacrificing all along, 
and when he came to the cross he sacrificed his all—sacrificed his life in the most awful 
circumstances. And those who would take up the cross must be prepared to follow 
Christ in his course of self-denial. And there, again, is where the offence of the cross 
arises. Its requirements are too high. But as the cross of Christ can never be blotted 
out, so its requirements can never be lowered. It is the standard up to which our life 
must be brought if we are to attain to our perfection. There is one blessed way in 
whicn the offence of the cross ceases, and that is, when we have been humbled by it as 
sinners, and have been led to own its power. Then we admire it for the light it throws 
on the Divine perfections, and for the power there is in it over human hearts. And 
we say, “ Far be it from me to glory, save in the cross of the Lord Jesus Christ.” 7. 
ile wishes the Galatians deliverance from the unsettling teachers. “I would that they 
which unsettle you would even cut themselves off.” In the case of the offender against 
morality in the Corinthian Church, the apostle issued a decree that he should be cut 
off by the Church. That could not be done in this case, because these teachers were 
not under the jurisdiction of the Galatian Churches. ‘They came to teach them as they 
were free to do; and all that the Galatians could do was to refuse them a hearing. 
hat this was the apostle’s mind may be gathered from the wish he expresses that 
they would cut themselves off, As they could not be cut off by the Church, let them 
cut themselves off. As they were only unsettling the Galatian order, let them leave 
Galatian soil. But he does no more than wish. It was certainly by itself desirable , 
but it might be the purpose of God that these unsettling teachers should be left thera 


284 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. fen, vo 1—26 


to make trial of the Galatians, and, it might be, thereby to purify and to strengthen 
them.—-R. F, 


Vers. 13—26.— Freedom sustained by the Spirit. I. Use or CurisTiAN FREEDOM. 
“ For ye, brethren, were called for freedom.” Paul, having wished the Judaizing teachers 
off Galatian soil, justifies the strength of his wish. They would have led the Galatians 
into bondage, but God had called them for freedom. He makes a distinction between 
the possession of freedom and the use of freedom. He had been under the necessity of 
making prominent their possession of freedom in contending against the Judaists; he 
would, however, remind them, as brethren, that there was responsibility connected with 
their use of freedom. It is thus that he slides into the more practical part of the Epistle. 
1. Dangers of freedom. “Ouly use not your freedom for an occasion to the flesh.” 
By the flesh, which here becomes a leading word with the apostle, we are not to 
understand our corporeal nature. Nor are we to understand by it depraved tendency 
in connection with our corporeal nature. But we are to understand by it depraved 
tendency as a whole, extending to our higher nature as well as to our lower nature. 
It is true that in this depraved tendency our lower nature has the preponderance. 
And that is the reason why the whole goes by the name of flesh. But the constant 
element in depravity is not sense, but it is self. as opposed to God and to the good of 
others. The admonition of the apostle, then, is, not that we abstain from all bodily 
gratification, as though sin were seated in the body, nor simply that we abstain from 
all fleshly sin, but that we abstain from all selfish gratification. The Galatians 
had been called for freedom, ¢.e. for ultimate and complete freedom; they were 
not, with their first experiences of freedom, or with their strong realization of it as 
against Judaistic error, to imagine that they were free to indulge the flesh. That is 
what, as free, we must be on our guard against, if we would not fall back into bondage, 
if we would come to the goal of our freedom in Christ. Let us not turn our liberty 
into licentiousness. 2. The binding of freedom. (1) Love binds the free. S But 
through love be servants one to another.” As it is self in the flesh that leads to atuse 
of freedom, so it is love that determines the right use of freedom. Love is going out 
beyond self. It is that which binds us in service to another. The Galatians were frce 
from Jewish bonds only to put on the bonds of Christian love. So it is true that we 
are free from the bonds of guilt only to bind ourselves in service one to another, Thus 
to balance our freedom—there is the bondage of love. (2) The whole Law is fuljilled in 
love to our neighbour. “For the whole Law is fulfilled in one word, even in this; Thou 
shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.” ‘lhe one word here is the summary of the second 
table of the Law. The quotation is from Lev. xix. 18. It appears, from “ neighbour” 
there following upon “children of thy people,” that the neighbour- of the Jew was his 
fellow-Jew. Christ has taught us to regard as our neighbour every one who is in need, 
temporal or spiritual. When we are commanded to love our neighbour as ourselves, it 
is implied that it is a right thing to love ourselves, There is a true self-love. We are 
to love ourselves intensely. It does not appear that we can be too much in earnest about 
our own well-being. We are to love ourselves rationally. We are not to seek only a 
section of our interest, but we are to seek our true interest as a whole. In these respects 
our love to our neighbour is to resemble our love to ourselves. We are to love our ueigh- 
bour in the saine intense manner. [118 good is as much to God as is our own good. 
And in all ways in which we can advance his good we are to be as much in earnest 
about it as though we were advanciug our own. We are to love our acighbour in the 
same rational manner. We may love intensely and yet be guided by reason. We are 
not to seek only part of our neighbour’s good. To give as much time and attention to 
our neighbour’s business as to our own would not ordinarily be for his good, nor would 
it be fair to one in comparison with another. Circumstances may arise in which duty 
may point to sacrifice for another, even to the extent of life. Let us, then, love our neigh- 
liour as we love ourselves, both intensely and rationally. The teaching of the apostle is 
that he who has observed the second table of the Law (as summarized) has fulflled the 
whole Law. Surprise has been expressed why there should be no reference to the 4rst 
table of the Law. But the reason is obvious. He who has only gone the length of the 
first table has not fulfilled the whole Law. Our love to God must be carried to com- 
pletion, in our loving our neighbour as ourselves. According to the thougat of the 


cH. v. 1—26.] THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 285 


Apostle John, we only properly love our Father-God, whom we do not see, when we love 
our brother-man whom we see. (8) Yhere is disaster at the opposite pole from love. “ Bur 
if ye bite and devour one another, take heed that ye be not consumed one of another.” 
The language is taken from wild beasts. The fact of the Galatians being thus warned 
may be explained partly by their excitable Celtic temperament. They are warned of 
what they might expect the consequences to be. None would come off victors, but they 
would be consumed one of another. In such biting and devouring there is a large con- 
sumption of time. ‘There is distraction from useful work. There is sometimes the 
consumption of means in litigation, There may be the consumption of life in brawls. 
There is always the consumption of good feeling, and, along with that, there is the 
consumption of the richer elements of the spiritual life, 
II. Tue FLESH AND THE Spirit. 1. The Christian rule is walking by the Spirit. “But 
I say, Walk by the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfil the lust of the flesh.” ‘he apostle 
calls attention to a point to which he advances in the subject he has in hand. This is 
laying down the Christian rule as between the flesh and the Spirit. In the ficsh, or 
our depraved nature, there is lust or desire for sinful gratification in some form or 
another. How are we to be delivered from this, so that it shall not be fulfilled? ‘The 
way is positively to follow the leading of the Spirit. The idea is not that we are to 
follow the tendencies of our renewed nature. That is missing the personal aspect of 
the leading. ‘I'he Spirit, indeed, renews the nature, and excites within it holy desires 
which seek for gratification. But the Spirit gives personal guiding, especially in and 
by the reason and conscience in conncction with the Word. And as a Guide he is all- 
sufficient. He is an internal Guide. He throws all the light that we need upon the 
character of desires and actions, upon the path of duty. And he affords timeous guid- 
ance. Jor whenever we are disposed to turn from the straight path to the right hand 
or to the left, it is then that we hear his voice behind us, saying, “ This is the way, walk 
ye init.” 2, The Christian rule is founded on @ contrariety between the flesh and the 
Spirit. “Tor the flesh lusteth against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh; for 
these are contrary the one to the other; that ye may not do the things that ye would.” 
The lust excited within the flesh is against the desire excited by the Spirit ; the desire 
excited by the Spirit is against the lust excited within the flesh. This conflict of desires 
is necessary. For the flesh and the Spirit are contraries, ‘They represent depraved seif 
and God. ‘They are as far apart as light and darkness. What is true of the one, then, 
cannot be true of the other. What the one moves toward in desire, the other necessarily 
moves against. Of this conflict of desires we are conscious in our own experience. When 
the Spirit impels to good, the flesh opposes ; when the flesh impels to evil, the Spirit 
opposes. Thus in two ways we cannot do the things that we would. And we lave in 
this conflict of desires, as free beings, to determine whether the Spirit or the flesh shall 
have the dominion of our hearts. 3. The Christian rule excludes regulation by the Law. 
“But if ye are led by the Spirit, ye are not under the Law.” The Spirit is an all- 
sufficient Guide, His regulation renders unnecessary all other regulation. He regulates 
within, and that is better than outward regulation, He regulates in conncction with 
all circumstances that arise, and that is better than having the rule to apply for our- 
selves. He is a timeous monitor, warning when the danger arises, and that is better 
‘nan being dependent on memory. 4. There ts contrast in the manifestations of the 
tesh and the Spirit. (1) The works of the flesh. We are to understand manifestations of 
aepravity, and concrete manifestations as distinguished from abstract qualities. Eveu 
when the abstract word is used, it is in the plural, with the effect of giving it a concrete 
character; not the feeling of wrath, but separate exhibitions of wrath ; not the feeling 
of jealousy, but acts or workings of jealousy. (a) What they are. “ Now the works of 
the flesh are manifest, which are these.” Before enumerating them the apostle describes 
them as manifest, i.e. easily distinguishable or glaring. It may be pointed to as a proof 
of depravity that vocabularies have more words descriptive of forms of sin than words 
descriptive of forms of holiness, Under the fruit of the Spirit he gives a list of nine. 
But under the works of the flesh his list extends to fifteen, properly sixteen. And the 
word translated “ which ” implies that he did not profess to give an exhaustive list—it 
would have been easy for him to have added other instances. This comparison is con- 
firmed by the relative number of words for sius and graces employed in Scripture. (a) 
Sins of uncleunness. “ Fornication, uncleanuess, lascivivusness.” The secoud is the 


286 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. ἴση, v. 1—26 


generic word; the first describes a special form; the third describes a special aggrava- 
tion, namely, open disregard of propriety. There is a sad prevalence of these sins still; 
it can only be said that they have been made more to hide their head. (8) IWicit inter. 
cowrse with the unseen world. ‘Idolatry, sorcery.” What is illicit in idolatry is the 
use of images to represent the unseen powers. What is illicit in sorcery (literally, 
“pharmacy” ) is the use of drugs, potions, and other things, with the idea that they can 
influence the unseen powers to produce love or hatred, prosperity or adversity. It can 
be said that this class of sins has almost disappeared with the diffusion of Christianity. 
(y) Breaches of charity. ‘ Enmities.” This is the generic word; including not only 
the graver, but all breaches of charity. “ Strife, jealousies.” In strife the variance may 
be slight; in acts of jealousy there is more deep-seated variance. ‘ Wraths, factions.” 
The furmer describes outbursts of anger. he latter describes deliberate and concerted 
compassings of selfish ends, especially by means of intrigue. “Caballings” some trang- 
late it, “cabal” being made up of the initials of an English ministry in the reign οἱ 
Charles IT., who were credited with sacrificing principle to place. ‘“ Divisions, heresies.” 
‘The former may only be ot a temporary nature. Heresies, by which we are to under- 
stand not heretical opinions, but rather their embodiments in heretical sccts, are 
divisions of a decisive nature. There is conveyed the idea of complete separation from 
the Church of Christ. Hence what is said of the heretic that he is condemned ot 
himself, ¢.e. in cutting himself off he has carried out the extreme sentence on himsel!. 
“Envyings, murders.” The latter is omitted in the Revised translation, against the 
manuscripts, and against the form of classification followed by the apostle under this 
head. ‘The former is want of love to our neighbour in his property; the latter is want 
of love in that which is most precious to him. (δ) Sins of intemperance. “ Drunken- 
uegs, Fevellings.” The first is the generic word; the second brings in a special associa- 
tion, viz. joviality. The special poiut of view is to be noticed here, There are 
some who lay the blame of intemperance on the manufacture of drink, on facilities for 
its sale, on the customs of society. And it does beara relation to these things. But 
the apostle goes to the root of the matter, in tracing it to the depravity of the human 
heart. Drunkenness and revellings are works of the flesh, manifestations of alienation 
from God. The advantage of this point of view is that it points to what can te the 
only effective remedy, viz. a change of heart through the operation of the Spirit. 
“And such like.” He could have mentioned others. We may suppose that those 
are named which it was important for the Galatians to note. We can sce that some of 
them would be connected with their temperament, which was neither melancholic nor 
phlegmatic, and also with their surroundings. We are not all inclined to sin in the 
same form or forms. That has a dependence on idiusyncrasies and surroundings. But 
we have all the same depraved heart for which to be humbled before God, and against 
which to pray. (Ὁ) What they entail, “Of the which I forewarn you, even as I did 
forewarn you, that they which practise such things shall not inherit the kingdom of 
God.” He is very emphatic in his warning of the Galatians. He had forewarned them 
when with them. Again he forewarns them. He acted on the principles enunciated in 
Ezekiel: “Son of man, I have made thee a watchman unto the house of Israel; there- ~ 
fore, hear the word at my mouth, and give them warning from me. WheuI say to the 
wicked, Thou shalt surcly die; and thou givest him not warning, nor speakest to warn 
the wicked from his wicked way, to save his life: the same wicked man shall die in his 
iniquity; but his blood will I require at thine hand. Yet if thou warn the wicked, and 
he turn not from his wickedness, nor from his wicked way, he shall die in his iniquity, 
but thou hast delivered thy soul.” What the apostle, in the spirit of these words, says, 
is that they which are in the habit of duing such things shall certainly be punished. 
Their very characters unfit them for the kingdom of God. Moreover, they are rebels 
against the government of God; and as such they must be dealt with. Their punish- 
ment is represented as exclusion from the inheritance which otherwise they would have 
gained. (2) The fruit of the Spirit, We are to understand the result of the workings of 
the Spirit. Iruit is applied here not to concrete manifestations or works, but to abstract 
qualities from which works proceed. It is not said that the fruit of the Spirit is mani- 
fest. Qualities are not so conspicuous as works, and especially spiritual qualities. The 
apostle refers us to qualities in the spiritual, not because he regards works as unim- 
puitant, but because qualit:vs must so niuch be taken into account in estimating their 


on. v. 1—26.] THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 287 


works. Fruit points to organic unity. The works of the flesh are confused and con- 
flicting. One lust contends with another for the mastery, But the fruit of the Spirit is 
like well-formed fruit. All is consistent. And one grace by its growth does not take 
from another grace, but contributes to the richness and beauty of the whole. (a) What 
itts, “But the frvit of the Spirit is love.” This stands at the head of the list as com- 
prehending or carrying with it all the rest. This is a characteristic result of the Spirit's 
working. ‘The apostle besceches by the love of the Spirit. And we are told of the love 
of God, ¢e, apparently the love which constitutes the very essence of God, being 
shed abroad in our hearts through the Holy Ghost given unto ua, Therefore we need 
not be surprised at the apostle connecting the Spirit, first, with the imbuing, dyeing 
deep of our nature with love. “Joy, peace.” These two go together, not as good dis- 
positions, but as feelings which always accompany good dispositions, With the former 
we associate movements, thrills; with the latter we associate repose. God is infinite 
Love, and therefore he is infinite Joy and Peace. And our being, through the Spirit, 
pulsating with his, now he sends a thrill of joy through us, and now he introduces his 
own calm. Oh what a joy in what God is! What a height of ecstasy does it admit 
of! And what a calm too in what God is! It takes away all the feverishness of sins 
and quiets us to the very depths of our being. And ever, as love animates us as it 
animates God, does the thrill pass through us, and the calm come into us, expelling 
doubt and fear and all restlessness of spirit. ‘“ Long-suffering, kindness, goodness.” 
These three go together, The first is bearing with others for their good. It is that 
which marks the outgoing of the Divine love toward us as sinners. And therefore it is 
fitting that it should be reflected in us. Love (not only in God, but in all beings) 
- “suffereth long,” and, it is added, “is kind.” The word translated “ kindness” seems 
to point to delight in men as our fellow-beings, God delights in us as beings whom he 
has made. He feels kindly disposed toward us, a3 a father does toward his children. 
And so are we to delight in others for what they are, especially as having come from 
God, wearing a noble nature. And we are to feel kindly disposed toward them, wishing 
especially that, as they have a noble nature, they may not fail of having a noble 
character. The word translated “goodness” seems to point to a disposition to benefit 
others, extending to all forms in which they can be benefited. The highest form of 
goodness is when we are impelled to help others to live well. “ Faithfulness, mecknesa, 
temperance.” The first is having such a love for our neighbour that we would not injure 
him by breaking our promise to him. God is a Rock, while infinite tenderness, and there 
should be something of the rock in us, that dependence may be placed on us in the various 
relations of life. Meekness is required when wrong has been inflicted on us. It especially 
points to us having the command of our feelings under wrong. Temperance is self- 
command, It has come to have a special reference to our having the command of our 
a) petites. When temperance is born of worldly prudence or of self-reliance it is not 
what it should be. It is only real and beautiful and everlasting when it is produced 
by the Spirit, when it is the outcome of a changed heart. (6) What it does not entail. 
“ Against such there is no Law.” The apostle might have extended his list. He would 
have us think not of these only, but of all such, and think this regarding all such, that 
against them there is no Law. If these things are in us, then the Law can never be 
adverse to us. We shall be removed beyond the condemnation of all Law. That is his 
way of saying that we shall be blessed. We shall be blessed in the very possession of 
these dispositions and feelings. ‘We shall be blessed in our enjoying the smile of God. 
5. Christians are being delivered from the flesh. ‘And they that are of Christ Jesus 
have crucified the flesh with the passions and the lusts thereof.” At a past period, in 
idea, they crucified the flesh. That idea is now being carried out into fact. There isa 
deadening, a slow and painful crucifying going on in the flesh. Its passions are being 
depleted of their heat; its lusts are being depleted of their force. The conflict is still 
going on; but the Spirit is gaining triumphs over the flesh, and there is promise of the 
Spirit gaining a complete triumph, of the flesh with all its inclinations to sin being 
annihilated. 6. The Christian rule re-enforced. “If we live by the Spirit, by the 
Spirit let us also walk.” If the life of the Galatians had depended on the Law, then 
their first and imperative duty would have been to have submitted to circumcision ; and 
their duty after that would have been to have subjected themselves to the whole disci- 
pline of the Mosaic ordinances. But, as they were in the better postion of depending 


288 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. [σπ. v. 1—26 


entirely for their life on the Spirit, it was their duty to take the rule of their life simply 
from him. 7 The Christian rule is applied to vain-glory. ‘Let us not be vain- 
glorious, provoking one another, envying one another.” Vain-glory is glorying in what 
we do not have, or in what we have in a way that is not real or according to a false 
standard. The spirit of the practice is sufficiently brought out in the language here. 
There is a provoking, literally a calling forth, to the field of contest. As the result of 
the trial, some are filled with a sense of their importance as superior in strength or in 
agility, in birth or in wealth, in culture or in honour. And others are filled with envy 
of those who are thus superior. But as we are not to glory in fancied possessions, so 
we are not to glory in possessions as though we had bestowed them on ourselves, or 
with an exaggerated idea of their importance. That would be glorying in what had 
not foundation in reality. “ But he that glorieth, let him glory in the Lord.” Let us 
glory in wnat God is, and let us glory also in what God has bestowed upon us. Let 
us glory especially in having a covenant standing before God, and in covenant, grace 
which has passed into our characters. That is having a foundation of reality for our 
glorying.—R. F. 


Ver. 1.—Christian freedom. St. Paul concludes the arguments and expostulations 
of the two previous chapters with a vigorous exhortation. This has, of course, its 
special application to the condition of the Galatian Churches, and the liberty to which 
it directly applies is deliverance from the bondage of Law. But it admits of wider 
application to the circumstances of our own day. We have here brought before us a 
privilege, a danger, and a duty. 

I, A privitecr. Christ confers freedom (see John viii. 36). 1. Religious freedom.: 
(1) From servile terrors of superstition ; (2) from priestly tyranny ; (3) from mechanical, 
ritual ; (4) from external constraints in moral and religious life; and (5) from the rule 
of the flesh over the spirit. 2. Intellectual freedom. Unbelievers sometimes arrogate 
to themselves the proud title of free-thinkers; yet it would seem too often that the 
only freedom they allow is freedom for expressing ideas with which they sympathize. 
The bigotry of Roman Catholic intolerance seems likely to be equalled by the bigotry 
that many leading opponents of Christianity show towards those who decline to 
abandon their faith. It is Christ who breaks the fetters of the mind. The Christian 
dares to think. The grounds of this liberty are (1) loyalty to truth, and faith in 
its ultimate triumph; (2) light and power to attain truth. 3. Political freedom. 
This is the outgrowth of Christianity (1) through the spread of the spirit of universal 
brotherhood, and (2) through the cultivation of conscience which makes the gift of 
liberty safe, 

Ii. A pancer. Christian freedom ta in danger. 1. It is attacked from without. It 
has to face the assaults of the ambitious, There are always those who desire to exercise 
undue influence over others. There is danger in officialism. The official appointed as 
a servant of the general body usurps the place of the master. The fable of the horse 
who invited a man to ride him is thus often exemplified. 2. It is undermined from 
within. The force of habit wears grooves that become decp ruts out of which we 
cannot stir. The dead hand lies heavy upon us. Creeds which were the expression of 
free thought contending in open controversy in one age become the bonds and fetters 
of a later age. Ritual, which palpitated with living emotion when it first joined itself 
naturally as the body to clothe the soul of worship, becomes fossilized, and yet it is 
cherished and venerated though it hangs about men’s necks as a dead weight. The 
very atmosphere of liberty is too bracing for some of us. It will not allow us to sleep. 
Therefore love of indolence is opposed to it. 

If. A pury. We are called to take a stand against all encroachments on our 
Christian freedom. Here is a call to Christian manliness. The freedom is given by 
Christ ; but we are exhorted to maintain it. He fought to win it; we must fight to 
hold it. This is not a mere question of choice—a matter only of our own inclination 
or interest; it isa solemn duty. We must stand firm for liberty on several accounts. 
1, That we may not be degraded to servitude. It is a man’s duty not to become a slave 
because slavery produces moral deterioration. 2. That we may have scope for the 
unhampered service of God and man. 3. That we may hand down to generations 
following the heritage of liberty. Once loss it cannot be easily recovered. We owe 49 


cH. v. 1—26.] THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 289 


our descendants the duty of maintaining intact the entail of a grand possession which 
we ΤΠ: γθὰ from our forefathers, and which was secured to them at great cost.— 
-F A, 


Ver. 5.—The hope of righteousness. I. Wuat rr is. The hope of righteousness 
appears to be the hope of realizing righteousness, the hope of becoming righteous. [n 
St. Paul’s language a hope is not our subjective anticipation, but the thing for which 
we hope, Such a possession we as Christians anticipate. 1. Righteousness ts a great 
treasure. It is a worthy object of desire. 10 is better than any rewards it may entail. 
To hunger and thirst after righteousness is to feel the deepest and purest appetite for 
the best of all spiritual possessions. 2. Rightcousness is not yet enjoyed. It is a hope. 
Even the Christian who has the faith that admits to it has not yet the full heritage. 
The longer we live the higher does the magnificent ideal tower above us until it is seen 
reaching up to heaven. Some righteousness we enter into with the first effort of faith, 
but the foretaste is only enough to make us yearn for more. 3. We may confidently 
hope for righteousness. It is a hope, not a mere surmise, that urges us forward. We 
are encouraged by the promises of the gospel. It is a grand inspiring thought that 
every Christian has the prospect of ultimate victory over all sin and ultimate attainment 
of pure and spotless goodness. 

IJ. How ΜῈ ARE TO REGARD 117. We are to wait for it. 1. We must exercise 
patience. Sudden perfect holiness is impossible. The idea that it has been attained is 
one of the most awful delusions that have ever ensnared the minds of good men. 
Physically, of course, it is possible for us never to sin, and to be perfectly holy, as 
physically there is nothing to prevent us from drawing a mathematically straight line; 
but in experience the one is no more realized than the other, and morally both are 
equally impossible. The law of life is progress by gradual development. 2. Never 
theless, wé must earnestly anticipate the future righteousness. We must wait for it as 
those who wait for the morning, 7.e. we must watch. To be indifferent about it is not 
te wait for it. Indifference will disinherit us from the hope. 

III. Wirh WHAT GRACE WE OAN THUS REGARD IT, 1. Through the Spirit. Here as 
often elsewhere we cannot be certain whether the apostle is referring to the Spirit of 
God or tc our spirit. The two work together. Human spirituality is the fruit of the 
inspiration of the Divine Spirit. It is in this spiritual state of mind that we hate sin 
and long for righteousness, and have glimpses of the future that cheer us with the 
prospect of the great hope. Our desires and anticipations are always fashioned and 
coloured by the state of our hearts. - Waiting for the hope of righteousness is a habit 
of soul only possible to those who are spiritually minded. 2. By facth. Here we 
come to the key and secret of the whole experience. Faith (1) makes us heirs of 
righteousness; (2) is the present assurance of things hoped for, and therefore of this 
great hope; and (8) leads us into that spiritual atmosphere where waiting for the hope 
of righteousness becomes natural to us.—W., F. 


Ver. 6.—Faith working through love. St. Paul has just been writing of the relation 
of faith to hope (ver. 5). He now shows how it is connected with love. We can only 
separate the Christian graces in thought. In experience they blend and interact one 
with another. 

I, Farru Is an active power. It works. Christ tells us that it can move moun- 
tains. Through lack of faith the disciples had not strength to cure a lunatic boy 
(Matt. xvii. 19, 20). This faith of St. Paul is very different from the “dead” faith 
which St. James scouted with so much scorn. It is not a cold intellectual conviction 
of the truth of certain propositions called collectively a creed. Nor is it a mere passive 
reliance upon the efficacy of the “ finished work of Christ,” or upon the grace of God 
which is to do everything for us while we slumber in indifference, or upon Christ 
himself solely as a Saviour. It is active trust rousing all the energies of our soul to 
loyal service. 

Il, Farrn shows 178 ENERGY IN LOVE. We do not read of love working through 
faith as some would prefer to regard the mutual operation of the two graces. We are 
familiar with the idea of love as a motive, and we can well understand how faith 
might give it a ground and channel of definite action, But the converse is here, 

GALATIANS, π 


290 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. Cow. ν, 126. 


Faith begins to operate in its own energy and discovers a field of enterprise in love. 
1. Faith inspires love, as love also in turn inspires faith. We believe in and trust the 
goodness of. Christ, and so we are moved to love him. If we did not believe in his 
love we should never return it. 2. Faith having once roused love exercises itself in 
promoting the objects of love. We trust in the unseen God, we also love him; then we 
try to please him, to enjoy his favour, and to live in his presence—objects of love; but 
objects we should never seek if we were not supported and urged on by our belief in 
and trust to what is beyond our sight and expericnce, 

IIL. Fairs WoRKING THROUGH LOVE 18 THE ONE ESSENTIAL CONDITION OF SUCCESS IN 
THE CHRISTIAN LIFE. Circumcision is of no use. Uncircumcision and the liberty that 
boasts of it by themselves are useless. Mere barren liberty is nothing, Freedom is 
conferred that in it we may have ἃ ficld and range for noble enterprises. Mere rites, 
baptism, etc., mere observance of religious services, will not advance us in the spiritual 
life, neither will resistance to the bondage of such things. The negative side of 
Protestantism is no gospel if we rest only in that. Spiritual, active life is the great 
thing. Faith alone would not suffice, because our supreme duties are love of God and 
love of man, and faith is only valuable as it leads up to these. But love alone would 
not suffice, for without faith, even if it came into being, it would languish and perish in 
despair. “ Faith working through love "—this is the motto for the healthy Christian 
life. He who relinquishes this will turn not only to a lower method, but to a worthless 
and fatal one. Nothing else will avail, and nothing more is needed for growth up to 
the attainment of the most perfect saintliness and the most fruitful service—W. F. A. 


Ver. 7.—Hindered. 1. Past aTTAINMENTS DO NOT DISPENSE WITH THE NECESSITY 
OF PRESENT Progress. ‘Ye did run well.” So far, so good. That was a matter of 
thankfulness. But it would count for nothing against the unworthiness of a slackened 
pace. Old laurels wither. Every day has its new duties. We must not waste to-day 
in congratulating ourselves on the success of yesterday. The tide is against us; to 
rest on the oars is to be swept back. No nation can prosper on its past history if the 
spirit of heroism has forsaken its citizens. As Christians, we never reach the goal till 
we have crossed the river of death. Till then we must be ever “pressing on and 
bearing up,” or we shall assuredly make shipwreck even after earnestly runnirg over 
the longest, steepest, roughest course. 

11. Pasr ATTAINMENTS CONDEMN US FOR NEGLECTING PRESENT PROGRESS. We are 
judged by our own past selves, Our history is witness against us. ‘lhe past proves 
that we could run well. It shows that we admitted the obligation to do so. Those 
who have never known Christ may plead ignorance. But they who have tasted of his 
grace and experienced the blessings of it and used it for some work in the Christian 
life, are without excuse if they turn aside at last. 

III. Past aATTAINMENTS MAKE THE NEGLECT OF PRESENT PROGRESS PECULIARLY BAD. 
It is melaicholy to see a life rendered abortive from the first, but it is much more 
mournful to witness the failure of a life that began in promise and made good way 
towards success, All the hopes and toils and sacrifices of the past are wasted. How 
pan to be so near the goal and yet to give up the race! to sink within sight of the 

aven! Such a broken life, like a day opening in a cheerful dawn and passing through 
a bright noon to a dark and stormy night, is of all lives most deplorable, ‘Ye did 
run well; who did hinder you ”—what pathos there is in these words! Christ wept 
over Jerusalem sadder tears than the ruin of Sodom could call forth. 

TV. WE MUST BEWARE OF THE DANGER OF NEGLECTING PRESENT PROGRESS AFTER 
SUCCEEDING WITH PAST ATTAINMENTS. ‘“ Who did hinder you?” There must have 
been new hindrances and possibly surprises and unexpected checks, 1. We must not 
rest satisfied with the establishment of good habits, Habits may,be broken. 2. We 
must be prepared for new dificulties, The way that is now so smooth may become 
suddenly rough and stony. 


“We know the anxious strife, the eternal laws, 
To which the triumph of all good is given—- 
High sacrifice, and labour without pause, 
Even to the death ; else wherefore should the eye 
Of men converse with inmortality ?” 


Git. ν. 1—26.] THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 491 


But let us not forget that if some may hinder us there is One more mighty than all te 
help us.—W. F. A. 


Ver. 9.—Leaven. A familiar proverb applicd in the present instance to doctrinal 
errors, introduced by a small party of Judaizers, but tending to spread through the whole 
community of Galatian Christians. The proverb is useful, however, as a caution 
against the spreading of evil generally. 

I, Tue princrete. LIivilis like leaven. 1. It has a life of its own. Leaven is the 
yeast-plant. We must not neglect evil with contempt as an inert dead thing. A low 
and horrible kind of life infests the remains of death. The lower in the order of life 
the organism is the more persistent will its vitality be. Yeast may be preserved dry 
for months and yet retain its power of fermentation. The most dezraded forms of 
evil are the most difficult to destroy. 2. Evil, like leaven, spreads rapidly. Leaven is 
the chosen emblem of evil, just on account of its extraordinary rate of growth. While 
the Church slumbers her enemy is sleepless. If weare not actively resisting evil it will 
be constantly encroaching upon the domain of goodness, It is folly to neglect a small 
evil. A child may stamp out a flame which, neglected, would burn a city. Scotch 
the young vipers while they are yet in the nest, or the brood will crawl far and wide 
beyond our reach. 3. Evil, like leaven, ass¢milates what it touches. The best men are 
injured by contact with it. All the powers and faculties of the individual, all the 
resources and institutions of the community, are brought under its fatal spell and turned 
to its vile uses. 4 Evil, like leaven, és’ iated with corrupti Fermentation is the 
first stage of decomposition. The leaven of evil is the leaven of moral rottenness and 
death. 

II. APPLICATIONS OF THE PRINCIPLE. 1. Doctrinal. A small error unchecked grows 
into a great perversion of truth. A lie once admitted spreads deceit and confusion in 
all directions. 2. Ecclesiastical. The Jewish custom advocated by a few of the 
Galatian Christians seemed to some, perhaps, an insignificant matter. But if it had 
been permitted to spread, undoubtedly it would have broken up the whole Church. 
3. Moral. (See 1 Cor. v. 6.) The taint of immorality spreads like a noxious con- 
tagion, (1) in the nation—for the whole country’s sake we must not allow “ the 
residuum ” to sink into corruption; (2) in the Church—hence the necessity of reviving 
Church discipline; (3) in the individual—small faults breed great sins. Beware 
of “the little foxes that spoil the grapes.”—W. F. A. 


Vers. 18—15.—Liberty and not licence. I. THE panazr. St. Paul was no 
antinomian, No Hcbrew prophet ever insisted more strenuously on the necessity of 
righteousness than did the champion of justification by faith. With him freedom from 
the bondage of Law is not release from the obligations of duty. If tedious ceremonial 
observances are discarded, eternal principles of morality are only exalted into the 
higher supremacy. If we are not required to shape our conduct according to rigid rules, 
we are thrown back on principles of wider bearing and more absolute necessity. But 
there was danger that this should not be fully recognized. New-fiedged liberty is 
tempted to take strange flights. This is an inevitable peril accompanying an undoubted 
boon. For fear of it many have dreaded to grant the liberty. But such policy is short- 
sighted and cowardly. The danger is itself the condemnation of the old bondage. The 
worst indictment against slavery is that it makes men servile. Unwise parents, who 
impose needlessly irksome home restraints, are preparing for their children a terrible 
peril when the coveted liberty is at length necessarily attained. The compressed spring 
is sure to open with violent energy. 

IL Tue caution. How shall the aanger be avoided? St. Paul points out the 
means. 1. Admonition. Let men see clearly the two sides of life. While some dwell 
exclusively on Law, others confine themselves too much to the mere fact of liberty. 
Much gospel preaching is dangerous from its one-sidcdness; In preaching “ liberty 
to the captives,” let us not forget to preach also that “ the kingdom of heaven is at 
hand ;” in offering the blessings conferred by Christ as the Saviour, let us not neglect to 
set forth claims made by him as the King. 2. Instruction. Liberty requires ligat, 
The captive may be led in darkness; the freeman must see where to turn his footsteps. 
Ignorance may be the motner cf the devotion of spiritual slaves, but knowledge is 


292 THE EPISTLE TC THE GALATIANS. ἴσῃ. v. 1—26, 


necessary for the devotion of freemen. 8. High principle. It is only the spiritually 
minded who are fit for spiritual liberty. We are only able safely to use our release 
from the servitude of Law when we willingly put on the yoke of service one towards 
another. The unselfish man is the one man who can use without abusing the privi- 
lege of the free man. He who has Christian charity joined to his Christian liberty 
will fulfil the essential principles of the Law while exulting in deliverance from ita 
crushing constraints—W. Εἰ, A. 


Ver. 16.— Walking by the Spirit. I. Toe TRvz CHRISTIAN WILL AIM AT NOT 
FULFILLING THE LUST OF THE FLESH. It is the fashion of the age to decry asceticism. 
St. Paul was not an advocate of the monkish ideal according to which there was a virtue 
in restraining desires and activities which are harmless in themselves. But this revul- 
sion of our own day with its “‘fleshly school” of poets goes much further in the oppo- 
site direction and honours as “natural,” what St. Paul would repress as “carnal.” It 
ignores two most important facts. 1. We have a higher anda lower nature. A man 
is as much an animal as a dog is. But he is also something more. In his right state 
the spiritual controls the animal in him, To be truly natural is not to reverse this 
relative position, To permit the lower self to dominate the upper self is to allow a 
most unnatural rebellion against right order to take place within us. As it is natural 
for aman to walk with his head erect, and as he is in an unnatural posture when he 
has fallen with his head downwards, so, as Bishop Butler has taught us, it is truly 
natural for conscience to be supreme, and it is going against nature to let the lower 
powers have unbridled liberty. 2. Our lower nature ts unduly powerful. It has been 
indulged. It bas broken through its proper restraints. It has grown too strong, while 
the higher spiritual nature has been starved and checked and weakened. As fallen 
creatures, we have lost the right balance of our powers. Our present nature is a 
corrupt nature. ‘To reverence the unrestrained exercise of all our nature, as it now is, 
is to treat corruption and confusion with the honour that belongs only to order and 
perfection. The evil of the unrestrained sway of the lower nature is seen in its fruits 
Poetry hides them, but conscientious truthfulness declares them, and a more hideous 
collection of horrors cannot be imagined (vers. 19—21). Such fruits are certain proofs 
that the root is evil. Hence the aim of all right-minded men must be to check the 
“lust of the flesh.” 

IL THE SECRET OF SUCCESS IN THIS AIM I8 WALKING BY THE Spirit. It cannot 
be accomplished by mere resistance and repression. This iswhy the method of Law 
failed. No laws will make a nation moral. Positive influences only can counteract 
the furious passions of the lower nature. We must walk by the Spirit. 1. Spiritual 
things must be the chtef concerns of our lives. We must draw off our thoughts from the 
lower things by engaging them with the higher. Our own spiritual nature will thus 
grow stronger to resist the impulses of “the flesh.” 2. God’s Holy Spirit must be 
sought as the guide and strength of our highest activities. Our spirituality can only 
flourish as the outcome of the indwelling Spirit of God. A real, direct influence will 
thus strengthen our better selves against the evil powers within. 3. Spirituality grow- 
ing out of the indwelling of God’s Spirit must become a habit of daily life. Itis not 
enough that we have brief moments of devout elevation above earthly things, if, when 
we return to the world, our hearts and minds are as much occupied} with the lower 
interests of life as if we knew no others. We must “pray without ceasing.” The tone 
and temper of our mind in the world must be above the world. 4. This condition is 
realized through union with Christ. The Spirit we need is ‘the Spirit of Christ.” 
When we are Christ’s we crucify “ the flesh with the passions and lusts thereof,” and 
learn to walk by the Spirit—W. F. A. 


Ver. 17.—The two selves. I. EVERY MAN HAS TWO SELVE8—A HIGHER SELF AND A 
LOWER SELF. 1. A bad man has his better self. When temptation is away, in calm 
thoughtful moments, or when he is stricken by mortal illness or bowed with a great 
sorrow, or perhaps when tne beauty Οἱ a sunset or the strains of sweet music call up 
memories of childhood, the true self will rise in the heart of a wicked man with pain 
and unutterable reorets. 2..4 good man has his lower self. The human saint is far 
removed from the heavenly angel ‘The body and its appetites are with him; the 


on, v. 1—26.} THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 293 


soul has its meaner powers, its earthly passions, its self-recarding interests. There 
ure times when the spiritual life is dull and feeble; then some sudden temptation, or 
even without that the depressing atmosphere of the world, will reveal to a man his 
worse side, 

IL Tue TWo SELVES ARE IN conriict. They are not content to lie at peace each 
ki its own domain. Both are ambitious to rule the whole man. While the flesh brooks 
any restraint, the Spirit strives to bring the body into subjection. Thus it comes to 
pass that life is a warfare and the Christian a soldier. The battle of life is not mainly 
a fighting against adverse circumstances and external concrete evils of the world. “A 
man’s foes are they of his own household,” nay, of his own heart. The great conflict 
is internal. It is civil war—rebellion and the effort to quell it; of all wars the most 
fierce. 

IIL THE conriicr BETWEEN THE TWO SELVES 18 SUCH THAT BACH 18 HELD IN 
CHECK BY THE oTHER. “ Ye cannot do the things that ye would.” Thcre is a dead- 
lock. Each army holds itself safe in its own entrencliments. Neither can turn the 
enemy’s position. Not that there is perfect balance of power. In most of us one or 
other force gives a temporary advantage. In many the lower self has the upper hand; 
in many, let us thank God, the better self maintains the supremacy. But neither has 
the victory that will enable it to drive the other off the field. Bad men, now and 
again, see yawning before them deep, black pits of wickedness, from the brink of which 
they start back in horror, arrested by the invisible hand of conscience. No man is 
wholly bad, or he would cease to be a man—he would bea devil. On the other hand, 
it is clear to all of us that no good man is wholly good. 

IV. In THE sTRENGTH OF THE Spirit oF CHRIST THE BETTER SELF OF THE CHRIs- 
TIAN WILL ULTIMATELY OBTAIN COMPLETE victory. The stress and strain of the war 
is but for a time. In the end all enemies shall be subdued. Meanwhile the sccret ot 
success is with those who “ walk by the Spirit.” So great a hope should lighten “ the 
burden of tho mystery.” 


‘The heavy and the weary weight 
Of all this unintelligible world.” 


Now life is broken, confused, inconsistent, discordant. But this is but the time of 
passing conflict. With victory there will come true harmony of being and growth to 
the full stature of the soul.—W. F. A. 


Vers, 22, 23.—The fruit of the Spirit, I. Tue Graces or THE CHRISTIAN LIFE 
GROW OUT OF THE INDWELLING oF THE Spirit or Gop, Neither of the two rival 
theories of Greek philosophers—that virtue comes by practice and that it is taught by 
instruction—would commend itself to St. Paul. Nor would he agree with Plato that it 
arises in the intuitive recollection of innate ideas, nor with Aristotle that it is the 
result of habits. Neither would he permit the modern separation of religion from morals. 
Morals need the inspiration of religion. Religion when truly alive must control conduct. 
The first great essential is for our spirit to be possessed by the Spirit of Christ through 
faith in him. Then Christian graces will appear as fruits of the Spirit. We must begin 
within. We cannot produce fruits by manipulating the outside of a dead stump. Life 
is the one essential, and from life within grows fruit without. Only internal spiritual 
life can produce external Christian graces. 

Il.. NEVERTHELESS, THE CHRISTIAN GRACES NEED TO BE DIREOTLY CULTIVATED. 
Although the tree produces the fruit from its own life, the branches must be pruned and 
trained and the fruit sheltered from cold and protected from vermin and wild birds. It 
is τεῦ enough to think only of the inmost sources of a holy life. We must watch the 
corrse of it and guide it aright throughout. Christian ethic is an important branch of 
religious instruction, and is not to be ignored as unimportant because it is only service- 
able in subordination to the cultivation of the inner spiritual life. 

III. Tue CurisTIAN GRACES HAVE SPECIAL OHARACTERISTICS OF THEIR OwN. Such 
a list as is here given by St. Paul has a character of its own. Some of its constituent 
parts might be found in a heathen moralist; perhaps all of them; for there is ἃ common 
conscience in all mankind. But the selection as a whole and the form and character of 
1t are foreign to the atmosphere of paganism. The one significant fact about it is that 


854 Pith KPISTLH TO THE GALATIANS. for. vi. 110, 


it is a portrait of Christ. Christianity is putting on Ohrist. He is our great Exemplar 
Our true life is walking in his footsteps. In particular note: 1. Attention is directed to 
internal principles rather than to external rules of conduct. St. Paul cared little for 
casuistry. 2. Emphasis is laid on the gentler graces. Pagan ethics treat chiefly of 
masculine virtues. Christian ethics add what are commonly called the feminine. Yet 
there is nothing unmanly in the gentleness of true nobility of character thus revealed. 
3. Charity and its fruits receive the principal place in the list. 

IV. THE PARTICULAR GRACES IN THE LIST GIVEN BY ST. PAUL ARE WORTHY OF 
SEPARATE CONSIDERATION. 1, Three graces of general disposition: (1) love, the root 
of all joy ; (2) the special joy of self-sacrificing love; and (3) peace, attained later, but 
more constant when attained. 2. Three graces in our conduct with others: (1) passive 
‘long-suffering ; (2) kindness, which wishes well to others ; and (3) beneficence, which does 
it. 8. Three more general graces: (1) fidclity, not made unnecessary by general kind- 
ness; (2) meekness when opposed by the evil in other men ; (3) sell-control in keeping 
under the evil in ourselves. “ Against such,” says St. Paul, with a touch of humour, 
“there is no Law."—W. F. A. 


EXPOSITION. . 


CHAPTER VL 


Ver. 1.—Brethren, if (or, although) a man 
be ‘overtaken in a fault (ἀδελφοί, ἐὰν καὶ 
προληφθῇ ἄνθρωπος ἔν τινι παραπτώματι) 3 
brethren, if even a man hath been overtaken 
in some trespass. “ Brethren;” the com- 
péllation so introduced betokens a somewhat 
pathetic urgency; cf. above, ch. iii. 15; 
iv. 31; v.11. But Phil. iii. 13, 17 suffice to 
show that its occurrence at the beginning 
of a sentence does not necessarily indicate 
the commencement of a new section of 
discourse—to which notion we, perhaps. 
owe the division of chapters here made. In 
fact, this paragraph is most closely con- 
nected with the preceding; the apostle’s 
object being to point out that not even 
a moral delinquency into which a brother 
has fallen should lead us to indulge our- 
selves in any feeling of superiority in 
dealing with him, or to vaunt even to our 
own selves (see ver. 4) our greater con- 
sistency. In short, he is enforcing by a 
strong instance the exhortation in ver. 26, 
“Let us not be vain-glorious.” “If even 
a man hath been overtaken.” The apostle 
supposes the case as one which might very 
well present itself; the form of expression 
(ἐάν, not εἶ), however, not pointing to such 
a case having already occurred. How pos- 
sible the supposed case was, was plain enough 
from the enumeration of the “ works of 
the flesh” above given, 80 many and 80 
multiform. Some critics have embarrassed 
themselves by supposing that the καὶ 
(“ even ”) must, of course, emphasize the 
first succeeding word προληφθῇ, “ hath been 
overtaken.” But it ΤΥ just as probably be 
meant to emphasize the whole clause, “a 
man hath been overtaken in some trespass.” 
This is proved by a number of other 


instances; thus: Luke xi. 8, “if (καὶ) even 
he will not give them unto him because 
he is a friend ;” 1 Cor. vii. 21, “but if even 
thou art able to become free ;” 2 Cor. iv. 3; 
xi. 6. The verb προλαμβάνω occurs besides 
in the New Testament in Mark xiv. 8, “she 
hath come beforehand to anoint for, ‘she 
hath anticipated the ‘anointing of’] my 
body ;” and 1 Cor. xi. 21, “iaketh before 
other his own supper.” A more helpful 
illustration, however, is furnished by Wisd. 
xvii. 17, where, speaking of the horrible 
darkness falling quite suddenly upon the 
Egyptians, the writer says, “ Whether he 
were husbandmun or shepherd or labourer 
in the field, he was overtaken and endured 
(προληφθεὶς ἔμενεν.) the ill-avoidable neces- 
sity;” the πρὸ in the compound verb 
meaning before he could help himself in 
any way. So here, προληφθῇ means be sur- 
prised, overtaken, before he is well aware 
what it really is that he is doing. ‘“Sur- 
prised;” but by whom or what? Not by 
ἃ person detecting the offender in the very 
act; as if it were equivalent to καταληφθῇ 
ἐπαυτοφώρῳ (Jolin viii. 4); for the apostle is 
not at all concerned with the evidence for 
the delinquency, which is the important 
consideration in John viii. 4, but simply 
with the fact. Rather, overtaken by tlie 
force of temptation; as the verb “taken” 
is used with “ temptation” in 1 Cor. x. 13; 
hence the words which follow, “ lest thou also 
be tempted.” The writer thus commends 
the delinquent to sympathetic commisera- 
tion. But there is no palliation indicated 
by the word “fault” or “trespass.” Not once 
in the fifteen other passages in the New 
Testament in which the noun παράπτωμα 
occurs is there any token of such palliation 
being intended. The petition, “forgive ua 
our trespasses,” is sufficient to exemplify 


on. vi. 1—18.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


295 


this statement. The trespass may be nothing 
less than one of the works of the flesh 
before specified. The preposition év—“ in,” 
not “by ”—points to the unhappy con- 
dition in which the delinquent is supposed 
to be, out of which it is the busincss of 
Christian charity to extricate him. Com- 
pare the expressions, “die in your sins;” 
* dead in trespasses ;” and the imagery of a 
“snare of the devil,” in 2 Tim. ii, 26. 
Ye which are spiritual, restore such a 
one (ὑμεῖς of πνευματικοὶ καταρτίζετε τὸν 
τοιοῦτον). The apostle intimates that the 
business of recovering a fallen brother is 
one which those Christians are not qualified 
to undertake who, by reason of the strong 
tincture of the flesh still existing in their 
moral character, may themselves be justly 
styled “carnal” (comp. 1 Cor. iii. 1). 
Putting as it were such persons on one side, 
the apostle summons to the work those in 
whom the Spirit hath gained so marked an 
asccndanvy that, compared with the gene- 
rality of Christiuns, they may be class.d 
as “spiritual.” It was incumbent on such 
(be says) not to stand aloof, as if it were not 
iheir concern, or as if the delinquent were 
to be treated as an enemy or outcast (comp. 
2 Thess. iii. 15), far lesa to indulge them- 
selv 2s in taking pleasure in his inconsistency 
2s ilustrating their own spirituality, but to 
cone forward to his assistance. Othcrs, 
who might justly feel less qualified to act 
in the case themselves, might, however, take 
from the apostle’s direction the hint that 
_at Teast they should lend their sympathy 
to the work of their more capable brethren, 
desire and pray for their erring brother's 
recovery, and not exult over his fault. The 
verb καταρτίζειν, “to make a thing fit, even, 
just that which it properly should be,” is 
used in Matt. iv. 21 of repairing nets; 1 Cor. 
i. 10 of a Christian community restored to 
its proper condition of unanimity; 1 Thess. 
iii 10 of making good auy lacking of faith. 
It is used also (Liddell! and Scott) of setting 
a broken limb. But there is nothing to 
show that the apostle has any one particular 
imnge of disorder in view. The present 
tense of the imperative scoms to mean, 
“apply yourselves to restore him ;” the 
actua] achievement (xaraprloare) may not be 
in their power. In tho spirit of meekness 
(ἐν πνεύματι πρᾳότητος); in α spirit of 
meekness. We have the same phrase in 
1 Cor. iv. 21, “Shall I come to you with a 
rod, or in love and a spirit of meekness?” 
The term “spirit” seems as it were to hover 
between the sense of the Holy Spirit and 
of that particular condition of our own 
spirit which is produced by his influence 
(compare “ spirit of adoption,” Rom. viii. 15). 
But the latter seems here the one more 
immediately intended. Lt is not identical, 


however, with the phrase, “meek spirit,” 
which we have in 1 Pet. iii. 4. The meek- 
ness or tenderness meant is that of one 
who, humbly conscious of human infirmity 
in general, his own infirmity included, is 
prepared to be very considerate and gentle 
towards the ignorant and those out of the 
way; loth to use the “rod.” Considering 
thyself, lest thou also be tempted (σκοπῶν 
σεαυτόν, μὴ καὶ σὺ πειρασθῇς); looking to 
thine own self, lest thou also be tempted. 
The change from the plural to the singular 
makes tle warning more impressive and 
searching. The verb σκοπεῖν in the New 
Testament always denotes looking intently : 
sometimes on something to bo guarded 
against, as Luke xi. 35 and Rom. xvi. 17; 
at other times, at something to be aimed at 
or imitated (2 Cor.iv. 18; Phil. ii.4; iii. 17). 
The former is meant here. The Christian 
is to be on his guard against his own weak 
and corrupt nature; lest he withliold help, 
or adequate help; lest in helping he get 
betrayed into the sin of Pharisaio self- 
righteousness—the sin of harshness, ‘cen- 
soriousness. ‘I'he clause is to be viewed in 
conjunction with the thought of the un- 
ecasing conflict between the flesh and the 
Spirit mentioned in ch. v.17. ‘ Tempted,” 
so as to full (1 Cor. vii. 5; 1 Thess. iii. 5; 
Matt. vi. 13). 

Ver. 2.—Bear ye one another’s burdens 
(ἀλλήλων τὰ βάρη βαστάζετε); carry ye, or, 
be ready to carry, the heavy loads of one 
another. The position of ἀλλήλων gives it 
especial prominence; as it stands here it 
scems pregnant with the exhortation, “ Look 
not every man only at his own griefs, but 
at the griefs also of others” (cf. Phil. ii. 4). 
The word βάρος, weight, points to an 
excessive weight, such as it is a toil to 
carry. Matt. xx. 12, “who have borne the 
burden (βαστάσασι τὸ Bdpos) and heat of 
the day.” §o in Acts xv. 28. In 2 Cor. 
iv. 17, “ weight of glory,” the phrase, sug- 
gested by the double sense of the Hebrew 
word kabhéd, indicates the enormous creat- 
ness of the future glory. The supposition 
that the apostle was glancing at the burden 
of Mosaical observances, superseded as a 
inatter for care on our part by the burdens 
of our brethren, seems far-fetched. These 
“heavy loads” are those which a man 
brings upon himself by acts of trans- 
gression: such 88 an uncasy conscience ; 
difficulties in his domestic, social, or Church 
relations ; pecuniary embarrassments; or 
other. But the prevept seems to go beyond 
the requirements of the particular case of 
a peccant brother which has suggested it, 
and to take in all the needs, spiritual or 
secular, which we are subject to, (For 
βαστάζειν of carrying a toilsome burden, 
comp. Mutt. viii. 17; John xix. 17; Acts 


296 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


(cu. νι. 1—18. 


xv. 10.) And so fulfil the law of Christ 
(καὶ οὕτως ἀναπληρώσατε [or, ἀναπληρώσετε) 
τὸν νόμον τοῦ Χριστοῦ); and so fulfil (or, ye 
shall fulfil) the law of Christ. ‘The sense 
comes to much the same, whether in the 
Greck we read tho future indicative or 
the aorist imperative. If the impcrative be 
retained, it yet adds no new element of 
precept to the foregoing; the clause so read 
prescribes the fulfilment of Christ’s law in 
the particular form of bearing one another's 
burdens. If we read the future, the clause 
afirms that in so doing we shall fulfil his 
law; which in the other case is implied. 
Many have supposed the word “law” to be 
here used for ἃ specific commandment; as 
for example Christ’s new commandment that 
we should love one another. So St. Jamcs 
(ii. 8) writes of the “royal law.” St. Paul, 
however, never uscs the term in this sense 
in his own writing, though in the Epistle 
to the Hebrews (viii. 10; x. 16), the plural 
“laws” occurs in citation from Jeremiah. 
It seems better to take it of the whole moral 
institution of Christ, whcther conveyed in 
distinet precept or in his example and 
spirit of action. Comp..re with the present 
passage the advice which St. Paul gives the 
“ strong” (Rom. xv. 1—4), that they should 
bear (βαστάζειν, as here, “ carry”) the in- 
firmities of the weak, and not wish to please 
themselves; after Chiist’s pattern set forth 
in prophetical Scripture, of old time written 
in order to instruct us how we shoul act. 
It has been often observed that the phrase, 
“the law of Christ,’ was selecte| with 
allusion to the stir now being made among 
the Galatians respecting the Law of Moses. 
“ Satisfy ye the requirements of the Law— 
not of Moses which some are prating about, 
but the law of Christ, a more perfect law 
than that other, and more our proper con- 
cern.” Possibly the words τυῦ Χριστοῦ 
were added as 2 pointed surprise of style— 
παρ᾽ ὑπόνοιαν, a8 the scholiasts on Aristo- 
phanes are wont to express it—‘and thus 
fulfil the law—of Christ!” 

Ver. 3.—For if a man think himself to be 
something, when he is nothing, he deceiveth 
himself (εἰ γὰρ δοκεῖ τις εἶναί τι μηδὲν 
dv, φρεναπατᾷ ἑαυτόν [Receptus, ἑαυτὸν 
φρεναπατᾷ]})}; for if a man is nothing and 
thinketh himself to be something, he ts 
deceiving his own soul. Tho conjunction 
“for” points back to tle practical direction 
just given to the “spiritual ;” meaning 
that for those who wished to be, and also 
perkaps to be thought to be, fulfilling 
Christ’s law, this was the behaviour which 
they were to carry out, and without which 
their claim was mere self-delusion. The 
phrase, δοκεῖ εἶναί τι μηδὲν dv, is well illus- 
trated by the passage cited by critica from 
Plato’s ‘ Apologia,’ p. 41, EB: "Edy δοκῶσί τι 


εἶναι μηδὲν ὄντες, ὀνειδίζετε abros . . « ὅτι 
νον οἵονταί τι εἶναι ὄντες οὐδενὸς ἄξιοι. 
“ Something ” is, by a common meivsis, put 
fur “something considerable ” (cf. ch. ii. 6). 
The especial form of eminence, the claim 
to which is here referred to, is eminence in 
spirituality and consistency as a servant cf 
Christ. Possibly the apostle has in his 
eye certain individuals among the Galatians 
that he had heard of, who, professing much, 
were, however, self-complacently bitter and 
contemptuous towards brethren who had 
gone wrong in moral conduct or who dif- 
fered from themsclves in the disputes then 
rife in those Churches. The phrase, μηδὲν 
év, “being nothing,” is a part of the hypo- 
thesis relative to the individual case spoken 
of, not a statement putting forth the aphor- 
ism that noone is really anything. The pas- 
sage quoted above from Plato shows, that 
iu the latter case we should have had οὐδὲν 
and not μηδέν. Some men, by the grace of 
God, are “something ;” but these persons 
only fancy themselves to be so. Whether 
any man is really “something” or not ix 
determined by his practical conduct—his 
“work ” ag the apostle expresses it in the 
next verse. The verb ppevanargy occurs in 
the New Testament only here, thuugh we 
have the substantive φρεναπάτης, dcceivors, 
in Titus i. 10. St. James (i. 26) speaks of 
a nian “deceiving his heart” in seemingly 
just the same sense. In both passages it 
appears to be meaut that a man palms olf 
upon his own mind func.cs as if they were 
just upprehensions of real facts; in beth 
also these fancies are but illusive notions 
of one’s own religious character—here, as 
being “ spiritual ;” in James, us being 
“religious” or “ devout” (@picxos)—the 
activity of practical benevolence being in 
both cases wanting; for “the bridlling not 
his tongue” in ver. 26 is proved by the 
contrasted behaviour spoken of in the next 
verse to refer to those sins of the tongue 
aes are implicitly condemned in vers. 
19—21, 

Ver. 4.—But let every man prove his 
own work (τὸ δὲ ἔργον ἑαυτοῦ δοκιμαζέτω 
éxaoros); but his own work let each man be 
bringing to the proof. “His own work ;” 
his own actual conduct. Both “ work ” and 
“his own” ore weighted with emphasis; 
“work,” as practical behaviour contrasted 
with professions or self-illusions (comp. 
1 Pet. i. 17, “Who without respect of per- 
sons judgeth according to each man’s work”); 
“his own,” as contrasted with thuse others 
with whom one is comparing himself to find 
matter for self-commendation. “Be bring- 
ing to the proof;” that is, testing his actual 
life by the touchstone of God’s law, espe- 
cially of “Christ's law,” with the honest 
purpose of bringing it into accordance 


tg. vi. 1—18.] THE EPISTLE TO 


fHE GALATIANS. 27 


therewith. In other words, “Let each man 
be endeavouring in a spirit of self-watch- 
fulness to walk orderly according to the 
Spirit.” This notion of practical self-im- 
proving attaches to the verb δοκιμάζω 
(“ prove” or “ examine”’) also in Rom. xii. 2; 
1 Cor. xi. 28; Eph. iii. 10. And then shall 
he have rejoicing in himself alone (καὶ τότε 
els ἑαυτὸν μόνον τὸ καύχημα ἕξει); and then 
in regard to himself alone shall he have 
whereof to glory. The preposition εἰς is 
used as in Matt. xiv. 31, Eis τί ἐδίστασας ; 
“What didst thou look at that thou didst 
doubt?” Acts ii. 25, “concerning him;” 
Eph. v. 82; Rom. iv. 20; xiii. 14; xvi. 19. 
It depends upon the whole phrase, “shall 
have his ground of glorying,” and not upon 
the word rendered “ground of glorying” 
alone. The distinction which ordinarily 
obtains befween verbals of the form of 
πρᾶγμα and those of the form of πρᾶξις 
appears to hold good also in respect to 
καύχημα and καύχησις. Compare the use of 
«καύχησις in 2 Cor. vii. 4 and Jas. iv. 16, with 
that of καύχημα in Rom. iv. 2, ἔχει καύχημα, 
“hath whereof to glory;” 1 Cor. ix. 16, ob« 
ἔστι μοι καύχημα, “1 bave nothing to glory 
of.” In 1 Cor. v. 6, οὐ καλὸν τὸ καύχημα 
ὑμῶν, the substantive scems to mean “ boast,” 
that is, what is said in boasting, as dis- 
tinguished from καύχησις, the action of 
uttering a boast. The verb καυχῶμαι, with 
its derivatives—a favourite term with 8t. Paul 
—often appears to mean “ rejoicing ” rather 
than “ bousting ” (cf. Rom. v. 2; Heb. iii. 6); 
but it seems desirable as a rule to render it 
by “glorying,” with the understanding that 
the writcr has frequently the joyous state 
of feeling more prominently in his view 
than the utterance of sclf-gratulation. 
What the apostle meant by “ having one’s 
ground of glorying in regard to one’s own 
self alone,” is well illustrated by what he 
suys respecting himself in 2 Cor. i. 12, 
“Our glorying is this, the testimony of our 
conscience, that in Loliness and sincerity of 
God, not in fieshly wisdom, but in the grace 
of God, we behaved ourselves in the world, 
and more abundantly to you-ward.” He 
had been himsclf in the habit of testing 
his conduct and spirit by the standard of 
Christ’s law; and this was the fruit. And 
not in another (καὶ οὐκ εἰς τὸν ἕτερον); and 
not in regard to that neighbour of his. The 
article probably points to that neighbour 
with whom he has been compuring himself; 
and so, perhaps, also in Rom. ii. 1. But 
it may be simply “ his neighbour ;” ‘ the 
man who is other than himself;” as it is 
in 1 Cor. vi. 1 and x. 24,in neither of which 
assages has any particular “ other person” 
een before referred to. : 
Vex 5.—For every man shall bear his 
ewn burden (ἕκαστος yap τὸ ἴδιον φορτίον 


βαστάσει; for each man shall carry his own 
pack. A man’s business is with his own 
pack; and all depends upon his carrying 
that, not putting it down. This “ pack” 
(φορτίον) is the whole of the duties for the 
discharge of which each man is responsible. 
It is thus that the image is employed by 
our Lord (Matt. xi. 30), “My yoke is easy, 
and my pack is light.” So also in Matt. 
xxiii, 4, “For they tie up packs heavy and 
hard to carry, and lay them upon men’s 
shoulders.” The phrase, τὸ ἴδιον φορτίον, 
“the pack which is individually his own,” 
implies that men’s responsibilities vary, 
each, one having such as are peculiar to 
himself. This “pack” is to be carefully 
distinguished from the “heavy loads” 
(βάρη) of ver. 2. Our Christian obligations 
Christ makes, to them who serve him well, 
light ; but our burdens of remorse, shame, 
grief, loss, which are of our own wilful 
procuring, these may be, must needs be, 
heavy. One part of our “pack” of 
obligation is to help each other in bearing 
these “heavy loads ;” and we shall find our 
joy and crown of glorying in doing so; not 
only in the approval of our own con- 
sciences and in the consciousness of Christ’s 
approval, but also in the manifold refresh- 
ments of mutual Christian sympathy. Ou 
the other hand, our Obristian responsibilities, 
including these of mutual sympathy and 
succour, we must not attempt to evade. 
Onc man is able to do more for others than 
another man can; the truly “spiritual” 
man, for example, can do that which others 
may not even attempt to touch: each one 
has his own part and duty. And Christ’s 
mot d’ordre to all his workmen, or possibly 
the apostle means to all his soldicrs, is this : 
“Every man carry his own pack!” The 
future tense of the verb “shall carry” docs 
not point to some future time, but to thie 
absoluteness of the law for all time; as in 
ch. ii. 16 (see Winer, ‘Gram. N. Τ᾿ § 40, 
p. 251, 6th edit.). The varying turn givea 
to the same general image of carrying 
burdens in ver. 2 and here is quite in 
St. Paul’s manncr. Compare, for example, 
in 2 Cor iii. the varying turn given to the 
images of “ epistle” and “ veil.” 

Ver. 6.—Let him that is taught in the word 
communicate unto him that teacheth in all 
good things (κοινωνείτω δὲ ὁ κατηχούμενος τὸν 
λόγον τῷ κατηχοῦντι, ἐν πᾶσιν ἀγαθοῖς); let him 
that is receiving instruction in the Word share 
with him that instructeth in all good things. 
The Authorized Version appears to have 
exercised sound discretion in leaving the 
particle δὲ untranslated. It is, in fact, here 
merely a conjunction of transition: not in 
any degree adversative; for the exhortation 
to liberality towards our teachers ia perfectly 
germane to the preceding topics of carrying 


RS 


SPORT Lot 


298 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


we 


.... ὕὺ.. 


(ou. σι. 1—18. 


one another’s loads, and 80 carrying our own 
pack. The verb κατηχεῖν, etymologically 
“to fill with sound,” thence signifies “to 
din a thing into another person’s mind 
with inculeation or constant repetition,” in 
which sense it occurs in Acta xxi. 21, 24, of 
the persistent repetition of a slanderous 
report. So early as in Hippocrates (Liddell 
and Scott) the verbal substantive κατήχησις 
is used for “instruction;” ond the verb, 
though not occurring in Attic writers, seems 
to have continued in use in other dialects, 
to reappear at length in the Common Dialect 
of Greek. Accordingly, it is found in the 
sense of “instruct” in Luke i. 4; Acts xviii. 
25; Rom. ii. 18; 1 Cor. xiv. 19. It does not 
denote instruction by question and answer 
in particular, but simply the inculcating of 
knowledge. Recently as the Galatian 
Churches had been founded, it appears from 
this passage that there were already persons 
among them whose particular business it 
was to give religious instruction to their 
fellow-Ohristians; 60 much their business, 
that they were on this ground entitled to 
receive from those they taught liberal help 
in temporal things. Such persons were 
doubtless included among the “elders” 
whom Paul and Barnabas appointed in the 
several Churches which they planted (Acts 
xiv. 23). It is noticeable, further, that the 
order of men alone singled out as entitled 
to such sccular assistance is characterized 
as a teaching order; so characterized, per- 
haps, because teaching religious truth was 
the most prominentand characteristic of their 
functions. In his First Epistle to Timothy 
(v. 17), written, probably, some years later, 
“ the elders who labour in Word and teaching 
(διδασκαλία) are particularized as those 
among the “ presiding elders” who are the 
“most especially” entitled to liberal pay- 
ment; the form of expression, however, 
implying that elders whose function lay in 
other duties than that of teaching were 
likewise entitled to liberal consideration. 
The teaching elders would require, more 
than other Church officers, leisure from 
worldly avocations for the study of God’s 
Word and his truth, and for the actual 
discharge of their especial work in private 
as well as in public (comp. Acts vi. 4; xx. 
20). ‘Tho direction here given would apply, 
as to the case of resident teachers, so also 
to that of persons who travelled about in 
the dissemination of tho faith; as we learn 
from 1 Cor. ix. 4—14; 2 Cor. xi. 7—12. In 
1 Thess. v. 12, 13 the apostle commends to 
the “high estimation” of the disciples 
“those who laboured among them, and were 
over them in the Lord, and admonished 
them (κοπιῶντας, προϊσταμένους, νουθετοῦν- 
ras)” The expression “the Word” is used 
without any further qualification to desig- 


nate the Christian doctrine, as in Mark ii, 
2; iv. 14; Acts viii. 4; xi. 19; Phil. 1. 14. 
So the Christian religion is stylad “the 
Way” in Acts ix. 2; xix.9. “Share;” the 
verb κοινωνεῖν and its derivatives are fre- 
quently used with reference to that kind of 
“fellowship” or “partnership” which is 
evinced by our liberally sharing with the 
object of it in our worldly means. If we 
“count a minister our partner (κοινανόν)," 
as St. Paul writes to Philemon (ver. 17), 
we shall not begrudge him frank and 
generous help in any direction. Thus Rom. 
xii 13, “ Communicating to the necessities 
of saints,” is properly “sharing with them in 
generous sympathy.” So Phil. iv. 14, “ had 
fellowship with (cuyoiwijcayres) my aftlic- 
tion” points to liberal temporal assistance. 
Similarly, gencrous sympathy embodied in 
money gifts is styled “communion,” or 
“partnership,” in Rom. xv. 26; 2 Cor. ix. 
13; Phil. i.5; Heb. xiii. 16; as also κοινω- 
vinds, “ready to communicate,” expresses 
one ready to show such sympathy, in 1 Tim. 
vi. 18. The apostle regards, and would have 
others regard, such offices of kindness with 
a fine delicate feeling, not as giving as if 
from a higher level of condition, but as 
sharing with brothers, with whom all things 
are held in common. Chrysostom and others 
consider the word to point to an interchange 
or barter of goods, spiritual and temporal, 
referring to 1 Cor. ix. 11. “In all good 
things;” in all good things of this life 
which he himself possesses. “ Good things” 
as in Luke xii. 18, 19 (“my goods*’); xvi. 
25; the preposition “in,” as in Matt. xxiii. 
30, ““ partakers in the blood of the prophets.” 
The exact import of this clause, which has 
been variously interpreted, is best appre- 
ciated by our taking account of the warmth 
of indignant feeling with which the apostle 
is writing. This clearly transpires both from 
the words, “be not doccived,” and from the 
assurance, “God is not mocked.” The apostle 
had evidently in his eye a certain course of 
conduct which he indignantly denounces as 
a “sncering at God.” This feeling prompts 
him to accentuate his exhortation addressed 
to the cold-hearted, niggardly Christians 
whow he hes in view, by adding this clause, 
which is in effect, “in every possible 
way;” vamely, by giving them respect and 
good will as well as maintenance. To no 
other Church does he address such direct 
admonition respecting the lilcral treatment 
of its teachers, though, perhaps, indirect 
admonition may be detected in 1 Cor. ix. 
7—11. No doubt the news he had just heard 
from Galatia made him feel the necessity 
of dealing with them roundly on this point. 

Ver. 7.—Be not deceived (uh πλανᾶσθε). 
So 1 Cor. vi. 9; xv. 33. Let nothing lead 
you astray from the conviction, that in the 


cn. vi 1---18.1 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


299 


conformity of your real sims and actual 
practice with the dictates of God’s Spirit, 
and in that alone, can you hope for etcrnal 
life. God is not mocked (Θεὸς οὐ μυκτηρί- 
Gera); God is not derided. The verb 
μυκτηρίζειν, to writhe the nostrils (μυκτῆρας) 
at one in scorn, to sneer at him, occurs 
frequently in tho Septuagint, rendering 
different Hebrew words, which denote dis- 
dain; as naatz (“ despise”), Prov. i. 30; bazah 
(“despise”), Prov. xv. 20; la’ag, “laugh (in 
derision),” Ps. Ixxx. 6. St. Luke uses it in 
his Gospel twice (xvi. 14; xxiii. 35), where 
it is rendered “deride,” “scoff at.” Its, in 
effect, a “ derision” of God when we meet 
his lorena of real piety and of prac- 
tical obedience by the presentation of lip- 
professions and outward shows of religious- 
ness. But the derision will not last long; 
it cannot hold good. Whatever in our 
hypocrisy we may pretend, or even after a 
fashion believe, as to ourselves, the eternal 
principles of Divine government are sure to 
work out they accomplishment. Bishop 
Lightfoot, founding upon the use of the verb 
μυκτηρίζειν in Greek authors on rhetoric— 
with whom it denotes a kind of fine ¢rony, 
in which a feeling of contempt is thinly 
veiled by a polite show of respect-— proposes 
to apply this sense here; and it would well 
suit the tenor of the passage; but as em- 
ployed by so Hellenistic a writer as St. Paul 
it appears safer to interpret the verb simply 
in the light thrown upon it by the usage 
of the Septuagint, For whatsoever a man 
soweth, that shall he also reap (ὃ γὰρ ἐὰν 
σπείρῃ ἄνθρωπος, τοῦτο καὶ θερίσει). The 
word σπείρῃ may be either an aorist, as in 
Eph. vi. 8, “ whatsoever good thing each one 
doeth (ποιήσῃ): or present. ‘The latter 
seems to agree better with the ὅ σπείρων 
of the next verse, and the more pointedly 
directs attention to one’s present immediate 
behaviour. The reaping-time is either the 
future life or its starting-point in the “ day of 
the Lord ” which determines its future com- 
plexion, as in Rom. ii. 5—16; 2 Cor. v. 10. 
The axiom here stated holds good, no 
doubt, in much that befalls us in the present 
life, as is forcibly evinced by the late Fred. 
Robertson’s sermon on this text; but this 
application of it hardly lies in the apostle’s 
present field of view. All human activity 
is here recited under this image of “ sowing,” 
with reference to the consequences which in 
the day of retribution will infallibly accrue 
from every part of it. In 2 Cor. ix. 6, how- 
aver (“Ho that soweth sparingly shall reap 
also sparingly,” etc.), the idea is applied to 
pecuniary gifts. Such an application seems 
to possess a peculiar propriety, founded on 
the benefits that the giving of money—which, 
viewed as gold, silver, or copper coins 18 in 
itself a dry and useless thing—would be the 


means of effecting (see vers. 12—15 of the 
same chapter). But this does not warrant 
our limiting the application of the word 
here to the bestowment of money gifta, 
though this in the context furnishes the 
occasion for its introduction; the next verse 
proves the wider application which the 
apostle’s mind is making of it, not, however, 
losing sight (vers. 9, 10) of this specifio 
reference. “Whatsoever he is sowing, that 
shall he reap;” the quality of the harvest 
(its quantity does not seem from the next 
verse to be particularly thought of, as in 2 
Cor. ix. 6) is determined by the quality of 
the seed sown. In the form of expression, 
the deed which is done is said to be itself 
received back—received back, that is, in ite 
corresponding reward or punishmeut. Ina 
similar manner the apostle expresses himself 
in Eph. vi. 8, “ Whatsoever good thing each 
man doeth, this shall he receive again (κομι- 
εἴται) from the Lord.” 8.0 of evil doings in 
Col. iii. 25, “He that doeth wrong shall 
receive again the wrong which he did;” 
and of both good and bad in 2 Cor. v. 10. 
These last-cited passages, together with 
others which will readily oecur to the reader, 
appear to contemplate a reference to be 
made in the day of judgment to each several 


action, with an award assigned to each; 


which view is likewise presented by such 
utterances of Christ himself as we read in 
Matt. x. 42; xxv. 35, 36, 42, 43. On the 
other hand, in the passage now before us, 
the “eternal life,’ and probably also the 
“corruption” mentionel in ver. 8, seem to 
point to the general award, of life or of 
destruction, which each man shall receive, 
founded on the review of his whole behaviour 
(see Rev. xx. 12,15). This is a somewhat 
ditterent view of the future retribution from 
the former. Considering such passages 
in the light of moral exhortation, we are 
reminded that in each several action we are 
taking a step towards either a happy or a 
disastrous end—a step which, tf pursued 
onward in the same direction, will infallibly 
conduct us to either that happy or that 
disastrous end. In regard to the relation 
between the two somewhat differing views 
of the future retribution above stated, when 
considered as sul,jects of speculative inquiry, 
a few observations may not be out of place 
here. We need find no difficulty at all in 
this diversity of representation so far as 
relates to the good actions of those who 
shall then be accepted or to the evil actions 
of those who shall be rejected. But a 
difficulty does seem to present itself with 
respect to the evil deeds done, if not before 
yet after their conversion, by the ultimately 
accepted, and also with respect to the good 
deeds done by the ultimately lost. Will 
the righteous receive the award of their evil 


800 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


(ou. vi. 1—18 


deeds? Will the lost receive the award of 
their good deeds? For there is no righteous 
man who hath not sinned; as also neither is 
there an unrighteous man whose life does 
not show good and laudable actions. A 
reference to the actual experience of souls 
in this life suggests, not indeed a complete 
solution of the difficulty which the nature of 
the case probably makes impossible to us at 
devise, but a consideration which helps to 
essen our sense of it. It is this: in Chris- 
tians who have a well-grounded conscious- 
ness of perfect reconciliation with God, 
assured to tlem even by the seal of the 
Spirit of adoption, this happy consciousness 
is, however, perfectly compatible with a 
vivid remembrance of wrong things done in 
the past. And this remembrance is per- 
petually suggestive of sentiments of self- 
loathing —self-loathing the more bitter in 
proportion as the soul, by its growing purifi- 
cation through the Spirit, is enabled the 
more truly to estimate the evil character of 
those evil deeds. This is exemplified by 
St. Paul’s wailing recollection, near the very 
end of his course, of those heinous sins of 
his, committed long years before, against 
Christ and his Church (1 Tim. i. 15). Now, 
we cannot conceive of a continuous existence 
of the soul apart from a continued remem- 
brance of its past experiences. The redeemed, 
then, in their perfected state after the resur- 
rection, can never become oblivious of those 
foul blots in their spiritual history ; the recol- 
lection of them can never cease at once to 
abase them in their own consciousness and 
to glorify the grace which has redeemed 
them. The Divine Spirit itself will still, 
we may believe,quicken these remembrances; 
and the infinite benefactions of God, in that 
state of felicity experienced, will be still 
heaping fresh coals of fire upon their heads. 
Their felicity will be no offspring of blind- 
ness or misconception in reference to the 
past; on the contrary, they will know the 
truth in respect to their own lives. in respect 
to every part of them, with a clearness un- 
attainable in the present siate; but they 
will know the truth too in respect to the 
intensity of the Divine love. God’s love, it 
is true, cannot shed the light of approval 
upon those dark spots of their earthly his- 
tory; cannot shed upon them those felici- 
tating beams of “Well done, good and 
faithful servant,” which will most assuredly 
flow down upon the acceptable portions of 
their conduct; that love itself cannot deal 
with his servants otherwise than according 
to truth. But the love of God will be 
clearly seen, cancelling, for Christ’s sake, 
the penal censequences which but for Christ 
those several wickednesses would have in- 
curred ; in those very instances of sinfulness 
magnifying in each aaved one’s consciousness 


the infinite benignity of his Father, which 
loved him even then, in those very hours of 
his extremest ill-deserving. If these specu- 
lations appear not unreasonable, then they 
will serve to explain in what way the sinful 
doings even of those finally accepted will, 
however, not fail of receiving their award; 
the award will be there, both in that sense 
of loss—loss of Divine commendation, which 
will necessarily accompany the recollection 
of them; and also in the sense of their 
debt of punishment, though cancelled. Be 
we sure our sin will find us out. 

Ver. 8.—For he that soweth to his flesh 
shall of the flesh reap corruption (ὅτι ὁ 
σπείρων εἰς τὴν σάρκα ἑαντοῦ, ἐκ τῆς σαρκὸς 
θερίσει φθοράν); for he that soweth unto his 
own flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption. 
“For;” the causal force of the particle 
ὅτι, properly “because,” is here greatly 
attenuated, being employed to introduce 
a sentence commending to acceptance the 
foregoing one, simply by a detailed exposi- 
tion of particulars illustrating its meaning. 
This is the case also in 1 Thess. ii. 14; 
iv. 16; Eph. ii. 18; Phil. iv. 16. In regard 
to the connection of this first half of the 
eighth verse with the preceding context, we 
must take note of the sternly monitory tone 
which marks ver.7. This shows that in the 
sentence, “ whatsoever a man soweth, that 
shall he also reap,” the apostle has more 
immediately in view the terrible harvest to 
be reaped by those who acted as if they 
thought that God might, be overreached. 
We may infer from this that this first 
clause of ver. 8 is mainly the thought 
which up to here the writer had it on his mind 
to inculeate—the “ corruption” which a 
man would reap from a life of self-indul- 
gence. But, after completing the statement 
of this thought, his tone forthwith changes; 
the frown clearing away from his coun- 
tenance, he adds, to the threatening ad- 
monition of the first clause, the cheering 
promise of the second, while a more genial 
tone marks his further remarks on the subject 
in vers. 9and 10. The second limb of the 
verse thus appears introduced in the same 
way as the second does in Rom. viii. 13; 
and in both cases with the conjunction δέ. 
“Sowing unto his own flesh.” Many critics 
render, “into his own flesh,” as if, with 
a shifting of the image, which is certainly 
not uncommon with St. Paul, the flesh were 
now the ground into which the seed is cast. 
This relation, however, to the verb “ sow” 
(see Alford and Ellicott) is in the New 
‘Testament expressed differently, by ἐν, in, or 
by ἐπί, upon; while <is'in Matt. xiii. 22 
denotes “among.” It is more obvious to 
take εἰς as “unto,” “denoting the imme- 
diate object of the action, that to which it 
tends, that in which it terminates ” (Webster 


on. vi. 1—18.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 301 


and Wilkinson, ‘Commentary’). This way 
of construing suits better in the phrase, εἰς 
τὸ Πνεῦμα, which follows. Applying the 
image of sowing generally, the apostle in 
ver. 7 speaks of the quality of the sowing 
(not precisely the quality of the seed) as 
determining the quality of the harvest; and 
lere, of one kind of sowing being “ unto 
the flesh,” the other “ unto the Spirit.” 
“He that soweth unto his own flesh ;” that 
ia, he whose general action in life is referred 
to his own personal gratification in his lower 
nature—to his own profit, pleasure, honour, 
The addition of ἑαυτοῦ (“his own’’) has a 
mgrked reference to the topic which led 
to this general statement: the apostle has 
in his view a man’s gratifying his own 
merely worldly inclinations, to the disregard 
of the well-being, even the physical well- 
being, of other men. To sow unto the flesh 
of our brethren, in one sense, namely, for 
the promotion of their physical well-being, 
would bear a different aspect from sowing 
unto our own flesh. “Shall from the flesh 


reap corruption.” This by some commen-- 


tators has been interpreted thus: In the 
harvest of That Day, nought will be found 
with him of all those things on which his 
heart has been set—nought save, at the 
best, mere rottenness, disappointment, and 
illusion. This would be analogous to the 
moral with which our Lord pointed his 
parable of the rich fool, to whom God 
said, “ Whose shall those things be which 
thou hast provided?” “So is he,” added 
Christ, “that layeth up treasure for himself, 
and is not rich toward God” (Luke xii. 
20, 21). The word φθορά, corruption, 
involves at least as much as this; but this 
view alone would furnish an inadequate 
antitheton to “ eternal life,” as also it givea 
less force to the word itself than it ap- 
pears from its ordinary use to convey. One 
essential element of this verbal noun φθορὰ 
is the notion of decay, or the condition of 
being ¢tmpaired, spoilt, wasted away (cf. 
Col. ii. 20; Rom. viii. 21). It is used of 
corruption in our moral nature in 2 Pet. i. 
4; ii 12, 19; as φθείρω and διαφθείρω are 
likewise applied in 2 Cor. vii. 2; 1 Tim. vi. 5. 
But the clear presentment of its sense, 
when connected as it is here with “ flesh,” 
is afforded by its antithesis, with respect 
to the “body” or “flesh,” to ἀφθαρσία in 
1 Cor. xv. 42, “It is sown in corruption, it is 
raised in incorruption,” and ibid.,50, “ Neither 
doth corruption inherit tncorruption ;” and 
by the opposed adjectives “ corruptible” 
and “incorruptible ” (φθαρτός and ἄφθαρτος) 
in 1 Cor. xv. 53, 54, a8 well as by the use of 
διαφθορὰ of the rotting away of a dead body, 
im Acts ii. 27, 31; xiii, 34—37. That the 
apostle uses the word “corruption” with 
ἃ direct reference to “flesh,” and therefore 


as alluding to or rather expressing a certain 
qualification of the flesh’s condition, ia 
shown by his inserting the words, ἐκ τῆς 
σαρκός, “of the flesh.” Strictly speaking, 
those words are not necessary for the com- 
pleteness of the sentence. ‘To all appear- 
ance they are added #tiologically, to make 
prominent the thought that what is sown 
unto the flesh may be expected to issue in 
corruption, because corruption is the natural 
end of flesh itself. For an analogous yeason, 
“ of the Spirit” is inserted in the antithetic 
statement; the Spirit being essentially not 
only living, but vivific. The words, then, 
scem to mean this: “shall from the flesh 
reap that corruption which the flesh, un- 
quickened by the Spirit of God [for comp. 
Rom. viii. 11], must itself issue in.” In 
endeavouring more exactly to determine the 
sense of these words, it ia well in the first 
instance to confine our view to the con- 
ceptions relative to this subject presented 
by St. Paul. In reviewing these, we 
observe that St. Paul never predicates 
ἀφθαρσία (“ incorruption,” “ incorruptible- 
ness”) of the future bodily condition of 
“those who perish (of ἀπολλύμενοι). On 
the contrary, in 1 Cor. xv. 42—54 he clearly 
restricts this conception of bodily being to 
the case of those whose body shall bo 
assimilated to that of the second Adam, 
the Lord from heaven, as indeed it is only 
to them that the entire discourse (vers. 
20—58) relates. So again in Phil. iii. 21, 
the “fashioning anew of the body of our 
humiliation into conformity with the body 
of his glory” is evidently limited to those 
whose end is not “ perdition (ἀπώλεια). 
Again, in 2 Cor. v.1 the “house not made 
with hands, eternal,” appears to be an exclu- 
sive designation of the resurrection-body 
of the accepted believer. Once more, in 
Rom. ii. 7 the words, “to them that by 
patience in well-doing seek for glory and 
honour and incorruption (ἀφθαρσίαν),᾽ imply 
that incorruption is an attribute exclusively 
pertaining to the happiness after which true 
Christians aspire. All that we meet with 
elsewhere in St. Paul’s writings fits in 
perfectly with his holding the view that, 
while “ there shall be a resurrection both of 
the just and unjust,” as he stated to Felix 
(Acts xxiv. 15)—a resurrection surely he 
meant in the body—the bodies of the 
accepted alone will be incorruptible, the 
bodies of the lost being, for all that appears 
in his teaching, left in some sense subject to 
corruption. In what way the apostle in his 
own mind connected this conception, of in- 
corruption being a quality exclusively per- 
taining to the future condition of the just, 
wits that of the “eternal destruction 
(αἰώνιος BAcOpos)” awaiting them who know 
not God (2 Thess. i. 9), we shall, perhaps, 


802 THE EPISTLE TO 


THE GALATIANS. (cx. vr. 1—18 


do wisely in not attempting to determine. 
We can, it is true, imagine ways of con- 
joining the two notions; but it will be best 
not to positively affirm that this or that 
that was St. Paul’s manner of viewing the 
subject. Possibly the Spirit had not re- 
vealed this to him; if so, he might feel it 
incumbent upon him to forbear from giving 
forth definite statements on matters not 
really disclosed to his view, and, therefore, 
not intended to form a part of revealed 
truth. This, however, should not keep us 
back from accepting what appears to be 
the only probable view of the sense of the 
present passage, namely, that they who live 
a life of selfishness and carnal self-indul- 
gence will reap the final award of having 
a body with flesh, in some most real and 
important sense, subject to corruption. The 
consideration that the apostle is thinking 
of the awards of the day of judgment, at 
once meets the objection that corruption is 
predicable of the Christian’s body also. It 
is obvious to reply that, though the body of 
a believer is sown in corruption even as the 
body of an unrighteous man, it is revealed 
to us that it will be raised in incorruption ; 
which it is nowhere said that the body of 
him who dies in his sins will be. As 
applied to objects lying on the other side 
of the veil which parts the spiritual world 
from that visible world whence all our 
images of thought are derived, this term 
“corruption” must be understood as de- 
scribing a condition of bodily being, not 
necessarily identival with, but very con- 
ceivably only in some respects analogous 
to, that which it describes in relation to 
a corpse in our present state. The resur- 
rection state, with all that pertains to it, 
inscrutably blending, as the story of the 
forty days commencing with Christ’s resur- 
rection exemplifies, spiritual phenomena 
with corporeal, is one which we are wholly 
unable to understand or to realize. This 
may be thought a very superfluous obser- 
vation, But it is not so. The attempts 
intellectually to realize the events which 
we are hereafter to witness and to be the 
subjects of, and the dogmatic affirmations 
relating to them, made, not merely in past 
ages, but in the very present, render it 
necessary tbat we should distinctly keep 
this truth in view. The physical theory of 
that future state, and the eventual history 
which is to be evolved in it, we not merely 
do not know, but are absolutely incapable of 
forecasting. We dare not say one syllable 
about them beyond what is distinctly told 
us; and what ἐξ told us, we are to remem- 
ber, is through the very nature of the case 
no other than images, presented in a dark 
dim mirror, which shows them so obscurely, 
that to rar intellective perception they seem 


riddles rather than revelations: “Apri γὰρ 
βλέπομεν δι’ ἐσόπτρου ἐν αἰνίγματι (1 Cor. 
xiii. 12). It is, in fact, not our intellect, but 
our moral sense, that the revelations of the 
future state are designed toinform. Next, 
looking out from the field of purely Pauline 
doctrine upon the teaching presented in 
other parts of the New Testament, we are 
reminded at once of that awful and repeated 
word of our Lcrd concerning the “ Gehenna 
of fire”—“ where their worm (σκώληξ) dieth 
not, and the fire is not quenched” (Mark ix. 
43—48). It is known that, before our Lord 
appeared upon earth, this conception of 
Gehenna, the terms of which beyond ques; 
tion were borrowed from the closing verses 
of Isaiah, had already become current in 
the eschatological views of the Jews. This 
is evidenced by Judith xvi. 17; Ecclus. vii. 
17. This imagery our Lord adopted, recog- 
nizing, it should seem, in this portion of 
‘rabbinical teaching a just evolution of ideas 
which had been presented in the inspired 
volumes of the Old Testament—a develop- 
ment of them which we may fairly attribute 
to the guiding influence of the Holy Spirit 
promised to God’s restored people, as e.g. 
in Ezek. xxxvi. 24—28. We cannot doubt 
that the “worm” which our Lord spoke 
of means the worm which preys upon 
rotting flesh. The image, therefore, exactly 
accords with the word “ corruption ” e268 
interpreted above. Whether the apostle 
glanced at that discourse of Christ, or was 
even aware of it, is uncertain; but that he 
both knew of it and even inferred from it: 
in using this word “corruption,” is by no 
means unlikely. One other reference to 
“corruption ” as the future doom of at least 
certain of the lost, is found in 2 Pet. 
ii. 12, which, according to the now approved 
reading of the Greck text, runs thus: “ But 
these, as creatures without reason, born 
mere animals to be taken and destroyed— 
shall in their destroying be destroyed (or, ‘ in 
their corruption shall even rot away’) (ἐν τῇ 
φθορᾷ αὐτων καὶ φθαρήσονται)." Possibly 
the word φθορά, taken as “ corruption,” 
points here to moral corruption; but the 
verb φθαρήπονται may very well point to 
the miserable doom of rotting away by 
which they shall judicially perish, moral 
corruption working physical corruption. 
But the exact sense is doubtful. With the 
clause before us we must group Rom. viii. 13, 
“If ye live after the flesh, ye are certain 
to die;” whilst the sentence which follows, 
“But if by the Spirit ye put to death the 
doings of the body, ye shall live,” answers 
to the closing sentence of the present verse; 
as also does “ death ” as “ the wages of sin,” 
balanced against the “eternal life” which 
is “the gift of God,” in Rom. vi. 25. The 


contrasted thoughts in Phil. iii 19, 20 


om. σι. 1—18.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


303 


likewise closely touch those here presented 
to us. But he that soweth to the Spirit 
shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting (ὁ δὲ 
σπείρων εἰς τὸ Πνεῦμα, ἐκ τοῦ Πνεύματος θερίσει 
ζωὴν αἰώνιον); but he that soweth unto the 
Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life eternal. 
That is, he that expends thought, time, effort, 
money, upon the furthering, in himself and 
in otkers, of the fruits of the Spirit, shall 
receive, from that Holy Spirit to whose 
guidance dwelling within him he resigns 
himself, that quickening of his whole being, 
body, soul, and spirit, for an everlasting 
existence in glory, which it is the proper 
work of that Divine Agent to effect. For 
the latter clause, comp. Rom. viii. 11, “If 
the Spirit of him tliat raised up Jesus 
from the dead dwelleth in you [as the 
‘guiding, animating influence in your lives], 
he that raised up Christ from the dead shall 
quicken also your mortal bodies, because 
of his Spirit dwelling within you;” in 
which passage the xtiological clause, “by 
reason of bis Spirit dwelling in you,” corre- 
sponds exactly with the stiological clause, 
“of the Spirit,” in the words before us. 
The two verses which follow show that one 


specific form of sowing unto the Spirit 


which the apostle has definitely in view, 
while enforcing the general idea, is that 
of Christian beneficence. How closely the 
practice of Christian bencficence was in 
the apostle’s mind, in conformity with 
Christ’s own teaching (Matt. xxv. etc.), 
connected with the securing of the future 
blissful immortality, is markedly shown in 
1 Tim. vi. 18, 19;—not the less so if we 
adopt the now approved reading, ἵνα 
ἐπιλάβωνται τοῦ ὄντως ζωῆς, “that they may 
lay hold on the life which is life indeed.” 
Ver. 9.—And let us not be weary in well- 
doing (τὸ δὲ καλὸν ποιοῦντες ph ἐγκακῶμεν 
(Textus Receptus, ἐκκακῶμενἼ) ; but in doing 
that which is good, let us not flag. That is, 
some sow unto their own flesh, some unto the 
Spirit ; let us be of those who do that which 
is commendable; and not that only; let us 
do it with an unflagging spirit. Such seems 
to be the swaying of thought in the sen- 
tence; hence the position of the participial 
phrase bofore the verb: the participle is 
not a mere qualification of the verb, as it is 
in the rendering, “ Let us not be weary in 
well-doing,” and as it is in 2 Thess, iii. 13; 
but, with an implied exhortation that such 
should be the case, it supposes that we are 
of the better class, and founds upon the sup- 
position the exhortation not to flag. “That 
which is commendable (τὸ καλόν)" recites, 
not worke of beneficence only, but every 
species of moral excellence, comprising in 
brief the enumeration given in Phil. iv. 8, 
ell of which is included in “sowing unto the 
Bpirit.” The verb ἐγκακεῖν occurs in five 


other places of the New Testament—Luke 
xviii. 1; 2 Cor. iv. 1, 16; Eph. iii. 18; 
2 Thess, iii. 18. In every one of these six 
passages some of the manuscripts present 
the variant reading of ἐκκακεῖν, which in all 
is adopted in the Textus Receptus, but is 
in all replaced with the general consent of 
receat editors by ἐγκακεῖν. It is, indeed, 
questioned whether ἐκκακεῖν is ever used by 
any Greek author. The difference in mean- 
ing is material: ἐγκακεῖν is to be bad in 
doing a thing; while ἐκκακεῖν would pro- 
bably mean to be so bad at a course of action 
as to leave it off altogether. In the first 
four of the above-cited passages it is ren- 
dered in the Authorized Version by 
“faint;” whilst in 2 Thess, iii. 13 aud 
here it is rendered “be weary,” that is, 
“flag.” In all the notion of flagging appears 
the most suitable, and in 2 Cor. iv. 1, 16 
necessary. In the present passage the 
course of thought requires us to understand 
it as not so strong a word as ἐκλύεσθαι. 
Critics point attention to the play of phrase 
in connecting the expression, doing that 
which is commendable or good, with the 
verb denoting being bad at doing it. Soin 
2 Thess. iii. 18, μὴ ἐγκακήσητε καλοποι- 
οὔντες. The epigrammatic combination 
would secm to have been u favourite one 
with St. Paul, occurring aa it does in two 
letters written several years apart. Such 
playfulness is not foreign to his style. The 
use of the first person plural may be merely 
cohortative, as above in ch. v. 24. But it 
may also be a real self-exhortation as well. 
In the long, long, weary, arduous conflict 
which St. Paul was waging throughout his 
Christian career, the flesh must often have 
felt weak, and have required the applica- 
tion of this goad. And this tone of personal 
feeling may, perhaps, be further discerned 
in the use of the phrase, ‘in due season ;” 
the blessed reaping of joy may seem to 
us at times long in coming; but God’s time 
for its coming will be the best time; let 
us, therefore, be resigned to wait for that. 
This seems to be the tone of the καιροῖς 
ἰδίοις, “in its own times,” of 1 Tim. vi. 15. 
For in due season we shall reap, if we faint 
not (καιρῷ γὰρ ἰδίῳ θερίσομεν, wh ἐκλυόμενοι); 
for at tts own season we shall reap, tf we faint 
not. Καιρὸς ἴδιος is the season assigned to 
an event in the counsels of God; as in 
2 Thess. ii. 6, ἐν τῷ αὐτοῦ καῖρῳ, “in his 
season,” of the revelation of the “man of 
lawlessness.” Καιροῖς ἰδίοις ia used in 1 Tim. 
vi. 15 with reference, as here, to the day of 
judgment; andin 1 Tim. ii. 6 and Titus i. 3, 
of the manifestation of the gospel. In every 
caso the phrase appears to intimate that 
the season appointed by God, though not 
what man might have anticipated or wished, 
was, however, to be acquiesced in as wisest 


304 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


Cou. vi, 1—18, 


and best (see last note). The reaping is 
the same as that referred to in the previous 
two verses. “If we faint not.” The verb 
ἐκλύεσθαι in Matt. xv. 32 and Mark viii. 2 
is to faint physically from exhaustion. In 
Heb. xii. 3, 5 it is used of succumbing, 
giving in, morally ; not merely feeling weak, 
but in consequence of weakness giving up 
all further effort. In this latter sense it 
oceurs in the Septuagint of Josh. xviii. 3 
and in 1 Mace. ix. 8. And this last is its 
meaning here. It expresses more than the 
flagging of spirit before mentioned; for 
that would not forfeit the reward of past 
achievement, unless it led to the actual re- 
linquishment of further endeavour; this last 
would forfeit it (comp. Rev. iii. 11 and 2 
John 8). Taking it thus, there is no occa- 
sion for understanding this phrase, “not 
fainting,” as several of the Greek commen- 
tators do, including appurently Chrysostom, 
as if it meant thus: “ We shall reap with- 
out any fear of fainting or becoming weary 
any more;” which surely, as Alford ob- 
serves, gives a vapid turn to the sentence. 
Ver. 10.—As we have therefore oppor- 
tunity (ἄρα οὖν ὡς καιρὸν ἔχομεν); 80 then, 
while (or, as) we have a season for 80 doing. 
“Apa οὖν : this combination of particles is 
frequently found in St. Paul’s writings, 
being so far as appears (cf. Winer, ‘Gram. 
N. T.,’ § 53, 8a) peculiar to him (1 Thess, 
v. 6; 2 Thess. ii. 15; Rom. v. 18; vii. 3, 
25; viii. 12; ix. 16,18; xiv.12,19; Eph. 
ii. 19). In every instince it marks a cer- 
tain pause after a statement of premisses 3 
in several, following a citation from the Old 
Testament; the writer, after waiting, so to 
speak, for the reader duly to take into his 
mind what has been already said, proceeds 
to draw hia inference. The ἄρα seems to 
point backward fo the premisses; the οὖν 
to introduce the inference. “ Well, then,” 
or “so, then,” appears a fairly equivalent 
rendering. In 1 ‘Thess. v. 6 and Rom. xiv. 
19 ἄρα οὖν introduces a cohortative verb, as 
here; in 2 These. ii, 15, an imperative. 
The words which foilow seem to be com- 
monly understood as meaning “ whenever 
opportunity offers.” But this falls short of 
recognizing the solemn consideration of the 
proprieties of the present sowing-time, 
which the previous contcxt prepares us to 
expect to find here; the term “season,” as 
Meyer remarks, having its proper reference 
already fixed by the antithetical season of 
reaping referred to in ver. 9. Moreover, 
instead of ὡς, would not the apostle, if he 
had meant “whenever,” have used the 
intensified form καθώς ἢ Chrysostom gives 
the sense well thus: “ As it is not always 
in our power to sow, so neither is it to show 
mercy ; when we have been borne isence, 
though we may desire it a thousand times, 


we shall be able to effect nothing.” Indeed, 
it is questionable whether the sonse now 

leaded for is not that which was intended ᾿ 
oy the rendering in the Authorized Version. 
The particle ὡς probably means “ while,” 
as it does in Luke xii. 58 and in John xii. 
35, 36, where it should replace the ἕως of 
the Textus Receptus; but this needs not 
to be insisted upon. Anyway, we are re- 
minded of the uncertain tenure by which 
we hold the season for doing that which, if 
done, will have so blessed a ounsequence. 
Let us do good unto all men (ἐργαζώμεθα τὸ 
ἀγαθὸν πρὸς πάντας); let us be workers of 
that which és good towards all men. The 
verbs ἐργάζομαι and ποιῶ appear used inter- 
changeably in Ool. iii. 23 and 3 John 5; 
but the former seems to suggest, more 
vividly than the other, either the concrete 
action, the ἔργον, which is wrought; or else 
the part enacted by the agent as being a 
worker of such or such a description—as if, 
here, it were “let us be benefactors.” The 
adjective “good” (ἀγαθός) is often, perhaps 
most commonly, used to desiynate what is 
morally excellent in general; thus, eg., in 
Rom. ii. 10, “the worker of that which is 
good” is contrasted with “the worker-out 
of that which is evil,” as a description of a 
man’s moral character in general. But on 
the other hand, this adjective frequently 
takes the sense of “ benevolent,” “bene- 
ficent;” as e.g. in Matt. xx. 15, “Is thine 
eye evil, because I am good?” 1 Pet. ii. 18, 
“masters, . .. not only the good and gentle, 
but also the froward ;” Titus ii. 5; 1 Thess. 
iii. 6; 1 Tim. vi. 18; Rom. xii. 21. .In the 
remarkable contrast between the righteous 
man and the good man in Rom. v. 7 (see Dr. 
Gifford’s note on the passage, ‘Speaker’s 
Commentary,’ p. 123), the latter term ap- 
pears distinctly intended in the conception 
of virtuousness to make especially pro- 
minent the idea of beneficence. Naturally, 
this sense attaches to it, when it describes 
an action done to another, as the opposite to 
the “ working ill to one’s neighbour,” men- 
tioned in Rom. xiii. 10; “good” in such κα 
relation, denoting what is beneficent in 
effect, denotes what is also benevolent in 
intention (see 1 Thess. v.15). Indeed, that 
the present clause points to works of bene- 
ficence” is made certain by that which is 
added, “and especially,” etc.; for our be- 
haviour should be in no greater degree 
marked by general moral excellence in deal- 
ing with one class of men than in dealing 
with any others; though one particular 
branch of virtuous action may be called into 
varying degrees of activity in different 
relations of human intercourse. “Towards 
all men;” πρός, towards, agin 1 Thess. v. 
14; Eph. vi. 9. The spirit of universal 
philanthropy which the apostle inculcates 


ou, vi. 1—18.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


805 


here as in other passages, as eg. 1 Theas. 
v. 15, is one which flows naturally from the 
proper influence upon the mind of the great 
facts stated in 1 Tim ii. 3—7, as also it was 
a spirit which in ἃ most eminent degree 
animated the apostle’s own life. Witness 
that noble outburst of universal benevolence 
which we read of in Acts xxvi. 29. Such 
an escape from bigotry and particularism 
was quite novel to the Gentile world, and 
scarcely heard of in the Jewish, thougb 
beautifully pointed forward to in the teach- 
ing of the Book of Jonah (see Introduction 
to the Book of Jonah, in ‘Speaker’s Com- 
mentary,’ vol. vi. p. 576). Especially unto 
them who are of the household of faith 
(μάλιστα δὲ πρὸς τοὺς οἰκείους τῆς πίστεω5); 
but especially towards them that are of the 
household of faith. The adjective οἰκεῖος 
occurs in the New Testament only in St. 
Paul's Epistles—twice besides here, namely, 
in Eph. ii. 19, “fellow-citizens with the 
saints, and of the household (οἰκεῖοι) of 
God;” and in 1 Tim. v. 8, “if any pro- 
videth not for his own, and specially his 
own household (οἰκείων). In the last-cited 
passage, the adjective, denoting as it plainly 
is meant to do, a closer relation than “his 
own (ἰδίων) must mean members of his 
household or family; and we can hardly 
err in supposing that in Eph. ii. 19 like- 
wise the phrase, οἰκεῖοι τοῦ Θεοῦ denotes 
those whom God has admitted into his 
family as children, So the word also 
signifies in the Septuagint of Isa. iii. 5; 
lviii. 7; and Lev. xviii. 6, 12, 18. It is, 
therefore, an unnecessary dilution of its 
force here to render it, “those who belong 
to the faith,” though such a rendering of it 
might be justified if found in an ordinary 
Greek author. The meaning of τῆς πίστεως 
is illustrated by the strong personification 
used before by the apostle in ch. iii. 23, 25, 
“before faith came; ” “shut up for the faith 
which was yet to be revealed;” “now that 
faith is come.” The apostle surely here is 
not thinking of “the Christian doctrine,” 
but of that principle of believing accept- 
ance of God’s promises which he has been 
insisting upon all through the Epistle. 
This principle, again personified, is here the 
patron or guardian of God’s people afore- 
time under a pedagogue: “of the household 
of faith,” not “of the faith.” The apostle 
is thinking of those who sympathized with 
the dootrine of justification by faith in 
Christ without legal observances; and very 
possibly is glancing in particular at the 
teachers under whose care the apostle had 
left the Galatian Churches. At first, we 
may believe, the Galatian Ohurchmen, in the 
fervour of their affection to the apostle him- 
" self, had been willing enough to help those 
teachers in evcry way. But when relaxing 
GALATIANS, 


their hold upon the fundamental prin 
ciples of the gospel, they had also declined 
in their affectionate maintenance of the 
teachers who upheld those doctrines. He 
now commends these, belonging to faith’s 
own household, to their especial regard 
(comp. Phil. iii. 17). “Especially ;” this 
qualification in an intensified form of the 
precept of universal beneficence, is the out- 
come of no cold calculation of relative 
duties, but of fervent love towards those 
who are truly brethren in Christ. That to 
these an especial affection is due above all 
others is a sentiment commended and in- 
culcated in almost all St. Paul’s Epistles ; 
as it is also by St. Peter, as e.g. in 1 Pet. i. 
22, ete.; and again by St. John. With all, 
“love of brethren (φιλαδελφία)᾽ is a different 
sentiment from that sentiment of charity 
which is due to all fellow-men; that is, it 
is an inteusified form of this latter, exalted 
into a peculiar tenderness of regard by the 
admixture of higher relations than ‘those 
which antecedently connect true Christians 
with all members of the human family. 
Christ has himself (Matt. xxv. 31—46) 
taught his disciples that he deems a pecu- 
liar regard to be due from them. to those 
“his brothren” who at that day shall be on 
his right hand; meaning, evidently, by 
“these my brethren,” not suffering men, 
women, or children as such, but sufferers 
peculiarly belonging to himself (comp. 
Matt. x. 42; xviii. 5, 6). Thus we see that, 
after all, there is a particulariem properly 
characteristic of Christian sentiment; only, 
not such a particularism as a Gentile, and 
too often a Jew likewise, would have for- 
mulated thus: “Thou shalt love thine own 
people and hate the alien; ” but one which 
may be formulated thus: “Thou shalt love 
every inan, but especially thy fellow-believer 
in Christ.” The reader will, perhaps, scarcely 
need to be reminded of Keble’s exquisite 

iecu on the Second Sunday after Trinity 
In the ‘Christian Year.’ 

Ver. 11.—Ye see how largo a letter I have 
written unto you with mine own hand 
(Bere πηλίκοις ὑμῖν γράμμασιν ἔγραψα τῇ ἐμῇ 
χειρί); see with what large pieces of writing 
(or, with what large letters) I have written 
(or, 1 write) unto you with mine own hand. 
There can be hardly any doubt that the 
rendering “ye see” of the Autlorized 
Version, supposing, as it seems to do, that 
this is meant as an indicative, must be 
wrong (cf. John iv. 29; 1 John iii. 1). The 
ἴδετε of the Textus Receptus in Phil. i, 36 
is replaced by recent editors with one con- 
sent by εἴδετε. Each one of the four next 
Greek words, πηλίκοις ὑμῖν γράμμασιν ἔγραψα, 
has been subjected to a variety of interpre- 
tations. What appears to the present writer 
the most probable view he must explain as 

x 


306 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 


[σπ. vr. 1—18. 


briefly as he is able. The interrogative 
πηλίκος means “how great,” as in Zech. ii. 2 
(Septuagint); Heb. vii.4. Accordingly, πόσα 
καὶ πηλίκα in Polyb.,i. 2, 8 (cited in Liddell 
and Scott's ‘ Lexicon’) means “ how many 
and how large.” Many, as e.g. Chrysostom, 
have supposed that the word includes 8 
reference to clumsiness, ungainliness, as 
attaching to the apostle’s handwriting 
(“ with what big letters a 
of the word being used in this sense of 
“ungainliness” has been adduced ; and it 
seems safer not to import into its rendering 
this additiunal shade of meaning. The 
dative ὑμῖν Bishop Lightfoot proposes to 
connect closely with πηλίκοις as μοὶ and 
σοὶ are often used in familiar style, with the 
sense mark you! But there is no instance 
of this use of the dative pronoun in the 
Greek Testament (see Winer, ‘Gram. N. T.,’ 
§ 22, 7, Anm. 2, p. 140); and here surely 
it more naturally connects ‘itself with ἔγραψα. 
It is not uncommon with St. Paul to insert 
some word or words between a substantive 
and its adjective or dependent genitive, as 
here between πηλίκοις and γράμμασιν (see 
ch. ii. 9; iii, 15; Phil. iv. 15, οἴ. In the 
instances now cited there appears no more 
logical occasion for such a seeming dis- 
arrangement of the words than there does 
here. The verb ἔγραψα is used with no 
objective accusative following, as in Rom. 
xv. 15; 1 Pet. v. 123 the substantive 
γράμμασιν being in the dative, because the 
apostle is referring merely to the form of 
the medium of communication, and not to 
the substance of the communication itself. 
The rendering of the Authorized Version, 
“how large a letter I have written,” cannot 
be defended as a literal- translation, though 
it may be allowed on one view of the pas- 
sage to give the sense rightly. But though 
the plural noun γράμματα, in ordinary Greek, 
like literz in Latin, sometimes occurs in the 
sense of a single epistle or letter, it is never 
so used by St. Paul, who always employs 
the word ἐπιστολὴ to express this notion, 
which he does no less than seventeen times. 
In Acts xxviii. 21 it is rendered “letters,” 
in the plural number; being properly “com- 
munications in writing.” The noun γράμμα 
was the word ordinarily employed in Greek 
to designate a letter of the alphabet. It 
also denotes “a writing,” as when in the 
plural we read in John v. 47, “if ye believe 
not his writings,” and in 2 Tim. iii. 15, “ the 
sacred writings,” or Scriptures. In Luke 
xvi. 6, 7 “take thy Lill” is literally, “take 
thy writings” (γράμματα being the now 
accepted reading in the Greek text). In 
2 Cor. iii. 7, “the ministration of death in 
writings,” the word probably refers to the ten 
commandments, each forming one “ wriling;” 
though it may mean “in characters of 


But no example. 


writing.’ In ordinary Greek it sometimes 
denotes a passage of a treatise or book 
(Liddell and Scott, under the word, ii. 4). 
Next (1) the verb ἔγραψα (“I have 
written ”) may be understood, as in Rom. xv. 
15, “I have written the more boldly unto 
you,” ete., with reference to the entire letter, 
now nearly con:plete, as it lies before jim. 
In that case the apostle’s words may be 
rendered, “See, with what long writings 
{or, ‘pieces of writing’) I have written unto 
you with mine own hand.” Through some 
cause or other, we know not what the cause 
was, writing with his own hand was not 
a welcome employment to him; so far 
unwelcome thit he generally devolved the 
actual penning of his letters upon an amanu- 
ensis, merely autheuticating each letter as 
his own by ἃ postscript added in his own 
hand (see 2 Thess. iii. jin.). Perhaps 
Philemon forms the only execption (see 
ver. 19), apart from this letter to the 
Galatians. We may, therefore, imagine the 
apostle as painfully and laboriously penning 
one portion after another of the Epistle; 
often pausing weariedly in the work as he 
came to the end of each γράμμα, that is, to 
the end of each section of his argument, 
each seeming to him a long and toilsome 
effort. And now at last he exclaims, “ Look, 
what long, laborious performances of hand- 
writing [ have achieved in writing to you! 
And from that learn how deeply I am 
concerned on your behalf, and how grave 
your present spiritual peril appears to me 
to be!” Ordinarily it was only a brief 
“piece of writing ” that he wrote with hia 
own hand; here, long pieces, added one 
after another with painful effort. Or (2) 


| the verb “I have written” may be re- 


ferred to what the apostle is now beginning 
to pen, not merely because the epistolary 
style of the ancients, Greek and Roman, 
was wont to place the writer of a letter in 
the temporal standing-point of its recipient, 
as when Cicero dates his letters scribebam 
Id., ete., but because under some circum- 
stances it is natural that the writer should 
thus refer himself to the view of his cor- 
respondent, Thus in Philem. 19, “I Paul 
have written it (ἔγραψα) with mine own hand, 
I will repay it.” It would be quite obvious 
to ourselves to express our meaning in the 
same manner. So far, then, as such con 
siderations rcvach, it appears quite suppos- 
able that the apostle, having employed an 
amanuensis as usual as far as the end of 
ver. 10, then himself took up the pen for 
the customary addition of an authenticating 
postscript; and that, for the purpose οὗ 
adding especial emphasis to the postscript 
which he here thouglit advisable to add, 
he made his handwriting most unusually 
large, and that it is to this emphatic style 


ou. vi. 1—18.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 


801 


of penmanship that he here drawe attention. 
Many modern critics have acquiesced in 
this explanation; and if γράμμασιν means 
“letters,” that is, characters of the writing, 
it seems the most probable; for it does not 
seem likely that the whole Epistle was 
written in letters of an extraordinary size; 
while, if the characters were those of his 
ordinary style of penmanship, the remark 
would be too trivial to come from him. The 
present writer inclines to the former method 
of interpretation. 

Ver. 12.—As many as desire to make a 
fair show in the flesh (ὅσοι θέλουσιν cbmpo- 
σωπῆσαι ἐν σαρκί); all those who wish to 
make a ‘fair show tn the flesh. In this verse 
and the next the apostle singles out for 
especial animadversion certain Christians, 
Galatian Christians no doubt, who were 
actuated by the aim of standing fair with 
the religious world of Judaism. They were 
Gentile Christians and not Jews; this ap- 
pears from their not themsclves wishing 
to keep the Law; for if they had been Jews, 
the external observance of the Law, being 
natural to them from their infancy, would 
have been with them a matter of course: 
St. Paul himself would probably not have 
urged them to relinquish it. The verb 
εὐπροσωπεῖν is not found by the critics in 
any earlier Greek writer, though the adjec- 
tive εὐπρόσωπος, fair-faced, is used of “ spe- 
cious” answers in Herodotus (vii. 168), and 
“specious words” conjoined with “fables” 
in Demosthenes (‘De Cor.,’ p. 277). Ari- 
stophanes uses the word σεμνοπροσωπεῖν 
(‘ Nub.,’ 362) to “ourry a solemn and wor- 
shipful face.” The notion of f.Jsity, plainly 
hinted by εὐπροσωπῆσαι, reminds us, Bishop 
Lightfoot observea, of our Lord’s words re- 
apecting whited aepulchres, which <“‘ out- 
wardly appear beautiful, but inwardly,” 
eto. (Matt. xxiii. 27). Compare the use of 
πρόσωπον, face, in 2 Cor. v. 12, “glory in 
appeorance, and rot in heart.” As the aorist 
of verbs denoting 8 certain state frequently 
expresses an entrance upon such a state (see 
Chow above, ch. ii. 19 and note), it probably 
is intimated that the persons referred to 
were consciour that their “outward appear- 
ance” was hitherto not acceptable to Jewish 
minds, but that they now were desirous of 
making it so, Time had been when they 
did not care so much about it. “In the 
flesh.” This word “flesh” not unfrequently 
designates men’s condition as unmodified 
by the Spirit of God; as when the apostle 
speaks of *heing in the flesh” (Rom. vii. 5; 
viii. 8, 9): thence also circumstances or re- 
lations pertaining to this unspiritual condi- 
tion, ar in Phil. ili, 8,4; where the apostle 
speaks of “having confidence in the flesh,” 
and goes on, in vers. 5, 6, to enumerate some 
of those circumstances or relations. Thus, 


again, in Eph. if. 11, “ye, the Gentiles in 
tue flesh,” that is, who in that state of things 
in which men lived before the spiritual 
economy intervened, were the “ uncircum- 
cision (axpofvoria),” while the Jews were 
the “circumcision.” But as the distinc- 
tion between these two classes was sig- 
nalized by an external corporeal mark, 
the apostle in that passage immediately 
after uses the expression, “in the flesh,” in 
a varied sense, with reference to this latter, 
“that which is called circumcision, in the 
flesh, made by hands,” With similar varia- 
tion of meaning the word “ flesh” is used 
here. The Christians spoken of, losing sight 
of the cross of Christ and the Spirit’s work, 
were becoming possessed by feelings be- 
longing to the old “carnal” relations be- 
tween Jews and Gentiles, and so were 
making it their ambition to figure with 
advantage in the eyes of the circumeision, 
as well as to escape their enmity. And 
then, as in the passage just referred to 
(Eph. ii. 11), the apostle passes from this 
sense of the phrase, “in the flesh,” to another 
relating to corporeal flesh; for this he does 
in the next verse, in the words, “ that they 
may glory in your flesh.” They constrain 
you to be circumcised (οὗτοι ἀναγκάζουσιν 
ὑμᾶς περιτέμνεσθαι); these compel you to be 
circumcised. “Compel;” the same verb as 
wis used above (ch, ii. 14) of St. Peter’s 
attitude towards the Gentile believers at 
Antioch. As here applied, it means “advise,” 
“urge,” argue for it as right and necessary 
for salvation, insist upon it as a condition 
of friendship. “These;” not, perhaps, 
meaning “these only,” “none but these ;” 
it appears enough to suppose that the 
apostle, from definite information which he 
had received, was persuaded that some of 
those who took the lead in urging onward 
the Judaizing movement were led to join 
in it by the cowardly motives here described. 
With indignant scorn, he says, “ As surely as 
@ man wants to stand well with the world, 
so surely will he be found with these 
circumcisers.” Only lest they should suffer 
persecution for the cross of Christ (μόνον 
ἵνα τῷ σταυρῷ Tod Χριστοῦ ph διώκωνται 
(Textus Receptua, μόνον ἵνα μὴ τῷ σταυρῷ 
τοῦ Χριστοῦ διώκωνται)); only that they may 
not by means of the crosa of Christ suffer 
persecution. “Only that;” that is, for no 
other reason than that. The μὴ is thrust 
out of its proper position in the sentence 
(which is that assigned to it in the Textus 
Receptus) by the fervour of the writer's 
feelings. To himself the cross of Christ 
seemed the centre of all glory and blessed- 
ness; to be connected with it he would be 
well pleased to suffer martyrdom; but these 
men could be well content to shelve it out 
of sight, and, in fact, were dving eo; and 


808 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


fou. νι. 1—18. 


what for? because the Jews did not like it, 
and they did not wish to get into trouble 
by offending them! A grand disdain prompts 
the apostle, at the cost of impairing the 
smooth run of the sentence, to (as it were) 
balance against each other the “cross of 
Christ” and “not being persecuted.” The 
construction of the dative to express “by 
means of,” that by which a certain result is 
brought about, is not very common; but we 
have it in Rom. xi. 20, τῇ ἀπιστίᾳ ἐξεκλά- 
σθησαν: and ibid., 30, ἠλεήθητε τῇ τούτων 
ἀπιστίᾳ: 2 Cor. ii. 12, τῷ μὴ εὑρεῖν. Our 
attention is in this passage again drawn to 
the manner in which the Jews regarded 
“the word of the cross” (1 Cor. i. 18), as 
that “ word” was unfolded by St. Paul and 
received by his disciples among the Gentiles. 
The great point of offence (σκάνδαλον) in 
the apostle’s teaching respecting it lay in 
his presenting its pollution in the view of 
the Law, as inferring the abrogation of the 
ceremonial institute itself. On this account 
the Jews could not abide him nor those 
who attached themselves to him as their 
teacher, though in a degree able to put up 
with Christians not anti-Judaists. To the 
Galatians he had presented “Christ cruci- 
fied’ (ch. iii. 1) as he saw him to be, and 
they had accepted the doctrine. But now 
sone, at least, of them were beginning to feel 
uneasy at observing how the Jews in their 
neighbourhood regarded Paul and those who 
attached themselves closely to Paul. Had 
not the Jews (they felt) high claims to con- 
sideration? Were they not the original de- 
positaries of the oracles of God? Was not 
their religion venerable for its antiquity, 
magnificent in its temple and ritual, and in 
origin Divine? To these new converts from 
the gross spiritual darkness and degradation 
of heathenism, some of them, perhaps, drawn 
from it originally by the teaching of non- 
Christian Jews, the adherents to the ancient 
faith would naturally appear entitled to 
high respect—respect which they themselves 
were also not backward in claiming (see 
Rom. ii. 19, 20). When the personal in- 
fluence exercised upon tlieir minds by the 
holy love and fervour of the apostle had 
through hia absence begun to wane, they 
also, we may imagine, began to get dis- 
heartened, by feeling that their Christian dis- 
cipleship was viewed with disfavour by their 
Jewish neighbours, by reason of its Pauline 
complexion; that on this account the Jews 
looked upon themselves, though worshippers 
of the same God, as unworthy of notice. 
nay, were even disposed to point them out 
to the surrounding heathens, only too will- 
ing to follow up the hint, as proper objects 
of contempt and ill usage (see for illustia- 
tion, Acts xiii.; xiv. 22; xvii.; xviii.; 1 
Thess. ii. 14—16). And herewith we have 


to bear in mind also that Judaism was in 
Roman jurisprudence treated as a tolerated 
religion (religio licita); and that, as long as 
Christians were regarded as belonging to 
a sect or branch of Judaism, they might 
seem to be entitled, in the eyes of Roman 
law, to the same toleration as the Jews them- 
selves enjoyed. But if the Jews cast them 
off or disowned them they might forfeit 
such immunity, and become liable to be 
treated, not only by mobs, but by the 
Roman law itself, as offenders. The per- 
sons, then, here censured by the apostle 
may be supposed to have pursued the course 
they did with the idea that, by making 
themselves acceptable to the Jews through 
the adoption to a limited extent of Jewish 
ceremonies, and especially through the ac- 
ceptance in their own person and the urging 
upon others of circumcision, they would 
relieve themselves of “the offence of the 
cross” (ch. v. 4). Without ceasing to be 
Christians, they would wipe themselves 
clear of the odium which with the Jews 
attached to Paul and those who held with 
Paul. Such seems to be the situation to 
which St. Paul’s words allude. Bishop 
Lightfoot interprets it somewhat differently. 
Ver. 13.—For neither they themselves who 
are circumcised keep the Law (οὐδὲ yap οἱ 
περιτεμνόμενοι αὐτοὶ νόμον φυλάσσουσιν); for 
neither do they who are betng circum- 
cised themselves keep the Law; or, for 
not even they who are being circumcised, 
themselves keep the Law. It is doubtful 
whether the οὐδὲ accentuates the main idea 
of the clause (see note on ch. i. 12), or only 
the single term, “they who are being cir- 
cumcised,” as in John vii. 5 it accentuates ~ 
“his brethren.” “For;” pointing back to 
the words, “ only that,” “for no other reason 
than that,” of the previous verse. The 
apostle means, it isfrom no zeal for the Law 
itself that they do what they do, for they 
are at no pains to keep the Law; but only 
with the object of currying favour with the 
Jews. The present participle περιτεμνόμενοι 
is the reading more generally accepted, 
though the perfect περιτετμημένοι has a com- 
peting amount of documentary authentica- 
tion. The perfect is so much the easier 
reading to understand (“not even those who 
have actually been circumcised”) as to be 
much more likely to be ἃ correction displac- 
ing περιτεμνόμενοι than the converse hypo- 
thesis of the latter being a correction of the 
other borrowed from ver. 3. “They who 
are being circumcised” may be understood 
of a party, including these wno first set the 
movement agoing, who were one after another 
undergoing the rite. Another turn is given 
to this participial phrase, as meaning “ who 
are eager for circumcision,” “who are all 
for being circumcised,” “ the circumcision 


on, νι, 1—18.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 


805 


party.” Bishop Lightfoot is in favour of 
this view, referring to “ the apt quotation ” 
from an apocryphal book, in which the 
phrase appears used in this very scnse (see 
his note). It is a sense grammatically diffi- 
cult to sustnin from the usage of the New 
Testament; for ὁ διώκων of ch. i. 23, which 
has been cited on its behalf, does not bear it 
out. But the passion of scorn with which 
the apostle writes make the supposed strain 
upon strict grammatical propriety not alto- 
gether improbable. “Themselves ;” this is 
inserted with allusion to the zeal shown by 
those men, both the first promoters and 
those drawn in by them, in urging upon 
others the observance, not indeed of the 
whole Law, but of certain of its prescrip- 
*’ans. The verb φυλάσσω is used similarly 
fn Rom. ii. 26; Acts xxi. 24. The sense 
seems founded upon the notion of watching 
-the Law to sce what it requires, as one is 
endeavouring to carry it out. The article 
is wanting before νόμον, though specifically 
denoting the Law of Moses, as in Rom. ii. 
25, 27, and often. But desire to have you 
cirsumeised, that they may glory in your flesh 
(ἀλλὰ θέλουσιν ὑμᾶς περιτέμνεσθαι, ἵνα ἐν τῇ 
ὑμετέρᾳ σαρκὶ καυχήσωνται); but they desire 
you to recetve circumcision, that in your flesh 
they may have whereof to glory. The con- 
junction ἀλλὰ is used in its proper original 
sense, “instead of that.” All that they 
want is that in their intercourse with the 
Jews they may have your circumcision to 
refor to as evidence of the high respect 
which they and you as influenced by them 
have for the Law. “See! so far from tram- 
pling upon the Law, weand theseour brethren 
too are adopting the very badge of the ser- 
vants of the Law.” The word “flesh” is in 
this clause used in its strictly literal sig- 
nification. The account which the apostle 
here gives of the motives actuating this par- 
ticular section of Judaizing reactionaries 
was no doubt grounded on specific informa- 
tion which he had just received. But such 
information, both in respect to its general 
probability and to its grave importance, was 
doubtless corroborated to his own mind by 
large experience which he had had elsewhere 
among the Gentile Churches of the behaviour 
of unsteady and imperfectly instructed Gen- 
> tileconverts. In almost every important place 
where Gentiles were won to the faith, there 
were previously existing communities of 
Jews (Acts xv. 21); and contact with these 
must have given rise to an endless diversity 
of relations both of attraction and of repul- 
sion. Everywhere, from the very first, the 
contact of Christianity with Judaism gave 
birth to varying phases of Judaico-Christian- 
ism such as afterwards developed into mon- 
strous forms of error. It was no new thing 
with the apostle that he should find himself 


called upon to check, on the part of weak or 
insincere brethren, a tendency to draw to- 
wards Judaism at the cost of not merely 
unseemly but even fundamentally fatal 
compliances, The peril was always very 
near, and had to be constantly watched and 
guarded against. 

Ver. 14.—But God forbid that I should 
glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus 
Christ (ἐμοὶ δὲ μὴ γένοιτο καυχᾶσθαι, εἰ μὴ ἐν 
τῷ σταυρῷ τοῦ Κυρίου ἡμῶν ᾿Ιησοῦ Χριστοῦ); 
but as for me, God forbid, etc. For the 
construction of the dative ἐμοὶ with γένοιτο, 
Alford cites Acts xx. 16,“Orws μὴ γένηται 
αὐτῷ χρονοτριβῆσαι, and Meyer Xenophon, 
“Cyrop.’ vi. 3. 11,70 Ζεῦ μέγιστε, λαβεῖν μοι 
γένοιτο αὑτόν. But neither passage matches 
the tone of abhorrence which attaches to 
the phrase, μὴ γένοιτο, on which see note on 
ch. ii. 17. Here only in the New Testa- 
ment does it form a syntactical part of a 
sentence. But in the Septuagint this con- 
struction is of repeated occurrence, following 
the Hebrew construction of chali‘lah with a 
dative and an infinitive verb with min. 
Thus Gen. xliv. 7, Μὴ γένοιτο τοῖς παισί σου 
ποιῆσαι, κιτλ.; id.. 17. So Josh. xxiv. 16. 
The pronoun ἐμοὶ is strongly emphasized 
both in this first clause of the verse and in 
that which follows. The apostle is vividly 
contrasting his own feeling and behaviour 
in relation to the cross of Christ with those 
of the leaders of the circumcision party 
whom he has been denouncing. They would 
fain put the cross as far as possible out of 
sight, not to offend the Jews they were 
so anxious to conciliate—that ‘ obnoxious 
object” (σκάνδαλον, 1 Cor. i. 25) itself, as 
well as the inferences which the apostle 
taught them to draw from it in relation to 
the ceremonial law: their καύχημα, that 
whereof they would glory, should be in 
preference the mutilated ficsh of their mis- 
led Galatian brethren; his boast, rejoicing, 
glory, was, and God helping him should 
ever be, the cross of Christ—that, and that 
alone. It quite emasculates the energy of 
his utterance to paraphrase “ the cross” as 
being “the doctrine of the cross or of 
Christ’s atonement.” Rather, it is the 
cross itself which rivets his admiring view; 
sneered at by Gentile, abhorred by Jew, 
but to his cye resplendent with a multiplicity 
of truths radiating from it to his sou! of 
infinite preciousness. Among those truthe, 
one group, which to us is apt to appear of 
but small interest, was to the apostle’s heart 
and conscience productive of profoundest 
relief. In former days he had experienced 
the burden and the chafing or benumbing 
effect of the Law, both as a ceremonial in- 
stitute and as a “letter” of merely impera- 
tive command. It was the cross which 
released him, as from the guilt and servitude 


810 THE EPISTLE TO 


THE GALATIANS. ὀὠ [ca. vi. 1-18 


of ein, so also from all the worry and distress 
of bondage to ceremonial prescriptions. 
And this group of truths, as well as those 
relating to man’s reconciliation with God, 
he felt it to be his mission, even perhaps 
his own most especial mission, boldly and 
frankly to proclaim; not only to rejoice in 
them on his own behalf, but to hold them 
forth to the view of others, as replete with 
blessing to all mankind; to glorify and 
vaunt them. His motive at present in thus 
vehemently protesting his own rejoicing in 
the cross of Christ was doubtless to rouse 
into fresh activity the slumbering sympathy 
with those feelings which had probably in 
some degree once animated his Galatian 
converts. Therefore it is that he writes, 
“the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ,” in- 
stead of “the cross of my Lord,” which it 
would else have been in this case natural 
to him to say, as he does in Phil. iii. 8, “ for 
the excellency of the knowledge of Christ 
Jesus my Lord,” and according to the tone 
of ch. ii. 20 of this Epistle. This “oar” 
lints to the Galatians that they have as 
much reason as he has to glory in the cross 
as redeeming God’s people alike from sin 
and from the Law. By whom (or, whereby) 
the world is crucified unto me, and I unto 
the world (5? οὗ ἐμοὶ κόσμος ἐσταύρωται, 
κἀγώ κόσμῳ [Receptus, τῷ κόσμῳ) ; through 
which the world has been crucified unto me, 
and I unto the world. The omission of τῷ 
before κόσμῳ, which is now generally agreed 
in, adds to the terseness of the sentence. The 
article is wanting before κόσμος elsewhere, 
as 2 Cor. v. 19; Phil. ii. 15; Col. ii. 20; 
1 Tim. iii. 16. The construing of the pas- 
sage which takes the relative ov as reciting 
“our Lord Jesus Christ,” loses sight of the 
image which is now the one most prominent 
to the apostle’s view: this surely is not 
Christ himself, but his eross; 88 in 1 Cor. 
ii, 2 the apostle determines the more gencral 
term, “ Jesus Christ,” by the more specific 
one, “and him crucified.” The reference 
of the relative is to be determined, here as 
often elsewhere, not by the mere propinquity 
of words in the sentence, but by the near- 
ness of objects to the writer’s mind at the 
moment. In language of singular intensity 
the apostle bespeaks the all-involving trans- 
formation which, through the cross of Christ, 
his own life had undergone. The world, 
he says, had become to him a thing cru- 
cified : not only a dead thing, ceasing to 
interest. or attract him, but also a vile, ac- 
cursed thing, something he loathed and 
despised. And conversely, he himself had 
become a crucified thing unto the world; 
not only had he ceased to present to the 
world ought that could interest or attract 
it, but also become to it a thing scouted and 
ebhorred; as he says 1 Cor. iv. 13, “We 


have been made as the filth of the world. 
the offscouring of all things.” The whole 
context of those words in the Corinthians 
(vers. 9—13) is here compressed into the 
single clause, “I have been crucified unto 
the world.” “The world;” the term de- 
notes unregenerate mankind taken in con- 
nection with that entire system of habits of 
life and of feeling in which man, os un- 
quickened by the Spirit of God, finds hia 
sphere and home. As the apostle is speaking 
of his own personal experience, we must 
understand him as referring in particular to 
all those circumstances of civil, social, and 
religious being which had once surrounded 
him, the honoured Jew and Pharisee. These 
he enumerates at length in Phil. iii. 5, 6. 
To these we might add, though it would, 
perhaps, have hardly occurred to Paul’s own 
mind to add it, the ordinary possession of 
worldly comforts and immunity from want 
aud suffering. All, be proceeds in that 
poscnae to say, he had “ forfeited ” (ἐζημιώθην 

hil. iii, 8). Nor did he look back upon 
his loss with regret: “I do count them aa 
dung (σκύβαλα). This twofold description, 
“T forfeited all things,” and “I do count 
them all as dung,” is here summarized in 
the phrase, “the world is a crucified object 
to me.” The world, further, thus de- 
scribed as crucified to him, included in par- 
ticular the entire system of Jewish cere- 
monialism, so far as it existed apart ‘rom 
the vitalizing influence of the Spirit of God. 
The “natural man (ψυχικὸς ἄνθρωπος) sets 
great store by religious ccremonialism ; it is 
to him, in fact, his religion. The apostle 
has himeelf felt it to be so. But his sen- 
timent now is the very opposite : he accounts 
it a dead, lifeless thing; nay, even loath- 
some and abhorred, whenever in the smallest 
degree placed even by a Christian Jew in 
the category of Christianly obedience. That 
he did regard such religious ceremonialism 
as belonging to the “ world,” from which as 
in Christ he had become dissevered, is plain, 
both from ch. iv. 3, “in bondage under the 
rudiments of the world,” and from Col. ii. 
20, “ why, as though living in the world, do 
ye subject yourself to ordinances, Handle 
not,” ete. That this particular ingredient 
in the whole system recited as “the world” 
was at this moment present to the apostle’s 
mind, appears from his singling out circum- 
cision for mention in the next verse. While, 
however, this was a part of the “crucified 
world” just now prominent to his view, this 
term comprised to his consciousness much 
beside; namely, the entire mass of ungod- 
liness and vice which appertains to “the 
course, or age, of this world” (αἰὼν τοῦ 
κόσμου τούτου, Eph. ii 2), from which αἰὼν 
the Christian is by the daily transforming 
of his character tobe removed (Rom. xii. 2), 


cH, vi. 1—~18.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS., 


811 


(See above, ch. i. 4, and note.) “Through 
which;” in various ways was the cross of 
Obrist the means of effecting this mutual 
crucifixion between the apostle and the 
world. It is apparent, from the whole tenor 
of his Epistles, that Ohrist crucified, as 
manifesting both Christ’s love to sinful men 
in general, and to his own self in particular, 
“the chief of sinners,” and likewise the 
love of God his Father, wrought with so 
mighty an attraction upon his whole soul— 
intellect, conscience, affections—that all other 
objects which were only not connected with 
this one lost to him their whole zest and 
interest, while all other objects which 
clashed with the moral aud spiritual in- 
fluence of this became absolutely distasteful 
and repulsive. And, on the other hand, 
the world at large met the man who was 
animated with this absorbing devotion to 
God as manifested in a crucified Christ, 
with just that estrangedness and aversion 
which might bave been anticipated. The 
influence exercised by the cross in crucifying 
the world and the apostle to each other wits 
inteusified by the especial bearing which, 
in the apostle’s view, the cross had towards 
Jewish ceremonialism (see ch. ii. 19, 20, 
and notes). The vivid, intense manner in 
which the apostle proclaimed such sen- 
timents alienated from him the adhcrents 
und champions of Judaism, and made him 
of all Christians the one who was to them 
the most obnoxious. And how this affected 
his standing, even in the Gentile world, 
there have been above repeated occasions 
for noting. 

Ver. 15.—For in Christ Jesus neither oir- 
cumcision availeth anything, nor uncircum- 
cision, but 8. new creature (οὔτε yap περιτομή 
τι ἔστιν οὔτε ἀκροβυστία, ἀλλὰ καινὴ κτίσι5)} 
for neither is circumcision anything, nor un- 
ciroumcision, but a new creature (or, creation). 
The reading of the Textus Receptus, followed 
in our Authorized Version, 18. this: ἐν yap 
Χριστῷ ᾿Ιησοῦ οὔτε περιτομή τι ἰσχύει, οὔτε 
ἀκροβυστία, ἀλλὰ καινὴ κτίσις. But by almost 
all recent editors this reading is replaced 
by the one given above. That ἔστιν is the 
true reading, and not ἰσχύει, all are agreed 
in thinking; ἰσχύει being regarded as a cor- 
rection imported from ch. v.6._ The evidence 
for the rejection of ἐν Χριστῷ ᾿Ιησοῦ, which 
is found in all the uncial manuscripts except 
the Vatican, is by no means equally decisive. 
The presence of those words in ch. v. 6, 
where they are very suitable to the context, 
has with great probability been supposed to 
explain their being also found here, being 
introduced, like ἰσχύει from the former pass- 
age, by the copyists; but here the qualifica- 
tion made by them is not so certainly required. 
The apostle felt it to be not merel true 
relatively, that is, for those “in Christ Jesus, 


but, since Christ died on @ cross, true absce 
lutely, that for salvation neither circumcision 
was aught, nor uncircumcision, but only a 
new creature. For the discussion of the 
terms of the aphorism as here stated, as com- 
pared with its form in ch. v. 6 and in 1 Cor. 
vii. 19, the reader is referred to the notes on 
ch. v.6. The words καινὴ κτίσις may mean 
either “a new creature,” or “a new act of 
creation making a man a new creature.” It 
is hardly admissible to take κτὶσις as “cre- 
ation” in ἃ collective sense, as in Rom. viii. 
19; though this may, perhaps, be its meaning 
in 2 Cor. v.17, “If any man is in Christ, 
there is a new creation,” that is (perhaps), 
he finds himself, as it were, in a new heaven 


‘and a new earth. Christians as such are 


elsewhere described by the apostle as the 
product of God’s creative hand; thus in Eph. 
li. 10, “ For we are his workmanship (ποίημα), 
created (κτισθέντες) in Christ Jesus for good 
works.” As ‘begotten again” (1 Pet. i. 23 
ἀναγεγεννημένοι), or “ born anew ” (John iii. 
8, γεννηθέντες ἄνωθεν), subjects of a “re- 
generation” (παλιγγενεσία, Titus iii, ὅλ, they 
aust, of course, be the products of a anew act 
of creation. In2Cor. v. 14—18 the sentence, 


“If any man is in Christ, there is a new 


creation,” or “he is a new creature,” lies 
embedded in 8 passage which describes in 
language of remarkable {ntenseness the 
transfurming influence of Oliist’s death, 
wherever by faith it has been fully grasped. 
That passage, occurring as it does in an 
Epistle written nearly at the same time as 
the Epistle to the Galatians, leaves no doubt 
as to the ideas which in the apostle’s mind 
cluster round the term “ new creation,” men- 
tioned, here too as in effect there, in close 
connection with the cross of Christ, his sole 
supreme glory. It points to the state of a 
sinner consciously reconciled to God by the 
death of Christ, and finding himself thus 
translated into the midst of new perceptions, 
now joys, new habits of life, new expectations. 
“The old things are passed away”—guilt, 
the overmastering power of sin, laborious 
effort after goodness frustrated after all and 
ineffectual, the servile routine of a dead 
unquickening ceremonialism : “behold, all 
things are become new, and all things are of 
God, who hath reconcilel us to himself 
through Christ.” The phrase, “a new 
creature,” appears to have been used by the 
Jews to describe the change resulting in the 
case of a heathen becoming a proselyte. 
That was no doubt a great change; but far 
greater seemed to the apostle to be the trans- 


formation in the case of one translated from 


the bondage and darkness of the “letter” 
into the “ newness of the Spirit” (Rom. vii. 
6). He had himself experienced how mar- 
vellously great as well as how blessed the 
transition was; and he has desoribed it in 


312 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


[ση. νι. 1-18, 


glowing terms also in Eph. i. 17—ii.10. In 
the present passage the particle “ for” seems 
to point back, not exclusively to ver. 14, but 
to the general tenor of the whole passage in 
vers. 12—14, as rebuking that great ado about 
circumcision which the innovators referred 
to were making in the Galatian Churches, 
thereby diverting the minds of those that 
listened to them from the Christian’s true 
business. This sense of the particle may 
seem somewhat loose; but it suits well the 
rapid, decisive, summarizing strain with 
which the apostle is now closing up his 
letter. The supreme concern, he means, for 
every one who wishes to be a member of 
God’s kingdom is that he shall realize in 
his own experience the “new creation ;” 
alike in the freedom and joy of adoption 
which appertains thereto (ch. iv.), and also 
in that walking of the Spirit which includes 
the crucifixion of the flesh (ch. v. 16—25). 
On this point we may compare Eph. iv. 23, 
24 and Rom. xii. 2. 

Ver. 16.—And as many as walk according 
to this rule (καὶ ὅσοι τῷ κανόνι τούτῳ στοιχή- 
cova); and as many as shall be walking by 
this rule. The word κανών, properly a work- 
man’s rule, according to Liddell and Scott, 
but according to Bishop Lightfoot, who, re- 
fers to Dr. Westcott, ‘On the Canon,’ App. 
A, the carpeuter’s or surveyor’s line by which 
a direction is taken, is used in 2 Cor. x. 13, 
15, 16 of the measurements and delimitation 
of districts; here, with reference apparently 
to a surveyor’s measuring-line, as marking 
out a path or road. So that τῷ κανόνι τούτῳ 
στοιχεῖν means “walking on orderly” (sce 
note on στοιχ εἴν, ch. v. 25) in the line marked 
out by what has now been said. The future 
tense appears to point forward to what should 
be the case among the Galatians when the 
letter now going to them should have had 
time to do its work. But what in the pre- 
ceding context does the apostle refer to as 
supplying “this rule”? Many think that 
he points to the aphorism in ver. 15, alfirm- 
ing the utter inditterency of circumcision or 
uncireumcision, and the all-importance of 8 
“new creature;” in which case the stress 
would lie mainly upon the latter point, the 
all-importance of a “new creature,” which 
was of perpetual interest, rather than on the 
indifferency of circumcision which in itself 
was a mattor of but passing concern. Itmay 
be fairly questioned, however, whether the 
apostle does not rather point to the descrip- 
tion which in ver. 14 he has given of the 
manner in which he himself regarded the 
cross of Christ, as a pattern to the Galatian 
Church men of the manner in which they also 
should be affected by it. It was customary 
with the apostle to present himself to his 
converts as the model to which they should 
cuuform theuselves, Thus he commends 


the Thessalonians for that on their conver 
sion they proved themselves imitators of him 
(1 Thess. 1. 6). When discoursing to the 
Corinthians of his manifold afflictions ané 
of his self-humbling, men-loving demeanout 
under them all, he besought them to be imi- 
tators of him (1 Cor. iv. 9—16), which en- 
treaty he renews with a similar reference in 
ix. 1. So he exhorts the Philippians to 
unite with one another in imitating him, and 
to fix their regards upon such as walked as 
they had him and those with him for a 
pattern (Phil. iii. 17), and again repeats to 
them (iv. 9), “Those things which ye, 
moreover, learned, and received, and heard, 
and saw in me, do,”—all which clauses refer 
to his own character and doings as seen by 
themselves or as reported to them by others 
(see Alford, in loc.). ‘This purpose, of pro- 
pounding his sentiments and course of action 
as a model for the guidance of his converts, 
no doubt underlies very many of those 
passages in which he so frankly and (we 
might but for this be tempted to think) so 
sclf-approvingly dilates upon them. In 
those days we must remember there was no 
“ Canon” of New Testament Scripture which 
might serve for the guidance of the newly 
gained converts from heathenism ; for prac- 
tical guidance in the Christian life, besides 
the Old Testament &criptures (2 Tim. iii. 
15—17), they had, perforce, to be referred 
partly to their own moral sense, partly to the 
inward teachings of the Holy Spirit, and 
partly, and this to a very important extent, 
to the living examples of eminently Spirit- 
taught men. This purpose, of propounding 
himself as an example, evidently underlay 
the writing of ver. 14; and it is the con- 
sciousness that it was so that now leads him 
to use the phrase, “by this rule,” in refer- 
ence, as seems most probable, to that very 
description of his own life. It is noticeable 
that, after having exhorted the Philippians 
to do all the things which they had seen 
and known him to do, he adds (Phil. iv. 9), 
“ And the God of peace shall be with you; ” 
just as he here says, “As many as shall be 
walking orderly by this rule, peace upon 
them, and merey!” We are now brought 
into a position to see clearly the force of the 
conjunction “and,” with which he intro- 
duces this verse. It connects it closely with 
ver. 14. “I myself glory in the cross of 
Christ, and to that cross have sacrificed all 
I held dear; and {or all that shall be found 
walking iu that same path—upon them shall 
rest my hearty sympathy and my pastoral 
benediction.” It is further deserving of 
notice that in Phil. iii, when presenting 
himself to the Philippians as their examplar, 
the apostle speaks of “many ”—no doubt 
with inclusive reference to those Judaizing 
advocates of circumcision whose circumcision 


ow. vi, 1—18.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS., 


318 


he scornfully styles a concision—as being 
“the enemies of the cross of Christ.” This 
was written some years after the Epistle to 
the Galatians; but it shows that it was a 
common experience with the apostle to find 
among the Gentile Churches two classes in 
particular of Christians: one, consisting of 
his own adherents and followers in the spirit 
and life of the gospel; another, of those who 
(either because as born Jews or Gentile 
Judaizers, they eschewed the pollution of the 
croas and its aspect towards the ceremonial 
Law, or because they were Gentiles, ashamed 
before their countrymen of trusting ina Jew 
who had been crucified), were fain to the 
utmost of their power to thrust the cruci- 
fixion of Christ out of sight—“ the enemies 
of the cross of Christ!” Peace be on them, 
and mercy, and upon the Israel of God (εἰρήνη 
ἐπ᾽ αὐτούς, καὶ ἔλεος, καὶ ἐπὶ τὸν Ἰσραὴλ τοῦ 
Θεοῦ). The suppletion of “be” in the 
Authorized Version, in preference to “shall 
be” or “is,” is borne out by the fact that 
the language of benediction, both in the 
greeting at the beginning of the Epistles 
and in their close, ordinarily omits the 
copula verb, which in such cases must be 
what is here supplied. We may compare in 
particular Eph. vi. 24, “Grace be with all 
them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in 
uncorzuptness,” not only as similar in con- 
struction, requiring the like suppletion of 
“be,” but also as another instance in which 
the apostle pronounces his pastoral benedic- 
tion with a certain limitation, specifying 
those only who sincerely “love Jesus Christ.” 
The limitation in these two cases only im- 
plied is in 1 Cor. xvi. 22 converted into a 
distinctly expressed anathema upon those 
who do not love Christ. The present passage 
makes the implied limitation without even 
that measure of stern precision which would 
have been marked by his writing ἐπὶ τούτους 
-(“ upon these’’) instead of ἐπ’ αὐτούς (“upon 
them”). It seems asif he would fain allure 
back to the gospel blessing those of his 
readers who might feel themselves as not 
now coming within its range. Perhaps in 
the addition of the words, “and mercy,” we 
may detect a sympathizing sense in the mind 
of the apostle of the mental suffering, which 
those in Galatia sincerely devoted to the 
crucified Christ had and would sill have 
to encounter, in contending for the truth of 
the gospel against fellow-Churchmen of their 
own, They would probably be no mere 
hard-minded controversialists, but humble, 
loving believers, to whom the mercy of God 
would be very dear. The apostle adds it to 
his greeting only in writing to Timothy 
(1 Tim. i, 2; 2 Tim. i. 2), distinguished ap- 
parently for the affectionateness and femi- 
nine-heartedness of his character. In Titus 
i, 4 the addition is not genuine. The words, 


“and upon the Israel of God,” seem to be 
an echo of the “peace upon Israel (εἰρήνῃ 
ἐπὶ τὸν Ἰσραήλ), which, in the Septuagint, 
closes the hundred and twenty-fifth and 
hundred and twenty-eighth psalms. The 
addition of the words, “of God,” seems in- 
tended pointedly to distinguish the “Israel” 
which the apostle has in view from that 
which boasted itself as being Israel while it 
was not, and also from the false brethren 
(ψευδαδελφοί, ch. ii. 4) in the Christian 
Church, who were for linking themselves 
with the false Israel. The addition is not 
merely honorific, as in the expression, “the 
Church of God” (1 Cor. i. 2; 2 Cor. 1. 1; 
x. 32; xi. 22; xv. 9), but distinctive as 
well—that which alone God views and loves 
as “Israel’’—to wit, the entire body of real 
believers in Christ, who, as portrayed in 
this Epistle, are “children of promise after 
the fashion of Isaac” (ch. iv. 28), Abra- 
ham’s seed and heirs of the promise” (ch 
iii. 29), and the children of “the upper 
Jerusalem, which is our mother” (ch. iv. 26). 
Of that portion of the true Israel which 
dwelt in Galatia (see 1 Pct. i. 1; 11. 10), 
those who, like the apostle, consecrated 
themselves to Christ as crucified, were the 
guiding and characterizing element; and 
therefore his blessing shed upon these spreads 
itself also upon those connected with them, 
That the apostle is even here still regardful 
of others among the Galatians, who were 
themselves “shifting away from the gospel ” 
and were drawing others away too (ch. i. 6, 
7), is shown by the next verse. 

Ver. 17.—From henceforth (τοῦ λοιποῦλ 
This genitive form is found, in the Now 
Testament, only here and in Eph. vi. 10, 
where the Textus Receptus reads τὸ λοιπόν. 
As being less ambiguous, it is chosen in 
preference to τὸ λοιπόν, because this latter 
word is also used in the sense “ finally,” as 
in Phil. iii. 1; iv. 8, as well ag for * hence- 
forth,” as in Matt. xxvi. 45; Heb. x. 13. 
The meaning of τοῦ λοιποῦ is illustrated by 
Aristophanes, ‘ Pax.,’ 1050, “You shal] never 
dine henceforth (τοῦ λοιποῦ) any more in 
the Prytaneum;” and Herod, iii. 15. Let 
no man trouble me (κόπους por μηδεὶς παρε- 
χέτω). The phrase, κόπους παρέχειν, “cause 
trouble, or annoyance,” occurs also in Matt 
xxvi. 10; Luke xi. 7; xviii. 5. Obviously 
the apostle refers to such trouble as was 
now accruing to him from the endea- 
vours of the Judaizing party to pervert 
his Galatian disciples. On him fell the 


“anxiety of all the Churches” (2 Cor. xi. 


28). In any of his Gentile Churches, tho 
defeat of the work of the gospel by Judaizing 
perversion was a “worry” which touched 
him to the very quick. There is nothing to 
warrant the supposition that he alludes to 
assaults made in partioular upon his apose 


314 THE EPISTLE TO 


THE GALATIANS. (cH. vi. 1—18. 


tolical authority, such as he had often 
occasion to deal with, as, for example, at 
Corinth. None such have been referred to 
in this Epistle, though he has found occasion 
to complain of the alienated affections of 
his converts. For I bear in my body the 
marks of the Lord Jesus (ἐγὼ γὰρ τὰ στίγματα 
τοῦ Ἰησοῦ [Receptus, τοῦ Κυρίου ᾿Ιησοῦ] ἐν 
τῷ σώματί μον βαστάζων); Iam one who bear 
branded on my body the flesh-marks of Jesus. 
The ἐγὼ is inserted with emphasis. Being 
such as he here describes himself, he had 
a claim upon his brethren to be spared un- 
necessary annoyance. The Greek word 
stigma here employed denotes a mark on 
the flesh, either by puncture, its proper 
sense, with a hot, sharp instrument, very 
often with hot necdles (see Prudentius’s 
lines quoted by Grotius in his note on the 
χάραγμα, mark, in Rev. xiii. 16), or more 
summarily by simply branding without 
puncture. It served sometimes as a mark 
of permanent ownership, as upon horses or 
cattle (Liddell and Scott, sub verb. orl(w). 
In respect to slaves, it was not considered 
humane to braud them, except for punish- 
ment, or as security in particular cascs 
against running away. Hence otryyatias, 
brandling, designated a scoundrel or a 
runaway slave; ‘as Aristophanes, ‘ Lys.,’ 
331; ‘Av.’ 760. Others besides slaves 
were sometimes branded in ignominious 
punishment: Aristophanes, ‘Ran.,’ 1507; 
Herod., vii. 233. Thus we have in Aschines 
(38, 26), ἐστιγμένος αὐτομόλος, “a branded 
deserter.” Vevetius (quoted by Faccivclati, 
sub verb. stigma), writing three hundred 
years later, states (‘De Re Milit.,’i. 8; ii. 
5) that, in the Roman army, raw recruits 
had to be proved fit for service before they 
were allowed to have the tattoo put upon 
tiem. After due trial, they were “ puuc- 
turis in cute punctis milites scripti et 
matriculis inserti”” But this testimony 
does not establish the fact of such usage 
prevailing in the Roman army in St. Paul’s 
time; though it is quite supposable that 
then, a8 now, soldiers might sometimes 
tattoo on their arm or hand the name of a 
favourite general. Instances are cited of 
consecration to a particular god being 
signalized by stigma. Herodotus, writing 
five hundred years before, says of a certain 
temple of Heracles, on the Egyptian coast, 
that if a servant, belonging to any man 
whatever, took sanctuary in it, and put 
upon himself sacred stigmata, giving himself 
to the god, no one could touch him (ii. 113). 
In 3 Mace, ii. 29 mention is made of a 
“mark of Dionysus’ ivy leaf being, by 
means of fire, put upon the body” of Jews 
in Egypt in the time of Ptolemy Philopator; 
but this would seem to have been intended 
rather a8 @ barbarous indignity, because 


especially abhorrent to their religious feel- 
ings, than as an actual consecration of them 
to Dionysus as his “slaves.” But that it 
was in some cises employed to signalize a 
“sacred slave” is attested by Philo, ‘De 
Mon..,’ ii. p. 221, M; and Lucian, ‘De Dea 
Syr.. § 59, as cited by Bishop Lightfoot, 
who remarks that “such a practice could 
not have been unknown in a country which 
was the home of the worship of Cybele.” 
An example more familiar to the apostle’s 
mind might, perliaps, be cited from Isa. xliv. 
5 (Septuagint), ἐπιγράψει χειρὶ αὐτοῦ Tod 
Θεοῦ εἰμί, “shall write upon his hand, I am 
God’s,” which rendering Gesenius (‘ Thea.,’ 
in verb. kathabh) consents to accept. But 
if this rendering be the right one, it may 
yet be doubted whether it means writing 
by puncture; for γράμματα στικτὰὴ uppear in 
Lev. xix. 28 to be forbidden; unless, in- 
deed, the prohibition be tuken to refer to 
idolatrous tattoos only. But even thus the 
use of such in idol-worships has a further 
confirmation. It appears, however, to be 
a strong objection to our supposing the 
apostle to be here alluding to either the 
stigmata of consecration or those of other 
ownership, that such would infer no more 
suffering than would attend simple tattoo- 
ing; whereas it is plain that the apostle 
alludes to marks which evidenced the under- 
going of inflictions of extraordinary severity. 
The word stigma had passed into Roman 
usage, being employed both in a literal 
sense and also in a figurative one of a 
“stigma,” as we also speuk, cast upon a 
person’s character as by a poet’s lampoon. 
Thus Martial (‘ Epigr.,” xii. 62) writes, 
“Frons bec stigmate non meo notanda,” 
“This forehead to be marked with a stigma 
not of my affixing,” where the word frons 
indicates a close adherence to the original 
notion of a slave’s forehead branded. Sue~ 
tonius (‘ Ces.,’ 73), * Catulluin, a quo sibi 
versiculis de Mamurra perpetua stigmata 
imposita non dissimulaverat, satisfacientem 
eodem die adhibuit cong.” Reviewing the 
evidence now adduced as to the manner in 
which the term was used, we observe that 
the words “brandling” and “branded” 
(στιγματίας and ἐστιγμένος) were used to 
describe a person made infamous to open 
view by brand-marks put upon his person. 
It was natural that the word stigma would 
thus acquire the sense of a mark of patent 
infamy left upon a man’s person by sume 
corporal abuse which he had been subjected 
to, without any other qualifying idea. Now, 
it appears most probable that it isin this 
sense that the apostle here uses the word. 
The term points to those scars, seaims, 
perhaps long-continuing sores, which the 
long course of ever-recurring hardships and 


ill usage, through which he had paseed, 


og. v1. 1—18.]} 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


815 


must have left upon him—patent evidenee 
to all who looked upon him of the manner 
in which his fellow-men regarded and 
treated him; this only, apart from any 
qualifying idea, whether of ownership, or 
of military allegiance, or of religious con- 
secration. It is in this general sense that 
Chrysostom appears to have read the clause ; 
and this general sense satisfies all the re- 
quirements of the context. A strong light 
is thrown upon this matter by what tho 
apostle, near about this same time, wrote 
to the Corinthians, in 2 Cor. xi. 22—27. 
The passage, as indeed does the whole 
Epistle, with much also of the former Epistle 
addressed to the same Church, betokens a 
strong feeling at this particular time rest- 
ing on his mind, of the grievous, countless, 
hardships which marked his career—a feel- 
ing, very supposably, just then freshened by 
some very painful experiences recently gone 
through, from the effects of which his 
bodily form was still suffering. “In stripes 
above measure, ... in deaths oft. Of the 
Jews, five times received I forty stripes save 
one; thrice was I beaten with rods, once 
was I stoned, thrice I suffered shipwreck, a 
night and a day have I been in the deep.” 
Such are some particulars which he speci- 
fies ; and the enumeration is very suggestive 
with reference to our present point. Could 
he have undergone that “stoning” at 
Lystra, after which he was dragged out of 
the city as dead to be left to lie without 
burial, and have carried away no enduring 
disfigurement ? Whether any marks would 
be likely to rema'n upon him from the five 
Jewish whippings, we cannot tell; but we 
may be assured that the three floggings 
inflicted with the cruel wits of the Roman 
soldicry must ‘have scarred his flesh with 
seams of permanent disfigurement. Perhaps 
while he wrote, sores remaining from some 
one of those eight punishments were making 
themselves painfully felt. ‘These judicial 
infliction, however, severe as some of them 
may have been, were nevertheless regulated 
by law and custom. There were in all 
probability other, much more barbarous 
aud altogether unregulated, violences, which 
came often upon him from the brutality of 
mobs, from the assaults of “robbers,” from 
accidents in shipwreck. It could not fail 
but that his person presented, wherever he 
went, conspicuously to view, tokens that 
he was one wont to be both regarded and 
dealt with as if he were, no doubt de- 
servedly, 8 wretched outcast; in his own 
forcible, most deeply pathetic phrase, ὡς 
περικαθάρματα τοῦ κόσμου πάντων περίψημα, 
“ as the filth of the world, the offscouring of 
ell things” (1 Cor. iv. 13). The apostle’s 
enemies taunted him with the contrast 
which subsisted between the solemnity and 


power— would-be power they mcant—of hia 
letters, and the meanness and feebleness 
of his personal appearance and his personal 
address (2 Cor. x.1, 10). His personal pre- 
sence may, originally and by natural make, 
not have been calculated to bespeak respect. 
But whatever disadvantages he lay under 
originally, must, beyond all question, have 
been vastly aggravated by the bodily hard- 
ships to which he had been subjected. 
These must have left effects (this, perhaps, 
being the “stake in the flesh” which he 
groaned under—‘“Satan’s messonger to buffet 
him,” the fruits, certainly, of Satan’s working 
in the hearts of godless men) which he felt 
to be not only fraught with personal hu- 
miliation in whatever intercourse he held 
with his fellow-men, but also likely greatly 
to mar his efficiency in his ministerial work. 
The only consolation remaining to him was 
that, in the utter extinction of all self-love, 
he rejuiced to know that Christ’s grace had, 
in this enhanced feebleness of his instru- 
ment, the clearer field wherein to manifest 
its own Divine potency (2 Cor. xii. 9, 10). 
“The flesh-marks of Jesus.” This may be 
understood as meaning that they were in- 
curred in Jesus’ service. In part it may 
be so taken; but the relation expressed by 
this genitive appears to go deeper than 
that. The apostle means, the marke which 
disfigured the body of Jesus as now repro- 
duced in his body. ‘The genitive is used 
in just the same way as it is in the strikingly 
similar clause in 2 Cor. iv. 10, “always 
bearing about in the body the dying of 
Jesus (παντότε τὴν νέκρωσιν τοῦ Ἰησοῦ ἐν 
τῷ σώματι περιφέροντες), Where ἣ νέκρωσις 
τοῦ Incod means apparently “the deadness 
or corpse-condition of Jesus” (compare the 
use of the Greek noun in Rom. iv. 19); the 
state of Jesus’ νενεκρωμένον σῶμα, while 
yet hanging a corpse on the cross. By a 
strong hyperbole, prompted by the intense 
feeling then on his wind of his own bodily 
sufferings and the almost ever-present im- 
minency of death (comp. vers. 7—12 of the 
same chapter), the apostle, in those words, 
refers to “Jesus’ curpse-condition” as re- 
produced in his own bodily condition, add- 
ing the expression of his assured conviction 
that all was to this end—that “the life also 
of Jesus,” that is, the life which Jesus him- 
self lives, should be all the more clearly 
manifested by what he was working in the 
world, in and through a body apparently 
80 deatli-bound as tlie apostle’s was. The 
use of the phrase, thus interpreted, coheres 
well with the feeling which, in the writing 
of this Epistle, was very near to his soul, 
of his being “ crucified along with Christ.” 
The phrase, then, glinces at those swollen, 
livid, blood-flecked, wales and bruises (τῷ 
μώλωπι αὐτοῦ, 1 Pet. ii, 24) which the 


316 


THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 


(cu. νι. 1—18. 


Roman scourging that immediately pre- 
ceded his being handed over for crucifixion 
must have left on his sacred flesh—no part 
spared—the entire frame pervaded alike 
with disfigurement and with torture. To 
tle body of his adorable Lord at that hour— 
to the human consciousness of every thought- 
ful spectator, defaced, shorn by the dis- 
honouring whip of the dignity properly con- 
nate with a human body, and made utterly 
vile (for this should seem to have been the 
symbolical meaning and intent of that 
customary preliminary of crucifixion)—and, 
at length on the cross, presenting to open 
view those brand-marks of degradedness, the 
apostle feels his own body to be, in the 
treatment it had received and the condition 
to which it had been reduced, in no small 
measure assimilated. Not only was he in 
spirit joined unto his Lord and one spirit 
with him; but in budy likewise was he (so to 
speak) joined unto his Lord, and one body 
with him; being deeply “taught” in the 
lesson of what was meant by being “a sharer 
of his sufferings, while day by day be- 
coming more conformed to the fashion of 
his death” (Phil. iii. 10); clothed with 
Christ in this sense also; clothed with the 
Crucified Oue. ‘Che verb βαστάζω, as here 
introduced, may be distinguished from the 
περιφέροντες of 2 Cor. iv. 10, by presenting 
the notion of one’s carrying something 
in thought separable from one’s self, instead 
of being (so to speak) commingled with 
one’s own being. “Iam carrying, and can 
offer to your view, the brand-marks of 
Jesus.” Chrysostom catches this view, per- 
haps carrying it out somewhat far, in his 
animated comment, “He saith not, ‘I have,’ 
but ‘I carry;’ like a man priding himself 
on a trophy and ensigns of ἃ king.” The 
use of the same verb in Acts ix. 15, “to 
bear my Name ‘before the Gentiles and 
kings,” clearly illustrates its import here. 
This closing verse is withal no pitcous 
appeal for commiserating sympathy. The 
tone of “from henceforth,” betokening the 
feeling of one who has made up his mind 
not to be trifled with, precludes the notion 
of his mood being one of mere self-pity aud 
tenderness. Far more does the apostle 
hereby make claim to share with his Lord 
in that mingled sentiment of reverence and 


deferential, sympathetic compliance, which 
the disciple of Christ might be expected to 
entertain towards his Lord, crucified for 
him; such a sentiment as would prompt 
him to lighten, if he might, his burden and 
pain, to take part in his enterprise, to help 
forward his designs. ‘Those brand-marks 
would cry out in loud protest against a 
fellow-disciple’s autipathy, tergiversation, 
or disesteem. 

Ver. 18.—Brethren, the grace of our Lord 
Jesus Christ be with your spirit. Amen 
(i χάρις τοῦ Κυρίου ἡμῶν ᾿Ιησοῦ Χριστοῦ μετὰ 
TOU πνεύματος ὑμῶν, ἀδελφοί. ᾿Αμήν); the 
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your 
spirit, brethren. Amen. “The grace of 

esus Christ” denotes his Saviour’s loving- 
kindness, not only effectual in making a 
guilty soul acceptable to God through his 
atonement, but also in purifying it from 
sin, euduing it with spiritual strength, 
and securing its final salvation. The pre- 
catory imperative “ be,” which, of course, is 
to be supplied, clothes a friendly wish in 
the pious form of a prayer. “ With,” the 
μετὰ which, in the Septuagint, represents 
the Hebrew ’im, meaning “ present to help,” 
is illustrated by Gen. xxi. 22; Ruth ii. 4; 
Judg. vi. 12; Matt. i. 23; xxviii. 20; Joho 
iii, 2; xvi. 32. “ With your spirit,” here, 
as in Phil. iv. 23; Philem. 25; 2 Tim. iv. 
22, replaces the “ with you,” which is the 
form in which the farewell grecting ia 
commonly couched; as in 1 Cor. xvi. 23; 
Eph. vi. 24, ete. There is no polemical 
reference whatever in the substitution; 
rather it is an affectionate amplification 
or intensification of the kindly wish or 
blessing, the outcome of affectionate yearn- 
ing, after the stern rebukes which he had 
felt himself compelled to address to them. 
It expresses his desire that Christ’s grace 
might be very near to them—near to the 
most intimate aud most controlling part of 
their nature. The singular “spirit” is 
conjoined with the plural pronoun “ your,” 
as in Rom. viii. 16; 1 Cor. vi. 19 (‘your 
body”); 1 Thess. v. 23, “your spirit and 
soul and body.” ‘The word “ brethren” is 
added last of all, as it were in caressing 
affectionateness, as in Philem. 7, The final 
“Amen” seals the true earnestness and 
the devotional spirit of the benediction. 


HOMILETICS. 


Ver. 1.—estoration of a fallen brother. The apostle changes his attitude of 
rebuke into one of affectionate admonition as he addresses the “ brethren” of the 


Galatian Churches. 


His language exhibits a marked softening of tone that recalls 


the warmth of his earlier relatiovship to them. There are “ brethren” still in Galatia, 


Notice— 
I. A GRAVE CASE OF OFFENCE. 


“ Even if a man be surprised in a transgression.” 


cH. vi. 1—18.) THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 317 


1. It is not a case of mere inadvertence or ignorance, but a case of falling away from 
a Divine command—more probably misconduct than heresy. The doctrinal reaction 
at Galatia may have had a morally unsettling tendency. It was a case in which the 
offender yielded to the force of temptation, as is implied in the words, “lest thou also 
be tempted;” yet a case in which he endeavoured to hide his transgression from the 
world. 2, Jé is the case of @ member of the Church who had fallen out of relations to 
brethren. A Christian shares in the infirmities of our nature, and may be surprised 
by sudden temptation, like Peter and David. The honour of Christ, the credit of 
religion, the offender’s benefit, demand the prompt but tender interference of Christian 
brethren, m 

Il. Tue purty oF Breturen. “ Ye who are spiritual, restore such a one.” It was 
not a mere admonition to replace the backslider in his old Church relationship, but 
rather to recover him from his sin and place him in a right relation to duty. There is 
no hint given as to the method of restoration, but it would naturally be by kindly 
admonition, by faithful instruction, by prayer. ‘There must be no blind love to inter- 
cept the friendly remonstrance; there must be no careless disparagement of the fault ; 
there must be no suffering a sin upon our brother. It was the praise of the Ephesian 
Church that “she could not bear transgressors” (Rev. ii. 2). Those urged to this duty 
must be “ the spiritual ”—those whose lives illustrated the graces of the Spirit (ch. v. 
22), for they only would have the capacity and the inclination, while their action 
would be backed by the full confidence of the Church. 

111. ‘Tue spirit ΙΝ WHIcH THIS DUTY 18 TO BE DONE. “In the spirit of meekness.” 
Not with harshness or want of sympathy, dwelling bitterly on the sin and expatiating 
with self-complacent severity on the weakness that led to it; but rather in a spirit of 
love, patience, and humility, as if they had a sincere compassion for the backslider and 
a supreme interest in his welfare. 

IV. THE REASON OR GROUND FoR THIs spirit. “ Considering thyself, lest thou also 
be tempted.” The apostle marks this emphatic consideration by an individualizing 
transition to the singular number. ‘The case may be thine. You who are spiritual 
may err. The saints of God have often failed in the very grace for which they were 
most distinguished. Therefore “let him that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he 
fall.’ We are, therefore, admonished to bring offenders with all love and tenderness to 
a due sense of their sin, and to comfort them lest they should be swallowed up with 
overmuch sorrow. 


Ver. 2.---The bearing of others’ burdens, “One another's burdens do ye bear, and so 
ye shail thoroughly fulfil the law of Christ.” ‘his verse is an advance upon the first 
verse, for it greatly widens the sphere of duty. Consider— 

I, THE BURDENS TO BE BORNE. They are not simply “ the infirmities of the weak,” 
which tbe Roman Christians were called upon to bear; but sins, sorrows, errors, and 
temptatiozs. It is a serious thing for the weak or the wayward to make themselves a 
burden to others, who have burdens enough of their own to carry. The Apostle Paul 
is an illustration: “ Who is weak, and I am not weak?” 

11. Tas purty or Caristians. As if to show that there is no separate interest in 
the Church of God, the apostle tells believers that the sins and infirmities of others are 
not only to be tolerated, but taken up as burdens. This is more than a counsel to 
‘support the weak, to be patient toward all men.” Travellers have often to carry the 
burdens of their comrades who become faint by the way. It would be a serious thing 
for the weak, if believers were to draw away from them and allow them to carry their 
own burdens. “A Christian must have strong shoulders and stout legs in order to 
bear the flesh, that is, the weakness of the brethren” (Luther). Christian life is a 
burden-bearing, but, after all, it is something short of the supreme Sacrifice. “ We 
ought to lay down our lives for the brethren.” Let us, therefore, bear transgressors 
upon our hearts at the throne of grace, and upon our shoulders by brotherly help and 
patience. Our gratification is not to be the rule for the exercise of our Christian 
liberty. 

ΠΝ THE MOTIVE TO THIS DUTY. “ Ye shall thoroughly fulfil the law of Christ.” 
That is the new commandment, “that ye love one another” (John xiii. 14), There 
could be no burden-bearing except from a principle of love, and the fulfilment of the 


318 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. (on. νι. 1~—18. 


duty implies a fulfilment of Christ’s law. This law is not to be conceived of as if it 
had come in the place of the moral Law, or as if believers were now exempt from Law 
even asa rule of life. ‘Love is the fulfilling of the Law.” It was so in Old Testament 
times; for the sum of the Decalogue is love (Matt. xxii. 40); and the Apostle Paul 
exhorts believers to love one another, on the ground of its being a requirement of the 
moral Law (Rom. xiii. 8, 9). We need Law as well as love. Law tells me what todo; 
love gives me powcr to doit. Our Lord never enjoined a greater love than the Law of 
Moses, though he prescribed more modes of its manifestation. The law of Christ, 
therefore, is only new in so far as it is enjoined upon a uew model, “ Love one another 
as I have loved you”—as it is addressed only to believers, as it sprang out of a new 
necessity as the distinguishing mark of discipleship, and as it goes forth into life 
with a new impressiveness, So regarded, the injunction to the Galatians becomes 
doubly impressive, as our Lord’s example has the force of a law for us, for he bore with 
us in our weaknesses, and cannot but be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, 


Ver. 3.—A warning against self-deceit. The high but false estimate that men may 
form of themselves is the great hindrance to this mutual burden-bearing, Consider— 

I, THE STRANGENESS OF SELF-DECEPTION. It is not remarkable that a man shoula 
be the dupe of others, but strange that he should be the dupe of himself. Yet there 
are many who think themselves to be something when they are nothing—partly from 
the want of self-knowledge; partly from the deceitfulness and pride of the human 
heart; partly from the fallacious habit of measuring themselves by the attainments of 
others; partly, too, from the influence of false teachings. 

11. 118 EvIL EFFECTS UPON THE MAN HIMSELF. He deceives himself, but he cannot 
deceive either God or man. It is a fatal delusion while it lasts, for it stands in the 
way of allimprovement. He lives in a fool’s paradise. Ifhe had once discovered that 
he was nothing he would be put in the way of getting the foundation rightly laid, and 
he would be the more likely to have points of sympathy with the outcast and fallen. 
‘The sense of our own weakness is the best motive to an indulgent consideration for 
others. 

III. 118 EVIL EFFECTS AS REGARDS OTHERS. This is the crowning idea of the 
passage. The self-deceived man is incapable of bearing others’ burdens, In fact, the 
imagination of superior piety leads him to be harsh and censorious and overbearing to 
others. There are sects in our day which pretend to a deeper communion with God 
than other Christians, and they are only remarkable for a censorious pride which kills 
love. The self-deceived man thiuks meanly of others’ attainments, in opposition to 
the gospel temper, which counsels Christians “in lowliness of mind to think others 
better than themselves ;” while he takes no delight in their graces or gifts, and will 
accept neither instruction nor correction from others. He seems self-supporting and 
self-contained, exempt from frailty, sin, and sorrow, and therefore cares nothing for the 
sins or the sorrows of others. It is only the disposition that can say, “ Not I, but the 
grace of God in me,” that will be ready for that mutual burden-bearing which conduces 
go much to the comfort and cohesion of Christian society. 


Ver. 4.—-The necessity of testing our work. “ But let each one prove his own work.” 
It is not a mere call to self-examination, though that is a commanded duty which 
tends to deepen the sense of our infirmity and our need of a higher strength; it is 
acall to prove, not himself, but his work—for there is a sort of introspection which 
might only foster his self-importanco; but a powerful check is provided by a rigorous 
account being taken of “work.” ‘The self-deception is mainly subjective; the cor- 
rection is supplied by au objective standard applied to the work done—the broad 
practical result of his life. The result will be that “then,” on the supposition that 
the work has stood the test, “he shall have his ground of boasting only in relation to 
himself, and not in relation to the other”—the man with whom he was comparing 
himself. He may test his own work, but he cannot test the work of the other man, 
‘The apostie does not mean to say that the test would be favourable, for, judging by 
himself, self-examination would discover, along with graces and virtues, many frailties 
and follies, that would lead him to glory, not in himself, but in the mercy and love 
of the Lord, Self-examination is not designed to leave us satisfied with ourselves or 


68, Hi.1-18.] THE HPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 819 


even free from doubts and fears, but to lead us to the Lord for fresh pardon and grace. 
It is a useful corrective to the merely morbid self-scrutiny with which men torment 
themselves, to have the test applied to their work. 


Ver. 5.— Our own individual burden. “ For each one shall bear his own burden.” 
He is not called to glory in reference to his neighbour, for he has his own burden to 
carry. The “burdens” of.the second verse point to the mutual sympathy; the 
“burden,” or load, of this verse, to that burden which each one carries for himself and 
no one can carry for him. 

I. Mark THE INDIVIDUALITY OF EACH MAN’S POSITION IN Gop’s sicat. Though 
God has set us in a wonderful scheme of human relations, we have an individual life 
that cannot be touched by man. We are individually responsible to God. This 
individuality sets man, as it were, in a solitude. He lives alone; he suffers alone; he 
dies alone. If he has pain in his body, no sympathy of friends can destroy it; it is 
still his pain. Our friends may soothe our dying moments by their prayers and their 
words of affection; but still we die alone. Thus every man carries alone, and apart 
from other men, his own burden of responsibility, or of frailty, or of sorrow. ‘‘ Hach 
soldier bears his own kit.” ; 

II. Mark THE INFERENCES TO BE DRAWN FROM THIS INDIVIDUALITY OF POSITION. 
The apostle does not mean to countenance the neglect of social concern nor to recom- 
mend a selfish isolation in human relations, but he condemns the harsh judgments 
pronounced upon others by men who have their own imperfections and infirmities to 
answer for. We cannot lighten the burden of our own responsibilities by any attempt 
to bear hardly upon others. 


Ver. 6.—The duty of supporting the ministry. “ But let him who 1s being instructed 
in the Word communicate with him that teacheth in all good things.” The apostle 
had spoken of burdens, but he did not mean to exempt the Galatians from the burden 
of supporting their teachers. Perhaps they were niggardly—for Gaulish avarice was 
a proverb—and it was necessary to teach them their duty. 

L. THIs PASSAGE IMPLIES THAT THERE IS AN ORDER OF MINISTERS IN THE CHURCH. 
If the ministry was common to all Christians, why should there have been provision 
made for the support of a particular class? 1. It is implied that the ministers were 
teachers, not mere celebrants of ritualistic devotion or spectacle. They taught orally, 
as the word signifies. It was thus that the early disciples were “nourished up in the 
words of good doctrine.” 2. It is implied that the Word of God was their text-book. 
The early Christians wero “taught in the Word.” They had the Scriptures in their 
dwn tongue, and were in a position to test the teaching of their guides as well as “to 
try the spirits” generally. 3. It is implied that the teachers referred to devoted 
themselves entirely to the work of ministry. They had isolated themselves from 
secular employments, else why should it be necessary to provide them with an 
independent support ? 

IL. THIs PASSAGE TEACHES THAT MINISTERS ARE TO RECEIVE AN ADEQUATE MAIN- 
TENANCE, They are to share “in all good things’;” not as a gift or dole, but as a 
right; for Christ said, ‘The labourer is worthy of his hire.” If inspired teachers like 
the apostles and prophets deserved this consideration, is it not much more needed for a 
class of teachers who spend much time and thought in preparation for their work ? 
The duty is clearly set forth by the apostle. (1 Thess. ii. 6,9; 2 Cor. xi. 7; ix.; 
Phil, iv. 10; 1 Tim. v. 17,18). Luther says, ‘“‘ Whosoever will not give the Lord 
God a penny gets his due when he is forced to give the devil a dollar.” Calvin 
suggests that “it is one of the tricks of Satan to defraud godly ministers of support 
that the Church may be deprived of their services.” 


Vers. 7, 8.—The two sowings and the two reapings. The Galatians were probably 
disposed to find excuses for avoiding the responsibility of supporting their religious 
teachers, ‘I'he apostle warns them of the danger of self-deception, and, above all, of 
the danger of imagining that a man may sow to the flesh and yet expect to reap the 
fruits of the Spirit. Mark— 

L THE SOLEMN WARNING AGAINST SELF-DECEPTION, ‘Be not deceived; God is not 


320 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. Lou. vi. L—18 


mocked.” Whether the self-deception arise from pride or corruption of heart, or from 
the perversions of false teachers, some might imagine that there would be no harvest 
after the present life; others might suppose that they would not reap the same sort of 
secd they were sowing; others, that the harvest would have no relation to the degree 
or proportion of the goodness or badness of the seed. They are sternly warned not to 
deceive themselves. They might impose upon themselves. That is all they can do. 
God is not mocked, either by a presumptuous neglect of a Divine command or with 
services that are pretended and not real. 

II. THERE 18 A NECESSARY CONNECTION BETWEEN THE SOWING AND THE REAPING. 
It is impossible for men to break the Divine order established in the nature of things. 
There is a sowing-time; there will be a reaping-time. The reaping will be as the 
sowing. He that sows wheat will reap wheat; he that sows cockle will reap cockle. 
Nobody expects, after sowing wheat, to have a crop of thistles. So it is in the acts of 
human life. Ifa man sow the seeds of charity, the harvest will be answerable both 
in kind and in degree. The actions of this life are as seed sown for the life to come. 
The tare-sower cannot expect wheat; for “ whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he 
also reap.” 

11. THe Two sowINGs AND THE Two REAPINGS. “He that soweth to the flesh 
shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he that soweth to the Spirit shall of the Spirit 
reap life everlasting.” The flesh and the Spirit represent, as it were, two corn-fields, in 
which different kinds of seed are sown. The future and the present here stand in the 
strictest connection. 1. The sowing to the flesh. The flesh is the unregenerate nature, 
Every act of life has a distinct relation to the gratification of that nature. The idea of 
the apostle is elsewhere represented in vivid phrase. The man who “sows to the 
flesh ” is he who “ walks after the flesh ” (Rom. viii. 4), who “minds the things of the 
flesh ” (Rom. viii. 5), who is “in the flesh ” (Rom. viii. 5), who “lives after the flesh,” 
who “minds earthly things,” who “ fulfils the desires of the flesh and of the mind,’ 
who “ presents his members unto sin as instruments of unrighteousness ” (Rom. vi. 13) 
2. Lhe terrible reaping. We see part of the harvest in this life. We see drunkenness 
dogged by disease, idleness with rags, pride with scorn, and the rejection of God by 
the belief of a lie. But the passage clearly points to the harvest at the end of the 
world, when the seed germinates into corruption. This is moral death (2 Pet. ii. 12; 
1 Cor. iii. 17). “To be carnally minded is death.” Great in consequence will be the 
misery of man upon him. 3. The sowing to the Spirit. All the acts of the believer 
have relation to the life of yrace: he lays up treasure in heaven; the life created by 
the Spirit can have no pause—it renounces self and lives to God. 4. The blessed 
reaping. The harvest is everlasting life. The conncction between the reaping and 
the sowing in the first case is that of desert; the connection in this case is established 
by grace; for, while “the wages of sin is death,” “the gift of God is eternal life 
through Jesus Christ our Lord” (Rom. vi. 23). Though the harvest is everlasting life 
to all sowers to the Spirit, it will not be the same to all; for “ every one is to reccive 
the things done in his body, according to that he hath done, whether good or bad.” 

IV. Conctusions. The passage suggests: 1. That we ought to have a due con- 
sideration to the importance of our present conduct, 2. That the hypvcrite is a fool 
who imagines that he can sow to the flesh and yet reap “‘life everlasting.” 3. That 
it is only by faith in Jesus Christ we shall ever be brought to cease sowing to the fies 
and begin sowing to the Spirit. 


Ver. 9.—Encouragement to perseverance ἐμ well-doing. The apostle enlarges the 
compass of his exhortation so as to include well-doing in general. Consider— 

1. WELL-DOING 18 THE DUTY, THE DIGNITY, THE DESTINY, OF BELIEVERS. 1. “ We 
are, as God's workmanship, created unto good works.” (Eph. 11. 10.) 2. It ts “quod 
and profitable to men” that believers should be careful to maintain yood works, These 
works are to be “ maintained for necessary uses ” (‘Titus iii, 8,14). 3. They are to follow 
the example of Christ, “who went about every day doing good” (Acts x. 38), and who 
so puintedly declared that it was lawful to do well on the sabbath day (Matt. xii. 12). 

IL THE IMPORTANCE OF PERSEVERANCE IN WELL-DOING., “ Be not weary in well- 
doing.” ‘I'he same counsel he gives to the Thessalonians (2 Thess. iii. 13). He doea 
pot hint that the Galatians were not already doing good ; he merely suggests that they 


on. v1. 1—18.] THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 32! 


must not weary in it. How much depends on perseverance! (1) God’s glory is greatly 
promoted ; (2) the prosperity of the Church powerfully enhanced ; (3) our own reward 
proportionately increased. Therefore we ought to be open to new opportunities, to new 
occasions, to new objects, of usefulness. 

TI, THE causzs OF WEARINESS IN WELL-DoING. They are numerous and complex in 
their operation. 1. The friction of life in a world with ungodly tendencies. 2. The 
ingratitude and unworthiness of those we befriend. 8, We are cooled by the coldness 
of other men. 4. Our patience is exhausted by the number seeking our help. 5. There 
is so much to be done that it seems useless to begin in the hope of overtaking every- 
thing. 6. There is so much opposition to the best plans of goodness. 7. Physical 
fatigue has a tendency to generate moral weariness. 

IV. ENcoURAGEMENT TO PERSEVERANCE. Our work will not be resultless, “Yn due 
season we shall reap, if we faint not.” 1. There is a regular time for the harvest. 
“The harvest is the end of the world.” The sowing goes on all through our lives. We 
must not be disheartened because the interval appears long. “Thou shalt be recom- 
pensed at the resurrection of the just.” If you do not find the results of Christian 
service on earth, you will find them in heaven, “Be patient therefore, brethren, unto 
the coming of the Lord. Behold, the husbandman waiteth for the precious fruit of 
the earth, and hath long patience for it, until he receive the early and latter rain” (Jas. 
v. 7). 2. The reaping will surely come. It will come partly in this world, in the 
blessing of God upon all we possess and all we do, in the gratitude and prayers of 
those we help, and in the secret satisfaction which a course of well-doing carries into 
the heart of the believer. But our full reward will be at the resurrection of the just, and 
will be proportional to the nature and extent of our labours. Therefore believers ought 
to be “ steadfast, unmovable, ever abounding in the work of the Lord, seeing that our 
labour shall not be in vain in the Lord” (1 Cor. xv. 58). ᾿ 


Ver. 10.— The sphere of beneficence. This verse sums up the ideas of the previous 
verses, which spoke of beneficence in general, by setting forth its objects and occasions. 

I. Tue pury commanpep. “ Let us do good.” Christian life is not a mere easy and 
‘ecent inoffensiveness. A man is not harmless who does no good. ‘The barren tree is 
hurtful, because it cumbers the ground and draws to itself the fertilizing qualities of the 
earth, which would make a better tree more fruitful. It brings forth no bad fruit; yet 
it is cast into the fire. Therefore we must not only “cease to do evil,” but “ learn to do 
well.” “To do good and to communicate forget not ” (Heb. xiii. 16). 

II. Tar pury BounDED By opporTuNITy. “As we have therefore opportunity.” 
Cotton Mather says, “ ‘The opportunity to do good imposes the obligation to do it.” It 
is not when our inclination or our self-interest or the thirst for fame or gratitude dispose 
us that we are to do good, but at every opportunity that opens on our path. These 
opportunities are constantly around us in the common intercourse of life, but they 
specially arise in connection with suffering and distress. Therefore “in the morning 
sow thy seed, and in the evening withhold not thine hand.” 

III. THe sPpHERE OF BENEVOLENCE. There is a wider sphere, and a narrower within 
it: “Do good unto all men, and especially to them who are of the household of faith.” 
There are distinctions even in the wider sphere. We recognize them in the obligations 
of family life. “If any man provide not for his own, he is worse than an infidel ;” we 
recognize the claims of friendship and of gratitude; yet our beneficence is to extend to 
all nen within the range of opportunity. Itis a significant fact that the Apostle Peter, 
in naming the successive graces of life that are essential to our partaking of the Divine 
nature, says, “ Add to your brotherly kindness charity.” There may bea selfish or 
sectarian feeling that leads us to forget the wider relations in which we stand in the 
scheme of Divine providence. Yet the brotherly kindness stands first. We ara to do 
good, “‘especially to them who are of the household of faith; ” on the same principle aa 
we are bound to remember first the wants of our family or our friends. ‘he spirit of 
the Rousseau philanthropy would not tolerate any distinctions of this sort. The 
household in question, which includes the whole collective body of Christians, is a large, 
a growing, a loving household, and, in carly times, sorely scattered by persecution. There 
was, therefore, a special nced to show kindness to its members. The “ collection for the 
saints” (1 Cor. xvi. 1, 2) is a practical illustration of this nearer relationship. 

GALATIANS. " 


822 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. (on. v1. 1—18, 


Ver. 11.—A personal postscript. “Ye see in what large letters I write with mine 
own hand.” There is a mystery about these large characters, It is conjectured that 
they may have been due to age, or to infirmity, or to weakness of eyes, or to the want 
of habit in writing Greek. But it is more interesting to see that, unlike other Epistles, 
which were written by an amanuensis, this one was written entirely with his own 
hand. 

I, To sHow 18 LOVE FoR THE GaLATIANs. Tho autograph would be a precious pos- 
session to them. It is the largest Epistle he ever wrote with his own hand. 

11. To PREVENT ImposTURE. Letters were sometimes forged in his name (2 Thess, 
ii. 2; 11,117). But his handwriting, being probably already known to them, would prevent 
raisaaderstanding as to the authorship. : 

IL. To Give GREATER WEIGHT TO THE Epistie. It showed his profound anxiety on 
their account at a most critical moment. 


Vera, 12, 13.— Hxposure of the tactics of his adversaries. The apostle recapitulates 
in a few sentences the contents of the Epistle and exhibits the falseness of his Judaistic 
adversaries in a clear light. Mark— 

I, ΤΉΕΙΒ pogMaTio ATTITUDE. They “ desire to make a fair show in the flesh.” They 
made a pretentious display of religion by a zeal for external rites—“ the unrenewed 
nature cropping out under its more special aspect of sensuousness and externalism.” 
Yet all the while they affected a peculiar concern for God and religion. 

11. Tuztr urGent zeaL. “They are constraining you to be circumcised;” their 
delusive flatteries (ch. iii. 1), their arguments, their example, having all the stress of 
moral compulsion. The Judaizers had an immense and eager zeal for proselytism, and 
were sleepless in their efforts to undermine the gospel of liberty. 

III. THE TRUE MOTIVE OF THEIR conDuCT. “ Only lest they should suffer persecution 
for the cross of Christ.” 1. Their conduct was cowardly. They would avoid persecu- 
tion either by renouncing Christianity altogether or by shaping it into Judaistic forms, 
The last was the course they took. They had no true love for the cause of religion when 
they insisted upon the indispensableness of circumcision, for their real motive was to 
protect themselves from the fierce anger of their countrymen. The cross of Christ 
offered salvation without law of any kind, and welcomed the Gentiles without their 
becoming Jewish proselytes; but the Judaizers, by circumcising the Gentiles, desired 
to show their countrymen that, in attaching themselves to the gospel, they did not 
abandon the Mosaic Law or ritual. 2. Their conduct was hypocritical. “ For neither 
they themselves who are circumcised keep the Law.” They placed a burden on their 
Gentile converts which they were not themselves willing to bear, ‘ Indifferent them- 
selves, they make capital out of you.” They make convenient selections out of the 
precepts of the Law; for they have no idea of obeying the whole Law, though it all rests 
upon Divine authority. 3.° Their conduct was self-interested. “They desire to have 
you circumcised, that they may glory in your flesh.” ‘They wanted to swell the 
importance of their sect by a large array of proselytes, who were to bear in the flesh the 
mark of their instructions. 

IV. Iv was JUST AND NECESSARY THAT THE APOSTLE SHOULD EXPOSE A POLICY 80 
MEAN, 80 MERCENARY, 80 INSINCERE. Love may prompt the covering of a neighbour's 
faults, but it is right to expose religious seducers of all sorts, 


Ver. 14.—The true ground of the apostle’s gloryiag. ‘But for me far be it to glory, 
save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ.” 

1. Tue oxoss or Curist. 1. This is not,as Romanists say, the wooden cress. It 
would be beneath the good sense of the apostle to say that he gloried in a piece of wood. 
2. It was not the metaphorical cross borne by believers—afflictions. “If any man will 
come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me” (Matt. xvi. 
24). 8. It was the atoning death of Christ. The apostle did not glory in this because 
of its moral influence upon his life, nor ever because it was a manifestation of Divine 
justice and love, but because Christ, through his expiatory sufferings on the cross, pro- 
eured for us eternal life, which he applies by his Holy Spirit. 

II. THE ATTITUDE OF THE APOSTLE TOWARD THE cross. He gloried in it. 1. It 
implied that he had abandoned the way of righteousness by the Law. 2. It implied 


on. γι, 1—18,} THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, $23 


that he trusted in the atoning death of Christ for salvation. 3. It implied the exclu: 
sion of all other elements in which errorists might trust as grounds of salvation. 

III. Tue eFreors oF THE cross or Curist, “ By which the world has been crucified 
to me, and I unto the world.” It is not material whether the double crucifixion here 
described is referred to Christ or to his cross; for as it is only Christ crucified whom the 
apostle preached, it is through him the believer is crucified to the world. Christ’s 
cross has sundered the relationship ‘between Paul and the wereld. They are dead to 
each other. Luther says, “The world and I are well agreed. The world cares not a 
pin for me, and I, to cry quittance with it, care as little for the world.” Consider: 1. 
What is the world? It is that sphere of things in which the lust of the flesh, the 
lust sf the eye, and the pride of life find their natural development. It is the world 
as opposed to God. “ The friendship of this world is enmity with God” (Jas. iv. 4). 
2. How is the worid crucified to the apostle? It is not that the apostle regards (1) the 
world as useless. (2) Nor 88 ἃ place to be abandoned, in a spirit of monkish austerity. 
Luther says, “The monks dreamed that the world was crucified to them when they 
entered into thcir monasteries; but by this means Christ is crucified, and not the 
world. Yea, the world is delivered from crucifying.” (3) Nor asa scene upon which 
he is to wreak his morbid spite or bitter misanthropy. But (4) it implies that the world 
had lost its attractions for him, its power over him, its influence to lead him astray. 
There was a time when he was not so crucified—he was “alive once;” but death in 
Christ and with Christ was his death to the world and the death of that world to him, 
3. How is he crucified to the world? The world regards him as a dead man, who has 
no longer any attractions that it should desire him. It regards him no longer as its 
own, and therefore hates him to the point of persecution. This inter-crucifixion came 
about through his union with Christ, and that union was effected by the cross, Well, 
therefore, might the apostle glory in the cross! 


Ver, 15.—The fundament I fact in Christian life. This is regeneration. The Jew 
wight find it in circumcision; the Gentile, in liberty; but “in Jesus Christ neither 
circumcision availcth anything, nor uncircumcisiun, but a new creation.” Consider— 

I. THavT CHRIST OBLITERATES THE MOST HIGHLY VALUED DISTINCTIONS. 1. In him 
the old separating distinctions are no longer in force. They have ceased to be. Jews 
aud Gentiles are made one in Christ. ‘They are fellow-citizens, of the same body, of 
the household of God (Eph. ii. 19), They are made “one new man.” 2, In him the 
old separating distinctions ‘have lost all their value. Neither circumcision nor uncir- 
cumcision ever availed anything for justification. The Jew might be ready enough to 
concede the point as to uncircumcision, but he would be offended to hear that his cir- 
cuicision availed nothing. ‘The sentence of the apostle cuts up by the roots all 
the ritualism of the Churches. Eating of meats, celibacy, holidays, are nothing; we 
are no better for abstaining nor are we the worse for eating. 

II. THAT THE FUNDAMENTAL FACT IN CHRISTIANITY IS REGENERATION. 1. This 
constitutes it an entirely spiritual system,in which the outer is nothing, the inward 
is everything. It is not a mere change of opinion, or of party, or of outward life. 
It is not of “ blood ;”—men may be noble by birth, but they cannot be holy by birth ; 
“not of the will of mau,” as many a godly father knows by bitter experience as he 
mourns over the waywardness of ungodly children. 2. The new life originates in 
Christ. ‘If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature ” (2 Cor. v. 17). The spiritual 
renewal springs from union with Christ. It is “not of the will of man,” for man cannot 
change his own heart. Christ is our very Life (ch. ii. 20). 3. It isa new life; for it 
has new thoughts, new desires, new principles, new affections, and stands in everlasting 
relation to the new name, the new song, the new Jerusalem, the new heavens, and the 
new earth. The new birth, in a word, has ushered the believer into a new world. 


Ver. 16.—The apostolic blessing. ‘This takes its colour from the tenor of the 
Epistle. Consider— 

I, THe AUTHORITATIVE RULE FOR CnRISTIAN q@uIpANoe. “As many as. walk 
according to this rule.” 1. Christians are not lawless in their obedience. They walk 
according to rule, and are never so free as within the limits of rule. 2. The rule és 
evidently that expressed in the previous verse—that what is outward in religion is 


324 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. fou. vi. 1--18 


nothing, and what is inward is everything; that the new creation is the whole of 
religion. If this position were rightly recognized, to be a Jew would be no privilege, 
to be a Gentile would be no barrier, 

Ii, Tu Benepiction. “ Peace be on them, and mercy.” The two greatest blessings 
of the covenant. Peace is the distinctive theocratic gift— Peace shall be upon Israel ” 
(Ps. exxv. 5); mercy is the blessing in which peace finds at once its origin and support. 

III. THe ossEors oF THE BLESSING. Those “ who walk according to this rule” and 
“the Israel of God.” ‘The first class was not Gentile believers as such, and the second 
Jewish believers as such. The blessing is for the entire number who walk according 
to this rule, but the apostle finds among them a class whom he describes with a tender 
and suygestive fitness as “the Israel of God.” He had been all along proving that the 
true Israel was “οἱ faith,” but he evidently thinks of his countrymen as standing 
apart from their Judaistic perverters in the glorious eminence of “the Israel of God.” 
10 is a peculiar expression, still more distinctive even than “Israel after the Spirit,” 
and emphasizes the Divine ownership in those who are “ the circumcision, who worship 
God in the Spirit, who rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh ἢ 
(Phil. iii. 3). 


Ver. 17.—An apostle pleading for forbearance. He now turns round to his adver- 
saries, and with one parting word asks to be let alone. 

I. A CLAIM TO BE LEFT UNMOLESTED, “Henceforth let no man cause me troubles,” 
by gainsaying my doctrine, impugning my apostleship, or imposing upon me the 
labour of a defence. He might well appeal to their forbearance; he needed to be 
strengthened rather than weakened, comforted rather than discouraged. 

II. THE GROUND oF HIS cLaIM. “I bear in my body the marks of Jesus.” “1”—not 
the false teachers who plan to escape persecution by their hypocrisy —“ bear in my body 
the marks”—in many scourgings, wounds, and scars—of Christ’s ownership. These 
marks were the visible vouchers of his apostleship. 


Ver. 18,—His parting word. “The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your 
spirit, brethren, Amen.” The Epistle began with a salutation of grace and peace; it 
ends with grace. 

J. Tue siessine. “Grace,” which is at once the beginuing, middle, and end of 
Paul’s theology ; and the beginning, middle, and end of Christian life. 

II. THe TOKEN OF PARTING TENDERNESS. “ Brethren.” It comes last in the sen- 
tence, as if, after all his grave censures, he would remember they were still brethren in 
Christ. His spirit softens as his pen traces the closing words of the Epistle, and the 
sweet “ Amen” seals everything with the token of his deep sincerity and his tender 
interest in their welfare. 


HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 


Vers. 1—5.—The restoration of the erring. The walk in the Spirit, which eschews 
vain-glory and envy, further manifests itself in consideration for the erring. The 
sins of others become our concern, and we anxiously seek how we can best have them 
restored. Here, then, is a burden which Christians have not undertaken as earnestly 
and sympathetically as they ought tc have done; it is the burden of sin which weighs 
on other people’s hearts. 

I. ‘THE PREPARATION FOR DEALING WITH OTHER PEOPLE'S SINS. (Vers. 1—3.) The 
idea of Paul here is that the Pharisaic temper is utterly incapable of the restoration of 
the erring. Thinking himself to be something, not realizing that he is in God’s sight 
nothing, the Pharisee deceives himself, and so cannot become the guide of others, He 
will be severe through his self-satisfaction, hard and unsympathetic because he is 
ignorant of his own need and cannot consequently know the needs of others. His 
pride makes sympathy for the abased impossible, and he passes on in utter uselessness. 
But when the Lord makes us meek, when the Lord impresses upon us the fact of our 
own liability to temptation, when the Lord leads us to ihe sifting of our own work, 
and to a higher standard than mere comparison of it with that οἱ others, when, in a 


ch. σι, 1—18.] THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 828 


word, we are led out of Phzrisate thankfulness that we are not as other men into 
Christian humility and self-abasement,—then are we in some measure fitted to take up 
the problem of other people’s trespasses and to solve it. It is the “spiritual” who are 
to undertake the delicate work. 

TI. Tu Law or ΟἬΒΙΒΤ Is TO BE OUR METHOD. (Ver. 2.) Now, when we consider 
broadly the work of Christ, we find that it resolves itself exactly into this work of 
restoring the erring. ‘This was the purpose of his life and death, to bear other people’s 
burdens—the burdens of sin. Of course, Christ could deal with sin in a more radical 
way than we can. He was sinless; he was Divine; he could accept of the respon- 
sibilities of human sins and atone for them, as we cannot do, But we can surely have 
fellowship with him in concern about other people’s spiritual state; we can sympathize 
with them, and perhaps encourage them to make us their confidantcs, so that we may 
do something for their relief. We can also keep their restoration steady as a star 
before us, and follow the Master in leading them to renewed hope. Iu all these ways 
we may follow the law of Christ in dealing with delinquent brethren. ‘The fact is 
that, because we cannot share in Christ's atoning work, we are tempted often to let sin 
ie outside our deliberate philanthropy. We are willing enough, perhaps, to help a 
fellow out of the burden of poverty, of outward misfortune ; but to help him as a 
spiritual counscllor seems beyond our province. And yet we are not surely very 
thorough in our philanthropy if we do not try to touch and remove the deeper burden 
of heart-trouble by leading the erring to our elder Brother. 

III. THERE WILL BE JOY AS WELL AS DISAPPOINTMENT UPON THIS PATH OF CHRISTIAN 
sympaTuy. The heavenly world gets more joy out of the penitent prodigals than out of 
the unfallen beings (Luke xv. 1—10). It is the same with us in our humble efforts after 
restoring erring brethren. What a joy it is to think that he has repented and got unbur- 
dened and restored! There is no joy of exactly the same pure intensity in all the world. 
There is music and dancing in our hearts as in the great Father’s house. Earth and 
heaven are one (Luke xv. 25). There will be a measure of disappointment. Souls 
over whom we have sighed and wept, for whose salvation we have longed, may dis- 
appoint us sadly ; but we can assure ourselves that in this respect also we are in fellow- 
ship with God. Every impenitent soul must be a disappointment to the Supreme! 
We leave the mystery at his holy feet, and, notwithstanding disappointment, resolve in 
dependence on him to work bravely on until our day is done, persuaded that our tale 
of souls relieved shall be longer in the end than we have dared to dream.—R. M. E. 


Vers. 6—10.—The seed-time of philanthropy. Paul has just spoken of the most 
delicate and precious form of philanthropy—that which deals with a brother’s sins. 
And now he passes on to speak, just for a moment, of the duty which the Galatians 
owe to their spiritual teachers. They are pre-eminently the unburdeners of men’s 
hearts; they undertake as life’s chief work the ministering to minds diseased, Let 
them be considered, therefore, and receive all good things from those they serve. But 
he passes on to the greater truth of which this “ministerial support ” is only a small 
»pplication—that life is a seed-time; and, according as men sow, must they reap. 
Let philanthropy rejoice, therefore, in every opportunity of doing other people good, 
for a harvest with its golden glory awaits all true workers in the other life. 

I. WHEN THIS LIFE 18 LOOKED UPON AS SEED-TIME, WE ARE PROJECTED OF NECESSITY 
FOR OUR HARVEST UPON ANOTHER AND BETTER LIFE. The mistake many make is in 
turning this life into harvest and looking on what it affords as all. It makes a mighty 
difference if I am living in the autumn only and am for ever past the spring. Now, 
Christianity, as the religion of hope, leads us to this view of the present life. It is only 
seed-time. The harvest is not yet. No refinement of speculation can be allowed to 
cheat us of our assurance of immortality. Weare only in the spring. The summer 
and the autumn are before us. 

11. THosE wHO sOW TO THE FLESH HAVE A FEARFUL HARVEST BEFORE THEM 
(Ver. 8.) Now, it is well for us to remember here that ritualism, or salvation by cere- 
movies, is the error mainly attacked in this Epistle. And a careful study of Paul’s 
writings shows that he puts this into the same category as the sins of tke flesh. 
“ Whereas there is among you,” said he to the Corinthians, “ envying, and strife, and 
divisions, are ye not carnal, and walk as men?” The exclusiveness of the ceremonialista 


826 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. fort, ve 1~ 18 


was a bondage to the elements of the world. “The Law,” it has been powerfully said, 
‘‘ was properly a schoolmaster to bring them to Christ; but in so far as its temporary 
disciplinary character was lost sight of—so far as it was made a ground of national 
exclusiveness, and its observance a matter of personal pride—it cut its votaries off from 
the righteousness of God, which is essentially a derived, communicated, and universal 
righteousness ; not of works, but of grace; not for a peculiar people, but for all men, 
They were living, not in the freedom and self-abandonment of the Spirit, but in the 
exclusiveness and selfishness of the flesh.” Hence the sowing to the flesh, in its more 
elevated or more degraded forms, can have only one issue, and this is “ corruption.” 
What comes of the exclusiveness and fair show in the flesh? Does it promote spiritual 
interests? Is it not productive of vain-glory and of the corrupt, self-righteous spirit ? 
The harvest is one of disappointment. It profiteth nothing. Into the corruption to 
which the grosser sins of the flesh lead we need not here enter with any particularity. 

IIL Trosz ὙΠῸ sow To THE SPIRIT SHALL REAP ETERNAL Lire. (Ver.8.) The 
sowing to the Spirit is the antithesis of sowing to the flesh. It means living with 
spiritual and immortal aims. It means, as the succeeding context shows, the life of 
active philanthropy. Now, a harvest of “eternal life” (Revised Version) is before 
all such philanthropists. Their life on earth is a seed-time which has this immortal 
harvest. The very life of God, who is eternal, becomes ours, and its fulness within us 
is just proportional to our present diligence in philanthropy. 

IV. ΤῊΙΒ SHOULD LEAD TO GREAT PATIENCE AND COURAGE IN OUR WORK. (Ver. 9.) 
We should not faint or get weary in our well-doing. Work along this line is sure to 
tell, Let us not be discouraged. Let us give the first place in our philanthropy to ~ 
“the household of faith,” and the second place to “all men” indiscriminately. Let us 
honestly be public benefactors, and a multiplication of blessing will be found awaiting 
us when the harvest comes, beyond our most sanguine hopes, The patience of hope is 
the attitude of every believing soul, and the harvest is in a wealth of life beyond the 
shadows proportional to our philanthropic spirit here-—R. M. Εἰ. 


Vers, 11~-18.—Glorying in the cross. Paul has been urging the Galatians to de 
good to all men, for now is the seed-time of philanthropy, and the harvest will be after- 
-wards, And now he appeals to them by the “large letters” of this unique Epistle, 
which seems to have been the only one which was a complete autograph. Though pen- 
manship was a trouble to him, he was yet anxious to do for these Galatians what good 
he could in the spirit he has been enforcing. But philanthropy has its counterfeits. 
Consequently he warns them once again against those teachers of ceremonialism, who 
would have the heathen converts to try to save themselves by Jewish ceremonies. These 
are merely making tools of them to save themselves. They wish to escape persecution 
for Christianity, Paul, on the other hand, glories in the cross, and carries in his body 
the marks of the Crucified One. The following thoughts are here suggested :— 

I. THE TOLERATION EXTENDED BY THE HEATHEN WORLD TO JuDAIsM. The heathen 
world was largely latitudinarian. The idea was comprehensive. All gods were to be put 
in the Pantheon, But among the idolatries of the East, Judaism, a spiritual worship, 
got a footing. Its synagogues were built side by side with the heathen temples, and 
they were allowed to worship without molestation. Thcir proselytism was trifling, 
their missionary enterprise was unworthy of the name. The heathen could not fear 
them, Hence their immunity from persecution, 

II. Tue JEWISH TEACHERS THOUGHT THAT, IF THEY MADE ALL CHRISTIAN CONVERTS 
JEWISH PROSELYTES, THEY WOULD SECURE CHRISTIANITY FROM PERSECUTION. They 
did not want to be persecuted for the cross. ‘They wanted to avail themselves of the 
toleration of Judaism and merge Christianity in it. An emasculated Christianity might 
escape the persecution which, in its naked simplicity, it was fitted to secure. It was 
a policy of compromise, begotten of cowardice and fear. Pride went along with it. It 
would be a grand thing to count up so many converts to Judaism and glory in the 
growth of circumcision. It was a selfish stroke under the guise of philanthropy. 

III, THe ANTAGONISM INDICATED BY THE cross, Now, the crogs of Christ is the 
expression of the antagonism of the world to the self-sacrificing Philanthropist who thus 
perished. It could not and would not tolerate the person who would not save himself 
when he had the power. It believes enly in those who can take care of number one, 


cH, v1. 1—18,] THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 82) 


As soon, then, as a man like Paul gets into unison with the crucified Christ, as soon ag 
the cross becomes an experience within, aad a self-sacrificing spirit takes hold of a man 
for the sake of doing good to others, that moment the world and he beconie antago- 
nistic. They cannot get on together. ‘I'he world is crucified to the person and he to 
the world. Each wishes to put the other out of the way, and as contemptuously as 
possible. As svon, therefore, as the world discovered what Christianity meant, that 
it meant a brotherhood of self-sacrificing philanthropy, it took alarm, fur it saw that, 
if Christianity were’not put down, it would put worldliness down. Hence the draw- 
back of persecution attaching to the Christian faith, 

IV. In THis UNWORLDLY oRoss PavL GLorizD. He appreciated its efficacy. He 
recognized its claims. He allowed it to make him unworldly. Hence he made it the 
sum and substance of his teaching. He preached “Christ crucified” continually. 
Circumcision was nothing in which to glory. It was a carnal ordinance which might 
be very carnally administered, and a mere stepping-stone for pride. But the cross of 
Jesus was an object in which to glory. Its spirit was so unworldly, so self-sacrificing, 
80 noble, that nothing in this world was so worthy of our interest and glorying.! 

V. Hi wap Caprist’s HAND UPON HIS BoDy. Now, if a man goes in for self-sacrifice, 
as Paul did, under the spell of Christ’s cross, his body will soon show it. There can be 
no pampering of the flesh, A spiritual soul soon makes the tenement enshrining it to 
transmit some of its glory. Paul shows the marks of self-sacrifice upon his person. 
Christ had made him his slave, and put the brand upon him. As Christ’s prisoner, he 
had the seals of office in his person. Cunsequently, no man need trouble him or try to 
move him away from his standard, the cross. It is a noble ending to this fine Kpistle. 
May it make all its students to glory in the cross also !—R. M. E. 


Vers, 1—5.—Treatment of a fallen brother. I, CurisTIAN WAY OF TREATING A 
FALLEN BROTUER. 1. Jt is our duty to restore him. “ Brethren, even if a man be over- 
taken in any trespass, ye which are spiritual, restore such a one in a spirit of meekness ; 
lovkiug to thyself, lest thou also be tempted.” ‘his subject arises out of the warning 
against vain-glory at the close of the last chapter. When a vain-glorious spirit possesses 
a society, some provoke as superiors, and others are filled with envy as inferiors. Vain- 
glory is usually connected with such external things as rank and wealth. ‘The apostle 
here supposes it carried beyond these, carried even (that seems to be the force of the 
word) into the inner sphere of character. He supposes some one connected with the 
society (presumably the Christian society) falling into sin. He describes him as over- 
taken in some trespass. The language defines without excusing. It indicates that the 
trespass was solitary or occasional, and not habitual. If it had been habitual, then he 
was not entitled to a place in the socicty, and the proper course toward him would have 
been excommunicatiun. But the trespass was not to be regarded as a fair representation 
of his character as a whole. He was overtaken in it, before he rightly considered what 
he was doing. ‘hat by no means relicved him from blame. It showed a want of 
steadiness in his Christian course. It showed a want of reliauce on the Divine supports. 
It showed carelessness in the use of appointed means. It could be said to him, “ Hast thou 
not procured this unto thyself, in that thou hast forsaken the Lord thy God, when he 
led thee by the way?” In such a case, then, how was he to be dealt with by the spiri- 
tual, t.e. not those who remained true to Paul and his doctrine, nor those who were 
strong, but those who, according to the Christian idea, desired to be led by the Spirit, 
to express the mind of the Spirit, ἐδ. in the specified circumstances, It is the teaching 
of the apostle that we are to restore a fallen brother. It is to be our object that he 
should be brought to a right state of mind. That he should trespass and not be sorry 
for it would be neither for his good nor for the good of the society. A fallen brother 
having evinced sorrow, we are to receive him back into the place which he formerly 
occupied, even as we believe that Christ, from his treatment of sinners when on earth, 
receives him back. We are to restore him in the spirit of meekness, i.e. in the spirit 


1 This is a favourite text (ver. 14) with preachers. Among others we may mention 
Maolaurin in ‘ Glorying in the Cross;’ Suurin, ‘Sur la Veritable Glorie du Chretien,’ in 
tome xii. p. 43; D’Aubigne on “The Cross of Jesus Christ,” in ‘ Discourses and Essays; ’ 
Huntingdon, “The Cross a Burden or ἃ Glory,” in his ‘ Christian Believing and Living ;’ 
and M'Cheyne in the ‘ Remains,’ p. 374. 


328 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. (ow. vi 1 —18 


which, while characterized by faithfulness, is chiefly characterized by meekness. There 
is to be the absence of self-exaltation. We are not to triumph over a brother, as though 
his fall added to our importance. There is to be the absence of that harshness which 
accompanies self-exaltation. We are not to wish to give him a sense of his inferiority 
to us in respect of his fall, nor are we to wish that he should be filled with sorrow or 
kept back in any way more than the ends of holiness require. We are not to break the 
bruised reed, nor to quench the smoking flax. The ground on which we are to restore 
him is of the strongest nature, and, to bring it home with more power, there is a 
singlieg out of the reader, “ Looking to thyself, lest thou also be tempted.” ‘Thou art to 
look to thyself as not beyond trial, Thou art to look to thyself as having elements of 
weakness in thy flesh ; and therefore liable to be tempted, and, when tempted, to fall. 
Nay, thou art to think of thyself as having in the past been tempted and having fallen 
before temptation. It has been said that, when looking on an offending brother, we may 
reflect with ourselves—We either are, or have been, or may be all that he is. If we 
have not sinned in the same form, yet have we sinned in a form which may be as heinous 
before God. We are to regard the fall of a brother only asa call to self-humiliation 
and tender dealing. 2. This is to fulfil the law of Christ. “ Bear ye one another's 
burdens, and so fulfil the law of Christ.” Mutual dependence is a law of the universe. 
As the philosophic poet has it, “ All are but parts of one stupendous whole.” Nothing 
stands alone; cach depends on all. Look at the innumerable worlds that inhabit 
space. God might have held each world in its place separately and out of relation to 
every other world. But he has chosen to hold all worlds together as a universe, or one 
vast world, by a law according to which all worlds and all particles of matter also 
attract one another in a certain proportion to mass and distance. The material world 
is one vast inter-dependency, so finely balanced that a modification of a part would 
necessarily be the modification of the whole ; while the aberration of a large mass might 
be the destruction of the whole. ‘The apostle points out the same thing in the human 
body. “'lhe eye cannot say unto the head, I have no need of thee; nor again the head 
to the feet, I have no need of you.” As in the human body, so it is in human society. 
The greatest happiness of individuals is not to be attained by each being his own servant, 
but by there being division of labour and each being as much as possible the servant of 
all. The greatest happiness of nations is not to be attained by each keeping within its 
own resources; but by each developing its own resources to the utmost, and exchanging 
them for those of other nations. It is not, therefore, to be wondered at that Christ, in 
founding a society, lays down this law of dependence for its regulation. Indeed, he bas 
to enact no new law, but only to give a higher sanction and application to an existing 
law. He finds men already dependent on one another, all the more by the entrance of 
sin, and he takes advantage of this for the training of his people. ‘ Bear ye one another’s 
burdens, and so fulfil the law of Christ.” It is implied that there are certain burdens 
which one Christian can bear for another, and which that other can bear for him, and 
which can in this way be lightened for them both. (1) Burden of want. We mean 
the burden of poverty which is commonly called want, being most* palpably, though 
not most really, so. For we have all to be supplied with our daily bread, and, while 
some are rich or comparatively rich, ¢.e. to say, have more than they need, others are 
poor or comparatively poor, é.e, to say, have less than they need. God might have 
ordained all to be rich and none to be poor in the Church. But he has, on the contrary, 
ordained some to be rich and others to be poor, ἐ.6. to say, he has made a dependence 
of the poor on the rich. “The poor,” says the Lawgiver here, “ye have always with 
you.” And we look forward to no golden era of science when there shall be no poor in 
our Churches. Certain it is that many are poor by circumstances over which they have 
had no control. And, while trade is not conducted on thoroughly Christian principles, 
which it will never be while there is sin and selfishness in the heart of man, there will 
always be circumstances bearing hard on some of our Church members. Now, we are to con- 
sider the care of the Christian poor. Having little coming in and perhaps many mouths 
to fill, they have a real burden on their minds, a burden which we would not choose to bear 
for ourselves. And the law of Christ is that we are to bear this burden for our fellow- 
members, those of us who are in a position to do it—bear it as we would have them to 
do it for us in like circumstances, Why are we not in their position and they not in 
ours? why have we more than enough and they less than enough? is it not of favour, and 


cH, VL i—18.] THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 829 


of favour that we may minister to their necessity? And we should minister to their 
necessity were it only for our own good, to counteract that greed which is apt to grow 
insidiously upon men who are prospering. And for this reason it were, perhaps, to be 
wished that there were more poor in some of our Churches, that there might be a greater 
flow of Christian charity. We are to bear this burden for them, as those who have the 
same heavenly bread to eat of. A little sacrifice on our part may do much to lighten 
their burdens and cheer their hearts. And we should be quick to know where we can 
30 good in this way. If there are not always those who are in clamant need, there are 
always those whose struggle for subsistence might well be made easier, whose difficulties 
might well be made fewer, and whose comforts might well be added to. As to the way 
in which we are to do it, we are to do it with discrimination, as good stewards of what 
we have been entrusted with for others. We are to do it as though it were a luxury to 
ourselves, and not as though we were conferring an obligation. We may do it secretly 
when it is no object to manifest personal kindness. We are always to do it with rever- 
ence. For, if there is anything in our bearing calculated to destroy the self-respect of 
the recipient, when he is taken at a disadvantage, then we may be removing one burden, 
but we are at the same time laying another upon him which it will be more difficult 
for him to bear. When we give help to any one we should be very studious to make 
him feel that he is our equal-in being a man, and, in the case before us, a Christian. 
(2) Burden of affliction. We mean the burden of sickness or bereavement. For we 
are all mortal. ‘“ Death has set his mark and seal” on our bodies. We are all liable 
to sickness and decay. And, when we come within the precincts of the Church, we do 
not leave our ills behind us.. But here, of this one and of that one it is said, “ He is 
sick.” Now, we are to consider the case of the afflicted members of the Church. They 
have a burden to bear. When of those beloved one after another is laid in the grave, 
the burden of mortality presses heavily enough upon them. “ What could be heavier ?” 
they seem to say through their tears. When, by a succession of premonitory symptoms, 
‘hey are made aware that their own health is failing, the burden seems to press yet 
more heavily. It is something more to feel for themselves as if life were slipping out 
of their grasp. When, at last, they are prostrated upon the bed of sickness and are 
withdrawn, perhaps for ever, from the wonted scene, from the sanctuary, from the sphere 
of usefulness, the burden seems to be weighted as with lead, and there is a multitude 
of thoughts within them. Now, Christ has appointed for such ; and his law laid upon 
fellow-members is, “ Bear ye this burden for them.” We are to bear this burden for 
them; for we may yet be in their case, and we should like the same office to be per- 
formed for us. We are to bear this burden for them; for so closely are we related to 
them, that it is as though part of ourselves were suffering. If we have a fine spiritual 
organism, then, what ἃ fellow-Christian suffers will, as it were, vibrate through us. We 
are to bear this burden in the way of sympathy. We may show our sympathy by a 
visit to the sick-bed, by a kind inquiry, by a kind office, by a kind expression, by a kind 
look. We are to be studious to show that we are not wholly taken up with ourselves, 
but have a place and a tender feeling for them. For, oh, when life is ebbing, it is hard 
to think that they are forsaken; while it is cheering to think that there are around 
them messengers of Christ, each, as it were, conveying to them a portion of the Master’s 
sympathy. It is a great accomplishment to be able to administer consolation. 


“The noblest art 

Is his, who skills of comfort best ; 

Whom by the softest step and gentlest tone 
Enfeebled spirits own, 
And love to raise the languid eye, 
When like an angel’s wing, they feel him fleeting by ;— 

Feel only, for in silence gently gliding 

Fain would he shun both ear and sight.” 


We should cultivate this Divine art, that we may become proficients in 18, We should 
scek each to be a Barnabas, a son of consolation, especially to the Lord’s afflicted ones. 
It is a fine spectacle to see a pilgrim bearing the burden of a fellow-pilgrim who may 
be nearing his journey’s end. May the Lord, by his grace, break our hearts, so that 
we whal! feel, as with his own fineness of feeling, for every sick Lazarus in our maidet { 


330 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. (ca. vi. 1-18 


(3) Burden of spiritual need. We mean the burden connected with our living the 
Christian life. For we have all our spiritual difficulties. We find it hard, with our 
natural weakness, to live up to the Christian standard. As Christians, we all need 
encouragement. Now, the ordinance of Christ is that we are to bear this burden for 
one another. We are to assist one another against the evil of our hearts, against the 
temptations of life. For this purpose we are constituted into a society, and not left 
each to live the Christian life apart by ourselves. As members of the same Christian 
suciety, we are to be interested not least in one another’s highest welfare. It is very 
encouraging to think that there are persons interested in us as spiritual beiugs, whe have 
passed through similar experiences themselves, and who are, therefore, anxious to do us 
all the good that lies in their power. While very sad must it be to be possessed with such 
a thought as that which possessed the psalmist—we have all felt a little of it in certain 
moods—*“ I looked on my right hand and beheld, but thcre was no one that would know 
me, refuge failed me, no man cared for my soul.” The burden to which we are specially 
referred in the context is the burden of trespass with which a brother is weighted. Of 
all burdens, the only intolerable burden issin. Far more than the burden which a fellow- 
man may lay upon us, or than what God may see fit to lay upon us, is what we lay 
upon ourselves when we incur guilt. Of all positions in which human beings muy be 
placed, the worst is that of impenitence, of insensibility to sin. Next to that is when 
we have been awakened and have afterward been overtaken in a trespass. When there 
is want of sensibility as to the evil of what we have done, that is an aggravating cir- 
cumstance. Now, we are to feel burdened with the burden of our brother’s trespass, 
We are to feel vexed and saddened that he has fallen, even as though we had fallen 
ourselves. We are not to feel for him as though he had been simply unfortunate, but 
we are to feel for him as placed in the grievous position of having sinned against God, 
Our sympathy is not to amount to tolerating sin in him. Neither can it avail to relieve 
him from his guilt. But it may avail to increase his sensibility to sin, and to encourage 
the desire in him to be delivered from his awful position, ‘The apostle’s teaching, in 
keeping with ch. v. 14, is that the bearing of one another’s burdens gives conplcteness 
to our filling up of the Law. 

Il. VaIN-GLORIOUS WAY OF TREATING A FALLEN BROTHER. 1. The root of the evil, 
“For if a man thinketh himself to be something, when he is nothing, he deceiveth 
himself.” It is true that he who triumphs over a brother in his fall injures him, by 
discouraging him from coming back to the paths of rectitude. But the apostle gocs to 
the root of the matter when he says that he practises deception on himself. He thinks 
himself to be something when he is nothing. That is true of the vain-glorious man. 
That in respect of which he raises himself above his neighbour is unreal, or he is in 
the way of making it unreal by the spirit in which he regards it. And thus in the false 
importance he attaches to himself he is prevented from being sympathetic. He does 
not bear his neighbour’s burden, because he does not feel his own. 2. Corrective. “ But 
let each man prove his own work, and then shall he have his glorying in regard of him- 
self alone, and not of his neighbour.” Let him apply the proper tests. Let him not 
compare himself, especially with one with whom he thinks he can compare favourably. 
But let hin. compare himself with the Bible standard. Let him compare himself 
with the example of Christ. Let him apply the test of humility, “ God resisteth the 
proud, but he giveth grace to the humble.” Let him apply the test of brotherly love, 
“ We know that we have passed from death into life, because we love the brethren.” 
The result of this self-examination will be to bring us to reality. If we have the root 
of the matter in us, then we shall be able to discover the workmg of Divine grace in us. 
And if there is also evil discovered, then that, being reason for our being humbled before 
God, vill lead to our having more reality. And then, through self-examination, shall we 
have matter for glorying in regard of ourselves alone, and not of our neighbour. 8, 
Reason for self-examination, “For each man shall bear his own burden.” It was 
said in the second verse, “ Bear ye one another’s burdens.” Here it is added, with suffi- 
cient nearness to be paradoxical, “ For each man shall bear his own burden.” The first 
representation was that of standing beside a brother, holding up his burden for him, 
The representation here is that of each man standing solitarily by himself, bearing his 
own burden. Strong but not very conclusive assertions are made that this is not the 
burden of responsibility. The burden to which reference was made at the beginning of 


OH, VI. 1—18.] THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, $31 


the paragraph was the burden of trespass. This we are to share with a brother Then 
comes in the thought of such self-deception as prevents us sharing it sympathetically with 
him. Following upon that is an exhortation to apply proper tests to our conduct as 
a whole, the result being that, if we have the root of the matter in us, we shall have 
matter for glorying in regard of ourselves alone, and not in regard of our neighbour. 
And then ils apostle seems to add that we have immediately to stand before God, each 
with his own burden, It is true that the burden includes the burden of trespasses, And 
it is true that the fact that we have trespasses should make us sympathetic. But that 
which weights the burden of our conduct as a whole, and which should make us tender 
to each other, is that we have immediately to render our account to God. The thought 
then is—We are to feel for our brother, who in his trespass has a heavy and incom- 
municable load of responsibility ; for in our own trespasses we have a load of responsi- 
bility that is heavy and incommunicable too. (1) 76 tsa burden which cannot be refused 
or laid down at pleasure. By a mere wish we cannot be irresponsible. We are, in this 
respect, as clay in the hands of the potter. We have not the choice of our own exist- 
ence or of our non-existence. All that pertains to our coming into existence, and to 
our constitution, has been ordained by a sovereign God, who for good and wise ends 
has made us, and has made us responsible, Now, what does God require of us? It is, 
in New Testament language, “ Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be 
saved.” Apart from the graciousness of this, there is its tmperativeness, We have not 
been consulted as to the making of this command; but it has been imposed in virtue 
of God’s sovereign prerogative to lay commands on us. Is there any question as to the 
desirability of salvation? It is enough that God wishes to see us saved. Is there any 
objection to the particular way of being saved? It is enough to say that this is God’s 
way. Having appointed it, there is no question of preference, but simply of obedience. 
Is there any discretion as to time? It is said, “ Behold, now is the accepted time, 
behold, now is the day of salvation.” If God says now, then it is at our peril if we delay 
for an hour. It is well to have the command laid upon us in all its imperativeness, 
that we may feel driven, as by weight of authority, to Christ for salvation. There is 
respons! dility connected with our whole life. We have not really the dispusal of any- 
thing, apart from God’s way of disposing of it. God’s will must rule our disposal of 
our time, of our talents, of our property. (2) It is a burden which we cannot devolve 
upon another. This is its incommunicableness, which weights it so much, We must 
act for ourselves in the matter of our salvation. If we wait until others save us we 
shall never be saved at all. They may give us their sympathy, and by their prayers 
and appeals influence us; but they cannot act in our soul’s stead, and accept of Christ 
for us. Why have we been so nobly gifted? Is it not that we may act for ourselves, 
and not need to hold on to another? We are to act out our convictions of what is right, 
as those that will have to stand before the judgment-seat and give an account of all 
our acts. And surely we can never sec our way as responsible beings to reject salva- 
tion. It will be found that all among whom our lot is cast will not be on the side of 
our best interests. There will be sume who would lead us to ruin, as though our souls 
were only to be played with. But if others choose to go to ruin, that is no reason why 
we should go with them. And yet it is to be feared that many ruin their souls merely 
to please or not to displease their friend. But no one can be excused for this, For 
what is that but thinking more of our friend than of God? It is at our peril if we can 
be influenced by a fellow-man when he asks us to sin, and not be influenced by God 
when he asks us to be saved, If those who seek to lead us away could take our respon- 
sibility and relieve us from the consequences of our acts, then we might have some 
inducement to go with them. But that is what none of them can do, be he ever so 
great. ‘ Wherefore should I fear [i.e. to say, sae when the iniquity of my heels 
shall compass me about? They that trust in their wealth, and boast themselves in the 
multitude of their riches; none of them can by any means redeem his brother, nor give 
to God a ransom for him (for the redemption of their soul is precious, and it ceaseth [1.6. 
there is a time when it ceaseth] for ever), that he should still live for ever, and not see 
corruption.” If no one, however great, can do this, then we must act for ourselves and 
refuse to be influenced for evil. Oh that men, when asked to take a wrong step, would 
only consider before God how they are alone as responsible beings, standing or falling by 
themselves! (3) Jé ts a burden whic’ we are always free to bear. We mean all who 


332 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, ἴση. vi. 1—18 


have the use of reason. We can never be forced to sin. If we could be forced, then sin 
would be no more sin. We sometimes hear of one being a martyr to circumstances. 
That is not altogether true. What God requires of us varies, indeed, according to cir- 
cumstances, And there are those who have been placed under great disadvantages 
compared with others. But, however badly placed we have been, we cannot say that 
we have been necessitated to refuse salvation. With the offer of Christ in the gospel 
we have the power of rising above circumstances, Whatever the difficulties in our way, 
let Christ be glorified in our triumphing over them. At the last day it will be no valid 
excuse that our difficulties were great. The testing question will be—Could we have 
surmounted them? did we ever sincerely try to surmount them? If Christ shall ask 
if we tried his strength, what shall we be able to answer? Let us not lay the blame 
upon circumstances; let us lay the blame on our own evil hearts. (4) It is a burden 
which may be borne lightly or irksomely. One bears the burden of daily toil with alight 
cheerful heart; another with a heavy heart. So is it with the burden of responsibility. 
We have reason to thank God that it can be borne lightly. Christ took over our heavy 
responsibilities. That was, not each bearing his own burden, but One bearing the burden 
of all, He has taken the weight of guilt out of our burden, and by his grace he can 
make us move freely in the groove of his purpose. There is resting upon every square 
inch of our bodies a weight of atmosphere equal to fifteen pounds ; and yet it does not 
oppress us. We move freely under all that weight ; we never think of it being there. 
With as little feeling of oppression do we bear, in Christ, the burden of our responsibilty. 
But if we stand out of relation to Christ, then it is as though we had two or three 
atmospheres upon us which would crush us.—R. F. 


Vers, 6—10.— Well-doing. I. THE MODE OF SUPPORTING THE CHRISTIAN MINISTRY. 
“But let him that is taught in the Word communicate unto him that teacheth in all 
good things.” It is implied that there is to be, in the Christian Church, an order of 
men whose function it is to teach in the Word. Where these give their whole time 
and attention to their work, which, as a general arrangement, is most advisable, it is 
necessary that provision should be made for their temporal support. The mode of 
support here sanctioned by the apostle is that the taught in the Word should contri- 
bute for the support of their teachers. Receiving spiritual things, they are to show 
their value of them by communicating of their temporal things. The apostle himself 
did not always see his way to take advantage of this mode of support. But even when 
he worked with his own hands to support. himself, as he did at Corinth, he let it be 
known that he was waiving his right of support from the Church he was serving. This 
voluntary mode of support has a rival in the mode of endowment. Where Christian 
teachers are the beneficiaries of the state, there are questions raised which need not be 
entered intohere. But there may be endowment not connected with the state, Christian 
people have sometimes gifted moncys and lands for the support of Christian teachers, 
And where these benefactions are used to support teachers for those who have not been 
brought under the influence of Christianity, or in aid of what can be raised by congre- 
gations, there is no violation of the spirit of the apostolic ordinance. But the question 
is whether Christian people should contribute, according to their ability, for the support 
of their minister. Should a Christian teacher be thrown on the willinghood of his 
people? or should he have his income secured to him apart from his people? It is said 
to be lowering to a minister that he should be dependent on his people. So far as 
worldly status or emolument is concerned that may be set aside. The essential thing 
is that he should have the opportunity of doing good to men by teaching them in the 
Word. And, where he has that secured to him, he may be content to be supported in 
the way in which the Master and ἀξ τε were supported before him. But it is said 
that he is under the temptation to lower his ideal of the Christian ministry in accom- 
modation to the tastes of those upon whom he depends for his support. That may be 
a reason for his being on his guard; but it is surely not a reason for dispensing with 
an apostolic ordinance, Is there no danger, on the other hand, of bringing down the 
ideal mode of supporting the Christian ministry to worldly expediency? The apostolic 
mode only works well where there are really spiritual men, where real spiritual benefit 
ia done by the teacher, and where the taught are really interested and reasonable. But 
ws it wise that it should be abandoned for a mode which dispenses with spiritual con: 


ou. νι. 1—18.] THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 333 


ditions? Is that not coming down to lower principles upon the failure of higher 
principles? And is it likely that these lower principles will be accompanied with the 
sanie spiritual results? The apostolic mode of support hus advantages for the minéster. 
He is put more on doing his best. He is under less temptation to consult his ease, and 
under greater necessity to work for his people. He is under less temptation to preach 
according to his fancy, and under greater necessity to bind himself to the word that 
is most fitted to interest and to benefit. He is under less temptation tc be indifferent 
to his people, and under greater necessity to live well in their affection. The apostolic 
mode of support has also advantages for the people. It delivers them from the feeling 
of dependence on others. It delivers them from spiritual inertia. And, when they 
have a field for their own exertions and sacrifices in connection with the gospel message 
they are more likely to be interested, both in the message and in the messenger. 

11. Prrvcipre invotvep. “Be not deceived; God is not mocked: for whatsoeve1 
a man soweth, that shall he also reap. For he that soweth unto his own flesh shall of 
the flesh reap corruption ; but he that soweth unto the Spirit shall of the Spirit reap 
eternal life.” It is remarkable here how the apostle, in support of the particular duty 
which he has been inculcating, introduces a great and wide principle. ‘There is a similar 
instance in 2 Cor. viii. He is inculcating there the duty of liberality, and he brings 
in the transcendent consideration of Christ’s self-sacrificing love: “ For ye know the 
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that, though he was rich, yet for your sakes he became 
poor, that ye through his poverty might become rich.” Here he is inculcating the duty 
of the taught in the Word doing well by their teachers; and he brings in the great 
principle of sowing and reaping. The immediate application is this. ‘There are eertain 
conditions upon which God blesses congregations. One of these is that they do well 
by their ministers. Let them not, then, be deceived. God is not mocked. Let them 
not think that he will act independently of his own regulation, or reverse it for their 
particular benefit. Ouly as they do well by their spiritual teacher shall they prosper. 
What a powerful enforcement of the duty! But let us look at the principle in its 
generality, and let us learn, in connection with the consideration of it, lessons suitable 
to seed-time and harvest. 1. The sower ¢s also the reaper. ““ Whatsoever a man soweth, 
that shall he alsoreap.” The seed he puts into the ground he gets back in the form of 
fruit. Everywhere is this arrangement carried out. The seed, small and hard, or 
walled up in stone, or blown about, is, of all objects in nature, the most suggestive. 
Nature sows innumerable seeds, far up in rocky places, and far away in lonely islands 
of the sea. Man principally confines himself to the sowing of a few seeds which are 
necessary for his life and would perish but for his care. A seed is a force, has power 
stored up in it which does not yet appear. It may be buried in the dry earth for 
centuries; but, under favouring conditions, it will burst forth, spring up, and come to 
maturity. And there is what is analogous within the spiritual sphere. All human 
life is a sowing. Whether we think of it or not, every time that we think and feel 
and exercise our wills we are sowing. All our acts are forces, which unite and form 
character. That is the great harvest which even here we are reaping. Let us not, 
then, be deceived. God is not mocked, Let us not think that he will not do what he 
is constantly teaching us in nature. Let us not think that we can do an action and 
have done with it when it is done. It is impossible. Even our slight words are forces 
that are productive. Our listless moods will be found by us again. As certainly as we 
sow shall there appear a harvest. 2. Wereap inthe same kind that wesow. “ Whatso- 
ever a man soweth, thut shall he also reap.” We are familiar with this too in nature. 
If we sow in our flower-plots mignonette seed, there will grow up mignonette plants. 
If we sow in our fields oats, there will not grow up barley ; if we sow barley, there will 
not grow up wheat. The type of what is sown is impressed on what is produced from 
it. And the analogy is carried out within the spiritual sphere. We reap in the same 
kind that we sow. The character of our actions is stamped upon the results that they 
produce in our nature. We are only liberal as we have acted liberally. We are only 
devout as we have cultivated devout habits, Wisdom does not spring from the same 
kind of seed as zeal; nor gentleness from the same kind of seed as courage. Whatever 
fruit we would have, we must sow in that kind. Let us not, then, be deceived. God 
is not mocked. Let us not think that he will disregard his own appointment—like 
8098, like harvest, Let us not think that we oan gow niggardliness and reap fatness; 


334 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS (on. vi. 1—1t 


that w2 can sow dissipation and reap steadfastness. The kind that we sow in om 
actions, and none other, determines what we reap. 8. As we sow to the flesh or to the 
Spirit, what we reap ts corruptible or incorruptible. There are many kinds of seeds in 
nature; but there is one essential distinction between them, There are seeds of plants 
which are vile and noxious, and which we seek only to extirpate. And there are seeds 
of plants which are useful or beautiful, and which we seek to cultivate. Sowing to the 
flesh is doing what is right in our own eyes, acting without regard to the will of God. 
Τὸ is like sowing the seeds of weeds in the soil of our hearts. Sowing to the Spirit is 
what is called, in the Old Testament, sowing in righteousness, doing what is right 
before God. It is like sowing the seeds of useful grains, or of beautiful flowers, in the 
soil of our hearts, It is said, sowing “ to our own flesh,” but simply “ sowing to the Spirit,” 
showing that the point of the distinction is taking the rule of our actions from self or 
from God. The Divine ordering is that, sowing to the flesh, we shall of the flesh reap 
corruption. And we are sufficiently taught what corruption is, There is an offensive- 
ness connected with wet, decayed vegetable matter. There is a greater offensiveness 
connected with putrid animal matter. And, as the best things corrupted are the worst, 
there is nothing so offensive, within the material sphere, as the human body in a state 
of corruption. And that, again, is but a suggestion of what the soul is in a state of 
corruption. Let us not, then, be deceived, God is not mocked. Let us not think 
that we can break God’s laws with impunity. Let us not think that we can sin, and 
have the freshness and beauty of holiness, It is impossible. Sin is working its work 
of deterioration even here. It is bringing in the elements of death into our nature. It 
is as though mortification in all its loathsomeness were proceeding in our various 
powers. And it is the most solemn fact of existence that, if we die in sin, then, as 
certainly as there is righteousness in the character of God, will retribution follow us 
into the next world. On the other hand, the Divine ordering is that, sowing to the 
Spirit, we shall of the Spirit reap eternal life. There is nothing within the material sphere 
which can fitly set forth what this life is. As spirit is finer than matter, so is spiritual 
life finer than the most lovely flower, the most beautiful human bodily form. It has 
especially the element of imperishableness, eternity. Flowers quickly fade; the most 
beautiful face loses its freshness. But the life that is begun in God and carried on in God 
shall be eternal as God himself. Let us not, then, bedeceived. God is not mocked. It is 
only by sowing to the Spirit that we can get beautiful and imperishable elements into our 
life. “ Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honourable, whatsoever things 
are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are 
of good report; if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these things.” 
That is the order of the Divine government which we must observe if we would be 
beautified with the Divine beauty and immortalized with the Divine immortality. 
Seeing, then, that God cannot deny himself, must honour his own arrangement, let us 
learn the supreme importance of sowing to the Spirit. There is nothing in this principle, 
rightly considered, which militates against the doctrine of the forgiveness of sing, For 
the great Substitute of mankind came under the broken.Law, which had its full course 
in him. He reaped, in terrible experience of forsakenness what we had sowed in our 
sins. “Surely he hath borne our griefs and carried our sorrows.” And, therefore, it is 
that we can reap a rich harvest of forgiveness. But it needs to be borne in mind, as 
a complementary truth, that, after we are forgiven, we have still to contend against 
depraved tendency, and especially against the results of our previous sinful life. And 
it is also to be borne in mind that we can only have the harvest of life eternal in so 
far as we have thought out the Divine thoughts and carried out the Divine will. Let 
-us not be deceived. God is not mocked. In no other way can it be secured by us. 
111. ENcoURAGEMENT AGAINST WEARINESS IN WELL-DOING. “And let us not be 
weary in well-doing: for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not.” The apostle 
has been exhorting to do well by Christian teachers; he now proceeds to exhort to well- 
doing in general, ¢.e. to all kinds of doing well to the bodies and souls of men. And 
let it be understood, that nothing is worthy of the name of well-doing which is not 
done from a right motive. It must be, not for self-glorification, but for the glory ot 
God. 1. Causes of weariness. (1) There are discouragements connected with the nature 
of well-doing. It is under a high impulse that we begin the life of well-doing. It is 
the kind of life that is furthest removed from selfishness, It requires a large infusion 


on. vi. 1—18.] THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 335 


of the spirit in which Christ regarded men.- But we have still to do with the matter. 
of-fact world. We are not placed above the ordinary cares and difficulties of life 
These may increase with us and may act upon us 80 as to tend to weariness in well: 
doing. We have to give out largely too of our best strength in well-doing. To be 
burdened with the souls of men is exhausting beyond anything else. And the more 
intensely we care for souls the more are we Jaid open to a feeling of weariness. (2) 
There are discouragements connected with the associations of well-doing. We may not 
like the scenes of discomfort, squalor, and vice into which well-doing brings us. We 
may feel the want of suitable appliances for engaging in well-doing. We may feel the 
want of hearty co-operation. Some to whom we had reason to look may fail us, having 
become cold in the work. Of our fellow-workers in the same society some may be 
more intent on getting their own way than on the advancement of the common cause, if 
they do not even resort to slander and obstruction. And all these things are causes of 
weariness, (3) There are especially discouragementa connected with the results of well- 
doing. In other work we can, to a large extent, walk by sight. We feel the encouraging 
influence of results, There is something to show for what our hands have done every 
day. But in well-doing there is little to show in the shape of results, There is some- 
thing to be secn, indeed, if we feed the hungry and clothe the naked. And there are also 
results that can be tested, if we engage in communicating knowledge to the young and 
the ignorant. But if we seek to influence men’s hearts through gospel truth we may 
have to say, “Who hath believed our report, and to whom is the arm of the Lord 
revealed ?” We may labour on, and some may appear further removed from good than 
they were. Some who appeared to be established may show deterioration or may fall 
greviously, to our great amazement and sorrow. Or, if we meet with outward tokens 
of success, in the very moment of success it may be felt to be unsatisfying. It may 
be not all real, when tested even by time. And we may afterwards bo disappointed 
in some upon whom we reckoned as savingly influenced. And there are wearying 
influences that come in from a wider range. It may seem as if there were but poor 
results from the money and labour spent on missions. It may seem as if little inroads 
were made upon the domain of evil. It may seem as if the Church were losing its 
wonted fire, were feeling the chilling influence of the world. It may seem as if iniquity 
were abounding, and, because iniquity abounds, our love, and that of many others, is 
apt to wax cold. 2. Hncouragement against weariness. We cannot remove the causes 
of weariness in well-doing. We cannot escape the temptation to be weary. What we 
have to do is to refuse to yield to the temptation. “Let us not be weary "—that is the 
word which the apostle sends forth to all who are inclined to be weary in well-doing. 
Let us learn a lesson from what we see going on in nature. The sower does not see 
his harvest the day he sows his seed. He has to begin by putting his seed out of sight, 
and it is a time before the plant appears above ground. And then he has to wait until 
nature slowly brings it forward to maturity. But if, in the face of what he does not 
yet see, he faint not as under the burning heat of the sun, then he shall assuredly one 
day be privileged to bring in the ripe grain into the stackyard. For God has appointed 
@ season for this. So let us learn, in the face of all discouragements connected with 
well-doing, especially in the face of what we do not yet see of results, that, if we faint 
not, if we lose not faith in God, in the mighty influences of the Divine Spirit, in the 
converting efficacy of the Divine message, in the binding nature of the Divine com- 
mand, and if we lose not hope for man,—then in due season we shall assuredly reap. 
We shall reap in our own souls, in the blessing God shall not delay to send on us for 
engaging, unweariedly, in well-doing. And, what is more to the purpose of well-doing, 
we shall reap in others, in the blessing which God may not immediately or within our 
observation, but shall in due season, send upon them as-the result of tearful prayers and 
labours which he never forgets, Let us, then, cast our bread, though it may be as upon 
the waters, and we shall find it, though it may be after many days. God has his own 
time and way of bringing the seed forward, and it may be long after we are dead and gone: 
that the fruit shall be gathered in. 

IV. OprorTUNITY OF WELL-DoING. “So then, as we have opportunity, let us work 
that which ‘s good toward all men, and especially toward them that are of the house- 
hold of faita.” These three things constitute opportunity, viz. time, ability, and 
objects of well-doing. 1, There is the limit of time, Spring ia the season for sowing 


THE EPISTLL TO THE GALATIANS. Con. v1. 1—18, 


the seed. If it is not improved, there will be nothing to gather at harvest-time. 8c 
the present life is the season for well-doing. It does not appear that in the next world 
we shall be employed in reclaiming sinners. Let us, then, improve the time that God 
has given us for doing good, all the more because of the uncertainty of its being con- 
tinued to us, In the morning let us sow our seed, in the evening let us not withhold 
our hand. Let us serve well our day and generation. 2. There ts the limit of ability. 
God has given us all the means of doing good with our powers, and money. Up to 
that point we have obligation. Let us, then, faithfully discharge our obligation as 
before God. Let us know how to use our powers, not selfishly, but usefully, bene- 
ficently. Let us learn the secret of making ourselves friends of the mammon of 
unrighteousness. 3. The objects of well-doing. These are in a manner unlimited, The 
apostle says, “all men.” That is to say, that, if we had time and ability, it would 
literally be our duty to work that which is good to all men. As it is. wherever there 
is a human being, he has a claim upon us on the ground of his humanity and on the 
ground of his being the object of God’s love and of Christ’s redemption. But there is 
a defining, limiting of the order in which we are to proceed with those whom we seek 
to bless. As within the natural sphere our own household have the first claim on us, 
so within the Christian sphere it is those who are of the household of faith. It is an 
additional and cogeas reason for the bestowment of a charity that the objects of it 
have the same faith and sympathies and look forward to the same home with our- 
selves. Within the Christian household, too, our own family and friends, our own 
neighbours, our own countrymen, have a prior claim on our interest. But let us 
remember that, if charity begins at home, it does not end there. We must go out in 
the spirit of this exhortation in our sympathies and charities and labours to all the 
ignorant, and to them that are out of the way. “I exhort therefore that supplica- 
tions, prayers, intercessions, thanksgivings, be made for all men. This is good and 
acceptable in the sight of God our Saviour: who willeth that all men should be saved, 
and come to the knowledge of the truth.”—R. F. 


Vers. 11—18.— Parting words. I. His Hanpwritine. “See with how large ‘letters 
Thave written unto you with mine own hand.” He seems to intimate that not merely 
the following words, but, against his usual custom, the whole Epistle, was in his own 
handwriting. This was to, be interpreted as a manifestation of his interest in them in 
connection with the importance of the occasion. He also intimates that he used large 
characters. It cannot be imagined that his intention in doing so, and in calling 
attention to it, was to emphasize his instructions. It was rather to be interpreted as 
an appeal to them in eonnection with his defective vision which necessitated tle use of 
large characters. 

II. Tae srrerr or THE Jupaiine TEACHERS. 1. They desired to appear well for 
their own interest. “ As many as desire to make a fair show in the flesh they compel you 
to be circumcised; only that they may not be persecuted for the cross of Christ.” He 
does not mention the Judaizing teachers by name, but he graphically describes them. 
They did not care for reality; what they cared for was to make a fair show. And, 
though it was to make a fair show in religion, that did not remove it from the sphere 
of the flesh. It was still self that was the actuating principle. If they had presented 
the cross of Christ in its simplicity, as the apostle seems to imply they were free in 
their conscience to have done, they would have offended their unbelieving countrymen, 
and would have been subjected to persecution from them. The carnal, self-interested 
way in which they got over the offence of the cross was to insist on the circumcision 
of the Gentile converts, 2. Their false glorying. “For not even they who receive 
circumcision do themselves keep the Law; but they desire to have you circumcised, that 
they may glory in your flesh.” They were the party of the circumcision, not merely 
because they were circumcised themselves, but because they made circumcision a 
prominent article in their teaching, They had not the zeal that might have been 
expected of them for the Law; for they were faulty in their own keeping of it, fecling 
it to be burdensome to their flesh. They displayed their zeal in proselytizing. They 
hoped to hold themselves up to the admiration of their countrymen in the numbers, 
not that had undergone a saving change, but that, through their influence, had received 
the mark of circumcision in their flesh, : 


on. vi. 1—18.] THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 837 


III. His srrriv ΑΒ CONTRASTED WITH THAT oF THE JuDaIzERS. 1. His glorying. 
“But far be it from me to glory, save iu the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, through 
which the world hath been crucified unto me, and I unto the world.” ᾿ (1) He gloried 
in the cross, By the cross we are to understand the atoning death of our Lord Jesus 
Christ. By glorying in the cross we are to understand that he not only trusted in it 
for his own salvation, and admired it himself, but that he held it up for the trust and 
admiration of others. The cross is to be gloried in as ἃ marvellous exhibition of the 
Divine love. It was God not sparing his Son, but delivering him up for the salvation 
of men. Iflove is to be measured by sacrifice, then it was a love that made infinite 
sacrifice. The cross is to be gloried in as 8 marvellous exhibition of the Divine 
righteousness. In default of man being able to make satisfaction for his sin unless in 
his own destruction, it was God coming forward in Christ and making satisfaction for 
sin by paying its utmost penalty. The cross is to be gloried in as amarvellous exhibis 
tion of the Divine power. It was God in Christ conquering the kingdom of Satan, 
showing himself stronger than the evil of man’s heart. The cross is to be gloried in 
as a marvellous exhibition of the Divine wisdom. It was God showing how he could 
be just, and yet the Justifier of him that believeth in Jesus; showing how he could 
attract the sinner to himself, and yet condemn his sin. (2) He gloried especially in 
the cross because of its effecting changed relations to the world. By the world we are 
to understand the sphere in which the principles of the flesh find their manifestation. 
The cross crucified the world to him, He condemncd it and tore himself from it 
because of its antagonism to God. He was independent of its favours and pleasures, 
for he had better within himself, in the love and approval of God, and in all the joys of 
sonship. The cross crucified him to the world. It condemned him in turn, and 
stood aloof from him as a lost man, and only thought of him to hate him and persecute 
him. In this cross, then, with all that it entailed, he gloried, and in this alone, Far 
te it from him to hold up anything else for the trust and admiration of nien. 2. His 
regard for reality. ‘For neither is circumcision anything, nor uncircumcision, but a 
new creature.” 70 him it was of no importance that men should be outwardly marked. 
What was of importance was that they should be inwardly changed. Numbers he 
would have rejoiced in if they represented saved men. 

IV. As HIS SPIRIT WAS 80 HE BLESSED. “ And as many as shall walk by this rule, 
peace be upon them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God.” He invokes blessing on 
all who would walk by the rule laid down, ¢.e. who would glory only in the cross of 
Christ, and would seek reality and not appearances. He invokes blessing on them in 
the usual form, only putting peace before mercy. All such, and not those whom the 
Judaizers blessed, were to be regarded as the Israel of God. 

V. His CLAIM TO BE UNMOLESTED. “ From henceforth let no man trouble me: for 
I bear branded on my body the marks of Jesus.” A general who has seen long service 
and has received many scars may reasonably claim to be relieved from future service. 
That was not Paul’s claim. Hard service had a singular charm for him. But ho 
thought that he had received scars enough to place his relationship to Christ as his 
servant and apostle henceforth beyond all doubt. The slave had branded on his body 
the name of the Master to whom he belonged. So in his past hardships he had as it 
were the name of Jesus branded on him. Henceforth, whatever men might do to him, 
let them not molest him by raising doubt as to the Master to whom he belonged. 

VL. His ΒΡΕΟΙΑΙ, AND FINAL BLESSING FOR THE GaLaTIaNs. “The grace of our 
Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit, brethren. Amen.” He blesses them from the 
centre of their being. He was so charged with indignation when he commenced the 
Hpistle that he was long before he could address them as brethren. Now he is so 
charged with affection that, putting “ brethren ” into an unusual position, he makes it the 
last word that shall linger in their memory when they have completed the reading of 
the Epistle. 

We have no evidence of the immediate effect which this Epistle had upon the 
Galatians. It is painful to read of heresies which, at a subsequent period, were 
rile among them. It is, however, pleasing to know that in the Diocletian perse- 
cution in the beginning of the feurth century, and in the “attempt to galvanize the 
expiring form of heathen devotion in Galatia,” by Julian the apostate, there were not a 
few Galatian martyra, It cannot be said that there is at the present day within the 

G@aLATIANG, ΓῚ 


338 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. ἴση. τι, 1—18. 


district any representation of Pauline Christianity. The Christian Church has yet to 
show its indebtedness for this Epistle by going forth in the spirit of the great preacher 
of the cross to reconquer Galatian soil for Christ.—R. F. 


Ver. 1.—Festoring the erring. In all the writings of St. Paul there is no more 
Christ-like utterance than this. It breathes the very spirit of him who came to seek 
and to save the lost. It seems to be addressed in particular to the more spiritual 
members of the Galatian Churches—to those who had not been carried away in the 
tide of fashionable Judaizing. There was a danger lest the severe rebuke administered 
by the apostle to their erroneous brethren should provoke a vain: and censorious spirit 
jn these men. St. Paul warns them of that danger (ch. v. 26), and points out the 
right course that is open to them. Instead of judging they were to help to restore the 
fallen in all gentleness and humility. 

I, Tue DUTY OF RESTORING THE ERRING. Too often they are harshly judged, con- 
cemned, despised, crushed, so that if they are strong they are confirmed in their errors 
by pride-and motives of sheer self-defence, and if they are weak they become reckless 
and despairing and a ready prey for greater evils. The censorious will have to answer 
for the terrible responsibility of confirming guilt and checking repentance. In no case 
is it ours to judge. But to brand and ostracize the guilty is to incur the heavy guilt of 
those who make others to sin. How different would the history of the Church have 
been if, instead of the controversy which aims only at silencing opponents, there had 
been the counsel that seeks at restoring brethren! But it is important to see that 
there should be no aim short of resforiny the erring. That is a false charity which 
ignores sins in others. They must be faithfully pointed out and earnestly opposed. The 
great end must not be mere punishment nor easy indifference, but restoration. 

11. THE PERSONS CHARGED WITH THIS DUTY. ‘I'he spiritual. It requires such, for it 
is a delicate duty. We are not all fit for it. Spirituality should produce charity, ‘he 
spiritual are not to withdraw from their weaker brethren in Pharisaic pride, Such 
pride, indeed, is ἃ proof of utter unspirituality, No nobler mission can be open to the 
purest souls than that of restoring the erring. It was Christ’s great. work, and hs 
does not liberate his people from the duty of taking their share in it. The more a man 
has of the spirit of Christ the better will-he be able to succeed in this beautiful labour 
of love. 

ILL Tae srretr IN WHICH THE DUTY IS TO BE CARRIED ouT. 1. Charity. Consider 
that the unfortunate man has been “ overtaken” in a trespass. Make due allowance 
for the peculiar form of the temptation under which he fell and for the surprise with 
which it came upon him. 2. Meekness. The duty is not to scold, but to heal. The 
healer of souls must show the utmost possible gentleness, consideration for wounded 
pride, and respect for natural reserve, and should do all he can not to humiliate the 
offender more than is necessary, nor to injure his self-respect. 8, Humility. ‘ Looking 
to thyself, lest thou also be tempted.” It is not necessary to appear immaculate in 
order to restore another. The pride of assumed superiority will be the worst possible 
hindrance in such a work. It is well to remember that, if we had met the same 
temptation, we might have had even a more grievous fall, And some day our time 
may come, and then the present offender may be our restorer. Let the work be done, 
then, as by a brother to a brother.—W. F. A. 


Ver. 2.—The law of Christ. The Galatians have been hankering after the Law of 
Judaism, as though some counsels of perfection could be found therein for adding hizher 
virtue to the graces of Christianity. “If you want a law,” says St. Paul, “take this 
rule of mutual sympathy—bear ye one another’s burdens.” Christ has his law, then, 
after all. It is not a ceremonial observance, but it is high enough for the ambition of 
the noblest self-sacrifice. 

L CnrisT EXPECTS US TO TAKE DEEP INTEREST IN ONE ANOTHER. Christianity is 
unselfish, To think that all we have to do is to save our own souls is to misunderstand 
the religion of Christ completely. He who would thus save his soul will lose it. The 
gospel ia a gospel to us just because it calls us out of ourselves and leads us to deny 
ourselves and practise active charity, 

11, Οὐδ SPECIAL INTEREST SHOULD BE DRAWN TOWARDS THE TROUBLES OF OTHERS. 


On. vi. 1—18.] THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 889 


The burdens are to be our concern. How large a share of life they cover! 1. Burdens 
of sin. These seem to be uppermost in the mind of St. Paul (ver. 1). As Christ bure 
our sin, we are to bear our neighbour's; ὁ.6. make it our trouble and anxiety, and a thing 
we labour at removing. 2. Burdens of sorrow, The trouble of our brother will be 
ours if we are members one of another, 3. Burdens of care. Fear and anxiety are 
magnified in loneliness, We can see the forlorn suffer from being quite desolate. 4. 
Burdens of dowht. Do not brand the doubter as a heretic. Enter into his difficulties, 
Discuss them frankly as with your brother. 

III, Iv 18 oR DUTY TO BEAR THESE BURDENS. The ascribes bound heavy burdens 
grievous to be borne on the shoulders of their victims, and would not so much as touch 
the:a with their little fingers. The example of these men has been too often followed 
by the teachers of the Church. Yet God knows the burdens of life are heavy enough 
without our adding to them. Our part is to lighten them. ‘This is a serious, practical 
work, and not a matter of humanitarian sentiment. We must take the burdens on 
ourselves till we feel the weight of them. 1. By sympathy. Real sympathy, and not 
mocking pity, makes another’s trouble one’s own. It takes the heaviest weight from 
the load—the dull, crushing sense of loneliness. The burden is lightened by being 
shared. 2. By active relief. When once we feel the burden we shall wish to remove 
it, Bearing it, we shall do all in our power to bear it away. Thus Christian sympathy 
produces active philanthropy. 

IV. To BEAR ONE ANOTHER’S BURDENS I8 TO FULTIL THE LAW oF Curist. It is 
required by Christ. We are disobedient to him if we neglect the duty. And to fulfil 
it is to satisfy Christ. In face of this plain duty there is an unreality amounting 
almost to hypocrisy in the effort to live a holy life by practising artificial, ascetic self- 
denial, as if enough could not be found in the common walks of life and in ways of 
plain usefulness, How absurd to wear a hair shirt and lash one’s self with scourges 
instead of taking the self-denial in the less romantic but more Christ-like way of 
helping the sick and ignorant and fallen ! 


“The trivial round, the common task, 
Will furnish all we ought to ask— 
Room to deny ourselves, a road 
To bring us daily nearer God.” 
W. Κ΄ A. 


Ver. 3.—The self-deception of self-conceit, A truism, yet such that, while everybody 
is ready to apply it to his neighbour, few are wise enongh to take it home to them- 
selves. By the very nature of the case it is always ignored where it fits most aptly. 
Hence the need of insisting upon it. 

1, THERE ARE STRONG INDUCEMENTS FOR FORMING AN UNDULY FAVOURABLE OPINION 
OF ONE’S SELF, Self-knowledge is a difficult acquisition. We cannot get the right per- 
spective. The effort of turning the mind in upon itself is arduous. Then we are inclined to 
take imagination and desire for direct perception, ¢.e. to think we possess qualities which 
we only picture in thought ; or to measure our faculties by our inclinatious, to suppose 
that the wish to do certain things carries with it the power. Z.g. an enthusiast for the 
violin is likely to suppose he can handle the instrument musically before other people 
are of that opinion. The very habit of thinking about ourselves causes a growing 
sense of self-importance. Moreover, by an unconscious selection we are led to dwell 
on the favourable features of our own characters, and leave out of account the 
unfavourable. 

11. A HIGH OPINION OF ONE’S SELF 18 COMMONLY FOUND TO BE ASSOCIATED WITH A 
LOW CONDITION OF REAL worTH. Not invariably, for we sometimes find men of high 
endowments painfully self-assertive, either because they know that their merits have 
not been duly recognized, or because their vanity has been excited by the applause of 
their friends, Such cases reveal a weakness, and strike us as peculiarly unfortunate, 
for the men of worth would be wiser to wait for the acknowledgment which thei¢ 
merits by themselves will ultimately command had they but patience enough, or at th 
worst should be above caring overmuch for any such acknowledgment. Still, the meri 
may be real. In most cases, however, it is those who are least who boast the loudest. 
The man of little knowledge thinks he knows everything; wide knowledge reveals the 


340 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. (ox. σι. 1—18. 


awful vastness of the unknown, and impresses profound humility. So the holiest 
man is most conscious of his own sinfulness. At best, too, what right have we to 
think much of ourselves when all we have comes from God—our natural abilities as 
gifts of Providence, our spiritual attainments as graces of the Spirit ? 

TIT. An UNDUE OPINION OF ONE’S SELF IS NOTHING BUT SELT*DECEPTION. It cannot 
long impose upon others. The world is not inclined to attach much weight to a 
man’s own evidence in favour of himself. (Hypocrisy, or the deliberate effort to deceive 
others, is out of the question here, as that implies a knowledge of the falseness of our 
pretensions, while we are now considering the honest belief in them.) Such self- 
deception is unfortunate, (1) because it will put us in a false position, incline us to 
make wrong claims, and to attempt the unattainable, and so result in disastrous failure ; 
(2) because it precludes the endeavour to improve ourselves; (8) because it destroys 
the Christ-like grace of humility ; (4) because it provokes the ridicule, scorn, or even 
enmity of others.—W. F. A, 


Vers. 7, 8.— Sowing and reaping. The Galatians appear to have been niggardly in 
their contributious for the support of their Christian teachers (ver. 6). St. Paul warns 
them that such conduct will tell against themselves (see Prov. xi. 24). The prin- 
ciple on which he bases his admonition is one of deep significance and wide application. 
No doubt the apostle wished it to be impressed upon his readers in all its bearings as 
well as in relation to the particular case that led him to mention 10. 

I, Iv 18 A LAW OF NATURE THAT THE REAPING SHALL CORRESPOND TO THE SOWING. 
1. This is part of the general law that, other things being equal, the same cause always 
produces the same effect. There is no known exception to the law of causation; there 
ig no possible evasion of it. We see it plainly working in human affairs. The eternal 
constancy of nature assures us that the consequences of which certain conduct is 
known to be the cause will undoubtedly follow. 2. The special law of sowing and 
reaping is that the product of the harvest will be the same in kind as the seed sown. 
Tares will never produce wheat, nor wheat tares. But each seed reproduces its own 
Kind, This is seen in human affairs. Commercial industry tends to commercial 
wealth, intellectual study to a state of intellectual cuiture, etc. It is vain to think 
that money will buy refinement or that learning is the road to wealth. Each pursuit 
has its own consequences in accordance with its own nature. 

11. THIs LAW APPLIES TO SPIRITUAL SOWING AND REAPING. 1. Here the future 
depends on the past and present by a certain law of causation. No words could more 
plainly assert that our conduct is shaping our own fate; and these are not the words of 
St. James, but of St. Paul! and they occur, of all places, in the Epistle to the Galatians, 
where the doctrine of justification by faith is most vehemently asserted! Moreover, 
they are not addressed to Jews still under the Law, nor to heathen who have not 
yet availed themselves of the privileges of the gospel, but to Christians who have come 
into the justification by faith, as it is to Christians that St. Paul says elsewhere, “ We 
shall all stand before the judgment-seat of God” (Rom. xiv. 10). We are here 
reminded that the future consequences of conduct are natural, not adventitious —that 
they are caused by what we are and do, that they flow of their own accord from our 
lives, and are not assigned from without by any arbitrary decree. We simply reap 
what our own sowing has produced for us, 2. In spiritual things there is a cor- 
respondence between what is sown and what is reaped. (1) Sowing to the flesh 
produces its own natural harvest—corruption. The mere animal life, the life of 
worldly interests, the life of the lower self, is itself a life of corruptible things. Its 
soil and nourishment are earthly and cannot outlast death. When the grave opens all 
is lost. Even before death thieves steal, and moth and rust eat into the treasures, 
The soul itself, too, is corrupted by such a life. Its faculties are dissipated and decay 
away. It descends to the evil state of moral rottenness and death. (2) Sowing to the 
Spirit produces its own harvest of eternal life. Spiritual things are eternal things. 
Treasures in heaven are beyond destroying influences. In proportion as the spiritual 
within us is cultivated we have what will outlast death and what no grave will ever 
claim Already we have an eternal life in living in the things that are spiritual and 
therefore eternal. Money goes, but faith remains; the pleasures of the senses pall upon 
us, but the peace of God never fails; self-seeking leads to dissatisfaction, the love of 
God sustains us with undying interests, 


ΘῈ. vi, 1. 18. THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, 84 


III. THE KNOWLEDGE OF SUCH A LAW OF SOWING AND REAPING IS A WARNING AGAINST 
INsINcERITY. It is vain to shut our eyes to it. Nature is pitilessly inexorable, and 
here we are considering a law of nature which is as rigid as the law of gravitation. 
Deception may avail with men, but here we have God’s action, and no subterfuge can 
escape his detection. There is a sort of irony on our petty schemes and contrivances 
in the calm, sure way in which the laws of the universe work out their issues, totally 
regardless of what we may imagine or pretend. Yet we are in danger of self-deception. 
1. The harvest is delayed. The result is not the less certain, however, on that account. 
Seeds found buried with Egyptian mummies thousands of years ago when sown now 
bear fruit after their kind, with as little deviation as if they had been produced last 
harvest. 2. We expect more consequences than the law of sowing and reaping justifies. 
Thus we are surprised that bad men should be prosperous in worldly matters and good 
men unfortunate. But each reaps as he sows. He who sows to the world reaps worldly 
gain, with its ultimate corruption. He who sows only to the Spirit has no right to 
expect more than spiritual returns, His harvest will be eternal life, not money and 
pleasure. He gets just what he sows, only with increase. Finally, how can we 
reconcile this principle with the gospel of Christ and the doctrine of grace? Simply 
by seeing that to have a true submissive and obedient faith in Christ is to sow to the 
Spirit —W. F. A. 


Ver. 9.— Weariness in well-doing. I. THE CONDITION OF WEARINESS IN WELL-DOING. 
1, It is a feeling, not at present a change of action. ‘The well-doing is continued in spite 
of weariness, Our moods vary, and we can scarcely be held to be responsible for them. 
The essential thing is that we do not cease working. 2. It is very different from being 
weary of well-doing. We may grow weary in our work and yet be most anxious for 
the success of it. Such weariness is a common condition. How often is the flesh weak 
while the spirit is willing! How often is the spirit, too, wearily cleaving to the dust, 
and pining for a Divine inspiration, like the hart thirsting and panting for the water- 
brooks 

Il. Tue Evin oF THIS conpITION. 1. It is distressing. The task over which we sing 
in the freshness of the morning becomes a burden to groan under when the evening 
fiuds us jaded and worn. 2. It is likely to make our work defective. We cannot row 
fast when the stream turns contrary to us, nor work effectively against the grain. 
3. It may lead to the abandonment of our mission. Weariness may end in despair. 
If we have no joy in our work we shall be tempted to negligence. 

III. THe causes oF THIS conpITION. 1. In ourselves. (1) Want of rest. “Come 
ye aside and rest awhile,” said Christ to his disciples in the midst of their bnsiest 
labours. (2) Want of nourishment. We grow weary if we work long without food. 
‘There isa danger lest the active servant of Christ should neglect his own private prayer 
and meditation and the quiet inward spiritual sustenance that is so necessary to give 
vigour and freshness to the external service. 2. Causes in our work. (1) Monotony 
and drudgery. How much of our work has no glow of romance and no insjiration of 
heroism about it! The soldier grows tired of camp service, though he would put 
forth tenfold exertions in the excitement of battle without feeling weary. (2) Lack of 
results, It often looks as though we were labouring in vain. Now, futile toil is of all 
toil the most wearying. 

IV. THE REMEDY FOR THIS WEARINESS, 1. If it comes from our own habits and 
conditions, see that we have the rest and nourishment that our souls need. We must 
be more with God in prayer. Natural bodily rest may be needed too. A good holiday 
may be the best cure for a weariness that sadly troubles the soul of a conscientious 
toiler, 2. If the weariness comes from our work, (1) remember that Christ is watching 
us, so that the commonest drudgery done for his sake becomes a noble service and will 
receive as warm @n approval as the most brilliant achievement—nay, a more kindly 
recognition, seeing that it was more trying to discharge the lowly duty with full 
fidelity ; and (2) remember that the harvest, though delayed, will surely be reaped in 
due time,—then “ they that sow in tears shall reap in joy.”—W. F, A. 


Ver. 14.—The cross of Christ. I. THe onoss ΑΒ AN OBJECT OF GLORYING. 1. St. 
Paul can glory in nothing else. Yet he had whereof to glory. His birth, his education, 


342 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. [σπ. σι. 1—18. 


and his religious devotions had been sources of pride to him, His Christian attain- 
ments, his apostolic authority, his missionary triumphs, and his brave endurance of 
persecutions, might be taken as reasons for self-glorification. But he rejects the whole. 
Plainly no Christian inferior to St. Paul can have anything in himself to be proud of, 
2. The glorying only begins in looking away from self to Christ. Men talk of glorying 
in their crosses. But St. Paul boasted, not in his own-cross, but only in the cross of 
Christ. He made nothing of his sufferings for Christ; all his interest was absorbed 
in Christ’s sufferings for him. All the brightness of Christian experience centres 
in Christ. 8, The grand source of glorying is the cross of Chrést. The cross was 
the symbol of shame; it has become the token of what we most reverently 
adore. So complete is the transformation of ideas that we can with difficulty under- 
stand the paradox as it would strike the contemporaries of St. Paul when he spoke of 
glorying in the cross. It is as though we spoke of priding ourselves on the gallows. 
This cross, this instrument of shameful death, has become the emblem of Christianity. 
Gleaming in gold on the spires and domes of’ our cathedrals, it typifies the most vital 
truth of Christianity. The glory of the cross is not a merely mystical sentiment. It 
springs from evident facts: (1) the fidelity of Christ as the good Shepherd, who would 
not forsake the flock and flee before the wolf; (2) the patience, gentleness, and for- 
giving spirit of Christ on the cross; but (3) chiefly the love of Christ in suffering 
shame and anguish and death for us. There are some who would dispense with the 
doctrine of the cross; but a crossless Christianity will be a mutilated, impotent gospel, 
robbed of all-efficacy, shorn of all glory. 

IL ‘THE cross ΑΒ AN INSTRUMENT OF DEATH. The cross does not change its nature 
by winning its glory. Still, it is a cross—tool of pain and death. It is no less than 
this to the Christian as it was no less to Christ. For Christianity is not a calm accept- 
ance of what Christ has done in our stead; it is union with Christ, first in his death 
and then in his victory. 1. The cross means the death of the world to us. Before 
that glory of Divine love in human passion all lesser lights fade and perish. As we 
look upon the cross the world loses its hold upon us. In the vision of truth and 
purity and love even to death, the threats of the world’s hurts lose their terror and 
the fascinations of its pleasures their charm, 2. The cross means our death to the 
world, Joined with Christ by faith, we have the old self killed out of us. Hitherto 
the power of the lower world has dragged us down to sin and trouble. But in propor- 
tion as we are united to the Crucified we cease to have the feelings and interests which 
chain us to the earthly. St. Paul describes a magnificent ideal, No man on earth 
has fully realized it. It must be the aim of the Christian more and more to be one 
with Christ, that the cross may pass more deeply into his soul till all else melts and 
fades out of experience. 

These two aspects of the cross—its death-power in us, its glory in Christ—are 
directly related. For it is only after it has been the instrument of death to us that 
we can rise in the new life and see it as the one absorbing object of glory.—W. F. A. 


Ver. 15.—" A new creature.” 1. ExTERNAL RELIGION COUNTS FOR NOTHING. “ For 
neither is circumcision anything.” Religion is wholly in the soul. 1. No rite has any 
value in itself. Nothing done to the body is of any religious account whatever. Neither 
is anything done by the body. A rite may be a symbol, and as such a means οὗ" 
grace; but St. Paul ead teaches that it has no magical efficacy. 2. Hcclesiastical 
position is in itself of no importance, Circumcision was the seal of membership in the 
Jewish Church. Yet it was nothing. We may be members of the strictest sect, or we 
may hold high rank in the most august Church. But before God this is just nothing. 
3. Doctrinal orthodoxy counts for nothing. Not that truth is unimportant. But the 
mere intellectual grasp of theological ideas leaves us where it finds us; and therefore if 
we go no further it is of no consequence whether those ideas are true or false. Con- 
versely, to dispense with rites, to be in no Church, or to be unorthodox, is no condem- 
nation. Neither, however, is it a merit, as some extravagant admirers of the idea of 
heresy strangely assert. If circumcision is not anything, neither is uncircumcision. 

11. Tue ong ΜΗΒΕΝΤΙΑΙ, 18 TO BECOME A NEW OREATURE. This great truth implies 
two others, 1. In religious matters the important question is as to what weare. It 
matters not what is done to us or what we hold. -All of importance is in our own life 


on. vi. 1—18.] THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 343 


and character. If we are not true and pure and self-sacrificing, if we have not the 
Spirit of Christ, all our orthodoxy, Church statua, and ritual observances are an empty 
mockery. If we are thus Christ-like, any further question is irrelevant. The sole 
essential is then safe. 2. In our sinful condition we are not like Christ, but are so 
radically unlike him as to need a complete, new creation before we can be in a right 
condition, The requisite change is so thorough that no ordinary religious influences 
will accomplish it. Circumcision is nothing, because what we want is nothing less 
than the crucifixion and death of the whole old life and the creation of an entirely new’ 
15, When this change has been accomplished, however, it is the evidence of its own 
sufficiency. It is impertinent to raise little questions of rites, etc, when the new man 
bears in each lineament.of his countenance, in the very tone of his conversation, and in 
the bearing of his whole life, the princely character of a son of God. 

Ill. THe ΟἨΒΙΒΤΊΑΝ 18 A NEW OREATURE IN CuRist. What circumcision symbo- 
lizes faith effects (ch. v. 6). “ΒΥ their fruits ye shall know them.” The gospel of 
faith proves its claims by the results that it works. Nothing else can make men new 
creatures. The gospel can do this. For those, then, who are still in the old life of sin 

“here is a warning and an sncouragement. 1. A warning. Renewal is necessary. 
2. An encouragement. Renewal is possible. No painful rites have to be observed, no 
difficult doctrines comprehended, no strict Church entered. All that is wanted is 
union with Christ in faith. The way is simple and clear; it is not easy and painless, 
ie " ᾿ by being crucified with Christ. But it issues in a glorious new life— 


Ver. 16.—* The Israel of God.” To one who enters into the ideas taught by St. 
Paul, the anxiety of some persons in the present day to discover that the English are 
descended from the lost ten tribes of Israel is altogether mistaken. Even if they could 
τ their very improbable theory, it would have nothing but an ethnological, or at 

st a sentimental, interest. Religiously it is not of the slightest importance. All 
Christians, whatever their birth and descent, are the true Israel of God. Look at somo 
of the marks of Israel upon the Christian. 

I, ABRaHAM’s SEED. The Jew traced his pedigree back to Abraham. He was Abra- 
ham/’s seed, Therefore he accounted himself the heir of the promises made to Abraham. 
The Christian possesses Abraham’s faith. By means of this he becomes Abraham’s seed 
(ch, iii. 29), while the Jew who lacks faith is disowned. 

IL PossessiIna THE ORAOLES OF Gop. St. Paul reckons as the first advantage of 
the Jews “that they were entrusted with the oracles of God” (Rom. iii. 2). The 
Hebrew race had the unspeakable privilege of receiving through their inspired teachers 
the highest revelation of God vouchsafed to the world for many ages. But there came 
a later revelation outshining this old revelation in clearness and glory. The Jew 
rejected this. The Christian accepted it. The Christian holds the New Testament, 
and he has Christ, God’s brightest mhanifestation of himself. Thus he steps into the 
position held by ancient Israel. 

Il. ΒΕΡΑΒΑΤΊΟΝ FROM THE WoRLD. The Jew was called out from the world to 
live apart 88. ἃ lonely race with a peculiar destiny of its own. Christians are thus 
called out of life into the world. ‘they are made to live as pilgrims and strangers, as 
sojourners with God. : 

IV. A MISSION TO-THE WoRLD. Israel did not always understand her mission, and 
often grossly neglected it in proud exclusiveness. Yet many of the prophets saw 
clearly that the chosen people were called from among the nations that they might be 
trained to give to the world the highest blessings, They did this, but only through 
giving it Christianity. Now, Christians are an elect people—elect to be missionaries 
and apostles to the people that sit in darkness, 

V. A rurune HERITags. The Hebrew in the wilderness looked for a promised 
land. Abraham and the patriarchs had hoped for “a city which hath foundations, 
whose Builder and Maker is God.” The perfect fulfilment of these hopes was not given 
to the Jew on earth. It is for the Christian hereafter; for “there remaineth therefore 
a sabbath rest for the people of God” (Heb. iv. 9).—W. Ε΄ A. 


Ver. 17.—The stigmata, 1, THe APosTLe 18 THE BEEVANT oF CuRIst, The stig 


344 THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. (cH. vz. 1—18. 


mata are the brands, the name of the master burnt on the slave. The most honoured 
of the apostles regards himself as the branded servant of Christ. To no higher honour 
ean any Christian aspire. Christianity is living, not for self, but for Christ, Wo must 
all understand that Christ stands to us in the relation of a Master. Our part is to 
submit to his will. The supreme and peculiar Christian duty is obedience to Christ 
(John xiv. 21). 

IL THE TRUE sURVANT OF CHRIST BEARS THE MARK oF HIS MasTeR. St. Paul 
bore on his body the scars of the sufferings he had endured in the service of Christ. 
These plainly marked him as Christ’s. Christians must all bear indications of Christ 
on their lives. It may be granted that St. Francis was none the better for having the 
wound-marks as of the nails of the cross in his hands and feet. Yet this strange con- 
dition was the last proof of his passionate identification of himself with Ohrist in 
thought and will and aff-ction. So the Christian must ever have the Name of Jesus 
upon him in the Christ-likeness of his life. It is useless to have it merely on the 
tongue; it must be on the body, ¢.e. on the life. 

LL Tue marks oF CuRisT COME THROUGH SUFFERING For Carist. Thus St. Paul 
received his. They were brands burnt in by fiery trials. Suffering for Christ proves 
our fidelity to him and brings out our Christ-likeness of character. They who are 
like the rocky soil and receive the Word with joy, but cannot withstand persecution, 
may sing of the sweetness of the Name of Jesus in sentimental hymns; but they have 
no such Name branded on their persons. After all their enthusiasm has evaporated, we 
see nothing but self left. The Christian must deny himself for Christ. His life may 
not be so hard as St. Paul’s. Rarely has such hardship been known as the great 
apostle endured; rarely have the brands been burnt so deep with such cruel fires. Yet 
all must have an experience that is similar in kind, though perhaps far less in degree, 
The sufferer, however, may console himself with the thought that the more fiery the 
trial he endures for Christ becomes, the deeper will be the sacred marks of the Name of 
Jesus upon him. For nothing makes us so Christ-like and nothing binds us so near to 
Christ as patient suffering and toil for his sake. This suggests the fear that it is no 
easy thing to be a Christian. Certainly to be a true Christian such as St. Paul was is 
not easy; it is the depth of self-renunciation and the height of arduous fidelity. Count 
the cost, then. Look at the irons ready to brand the Name of Jesus before consenting 
to become his servant. But look also on the other side, at what he suffered for us 
and at the glory of his service. 

IV. THE BRANDS OF SERVICE SHOULD BE THE SECURITY OF THE SERVANT OF CHRIST. 
With such marks upon him, how dare any man trouble the apostle by questioning hia 
authority ? Suffering for Christ should be a confirmation of our faith to others. It 
should also be a eecurity avainst the danger of unfaithfulness. How can he who bears 
the Name of Jesus thus conspicuously burnt in by hard trial and long service forsake 
his Master? Such brands should be eternal.—W. F. A, 


HOMILELICAL INDEX 


ΤῸ 


THE EPISTLE OF 


ST. PAUL TO THE GALATIANS. 


CHAPTER L 


‘THERE 
The Inspired Authority of the Apostle 
The Apostle’s Companions in the 
Gospel oe wos 
The Churches of Galacia ute 
The Apostolic Benediction οὖν 
The Sum and Substance of the Epistle 
The Sad Defection of the Galatians 
The True Character of the Perverters 
The Apostle’s Anathemas 
The Apostle’s Explanation of his 86. 
verity ves 
The True Origin of the Apostle 8 
Gospel τοῦ as 
A Retrospect of his — asa Jew 
After his Conversion he took no 
Counsel with Men as to his Doctrine 
or Career ie 
Proofs of his Entirely Thdependent 
Course after Conversion 
The Gospel of Self-Sacrifice toe 
Paul’s Intolerance of any other 
Gospel Ss 
Paul’s Personal Grasp of (ha Gospel 
Introduction ea 
Occasion of the Epistle 
Position oes 
Apostolic Authority coe 
Christ's Sacrifice for our Deliverance 
GALATIANS. 


ory 


THEME 
The Duty of Intolerance 


The Destiny, Call, and Mission of 

St. Paul ai vee eee 

God glorified in Man eee ooo 
CHAPTER IL 


The Battle of Christian Liberty 
fought over the Case of Titus 
The Apostle takes Counsel with the 
other Apostles on perfectly ἜΣ 
Terms ss eee 
The Claims of the Poor Saints - in 
Jerusalem P 
The Apostle’s Rebuke of “Pater δὲ 
Antioch see 
The True Way of Salvation 
An Objection met sn 
Fellowship with Christ in his Death 
and in his Life ase 
The Nature and Conditions of Chris- 
tian Life ee 
No Frustration of Divina Grace in 
the Apostle’s Teaching 
The Apostolic Conference eee 
The Apostolic Strife at Antioch ... 
The Death of Legal Hope the Life of 
Evangelical Obedience eos 
Period of Third Visit to Jerusalem ... 
Withstanding of Peter at Antioch .., 


Za 


92 


Hi INDEX. 
THEME PAGE THEME PAGH 
Diversities of Administrations 4. 112 | The Tutor ose ove ww. 177 
A Bold Rebuke ... a es 113 | Sonship we ove “- 118 
Justification by Faith ... oo. 3214 
Dying to Law and living to God... 115 CHAPTER IV. 
Crucified with Christ as «+ 115 | The Charoh of God in its Minority... 210 
Grace frustrated we «+ 116 | Phe Fulness of Time with its Blees- 
ings ... we O31 
The Evidence of Boustip oes ve «212 
ORS ETE TE An Appeal to the Gentile Christians 218 
Beginning of the Polemic Part of the A Protest against Relapse we 213 
Epistle 147 | The Observance of Days ... 218 
The Apostle’s First Αὐδανιδπε in this The Apostle’s Apprehensions for his 
Controversy 148 Converts vee 214 
Second Argumeut—the Case of Arte An Affectionate Call to Liberty “211 
ham .. τ 149 | A Retrospect with its Lessons we «215 
Third Aveneibal—Ahe ΠΝ οἵ the The Tactics of the False Teachers ... 216 
Law ... ταῦ sda ... 150 | A Tender Appeal to his Converta ... 216 
Fourth Argument —the Inconsistency An Appeal to Bible History 216 
of Law and Faith 151 | Allegorized Interpretation of the 
Fifth Argument—our Salvation is by Facts a wn we 247 
Christ made Curse for us 151 | Conclusion of the whole Matter ... 218 
A New Line of Argument— the Rela Majority through the Gospel ve 218 
tion between the Covenant and The Return of the Legal Spirit .., 219 
the Law ws 152 | The Appeal of the Suffering Apostle 221 
The Contents of 186 Covenant ead The Children of the Bondwoman and 
the Parties to it ἐὰν 152 _ofthe Free... ie woe 222 
The Irreversibleness of the Covenant Majority and Minority wee .“.. 223 
by the Law... e-- 152 | Personal Appeal ... ove wee 229 
The Use and Nature of the Law 153 | Allegory of Hagar and Sarah ... 291 
The Law designed to be Subservient The Advent in Redemption woe 232 
to the Promise wa «» 154 | “Abba, Father’... eee eo 233 
The Blessing of Adoption 155 | The Son and the Slave see .“.. 294 
The Import and Obligations of Hep: “Beggarly Rudiments” ... ee 2504 
tism vee +. 155 | Observing Seasons τὴς we 285 
The Unity of Βοϊϊονοσα ove + 156 | Labour bestowed in Vain ... we 236 
The Heirs ie eve e. 157 | A Friend mistaken for an Fuemy .. 237 
The Bewitchery of Law +. +. 157 | The Allegory of Hagar... vue 237 
The Covenant of Promise 108 
The Law-School and the Home- 
Coming 159 CHAPTER V. 
Appeal to Hxpaxtence mci Boxiptone 160 | The Importance of Standing by 
Promise and Law bee we 164 Christian Liberty : ὡς 260 
Before and after Faith .. ee 166 | A Solemn and Emphatic Waraltig ve 266 
Bewitched «ἂν eee ee 172 | The Obligations involved in Circum- 
Going back ἦν dea 173 cision Nae 267 
The Faith and Blessing of ‘Arata 173 | The Logical Results of the Thdatatin 
The Curse of the Law and the Curse Position “ets .. 267 
of the Cross... “ 174} The Blessed Prospects involved in 
The Everlasting Gavensnt. wee 176 the True Doctrine of Grace . 267 
The Object of the Law... +. 175 | The Essential Principle of Bible 
Direct Communication with God ... 176 Christianity .., aia 268 


INDEX. mt 
rSENB ῬΔΟΝ 
The Sudden Swerve of the Galatians Thins CHAPTER VI. rxce 
from the Truth sie +» 269 | Restoration of a Fallen Brother 816, 327 
The Apostle’s Sanguine Hopes of The Bearing of Others’ Burdens 317 
Galatian Recovery see w 2701 A Warning against Self-Deceit ... 318 
A False Imputation repelled vo 270 | The Necessity of Testing our Work 318 
A Fierce Stroke of Apostolic Our own Individual Burden ee (319 
Trony o.. wee eee oe 271 | The Duty of Supporting the Ministry 319 
The Meaning of Christian Liberty 271 The ‘Two. Sowings and the Two 
The Spirit of the Law ove 272 Reapings wg 819 
The Evil Effects of Heresy 272 | Encouragement to Perseverance in 
The Life and Warfare of the Spirit Well-Doing ... oO ve. 820 
in the Soul -... hay .. 273 | The Sphere of Beneficence oe 82] 
Classification of the Works of the A Personal Postscript ay ve 8.22 
Flesh eas ea « 274 | Exposure of the Tactics of hig Ad- 
“The Fruit of the Spirit” 274, 293 versaries τὰς 822 
The Distinguishing Feature of Chris- The Trae Ground of 186. “ Apastle’s 
tianity ay wee «275 Glorying asl vee B22 
The Consistency of the. ‘Ghtistian The Fandamental Fact in n Obiistiaa 
Life ww. 276 | Life ... is es we 823 
No Departure silewed eon ‘be Spiri. The Apostolio Blessing ... vee 823 
tual Standard ... eve ve 276 | An Apostle pleading for Forbearance 824 
Falling from Grace tee ve 270 | His Parting Word ese ve 324 
The Liberty of Love ave . 277 | The Restoration of the Erring 824, 338 
Christian Progress realized through The Seed-Time of Philanthropy ... 325 
Antagonism ... to .» 278 | Glorying in the Cross oo ew 826 
Circumcision ss see vw. 279 | Well-Doing ove eon ae 882 
Freedom sustained by the Spirit ,.. 284 | Parting Words ... eee ve 336 
Christian Freedom “. 288 | The Law of Christ tee Ὁ“. 888 
The Hope of Risbiacanden eee 289 | The Self-Deception of Self-Conce't 839 
Faith working through Love ... 289 | Sowing and Reaping a w. 840 
Hindered ees vee se 290 | Weariness in Well-Doing ,,, ων. 841 
Leaven tie ἡρᾷ es 291 | The Cross of Christ we ve 841 
Liberty and not Licence ss. we 291 | “A New Creature” sa ve 812 
Walking by the Spirit .. 1 292 | “The Israel of God” a we 843 
Tha Two Selves oss oe eo 292 | The Stigmata ox eee eo 343 


THE 


PULPIT COMMENTARY, 


EDITED BY THE 


REY. CANON ἢ. ἢ. M. SPENCE, M.A, 


vit & AND RURAL DEAN OF ST. PANCRAS, AND EXAMINING CHAPLAIN TO THE LOBD 
BISHOP OF GLOUCESTER AND BRISTOL } 


AND BY THE 


REV. JOSEPH ὃ. EXELL, M.A. 


HPHEHESIANS. 


Exposition and fjomilctics: 
By REV. PROFESSOR W. G. BLAIKIE, D.D. 


Homilies by Darions Authors: 


\EV. Ὁ. THOMAS, D.D., REV. W. F. ADENEY, M.A, 
LEV. PROF. T. CROSKERY, D.D., REV. R. M. EDGAR, ΜΑΑ., 
REV. R. FINLAYSON, B.A. 


FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY 
New Yor« anp TORONTO, 


THE EPISTLE OF 


PAUL TO THE EPHESIANS. 


hen 


INTRODUCTION. 


ἜΡΟΝ 
I. By wHom written. 


Tit, the days of De Wette, who was followed by Baur and Schwegler, Dr. 
Samuel Davidson, and some others, it was never doubted that the Epistle 
to the Ephesians was written by St. Paul. This had been all along the 
uniform tradition of the Church. The external evidence in his favour is 
about as strong as the case admits of. The list of early writers who are 
believed to attest this includes Ignatius, Polycarp, Marcion, Valentinus, 
Trenswus, Clemens Alexandrinus, Tertullian, and the author of the Mura- 
torian Canon, and thereafter the Hpistle is constantly included among the 
Pauline writings. It is not alleged that there is the faintest external 
evidence in favour of any other writer. 

It is solely on internal grounds that the anti-Paulinists base their opinion. 
1. Generally, it is alleged that the Epistle is a somewhat wordy repetition 
of that to the Colossians, and that so fresh and vigorous a mind as that. 
of the apostle would not have been likely to repeat itself in such a way. 
2. There are expressions that seem to show that the writer had never been 
at Ephesus; e.g. ch. i. 15, he has heard of the faith, etc., of the Ephesians; 
ch. iii, 2, 8, the Ephesians may have heard of the commission given to 
him; ch. iv. 21, “If so be ye have heard him.” Such expressions seem 
to show uncertainty as to their position and knowledge. 3. There are no 
salutations to the members of the Church at Ephesus, as we should certainly 
have looked for, considering how long St. Paul was there (Acts xx. 31). 
4. The Church at Ephesus consisted of both Jews and Gentiles (Acts xix. 
8—10, 17); but the Epistle is addressed wholly to Gentiles, and rests 
mainly on the fact that privileges of equal value had been brought to them 
by the instrumentality of the apostle. 5. Many things in style, sentiment, 
and aim are not Pauline. 

The hypothesis as to the authorship which those who hold these views have 

EPHESIANS, ὃ 


ἢ INTRODUCTION TO 


adopted is that some worthy ‘man, residing at Rome, wishing to do good to 
the Ephesians, or perhaps to a cluster of Churches of which that at Ephesus 
was one, wrote this Epistle, and, in order to obtain acceptance for it, issued 
it in the name of Paul; nor was this an absolute fabrication, for, as it 
consists to a large extent of the views of Paul as expressed in the Epistle 
to the Colossians, it really is in substance Pauline. People were not very 
critical in those days; they received it as genuine, and ever after it passed 
as such, The date at which it is supposed to have been written is various; 
De Wette assigns it to the apostolic age; Schwegler and Baur give it the 
same date as that of the fourth Gospel—the middle of the second century ; 
but Davidson is compelled to place it between a.p. 70 and 80. 

In this hypothesis, the error is committed, so common with critics of the 
new light, of removing one set of difficulties by creating much greater. 
The difficulties of the new view are both moral and intellectual. Morally, 
there is the very serious difficulty of giving, as author of the Epistle, the 
name of one who was not its author. The guilt of this is aggravated by 
the way in which the writer’s claim to be listened to is set forth, “ Paul, 
an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God,” and by the fact that all 
writings that were really apostolic carried to the Church supernatural autho- 
rity. The real writer assumes Panl’s name; he not only trifles with the 
apostle, but with the Divine authority which all true apostles enjoyed. 
Intellectnally, the hypothesis has this difficulty—it maintains that Paul 
could not have been the author, yet that, from the very beginning, the 
Church accepted him as the author. The writer makes it plain that he was 
never at Ephesus, but the blind Ephesians received the letter as from Paul, 
who had been three years there. The style, the sentiment, the aim, are not 
Pauline, yet they were accepted as such. The writer was so careless that 
he did not take the trouble to avoid expressions that could not have been 
written by Paul; and the recipients were so stupid that, in spite of these 
things, they accepted it as his. An hypothesis so clumsy and hanging so ill 
together refutes itself. 

The objections referred to, though attended with considerable difficulty, 
are not at all conclusive. The very principle of the De Wette hypothesis, 
that the Epistle was passed off and accepted as Pauline, may show that 
it cannot contain anything obviously un-Pauline. It is true that many 
topics are the same as those handled in Colossians; but the matters peculiar 
to Ephesians are very remarkable (e.g. the statement of salvation by grace, 
ch. ii.; the prayer for the Ephesians, ch. iii.; the Christian panoply, ch. vi.). 
Every devout reader feels that the parts peculiar to the Ephesians contain 
some of the finest of the wheat; and though repetitions are not usual with 
the apostle, there is no reason why he, like any other letter-writer, should 
not have repeated to the Ephesians what he had written to another Church, 
if their circumstances required a similar communication. 

The objections which we have marked 2, 3, 4, do certainly cause a feeling 
of surprise. We should certainly have expected the apostle to refer to his 


THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. iii 


personal intercourse with the Hphesians, and to send salutations to some 
of them, especially the elders he had met at Miletus; and we should not 
have expected the Epistle to be written so preponderatiugly to Gentiles. 
But, in point of fact, in many of his Epistles the apostle sends no personal 
greetings; to do so was by no means his universal habit. Besides, as the 
Epistle was sent by Tychicus, a personal friend in whom he had great 
confidence, the greetings might be conveyed orally by him. We find, too, 
that in his Epistle to Philemon, who was one of his own converts, he uses 
that very expression, “hearing of thy faith and love,” which in Ephesians 
is said to prove that the writer had never been at Ephesus. And as for the 
composition of the Ephesian Church, there are several incidents which show 
that, from the Jews, there came for the most part only bitter oppositior 
(Acts xix. 9, 18, 14; xx. 19); so that the great majority of the Church, 
which was a very numerous one, must have been Gentiles. In fact, the 
shrine-makers for Diana would have had no cause for fear if it had not. 
been for the multitude of pagans whom Paul was persuading to abandon 
the old religion. Moreover, in our everyday life, we are ever finding 
things that are mysterious to us when our information is imperfect, but that 
become plain and simple when some missing link of explanation is supplied. 
It is certain that the early Church did not see in the features of the 
Epistle now adverted to any reason for doubting that Paul was the author. 
As to the allegation that the style, tone, and sentiment are in many 
respects not Pauline, no weight is to be attached to it. To trace salvation 
to grace as its fountain; to magnify the glory of the Lord Jesus Christ; to 
proclaim the freedom of the new dispensation; to interlace doctrine and 
duty in the web of exhortation; to sound the military trumpet, as it were 
and stimulate his readers to intrepid action in the service of Christ ;—what 
were more eminently Pauline objects than these? and where are they more 
characteristically promoted than in this very writing ? 

A conjecture has been adopted by some writers that this Epistle was not 
addressed to Ephesus only, but was a kind of circular letter, sent first to 
Ephesus, but afterwards to various neighbouring Churches. On this hypo- 
thesis it has been held that an explanation may be given of those things 
which create a feeling of surprise. To this hypothesis we shall have to 
advert further on. 

The Epistle bears throughout to have been written by Paul, and, as 
he speaks in several places in the character of “a prisoner of the Lord,” 
it appears that he was a captive at the time. There were two places where 
he suffered captivity—Cesarea and Rome. The reference to Tychicus, the 
bearer of the letter for the Colossians as well as of this one for the 
Ephesians, and other allusions, make it probable that he was at Rome when 
he wrote this letter. It is usually thought that the Epistle to the Ephe- 
sians was written shortly after that to the Colossians, while both were 
despatched together, and that their date is a.p. 62. No one could have 
inferred from the tone of the letters that at the time the writer waa 


\v INTRODUCTION TO 


confined in bonds, Anything more bright, cheerful, and even exulting than 
the tone of the letter to the Ephesians can hardly be conceived. No doubt 
some critics would say that this showed that the letter could not have been 
written in such circumstances. But negative critics are never more at sea 
than in estimating spiritual forces. The triumphant tone of the letter is 
no proof that the writer was not in prison, but it is a signal proof that 
his Master had kept his word to him, “ Lo, Iam with you alway, even to 
the end of the world.” 


IL To whom writrex, 


The words of the first verse (as it is in our text), ἐν ᾿Ε φέσῳ, sufficiently 
show the destination of the Epistle; but the authenticity of these words has 
been disputed. Basil the Great received the Epistle as addressed to the 
Ephesians, but quoted and commented on ver. 1 so as to show that é 
"Ἐφέσῳ was not in the manuscripts he used, at least not in those of early 
date. In the Codex Vaticanus and the Codex Sinaiticus the words are 
written by a later hand. Marcion appears to have called it Paul’s Epistle 
to the Laodiceans, and quoted ch. iv, 5, 6 as from that Epistle. But 
the liberties taken by Marcion with the canon and canonical books show 
that but little weight is to be attached to him, Undoubtedly a difference 
was introduced in the manuscripts at an early date. It is not easy to 
decide whether the words were omitted in some manuscripts from the 
original text, or whether they were inserted in other manuscripts where 
the text had them not. 

By some it has been thought that the Epistle was originally addressed to 
the Laodiceans, and that it is therefore the writing referred to in Col. iv. 16. 
Bleek favours this view, while he holds that the letter may have been an 
open one, intended for Laodicea in the first instance, but for other places 
near Laodicea that were even less known to the apostle personally. In 
opposition to this view, it is to be remarked that in no manuscript are the 
words ἐν Λαοκιδείᾳ to be found in place of ἐν Ἐφέσῳ, and, moreover, the 
letter referred to in Colossians is not ἃ letter fo the Laodiceans, but an 
Epistle from Laodicea, What that Epistle was is unknown, and can be 
only matter of conjecture. 

Another supposition, as we have already said, is, that while this letter 
was addressed to the Ephesians in the first instance, it was not meant for 
them alone. It is supposed that there were other Churches in much the 
same condition as that of Ephesus, and that the Epistle was intended as 
an encyclical letter, to go the round of them all. This might in some 
degree account for the absence of familiar salutations, and for other 
features that might have reasonably been looked for in a letter to the 
Ephesians. On the other hand, and in opposition to this hypothesis, there 
is nothing to indicate that the letter was meant for a variety of Churches. 
There is throughout an assumption of the unity of the Church, the letter 


THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. g 


is addressed apparently to one sect of people, whose spiritual history had 
been marked by the same features. 

To get over the difficulty arising from the absence of all personal 
references, and other difficulties, some have thought that Ephcsus was not 
included among the places to which the letter was addressed; but fresh 
difficulties arise with this supposition: it makes it impossible to account 
for the words ἐν Edéow occurring so generally, and for the universal tradi- 
tion that the letter was addressed to that Church. Nor is it easy to 
conceive that Paul should write to a circle of Churches adjacent to the city 
where he spent three years, and say nothing to the Christians in that city. 

On the whole, taking both external and internal evidence into account, 
there seems to be no reason for giving up the traditional view that the 
Epistle was addressed to the Ephesians. It is not a question that admits 
of demonstration, but the difficulties attending this view are less than 
those attending any other. Even if it were a perfectly open question, if 
Ephesus were not now in possession, we should say that it had the best 
claim; certainly nothing has been advanced to show that that claim ought 
to be surrendered in favour of any other. 


ITI. Eeuesus anp its Cuurce. 


Ephesus was an important city, situated at the mouth of the river Cayster, 
near the middle of the western coast of the peninsula of Asia Minor. The 
term “ Asia,” however, was in those times confined to the Roman province in 
the west of the peninsula, of which Ephesus had become the capital nearly 
two hundred years before it was visited by Paul. Its inhabitants were half 
Greek, half Asiatic, and their religion and superstitions were a compound 
of the East and the West. Diana, or Artemis, a goddess of the West, was 
the chief object of worship; but the style of her worship had in it much 
of Oriental mystery and munificence. The temple of Diana was renowned 
as one of the seven wonders of the world. It had been two hundred and 
twenty years building; its roof was supported by one hundred and twenty- 
six columns, each sixty feet high, the gifts of as many kings. The image 
of Diana, said to have fallen from heaven, was of wood, forming a striking 
contrast to the magnificence around. Ephesus was notorious for its luxury 
and licentiousness. Sorcery or magic, an importation from the West, was 
exceedingly common. The E¢éora γράμματα were a celebrated charm, which 
continned to be used more or less till the sixth century, a. Ephesus 
was a great and busy centre of commerce; “it was the highway into Asia 
from Rome; its ships traded with the ports of Greece, Egypt, and the 
Levant; and the Ionian cities poured their inquisitive population into it 
at its great annual festival in honour of Diana.” It is known from Josephus 
that Jews were established there in considerable numbers; it is the only 
place where we read of disciples of John the Baptist being found, and 
retaining that designation; while the case of Apollos coming to it from 


vi INTRODUCTION TO 


Alexandria, and that of Aquila and Priscilla from Rome and Corinth, show 
that it held ready intercourse with the rest of the world. 

The apostle paid his first visit to Ephesus in his second mission tour 
(Acts xviii. 19—21), but it was very short; in his third tour he returned 
and remained two years and three months. The unusual length of time 
spent by him in the city shows the importance he attached to the place 
and the measure of encouragement he received. His labours were very 
assiduous, for he visited “from house to house,” and “ ceased not to warn 
every one of them day and night with tears” (Acts xx. 20, 31). The 
opposition he met with was correspondingly great. He writes to the 
Corinthians that he had fought with beasts at Ephesus, and the tumult 
that occurred at the instigation of the silversmiths connected with the 
temple of Diana, where he was assailed ever so long with brute force and 
insensate yelling, justified the expression. At first, the opposition was 
chiefly from the Jews; latterly from the pagans too. On his last recorded 
journey to Jerusalem he sailed by Ephesus, and summoned the elders of 
the Church to meet him at Miletus, where he delivered a solemn charge to 
them to continue their work with fidelity and diligence He laboured 
under a great dread of unfaithful teachers arising from among them, and 
heartless plunderers falling on them from without, that for selfish ends 
would make havoc of the Church. The anxiety which the apostle had about 
the Ephesian Church seems to have led him to place Timothy in a peculiar 
relation to it. There is no mention of Timothy having been ordained to 
any special office at Ephesus, but he is called to “do the work of an evan- 
gelist” (2 Tim. iv. 5). Theapostle speaks of him more as his assistant and 
personal friend than as sustaining an independent and permanent office in 
the Church (1 Tim. i. 3, 18; iii. 14, 15; iv.6; 2 Tim. iv. 9, 13,21). It 
has always been the tradition of the Church that the Apostle John spent 
the last part of his life at Ephesus, although very recently this has been 
questioned by Keim, who holds that the John who laboured at Ephesus was 
not the apostle, but another John. This view, however, has obtained little 
support. 

At Ephesus, Paul was helped by Aquila and Priscilla, and by Apollos, 
and he likewise enjoyed a special manifestation of supernatural power, for 
many miracles were wrought by him. The first scene of his preaching 
labours was the synagogue; but his reception there was so unfavourable that 
he had to leave it, and then he reasoned daily in the school of one Tyrannus. 
His success among the Gentiles was much greater than among the Jews. 
The power of the Word of God was so great that it, even subdued those 
who had become rich by lucrative sin. The power given to Paul to cast 
out evil spirits was so manifestly above any that they possessed, that many 
exorcists and persons who practised magical arts became converts to Christ, 
and gave proof of their sincerity by burning their books and abandoning 
for ever a business which may have enriched them for this world, but 
would have ruined their souls. 


THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, vii 


The sovereignty of Divine grace was shown in the wide difference between 
the conduct of the believers and that of the men who feared that the gospel 
was going to dry up the sources of their wealth, and raised the tumult that 

-led to the expulsion of the apostle. Those who were led by a Divine hand 
surrendered everything for Christ; those who followed the impulse of 
their own hearts would have crucified the Son of God afresh rather than 
given up their gains, A Church that had surrendered so much for Christ 
could not but be very dear to the apostle. It may be said that we do not 
find in the Epistle any special allusion to this sacrifice. But neither does 
any such allusion occur in the address to the elders at Miletus nor in the 
Epistles to Timothy. Possibly the form of expression in ch. iii. 8, “the 
unsearchable riches of Christ,” may have been suggested by the fact that, 
for his sake, many Ephesians had given up the riches of this world. But 
both in the Epistle to the Ephesians and in those to Timothy the mind of 
the apostle seems to have passed from the minuter features of the indi- 
vidual character and life to those broad manifestations of corruption, on 
the one hand, that marked their unregenerate life, and those precious fruits 
of Divine grace, on the other, that thereafter began to adorn their character. 
The anxieties he had about the Ephesian Church arose from a restlessness 
and selfishness of which doubtless he saw many evidences. It seems to 
have been a strongly emotional Church—distinguished for the warmth of 
its first love (Rev. ii. 4). Where there is not a strong backbone of con- 
scientious fidelity to truth and submission to law, Churches of the emotional 
type are very liable to degenerate; hence the anxiety of the apostle, and 
hence those forebodings of coming declension that, in one point at least, 
were verified before the close of the century (Rev. ii. 1—7). 


IV. ὌΡΘΙΟΝ anp Score or THe Epistie. 


No specific object occupies the apostle’s attention in this Epistle, as in 
those, for instance, to the Galatians and the Colossians. His design is a 
general one—to confirm, animate, and elevate. By God’s blessing on his 
labours while he was among them, they had started aright on the Christian 
course; he now desires to give them a fresh impulse in the same direction. 
The evils of which he had warned the elders at Miletus had not yet begun 
to break out; against these, therefore, he does not require to sound the 
trumpet anew. At the moment of his writing there was little to correct 
either in doctrine or in practice, and there was little to disturb the serenity 
of the apostle’s mind in the contemplation of their state. The atmosphere 
of this Epistle is thus very calm, and the sky bright and sunny. The 
apostle and his correspondents seem to walk together on the Delectable 
Mountains; they sit with Christ in heavenly places. We seem to hear the 
call and enjoy the scenery of the Song of Solomon: “ For, lo, the winter is 
past, the rain is over and gone; the flowers appear on the earth; the time 
of the singing of birds is come, and the voice of the turtle is heard in our 


vit INTRODUCTION TO 


land.” We are near the New Jerusalem, and the Lord is to us an everlast- 
ing light, and our God our glory. 

After the usual salutation, the apostle breaks out into a fervent thanks- 
giving on behalf of the Ephesians, for the Christian blessings now in their 
enjoyment, tracing these to their ultimate source, the good will of the Father 
who had placed their welfare on the securest possible footing, seeing he had 
chosen them. in Ohrist before the beginning of the world, and blessed them 
with all the blessings of the Spirit. From the beginning of the Epistle 
the several functions of the three Persons of the Trinity in redemption are 
recognized, and the medium or element in which all the blessings of redemp- 
tion are possessed and enjoyed by believers is made prominent—“ in Christ 
Jesus.” 

Then we have an earnest prayer for the spiritual growth of the Ephesians, 
and more especially for their growth through experience in their souls of 
that Divine power of which the nature and the measure were seen in the 
resarrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, and in his elevation to the 
position of Head over all things to the Church. The Church is declared to 
be Christ’s body, and, in subsequent parts of the Epistle, this figure is 
worked out in a practical way. 

The spiritual history of the Ephesians is then more fully and minutely 
dwelt on, in order to bring out the sovereignty and riches of the grace 
which they had experienced. From death they had been brought to a state 
of life; from wrath to acceptance; from lying spiritually in the grave te 
sitting with Christ in heavenly places; from moral distance to moral near- 
ness. No atom of this was due to themsolves,—it was all of grace; and one 
purpose why they had been so treated was that the riches of God’s graco 
might thereby be for ever revealed. Jew and Gentile were thus on an 
equal footing in the sight of God, and a great spiritual temple was in the 
course of being reared, in which Jew and Gentile would equally share, and 
which would, when completed, exemplify the fulness of blessing and the 
fulness of beauty of the new creation in Christ Jesus. 

The apostle then makes a digression to emphasize the goodness of God in 
placing Jew and Gentile on the same level, and he takes occasion to show 
the greatness of the privilege conferred on himself as the instrument that 
God chose to announce his goodness to the Gentiles. Having shown that 
the Gentiles had received a right to all the unsearchable riches of Christ, he 
proceeds to offer an earnest prayer to the effect that they might practically 
receive and enjoy a larger measure of these riches—a larger measure of 
blessing in their relation to each of the three Persons of the Godhead. 

Then begins, at ch. iv., the more practical part of the Epistle. Some 
principles have yet, however, to be laid down. The relation of believers to 
each other, and also their relation to Jesus Christ, are made the basis of 
encouragement and exhortation; Christ, as Head of the Church, treating 
his Church as one, has obtained for her and bestowed on her certain gifts 
with a view to edify all the members and advance them in the direction of 


THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. ix 


completeness. The office-bearers of the Church, whether temporary, like 
the apostles and prophets, or permanent, like pastors, teachers, and evange- 
lista, are gifts of Christ for this end. As such they are to be received and 
prized, and all members of the Chureh are to aim at growth in the direction 
of perfection. 

Coming closer to the region of character, the apostle contrasts the prin- 
ciples of Gentile character with those of the Christian, and on the latter urges 
that they should walk worthy of their vocation. Personal holiness and 
purity are urged under the figure of putting off the old man and putting on 
the new, and on the ground of the oneness of believers as one body, whose 
welfare all are bound to seek. The spirit of love and forbearance is specially 
urged by the consideration that in Christ our Father has forgiven us, 
and we all ought to be imitators of our Father. Another figure is then 
taken up—children of light, and similar exhortations are based on it to a 
holy life. ; 

The apostle proceeds to further exhortation based on the several social 
relations of Christians as husbands and wives, parents and children, 
masters and servants. Being united to Christ, and living in the element 
of union to him, their character in all these respects should be the very 
purest possible. 

Lastly, in the view of all the powers, earthly and spiritual, that were 
ranged against them and their souls, he exhorts them to put on the whole 
armour of God, and maintain a vigorous and fearless conflict with the forces 
of evil. And after a few words about himself, he closes with prayer and 
benediction, invoking peace and other blessings on the brethren of Ephesus, 
and grace on all who love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity. 

The Epistle is marked by a tone of great exuberance and spiritual eleva- 
-tion. The frequent occurrence of such expressions as “fulness,” “ riches,” 
“abounded,” “exceeding riches,” “riches of glory,” “exceeding abun- 
dantly,” and the like, shows that the writer was in the spirit of glowing 
satisfaction and delight at the thought of God’s provision for the wants of 
sinners. The three Persons of the blessed Trinity are ever present, in 
the various functions which they fulfil in the economy of Godhead. The 
foundations of the believer’s security and blessedness are laid deep in the 
eternal counsels of God. The believer is not viewed merely as an indivi- 
dual, but also, and very specially, in his relation to the Church, both to its 
Head, Jesus Christ, and also to its members. The moral counsels of the 
Epistle are searching and salutary. The standard of Christian privilege is 
very high, but so also is the standard of Christian character. The great 
aim of the writer is to urge the Ephesians to aspire to the very highest 
reach of Christian attainment, and thus bring the greatest revenue of 
glory to their God and Saviour. 

No part of Scripture presents ina more striking light the riches of the 
grace of God, or furnishes his people with stronger inducements to walk 
worthy of the vocation wherewith they are called. 


THE EPISTLE OF 


PAUL TO THE EPHESIANS. 


EXPOSITION, 


CHAPTER L 


Vers. 1, 2.—Appress AND SALUTATION, 
Ver. 1.—Paul an apostle of Christ Jesus. 
Paul’s one but all-sufficient claim on the 
- Ephesians is his relation to Christ: he is 
Christ’s apostle, not only as sent forth by 
him, but also as belonging to him; else- 
where his servant or bondman. He makes 
no claim to their attention on the ground of 
his great experience in the gospel, his pro- 
found study of it, or even his gifts, but 
rests simply on his being Christ’s apostle; 
thus recognizing Christ as the only Head of 
the Church, and source of authority therein. 
By the will of God. The First Person of the 
Trinity, the Fountain of Godhead, has not 
only devised the whole scheme of mercy, 
but has likewise planned the subordinate 
arrangements by which it is carried out; 
thus it was by his will that Paul held the 
office of an apostle of Christ (see Gal. i. 1; 
Acts xxvi. 7; Gal. i. 11,12). His authority 
and his dignity as an apostle are thus the 
highest that can be: “He that heareth you, 
heareth me.” To the saints that are at 
Ephesus, and the faithful in Christ Jesus. 
This designation is expanded in the verses 
that immediately follow. “Saints” means 
set apart for God, and, as thefresult thereof, 
persons pure and holy; “faithful” (πιστοῖς) 
is equivalent to “believers;” while ‘in 
Christ Jesus” denotes the Source of their 
life, the element in which they lived, the 
Vine into which they were grafted. Such 
persons were the heart and nucleus of the 
Church, though others might belong to it. 
In the fervour of his salutations here and 
elsewhere, Paul seems to see only the 
genuine spiritual members of the Church; 
though afterwards he may indicate that all 
are not such (see Phil. iii. 18). With regard 
to the elause, “that are at Ephesus,” see 
Introduction. 
EPHESIANS. 


Ver. 2.—Grace unto you and peace from 
God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. 
As in most of Paul’s Epistles, “grace” is 
virtually the first word and the last (ch. 
vi. 24), equivalent to free, undeserved mercy 
in all its manifold forms and manifestations. 
This Epistle is so full of the subject, that it 
has been called “The Epistle of Grace.” 
The apostle dwells more fully on it than 
even in the Epistle to the Romans, and 
with « more jubilant sense of its richness 
and sufficiency. Peace is conjoined with 
grace; they are like mother and daughter, 
or like twin sisters, Grace is the only 
foundation of true peace—whether peace 
with God, peace of conscience, rest and 
satisfaction of soul, or peace toward our 
f.llow-men. The source of grace and peace 
is “God our Father and the Lord Jesus 
Christ.” The two are always in apposition 
as the Source of blessing, never in opposi- 
tion. The notion is emitently unscriptural 
that the Father personally burned with 
anger until the Son rushed in to appease; 
both are in beautiful harmony in the scheme 
of grace. ‘God so loved the world, that he 
gave his only begotten Son,” etc. 

Vers. 3—14.—THANKSGIVING FOR THEIR 
Divine ORDINATION TO THE BLESSINGS OF 
Grace. In this glorious anthem. in which the 
apostle, tracing all to the Divine Fountain, 
enumerates the glorious privileges of the 
Church, and blesses God for them, he first 
(ver. 3) states summarily the ground of 
thanksgiving, expanding it with glowing 
fulness in vers. 4—14. 

Ver. 3.—Blessed be the God and Father of 
our Lord Jesus Christ, who hath blessed us 
with every blessing of the Spirit, in heavenly 
places in Christ. Here we have (1) the 
Author of our blessings; (2) their nature and 
sphere; (3) the Medium through whom we 
have them. 1. The Author is “the God and 
Father of our Lord Jesus one Jesus 


2 THE EPISTLE TO THE EVHIESIANS. 


(cu. 1. 1—23. 


called God his God and his Father (John xx. 
17) in virtue of the state of subjection to 
him in which, as the Sun of mun, he had 
voluntarily placed himself. In this aspect 
and relation to Christ, God is here thauked. 
because he hath blessed us in him. 2. 
Ἔν macy εὐλογὶᾳ πνευματικῇ : not merely 
spiritual as opposed to material, but as 
applied by the Holy Spirit, the office of the 
Third Person being to bring Divine things 
into actual contact with human souls—to 
apply to us the blessings purchased by 
Christ; which blessings are ἐν τοῖς ἐπου- 
paviors—in heavenly places. They belong to 
the heavenly kingdom; they are therefore 
the highest we can attain to. ‘The expression 
occurs three times, and with the same mean- 
ing. 8. Ἐν Χριστῷ. The Medium or Mediator 
through whom they come is Christ; they 
are not fruits of the mere natural bounty of 
God, but of his redeeming bounty—fruits of 
the mediatorial work of Jesus Christ. Thus, 
in this summary, we recognize what is 
eminently charucteristic of this Epistle— 
the doctrine of the Trinity, and the function 
of each Person in the work of redemption. 
No other writing of the New Testament is 
so pervaded with the doctrine of the ‘Trinity. 
The throe great topics of the Epistle will 
be found to be considered in relation to the 
three Persons of the ‘Trinity. Thus: 1. 
Origin and foundation of the Church, re- 
ferred to the eternal counsel and good 
pleasure of the Father. 2. The actual birth 
or existence of the Church with all its 
privileges, to the atoniny yrace and merit of 
the Son. 8. The transformation of the 
Church, the realization of its end or purpose, 
in its final holiness and vlory, to the sanctify- 
ing grace of the Holy Spirit. This throws 
light on the expression, “every blessing ;” 
it includes (1) all that the Father can 
bestow; (2) all that the Son can provide; 
(3) all that the Spirit can apply. The re- 
sources of all the three Persons thus conspire 
to bless the Church. In the verses that 
follow, the First Person is prominent in vers. 
4—6; the second ia introduced in vers. 
6—12; and the third in vers. 13,14. But 
all through the First Person is the great 
directing Power. 

Ver. 4.—Even as he chose us in him before 
the foundation of the world; literally, he 
chose us out, or selected us (ἐξελέξατο) for 
himself (middle voice). The Father chose 
the heirs of salvation, selected those who 
were to be quickened from the dead (ch. ii. 1) 
and saved. He chose them ὑπ Christ—in 
connection with his work and office as 
Mediator, giving them to him to be re- 
deemed (John xvii. 11, 12); not after man 
was created, nor after man had fallen, but 
“before the foundation of the wurld.” We 
are here face to face with a profound 


mystery. Before even the world was founded, 
maukind presented themselves to God as 
lost; the work of redemption was planned 
and its details arranzed from all eternity. 
Before such a mystery it becomes us to put 
the shoes from off our feet, and bow rever- 
ently before him whose “judgments are 
unsearchable and his ways past finding out.” 
That we should be holy and without blame 
before him in love. This is obviously the 
design of God’s electing act; εἶναι ἡμᾶς can- 
not denote the ground, but the purpose, of 
the choice. God did not choose some be- 
cause he foresaw their holiness, but in order 
that they might become “holy and without 
blame.” These two terms denote the posi- 
tive and negative sides of purity: holy— 
possessed of all the fruits of the Spirit 
(Gal. v. 22, 23); without blame, or blemish— 
marked by no stain or imperfection (see ch. 
v. 27). The terms do not denote justifica- 
tion, but a condition of sanctification which 
implies justification already bestowed, but 
goes beyond it; our justification is a step 
towards our complete final sanctification. 
This renewal being “before him,” must be 
such as to bear the scrutiny of his eye; 
thervfore not external or superficial merely, 
but reaching to the very heart and centre of 
our nature (1 Sam. xvi. 7). The expression 
further denotes how it is of the very nature 
and glory of the new life to be spent in 
God’s presence, our souls flourishing in the 
precious sunshine which ever beams out 
therefrom. For, when thus renewed, we do 
not fly from his presence like Adam (Gen. 
iii. 8), but delight in it (Ps. xlii. 1; ΧΗ]. 1). 
Fear is changed to love (1 John iv. 18) ; the 
loving relation between us and God is re- 
stored. It has been much disputed whether 
the words ἐν ἀγάπῃ ought to be construed 
with the fourth verse or with προορίσας in 
the fifth. The weight of authority seema 
in favour of the latter; but we prefer the 
construction which is given both in the 
Authorized and the Revised Version, first, 
because if ἐν ἀγάπῃ qualified προορίσας, it 
would come more naturally after it; and 
second, because the scope of the passage, 
the train of the apostle’s thought, seems to 
require us to keep ἐν ἀγάπῃ in ver.4. We 
never could come to be holy and without 
blemish before God unless the loving rela- 
tions between us were restored (comp. ch. 
iii. 17, “Rooted ond grounded in love”), 
The spirit of love, trust, admiration, direoted 
to God helps our complete sanctification— 
changes us into the same image (2 Cor, 
ili. 18). 

Ver. 5.—Having predestinated (or, fore- 
ordained) us to adoption throug), Jesus Christ 
unto himself. The same idea .s denoted by 
προορίσας in this verse and ἐξελέξατο in 
ver. 3, but while in ξελέξατι the idea of 


cu, τ, 1—23.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, 8 


selection out from among others is prominent, 
in mpoopicas the special phase of thought is 
that of the time, πρὸ, before—before the foun- 
dation of the world, Both denote the exercise 
of Divine sovereignty. In ver. 4 we have the 
ultimate purpose of God’s decree —the entire 
sanctification of the elect; here, in ver. 5, we 
find one of the intermediate steps of the pro- 
ceas—adoption. The apostle’s reason for 
speaking of adoption in this place, and of 
justification afterwards, is that he had just 
referred to the restoration of a relation of love 
between us and God as connected with our 
ultimate complete sanctification; thus it was 
natural for him to bring in our adoption as 
the preordained act in which this loving re- 
lation is formed. Our obedience is not the 
forced obedience of servants, but the loving 
obedience of ‘sons. “Adoption implies more 
than sentiment—a real legal relation to God 
as his sons (Rom. viii. 17). The adoption is 
“by Jesus Christ :” “As many as received 
him, to them gave he the right to become 
children of God” (John i. 12), And it is 
εἰς αὐτὸν, unto or into himself—denoting a 
movement towards God which terminates in 
union to him. According to the good plea- 
sure of his will. The spring or motive to 
the selection is solely in God, not in man. 
It is an act of sovereignty. It has been 
disputed whether “the good pleasure of his 
will” is equivalent to benevolentia or to 
bene placitum. Parallel passages like Matt. 
xi. 26 and Luke x. 21 lead us to prefer the 
latter. The idea of kindness is not excluded, 
but it is not what is affirmed. Kindness is 
always involved in the Divine will ; but the 
point here is simply that it pleased God to 
choose and ordain tle Ephesian believers 
to the privilege of adoption through Jesus 
Christ. This is presented as ἃ ground of 
praise, a reason for their blessing God. ‘The 
Divine sovereignty is not presented in Scrip- 
ture to seekers, but to finders. It is apt to 
embarrass those that seek; and accordingly 
the aspect of God’s character presented te 
them is his good will to men, his free offer of 
mercy; “Look unto me, and be ye saved ;” 
“ Him that cometh unto me I will in no wise 
cast out.” But it is a ground of thanksgiving 
to those who have accepted the offer; they see 
that before the foundation of the world God 
chose them in Christ. What an interest he 
must have had in them, and how thoroughly 
they may rely on his finishing the work he 
has begun! Divine sovereignty, human 
responsibility, and the free and universal 
offer of mercy are all found in Scripture, 
and, though we are unable to harmonize 
them by our logic, ought all to have a placa 
in our minds. ᾿ 
Ver. 6.—To the praise of the glory of his 
grace; with a view to praise being given 
to the glory of his grace. The purpose of 


grace quoad man, is to make him perfectly 
holy; quoud God, is to give to the uni- 
verse a right conception of his grace, and 
draw forth corresponding tributes of praise. 
It is to show that Divine grace is not a limp, 
shallow attribute, but one of glorious riches, 
deserving iufinitegpraise. The ilea of the 
richness, fulness, abundance, of God’s grace 
is prominent throughout the Epistle. God 
desires to draw attention, not only to this 
attribute, but to the boundlessness of it— 
thus to draw the love and confidence of his 
creatures to himself and inspire them with 
the desire to imitate him (comp. Matt. xviii. 
21—35). Wherein he abounded toward us 
in the Beloved. Two slight difficulties are 
found here—one in the text, the other in 
the interpretation. After χάριτος αὐτοῦ, 
some copies read ἐν 7, others js. A.V. follows 
the former; R.V. the latter. Χαριτόω usually 
means to bestow grace; sometimes, to make 
gracious or beautiful. The former is more 
in accordance with New Testument usage 
(Alford) and with the tenor of the passage. 
The glory of the grace of which God desires to 
create a true impression is not an abstraction, 
not a glory hidden away in some inaccessible 


-region, buta revealed glory, a communicated 


glory ; it is revealed in the grace wlcrein he 
abounded to us, or which he freely bestowed 
on us, in the Beloved. The grace bestowed 
on believers exemplifies the glorious quality 
of the attribute—its glorious riches, The 
connection of God with Christ in the bestowal 
of this grace, and of believers in the recep- 
tion of it, is again noted by the remarkable 
term, “in the Beloved.” That the Father's 
relation to Christ was one of infinite love is 
a fact never to be lost sight of. His having 
constituted the Beloved One the Kinsman 
and Mediator of sinners shows the riches of 
the glory of his grace. ‘ He that spared not 
his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, 
how shall he not, with him also freely give 
us all things?” Our union to the Beloved, 
our participating in all the blessings of his 
purchase, our becoming heirs of God and 
joint heirs with Jesus Christ, further i)lus- 
trates the glorious riches of his grace. 
“Behold, what manner of love the Father 
hath bestowed on us, that we should be 
called children of God!” 

Ver. 7.—In whom we have the redemption 
through his blood, Some of the blessings 
referred to in ver. 3 are now specified—be- 
ginning with redemption (τὴν ἀπολύτρωσιν). 
The article makes it emphatic—the great 
redemption, the real redemption, compared 
to which all other redemptions are but 
shadows. It isa redemption through blood, 
therefore a proper propitiation or expiation, 
blood being always the emblem of expia- 
tion. In Christ, or in union to Christ, we 
have or are haying this blessing; it is noi 


4 THE EPISTLE TO 


THE EPHESIANS. (cu. 1. 1—23 


merely in existence, it is ours, we being in 
him by faith; not a privilege of the future 
merely, but of the present as well. Even 
the forgiveness of our sins. “Ageoww denotes 
releage, separation from all the consequences 
of our transgressions; equivalent to ΡΒ. cili. 
12, “ As far as the east is from the west, so far 
hath he removed our transgressions from us.” 
According to the riches of his grace. The 
completeness of the forgiveness, its ready 
bestowal now, the security of its being con- 
tinued in the future, and such like qualities 
show the richness of his grace (comp. Matt, 
xviii. 27; Luke vii. 42, 47). 

Ver. 8.—Which he made to abound toward 
usin all wisdom and prudence. This render- 
ing of the R.V. is better than the A.V., 
“ wherein he hath abounded,” for ἧς before 
ἐπερίσσευσεν can hardly be put forthe dative; 
it is genitive by attraction for the accusative. 
The wisdom and prudence refer to God; he 
has not made his grace abound to usin a 
random manner, but in a carefully regulated 
manner. This is more fully explained after- 
wards, in reference to God’s concealment for 
a time of the universality of bis grace, but 
manifestation of it now. Some have found 
a difference between coptaand φρονήσις, the 
one being theoretical wisdom and the other 
practical, or the one intéllectual and the 
other moral; but possibly they may be 
meant merely to intensify the idea—the 
height of wisdom is shown in God’s way of 
making his grace abound toward us (comp. 
Rom. xi. 33, “Oh, the depth of the riches 
both of the wisdom and knowledge of 
God!”). 

Ver. 9.—Having made known unto us the 
mystery of his will. The wide extent of 
God’s grace was a mystery, ie. a hidden 
counsel, before Christ came and died, but it 
is now made known. In this, and not in the 
modern sense of mystery, the word μυστήριον 
is used by Paul. The thing hidden and 
now revealed was not the gospel, but God’s 
purpose with reference to its limits or sphere 
(see ch. iii. 6). According to his good plea- 
sure which he purposed in himself. The 
whole phraseology denotes that, in this trans- 
action, God was not influenced by any 
external considerations; the whole reason 
for it sprang from within. The threefold 
expression brings this out: (1) according to 
his good pleasure (see ver. 5); (2) he pur- 
posed, or formed a purpose; (3) in himself, 
without foreign aid, “ For who hath known 
the mind of the Lord? or who hath been his 
counsellor?” (Rom. xi. 34). 

Ver. 10.—With a view to the dispensation 
of the fulness of the times (or, seasons) (vers. 
9 and 10 are one sentence, which should not 
be broken up). This seems to denote the 
times of the gospel generally; not, as in 
Gal. iv. 4, the particular time of Christ’s 


advent; the οἰκονομία, or economy, of the 
gospel being that during which, in ita suc- 
cessive periods, all God’s schemes are to 
ripen or come to maturity, and be fulfilled. 
To gather together under one head all things 
in Christ. ᾿Ανακεφαλαιώσασθαι is a word of 
some difficulty. It is true it is derived from 
κεφάλαιον, not κεφαλή : therefore some have 
thought that it does not include the idea of 
headship; but the relation of κεφάλαιον to 
κεφαλή is 80 close that this can hardly be. 
The word expresses the Divine purpose— 
what God mpoéero—which was to restore in 
Christ a lost unity, to bring together dis 

united elements, viz. all things, whether they 
be things in heaven or things on earth 

There is no hint here of a universal restora- 
tion. Such a notion would be in flat con- 
tradiction to the doctrine of Divine election, 
which dominates the whole passage. God’s 
purpose is to form ἃ united kingdom, con- 
sisting of the unfallen and the restored—the 
unfallen in heaven, and the restored on 
earth, and to gather this whole body to- 
gether under Christ as its Head (see ch. iii. 
15). We cannot say that this purpose hae 
been fully effected as yet; but things are 
moving towards it, and one day it will be 
wholly realized. ‘ He that sat on the throne 
said, Behold, I make all things new” (Rev 

xxi. 5) 

Ver. 11.—Even in him—in whom we were 
also made his inheritance. This is the 
literal rendering of ἐκληρώθημε», and it is 
more expressive than the A.V., “In whom 
also we have obtained an inheritance.” God 
taking us for his own heritage involves 
more than our getting an inheritance from 
God (see Deut. iv. 20, “ The Lord hath taken 
you... to be unto him a people of inheri- 
tance”). It is implied that God will protect, 
care for, improve, and enjoy his own inheri- 
tance; he will be much with them and do 
all that is necessary for them. Formerly 
God’s inheritance was Israel only; but now 
it ismuch wider. All that God was to Israel 
of old he will be to his Church now. Having 
been predestinated according to the purpose. 
The reason why the reference to predestina- 
tion is repeated is to show that this new 

rivilege of the whole Church as God’s in- 
orlatis is not a fortuitous benefit, but the 
result of God’s deliberate and eternal fore- 
ordination; it rests therefore on an immov- 
able foundation. Of him who worketh all 
things after the counsel of his will. Pre- 
destination is not an exception to God’s 
usual way of working; he works, or works 
out (évepyotdros) all things on the same 
principle, according to the decision to which 
his will comes. When we think of the 
sovereign will of God as determining all 
things, and in particular determining whe 
are to be his heritage, we must remember how 


cH. 1. 1—23.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 5 


differently constituted the will of an infinitely 
holy Being is trom that of frail and fallen 
ervatures. The fallen creature’s will is often 
whimsical, the result of some freak or fancy ; 
often, too, it is the outcome of pride, avarice, 
sensual affection, or some other evil feeling; 
but God’s will is the expression of his in- 
finite perf-ctions, and must always be in- 
finitely hely, wise, aud good. Wilfulness 
in man is utterly different from wilfulncss 
in God; but the recoil we often have from 
the doctrine of God’s doing all things from 
his mere bene placitum, or according to the 
counsel of his own will, arises from a tendency 
to ascribe to his will the caprice which is 
true only of our own. 

Ver. 12—That wo should be to the praise 
of his glory, we who had before hoped in 
Christ. The “we” which hitherto has been 
applied to the whole Church, Jewish and 
Gentile, begins to have a more limited refer- 
ence, and to contrast with “ you” in ver. 13. 
The first “we” in this verse embraces all, 
us in the preceding part of the chapter; the 
second (omitted in the A.V.) is conditioned 
by the words following, and is applicable 
to the Jewish Christians, who, through the 
prvmises given to the fathers, had seen 
Chyrist’s day afar off, and had thus hoped 
in jim. This special reference to ἡμᾶς is 
followed immediately by a reference to ὑμεῖς. 

Ver. 13.—In whom are ye also, having 
heard the word of the truth, the good news 
of yovr salvation, A.V. has “in whom ye 
also trusted,” or hoped, supplying a verb 
from προηλπικότας in ver. 13, but without 
the prefix. This seems hardly natural, 
because the prefix πρὸ is characteristic and 
emphatic in ver. 12. It is a much less 
strain to supply simply ἐστὲ, the important 
point being that you are now in him—in 
Christ. ‘I’his expression, “in Christ,” is one 
of the hinges of the Epistle ; it occurs times 
almost without number, denoting the inti- 
mate vital union through faith between 
Christ and lis people, as of the members to 
the head, in virtue of which they not only 
get the beneiit of his atonement, but share 
his vital influences, live by faith on the Son 
of God. Having heard and received the 
truth as it is in Jesus, the glad tidings of 
salvation throwgh a crucified Jesus, they 
became one with him, just as freely as did 
the believing Jiws, and to the same blessed 
effects. More than that—in whom also 
having believe¢, ye were sealed with the 
Holy Spirit of the promise; thus yeceiving a 
new nd for thankfulness, a new proof 
of the riches «f the grace of God. Many 
explain this seal of baptism, which un- 
doubtedly seals Christ and all his blessings 
to believere But though the seal of the 


Holy Spirit may have been given in and 


with baptiem, it is mot identical with 


baptism. The impression of it {s partly 
within believers and partly without. 
Within, it is the felt result of the working 
of the Holy Spirit—the feeling of satisfac 
tion and deligiit in the work and person of 
Christ, of love, confidence, and joy flowing 
out toward Gud, and the desire and endea- 
vour in all things to be conformed to his will. 
Without, it is the fruit of the Spirit, the 
new man, created in righteousness and holi- 
ness after the image of Christ. Within, 
the Spirit bears witness with their spirits; 
without, the transformed life corroborates 
the inward witness, and gives it to the 
world. The first is never complete without 
the second, nor the second without the first. 
The spiritual history of believers is thus 
presented : (1) hearing the truth; (2) be- 
lieving; (3) being sealed. The Spirit is 
called the Spirit of the promise, because 
he is often promised in the Old Testament 
(Isa. xxxii. 15; Ezek. xxxvi. 20; Joel iii. 
1, etc.). 

Ver. 14.—Who is the earnest of our in- 
heritance. The gift of the Spirit is not 
only a seal, but an earnest, firstfruit, or in- 
stalment, a pledge that the rest shall follow. 
The seal of the Spirit not only assures us of 
the full inheritance to come, but gives us a 
right conception of its nature. It shows us 
the kind of provision God makes for those 
whom he takes as his heritage, his peculiar 
pe It is an inward heaven the Spirit 

rings them. “The kingdom of God is 

not meat and drink, but righteousness and 

ace and joy in the Holy Ghost.” The 
fant inheritance will consist in a heart in 
full sympathy with God, and in those occu- 
pations and joys, intellectual and moral, 
which are most congenial to such a heart. 
Unto the redemption of the purchased pos- 
session. The until of the A.V. is not textual, 
and does not give the force of εἰς, which 
implies that the earnest of the Spirit is a 
contribution toward the result described; it 
tends to realize it. ‘ Redemption ” here is 
not quite equivalent to “ redemption ” in ver. 
7; for there it is a thing accomplished, here 
it is a thing to come. It is obvious that 
here the meaning is the completed redemp- 
tion—the full and final deliverance of the 
Lord’s heritage from all sin and sorrow, 
from all the evils and disorders of this life. 
The term περιποιήσις, translated “ purchased 
posscssion,” is an unusual one. But its 
resemblance to περιούσιος, the Septuagint 
rendering for “a special people ;” its uge by 
Peter, λαὸς περιποίησεως, “a peculiar people;” 
the use of the verb ἐκκλησίαν τοῦ Θεοῦ, ἣν 
περιεποιήσατο διὰ τοῦ αἵματος αὐτου, “ the 
Church of God, which he hath purchased 
with his own blood;”—show that it must 
be regarded in this place as denoting the 
special, own, purchased possession of God, 


6 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 


(cn, 1. 1—28, 


whose final glory ia so often presented to 
our tioughts in this Epistle. To the praise 
of his glory. For the third time in this 
paragraph, these or similar words are intro- 
duced. In this place the precise meaning 
is that the consummation of redemption 
will be the highest tribute to God’s glory — 
his infinite excellence will be wonderfully 
manifested thereby. Neither men nor 
angels are qualified to apprehend the glori- 
ous excellence of God in an abstract way; 
it needs tu be revealed, exhibited in acts and 
operations. The teaching of this verse is 
that it will be manifested with triumphant 
brightness in the final redemption of the 
Church, when the groans of nature shall 
come to an end, and the creation shall be 
delivered from the bondage of corruption 
into “ the glorious liberty of the sons of God” 
(Rom, viii. 21), 

Vers. 15—23,.—PRaYER FOR THEIR SPI- 
RITUAL GROWTH. 

Ver. 15.—Wherefore I also, having heard 
of the faith among you in the Lord Jesus, 
and your love which extends to all the saints, 
The “wherefore” has reference to their 
present standing in grace, described in the 
verses preceding: since ye have heard, be- 
lieved, been sealed, and thereby shown to be 
in the right line, I apply myself towards 
promoting your progress, towards advancing 
you to the higher stages of the Christian 
life. Special mention is made of their faith 
and love, as cardinal Christian graces, to 
which elsewhere the apostle adds hope (1 
Cor. xiii. 13;,1 Thess. 1.3; 2 Thess. i. 3). 
The literal expression, “ faith among you” 
(καθ᾽ Spas), indicates that it was a marked 
social feature, but perhaps not universal ; 
while their love was not mere general umia- 
bility, but a love that embraced the saints 
as such, haviug a special complacency in 
them, and being directed to them all. If 
it be asked—Could this knowledge of the 
condition of his correspondents have been 
derived from hearsay (“having heard’’) if 
the letter was addressed to the Ephesians, 
among whom Paul had lived so long, and 
whose condition he must have known by 
personal intercourse (Acts xix. 10; xx. 31)? 
we reply that, though he derived his first 
acquaintance from personal intercourse, it 
was some years since he had been at Ephesus, 
and the ἀκούσας refers to what he had heard 
in the interval (see Introduction). 

Ver. 16.—Cease not to give thanks for 
you. This clause expresses the continuation 
of avformer action—the giving thanks for 
them had begun before the hearing of their 
faith and love—from the days, in short, of 
his personal intercourse. We notice as a 
remarkable feature of Paul’s personal reli- 
gion, as well as his pastoral care, the fre- 


prevalence in him οὗ a bright, joyous state 
of mind, and tending to increase and prr- 
petuate the same. Constantly to recognize 
God’s goodness in the past begets a larger 
expectation of it in the future. Making 
mention of you in my prayers. This seems 
additional to his giving thanks. “‘ Prayers” 
(προσευχῶν) refers more to supplication and 
entreaty. While thankful for them, his 
heart was not satisfied regarding them; he 
wished them to forget the things behind, 
and reach forth to thuse before. The apostle’s 
prayers for his spiritual charge are always 
remarkable. They are very short, but 
wonderfully deep and comprehensive; ΝΟΥ͂ 
rich and sublime in aspiration ; powerful in 
their pleas, whether expressed or implied ; 
and exhaustive in the range of blessings 
which they implore. 

Ver. 17.—That the God of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, the Father of glory. The invocations 
of Paul—the terms by which he calls on 
God—are always significant, involving a 
plea for the blessings sought. God, as “the 
God of our Lord Jesus Christ,” gave to him 
the Holy Spirit without measure, and miglit 
well, therefore, be asked and expected to give 
the gifts of the same Spirit to those who were 
“in him ”—one with him as members of his 
body. Being also the “Father of glory,” 
and having glorified Jesus, even after his 
suffering, with the glory which he had with 
him before the world began, he might well 
be asked and expected to glorify his people 
too. May give to you the Spirit of wisdom 
and revelation in the full knowledge of him 
“Spirit” here is neither exclusively the 
Holy Spirit nor the spirit of man, but the 
complex idea of the spirit of man dwelt in 
and moved by the Spirit of God (Alford). 
Wisdom seems to denote the general gilt _ 
spiritual illumination ; revelation, capacity 
of apprehending the revealed—of perceiving 
the drift and meaning of what God makcs 
known, 80 that it may be a real revelation to 
us (comp. Matt, xiii. 11). ᾿Επιγνώσει is some- 
thing more than mere yodoe—full know- 
ledye of Christ, implying that it is in becon- 
ing better acquainted with Christ that we 
get the spirit of wisdom and revelation. In 
seeking to know Christ more, we are in the 
true way to get more insight into all that is 
Divine (comp. John xiv. 9). The importance 
of seeking more knowledge, even after we 
have believed and been sealed by the Holy 
Spirit, is here apparent; a growing know- 
ledge is a most healthful feature of Chistian 
life. “ Grow in grace, and in the knowledge 
of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Chriet (2 
Pet. 111. 18). 

Ver, 18.—That having the eyes of your 
heart enlightened. “The eyes of your heart” 
is an unusual expression, but it denotes that 


quency of his thankegiving, indicating tle | to see things clearly there is needed, not 


cH. 1, 1--- 8.} 


THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 1 


merely lumen siceum, but lumen madidum | achievements, in order to elevate our con- 


(to borrow terms of Lord Bacon), uct merely 
intellectual clearness, but moral suscep- 
tibility and warmth—a movement of the 
heart as well as the head (compare the oppo- 
site state, “blindness of the heart,” ch. iv. 
18). Ye may know what is the hope of his 
calling; the hope which he calls you to 
cherish. The glory which he invites you to 
look forward to, when Christ shall come 
again, how sure it is and how excellent! 
How infinitely it surpasses all earthly glory ! 
How it at once ravishes and satisfies the 


heart! And what the riches of the glory of 


his inheritance in the saints. If the saints 
form God’s heritage (see ver. 11), it may be 
asked—Where are the riches of God’s glory 
in them? But it is not necessary to take 
the ἐν τοῖς ἁγίοις so literally. It may 
be rendered, ‘in reference to the saints.” 
The riches of the glory of his inheritance 
in reference to the saints is the riches of the 
glory of their privileges as the Lord’s heri- 
tage, or people ; that is, their privileges are 
glorious. But this glory is not limp, limited 
—it is wonderfully rich, full, abundant. 
God gives liberally—gives as a King, gives 
glory to all Christ’s people. ‘When Christ, 
who is our life, shall appear, then shall ye 
also appear with him in glory ” (Col. iti. 4); 
“The glory which thou gavest me I have 
given them.” The difference between this 
glory and other glory is, human glory is often 
unjustly accorded, it passes away with won- 
derful quickness; but this glory is real and 
everlasting. “When the chief Shepherd 
shall appear, ge shall receive a crown of 
glory that fadeth not away.” 

Ver. 19.—And what the exceeding great- 
ness of his power toward us who believe. A 
new object of knowledge is here brought 
forward—knowledge of a power which works 
in us—a great power, a Divine power, a 
power surpassingly great. The whole 
energy of the Divine Being is turned on to 
our feeble, languid nature, vivifying, purify- 
ing, and transforming it, making it wonder- 
fully active where all was feebleness before, 
as the turning on of steam suddenly wakens 
up a whole mass of inert machinery. When 
we think of the glory of the inheritance, we 
feel unfit for it; our narrow hearts, cold 
temperaments, feebleand dislocated faculties, 
how can they ever be right? Our fear is 
removed when we think of the greatness of 
the Divine power that works in us—God’s 

wer to transform us so that, “ though we 

ave lien among the pots, we sliall be as the 
wings of a dove covered with silver, and her 
feathers with yellow gold.” According to the 
working of his mighty power. We are now 
farnished with a standard and sample of 
the mighty power which energizes in be- 
lievers —are referred to ove of its grandest 


ceptions of what it is capable of effecting 
tn us. In the prophets we find a similar 
encouragement for God’s people, in sublime 
descriptions of the almighty power of him 
who was working in them and for them 
(Isa. x]. 21, etc. ; xlv. 7, etc.). 

Ver. 20.—Which he wrought in Chnist, 
when he raised him from the dead. The 
same power that produced the marvellous 
miracle of Christ’s resurrection now works 
in the hearts of believers. To appreciate 
this, we must bear in mind the apostle’s 
full doctrine of the resurrection of Jesus, 
embracing not only the revivifying of his 
dead body, but the transformation of that 
body into ἃ spiritual body, and the consti- 
tuting of Jesus a second Adam, who should 
transmit or communicate to his spiritual 
seed both a renewed soul and a glorified 
body, as the first Adam transmitted a sinful 
nature and a corruptible body to his natural 
seed. ‘Che power that accomplished all this 
now works in believers, and can surely work 
in them all needed transformation. And 


set him at his own right hand in the heavenly. 


places, effecting on him a change alike 
sudden and marvellous: from the cross and 
the tomb to the throne of glory, from being 
as ἃ worm and no man, to be higher than 
the kings of the earth—-King of kings, and 
Lord of lords. It is frequently represented 
in Scripture that Jesus in heaven is at the 
right hand of God. There must be a spot 
in the heavens where his glorified body 
exists, in immediate contact with some 
manifestation of the glory of the Father. 
There Stephen saw him; thence he came to 
meet Saul on the way to Dimaseus; and 
his promise to his people is Where I am. 
there shall ye be also (Jolin xiv. 3). 

Ver. 21.—Far above all rule, and power, 
and might, and dominion. Separate shades 
of meaning may doubtless be found for 
these expressions, but the main effect of the 
accumulation is to expand and deepen the 
idea of Christ’s universal lordship. Hardly 
anything is revealed to us on the various 
orders of the spiritual powers, unfallen and 
fallen; and the speculations on them in 
whicl the Fathers used to indulge are of no 
value; but whatever may be true of them, 
Uhrist is exalted far above them all—far 
above every creature in earth, heaven, or 
hell (comp. Ps. ii.; Ixxii.; ex.; Dan. vii. 
13, 14, etc.). And every name that is named, 
not only in this world, but also in that 
which is to come. The pre-eminence of his 
Name is to be eternal. It shall never be 
eclipsed by any other name, nor shall there 
ever be a name worthy to be coupled with 
his Name. In human history we find no 
name that can be fitly coupled with Chriat’s. 
In the world to come, it shall ever shine 


8 THE EPISTLE ἸῸ THE EPHESIANS. 


(cu. 1. 1—23. 


forth with an unapproached effulgence. All 
this is sail to exalt our sense of the Divine 
power that so raised up and exalted the 
God-Man, Christ Jesus—the same power 
that still works in believers. 

Ver 22.—And put all things under his feet; 
a strong, figurative expression, denoting 
high sovereignty. It does not refer merely 
to defeated and arrested enemies, but to the 
whole of creation and the fulness thereof. 
They are as thoroughly under Christ and at 
his disposal as if they were literally under 
his feet. As a military commander, pro- 
seeding even through his own country, has 
Ee to requisition everything needful for 

is army, and deal with all property as may 
be required for military purposes, so Christ 
has the whole creation at his disposal, ani- 
mate and inanimate, hostile and friendly. 
And gave him to be Head over all things to 
the Church. The exaltation of Christ is 
not merely an honour conferred on himself, 
but has also a definite practical purpose; it 
is for the benefit of the Chureh. God gave 
him to the Church as Head over all things. 
The gift of Christ to the Church is the gift 
of One who has sovereign authority over all 
shings. The official subordination of Christ 
to the Father is recognized throughout this 
remarkable passage. So in Philippians, 
though he was “in the form of God, and 
thought it not robbery to be equal with 
God, he made himself of no reputation, and 
took upon him the form of a servant, and 
was made in the likeness of men.” It is 
this Jesus, in the form of a scrvant and in 
the likeness of men, that is now Head over 
ali things, and as such given by the Father 
to the Church. With such a Head, what 
need the Church fear, and what can she 
want? 

Ver. 23.—Which is his body. The Church 
is Christ’s body in a real though spiritual 
sense. He is the Head, his people the mem- 
bers; he the Vine, they the branches. He 
dwells in the Church as life dwells in a 
living body. He fills it with his life, re- 

lenishes it with his strength, feeds it with 
bis body and blood, beautifies it with his 
comeliness, calms it with his peace, brightens 
it with his holiness, and finally glorifies it 
with his glory. All things are delivered 
unto him of the Father; and all that he 


has he has for the Church: “ My beloved is 
mine, and I am his.” The fulness of him 
that filleth all in all. The grammatical 
structure of the words would lead us te 
construe “ fulness” with “the Church,” and 
to regard the Church as Christ’s πλήσομα. 
Some object to this, inasmuch as, in poiu* of 
fact, the Church is often very empty, end 
therefore not worthy of the term “fulness.” 
But it is not meant that the Church hag 
actually received all the fulness of him who 
filleth all in all, but only that she is in the 
course of receiving it. The Church on 
earth is an ever-changing body, perpetually 
receiving new members, who are at first 
empty; so that it must always in this state 
be in the course of filling, never filled. It 
is in the course of being filled with all 
Divine things—with all the treasures of 
heaven. As the empty cells of the honey- 
comb aru being filled with the sweet essences 
of flowers, so the empty vessels of thi 
Church are being filled with the gloriou 
treasures of God; or, as the courts an 
compartments of a great international exhi 
bition get filled up with the choicest pro 
ducts of the lands, so the Church gets fille 
with the handiwork of the grace of God 
When the Church is completed, it will be 
representation of the fulness of God; el 
of God that can be communicated to mea 
will be made manifest in the Church. Fir 
he whose fulness the Church is, is He that 
filleth all in all, or fill-th all with all. He 
possesses all things, and he fills all space 
with the all things. He fills the ocean with 
water, the organic world with life, the firma- 
ment with stars, the entire creation with 
forms innumerable, alike beautiful and use- 
ful. So also he fills the Church. Thus 
appropriately concludes this chapter, be- 
ginning (ver. 3) with thanksgiving to him 
who had blessed the Ephesians with every 
blessing of the Spirit in Christ Jesus, and 
now ending with a sublime picture of the 
Infinite One filling the Church with these 
Divine blessings out of the infinite stores of 
the kingdom of heaven. Thus we see the 
quality of richness, exuberance, overflowing 
abundance which is so conspicuously ascribed 
in this Epistle to the grace of God (comp. 
Pa. xxxvi. 8; ciii. 3—5; Matt. v. 3, etc.). 


HOMILETICS. 


Vers. 1, 2.—Address and salutation. Character and scope of the Epistle as a whole 
(sce Introduction); circumstances of the writer; jubilant tone of the Epistle; cordiality 


of the Ephesian Church. 


I. The writer speaks with authority. He is an “apostle,” sent and commissioned 
directly by Christ, and acting in his name—a reai ambassadcr of the Lord of glory. 

Il. He holds this office “ by the will of God;” pursues neither an irregular ‘nor a 
merely volunteer course unsanctioned by the supreme Ruler, but acts by the will of Gud. 


cn, 1, 1—23.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 9 


IIL, The Church is a society of “saints,” and “ faithful,” or believing, “ in Christ 
Jesus.” If we want these attributes, we may be of Israel, but we are not Israel. 

IV. Divine blessings are invoked and brought near to the Church, viz. (1) grace 
(see Exposition) ; (2) peacé; both of these having their only source for sinners in God 
and Christ. This salutation is more than a pious wish or even prayer; the blessings 
are brought as it were to the door of all. It rests with them either to receive them 
or not. “Glorious things are spoken of thee, O city of God!” ‘The blessings brought 
near are very precious, for God in Christ with all his fulness is there. Let us beware 


of trifling with the offer. Let us open the door and welcome the Lord of grace and 
peace. 


Vers. 3—14.—The thanksgiving. The condition of believers is fitted to excite the 
profoundest emotions of gratitude and praise in all who know them. Grounds of this 
thankfulness are— 

I. Starep summaRity. (Ver. 3.) (For outline discourse on this text, see 
Exposition.) 

IL. Srarep mn DETAIL. (Vers. 4—14.) The chief elements of blessing are: 1. 
Holiness and blamelessness in love, secured by God’s eternal election (ver. 4). 2. 
Adoption, secured in the same way (ver. 5). 8. Acceptance in the Beloved (ver. 6). 
4, Redemption through Christ’s blood, especially forgiveness of sin (ver. 7). 5. Abun- 
dance of grace, regulated by wisdom and knowledge (ver. 8). 6, Enlightenment in the 
mystery of God’s will as to the Gentiles (ver. 9). 7. Especially, knowledge of Jesus 
Christ as the predestined Centre or Head of all things (ver. 10). 8. Fellowship with 
Christ in the enjoyment and purpose of his inheritance (vers. 11,12). 9. The seal of 
the Holy Spirit, or earnest of our inheritance, the pledge and assurance of the eternal 
glory. Observe the constant allusions to the glory of Gvd’s grace, the riches of his 
grace, the abundance of his grace, the riches of his glory ; the munificence of God, It 
is the narrowness of our hearts that will not take in this boundless generosity. 


Ver. 5.— Adoption. I. In a certain sense, all men are children of God (Mal. ii. 10); 
i.e. God has a fatherly interest in them and yearning towards them. But sinners hava 
forfeited the rights and position of sons; they are like the prodigal son, “ not worthy to 
be called thy son.” Thus they have no claim on God. Nay, they are “children of 
wrath ” (ch. ii. 3). 

II. Sonship in God’s family is for sinners only the fruit of adoption. Adoption is 
solely by grace, through Jesus Christ. It is the result of Divine predestination. It 
belongs only to “as many as receive him” (John i. 12). It is the fruit of spiritual 
oneness with Christ. When we are by faith united to the eternal Son of God, we 
become, in a lower sense, sons of God ourselves. 

III. Sonship has many privileges; parallel between nature and grace. Sons have a 
right to a due provision, to protection and shelter, to education and training ; they share 
their father’s house; they get the benefit of his experience, wisdom, counsel ; they enjoy 
his fellowship, and are moulded by his example and influence. 

IV. Sonship has many duties: obedience, honour, trust; gratitude, complacency, 
affection; co-operation with the father in his designs and aims. 

V. In Christ, sonship is indissoluble and everlasting. 


Ver. 7.—Redemption. “In whom we have the redemption through his blood, even 
the forgiveness of our sins.” 

I. What men need is more than instruction, education, or an elevating influence. 
They are in sin—condemned, enslaved, and disordered; in the fetters of a strong man 
armed, and a stronger is needed to disarm him and spoil his house. In a word, they 
need redemption from sin. 

11. What the gospel specially announces is such a redemption. Christ came, not 
merely to enlighten, or elevate, or improve, but to redeem. He came to grapple with 
sin in all its bearings and results. 

111. This redemption was consummated by the shedding of Christ’s blood. Jesus 
died as a sacrifice or propitiation for sin. He came by water and by blood, not by 
water only. His blood “cleanseth us from all sin;” his Spirit renews the soul. Calvin 


10 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. [ou. 1. 1—23. 


says the blood figured atonemext, the water ablution. The side of Christ, he says, was 
the fountain of our sacraments, 

IV. Forgiveness of sins is a fundamental element of this redemption. The gospel of 
Christ is a gospel of forgivencss. Sin is blotted out freely through Christ’s merit, We 
need nothing short of forgiveness, and should not rest till we have it. 

V. All this is to be enjoyed in union to Christ. ‘In whom” we have redemption. 
Thus union to Christ is the turning-point of all blessing. 


Ver. 10.—Christ the Head of all, “To gather togcther under one head all things 
in Christ.” Unity a characteristic of God’s works, Unity of the solar system, the 
stars, the heavens. In the moral and spiritual world there are diverse orders of 
holy being. ΤῸ us only two are known—angels and men, But there may be many 
more. All these it is God’s purpose to form into one economy. Jesus Christ is the 
Centre of this great plan. We have some glimpses of this in the Apocalypse. Besides 
countless angels, “ Every creature which is in heaven, and on the earth, and under the 
earth, and such as are in the sea, and all that are in them, heard I saying,” ete. (Rev. 
v.13). This does not imply that there will be nothing outside this glorious host of holy - 
beings; for the Apocalypse affirms the contrary. 

I. This subject gives us an exalted conception of the place of honour to be occupied 
by Christ in eternity. As was his humiliation, so will his glory be. 

11. It gives us also an exalted conception of the glory and dignity of all true 
believers. How glorious the fellowship of such an order of beings! How insignificant 
the honours of earth, for which men toil so hard | 


Vers, 13, 14.—The seal of the Spirit and the earnest of the tnheritance. I. THE 
SPIRIT 18 HIMSELF THE SEAL BY WHICH BELIEVERS ARE KNOWN ΑΒ Gop’s. 1. Jn his 
inward operations on their hearts. (1) Revealing to them the all-sufficiency of the 
Saviour. (2) Enabling them to close most heartily with his offers. (3) Satisfying 
them with Christ and his blessings. (4) Drawing out their hearts in love, trust, and 
cheerful obedience. (5) Conforming their wills and affections to the will of God. 
2. In the outward effects of his working: (1) Generally, in their contrast to their former 
life. (2) In their renewal in knowledge, righteousness, and holiness. (8) In their 
specific points of resemblance to Christ. (4) In their active intcrest in Christ’s work 
and kingdom. (5) In their visible ripening for heaven. 

1Ι|. Tue Sprrir 18 ALSO THE EARNEST OF THE INHERITANCE. Heaven a condition 
more than a locality. Heaven is brought to men before they are brought to heaven, 
Renewal of soul is the beginning of heaven. It is thus the firstfruits of their inheri- 
tance. It is the pledge and assurance of ‘ more to follow.” Apart from this there 
isno heaven, ‘ Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God.” 


Vers. 15—23.—Prayer for spiritual growth. General characteristics of Paul’s 
prayers (see Exposition, ver. 16). The prayer is (1) retrospective ; (2) prospective, 

I. Rerrospective. Consists of thanksgiving (ver. 16). Happy key-note for 
prayer. 

11. Prospective. Of supplication, Here we may note: 1. The name by which 
God is invoked (ver. 17 ; see Exposition). 2. The blessing sought, viz. further illumi- 
nation in the knowledge of God’s will. 3. The points needing to be more fully revealed, 
viz.: (1) The hope of his calling, or to which he calls, (2) The riches of the glory of 
his inheritance in the saints. (8) The greatness of his power toward believers. 
4. The working of God’s power in Christ, as foreshadowing his working in believers. 
(1) In his resurrection, (2) In his elevation to God’s right hand. (8) In his universai 
dominion. (4) In his relation to the Church. 
> To what a glorious elevation we are carried in such prayers! We seem to luxuriate 
in infinite stores of blessing. Observe, again, that all is connected with Christ and his 
redemption. If the power that raised Christ should raise us, to what a glorious elevation 
should we rise! 


Ver. 22.—Christ Head over all things for the Church. The double headship of Christ 
—(1) Head of the Church ; and (2) Head over all things for the Church. 


oH. I, 1—23.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 11 


I. As Heap or ΤῈ Caurca, he is the sole Fountain of authority, grace, influence, 
blessing. No other to be set above him or alongside of him on his throne. 

II. As HEAD OVER ALL THINGS FOR THE CuuRCH, he has complete control: 1, Over 
the devil and all his hosts, to restrain their malice, ete. 2. Over the angels, to com- 
mand their services. 3, Over all kings and rulers, heathen and Christian, to counteract 
their opposition or summon them to his side. 4. Over Nature and all her resources. 
5. Over the whole realm of mind—philosophy, art, science, literature, etc. 6. Over all 
the stores of grace and blessing (see Ps. ii.), But this headship of Christ is not to be 
held as superseding civil authority, which is ἃ Divine ordinance in its own sphere. 
‘Though Christ is Head over all things for the Church, he has not called his ministers to 
share this authority ; he keeps it in his own hands, 


Ver. 23.—The Church the fulness of Christ, The Church, when completed, will 
show the fulness of Christ’s love, grace, wisdom ; it will γι flect the fulness of his meck- 
uess, self-sacrifice, forbearance, and bountifulness; it will show the fulness of his power 
to bless the individual and to regenerate the world. 


HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 


Vers. 1, 2.—The salutution. The apostle introduces his Epistle by a duplicate order 
of ideas: a double blessing— grace and peace ;” ἃ double source of blessing—“ God 
our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ ;” a double designation of the Christian people— 
‘‘saints and faithful in Christ Jesus;” and a double source of authority—“an apostle 
of Jesus Christ by the will of God.” 

I Tue avrnor. “Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God.” As one 
standing outside the circle of the twelve, who overshadowed all others by his 
immense authority?it was necessary he should preface his Epistle by the mention of 
his independent apostleship. Yet in no spirit of vanity or self-assertion does he use 
the high language of apostolic authority and inspired conviction. He disclaims all 
personal merit in his call. His apostleship was linked with grace in its original 
bestowal; therefore he speaks of “grace and apostleship” in the same breath (Rom. 
i. 5); it was “by the will of God,” not by the suggestion or call of man, that he found 
his place in the service of all the Churches. For us the interest of our author’s name 
hasa profound significance ; for, though in language of the deepest humility he speaks 
of himself as “the least of the apostles” and “less than the least of all saints,” he 
stands before all coming ages as the great apostle of the Gentiles, whose personal his- 
tory and writings fill one-third of the New Testament Scriptures, and who, more than 
any other apostle, has shaped the theology of Christendom in its best periods, sup- 
plying at once the bone and marrow of the evangelical system of thought. 

Il. THE PERSONS ADDRESSED. “The saints which are at Ephesus, and the faithful in 
Christ Jesus.” 1. This double title seems to suggest the objective and subjective sides 
of Christian life ; for if it is God’s work to make saints, “itis man’s to believe ;” we are 
chosen. to salvation “through sanctification of the Spirit and belief of the truth” (2 
Thess. ii. 13). God has joined these two principles together : let not man put them 
asunder. 2. It is in Christ we obtain our standing both as saints and as believers. 
He is made unto us “ wisdom, and rightcousness, and sanctification, and redemption” 
(1 Cor. i. 80). The expression, “in Christ,” which occurs here for the first time in this 
Epistle, is found thirty-three times in the New Testament. Christian life, like revela- 
tion, is Christo centric. 3. The Christians at Ephesus had grown from twelve disciples 
(Acts xix. 1)into a large and influential community, worshipping the Lord under the 
very shadow of the great Temple of Diana. The apostle has ἃ deep personal interest in 
the fortunes of a Church established in the very acropolis of paganism—the first of the, 
seven Churches of Asia—forming the third capital of Christianity, as Antioch was the 
second and Jerusalem the first. He remembers the three years of untiring and anxious 
labour he had spent in the city, as well as the interest of the Ephesian Christians in 
himself and his work which he seeks shortly to intensify by the projected visit of a 
“beloved brother and faithful minister in the Lord” (ch. vi. 21, 22). The Apostle Paul 
was unique among the apostles of Christ for his quickness in finding out a common 


13 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, (cH. 1. 1—23. 


ground of interest among the believers of every place, for his deep yearning after 
appreciation, and the heartfelt joy of finding his services recognized by the Churches 
he served, as well as by the facility with which he held a hundred interests in his 
hand, and engazed the sympathy of all sorts of men in the cause of Christ. 

III. THE TERMS OF THE SALUTATION. ‘Grace be to you, and peace, from God our 
Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ.” ‘his is the apostle’s usual salutation to 
Churches—it is only in the pastoral Epistles that he adds the word “ mercy ”—but its 
form suggests a beautiful and significant blending of the Greek and Hebrew methods of 
salutation, as if to anticipate the share of Jew and Gentile alike in the future blessings 
of the gospel, How sweetly Christianity sanctifies the common courtesies of life! 1. 
The double blessing. “ Grace and peace.” The word “ grace” hasa unique history among 
English words. It means ever so many things, all suggestive of the happiest associa- 
tions, and has never suffered that contraction of meaning which has spoiled the moral 
beauty of so many other words. In the gospel sense, whether it applies to the origin 
of man’s salvation or to the Christian disposition which is the result of it, grace marks a 
beautiful movement of life in the direction of blessing given or received. Grace is the 
key-note of the Ephesian lpistle. Grace is the well-spring of all blessings. “The way 
to heaven lies not over a toll-bridge, but over a free bridge, even the unmerited grace 
of God in Christ Jesus.” Peace is the fruit of grace, which can never be severed from 
its fruits. It is the very testament of Christ: “My peace I give unto you:” the 
very equanimity, firmness, serenity, of his own life carried into the lives of his saints, 
This peace so “ keeps the heart and mind” that nothing can break down a spirit so 
established. The two graces are here in their due order; for there is no peace without 
grace. They cover the whole space of a believer's life; for if it begins in grace, its 
latter end is peace. The Lord always has “thoughts of grace and peace toward us” 
(Jer. xxix. 11), They are together the bright sum of the gospel. 2. The double Source 
of blessing. ‘From God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ.” There is a 
certain intensity of bright suggestion in the asserted origin of these blessings. God the 
Father is the “God of grace” (1 Pet. v. 10) and “the God of peace” (Heb, xiii. 20) ; 
and equally so “grace and truth came by Jesus Christ” (John i. 17), and he is also 
our Peace (ch. ii. 14), But the Father is the original Fountain of all blessings, and 
the Son the Dispenser of blessing to us. The juxtaposition of Christ with the Father 
is the significant proof of the divinity of the Son of God. No man’s name can be 
placed beside God’s in the dispensation of Divine blessings. The Holy Ghost is not 
named, because it is he who communicates the grace and the peace. Similarly, the 
believer has “fellowship with the Father and the Son” (1 John i. 3), but the Holy 
Ghost is the power of this fellowship. 3. J¢ ts neither tmproper nor unnecessary to 
pray for grace and peace, though we already possess them. We need a continuous 
supply and a continuous experience of both blessings. Believers are, therefure, fully 
justified in coming boldly to a throne of grace, that they may obtain mercy and find 
grace to help in time of need.—T. O. 


Ver. 3.—The blessings of redemption. Full minds overflow in long sentences. The 
sentence which begins with the third verse runs on continuously to the fourteenth, 
marked all the way by many rich and happy turns of expression. The apostle pours 
forth his thoughts with a splendid exuberance, which dazzles common readers, but is 
kindling to congenial minds, The whole passage is “a magnificent anthem,” in which 
the ideas “ suggest each other by a law of powerful association.” It takes up the spirit 
of the psalmist, “ Bless the Lord, Ὁ my soul: and all that is within me, bless his holy 
Name” (Ps. ciii.). 

I, THE BLESSINGS ARE TRACED UP TO THE FATHER ΑΒ THEIR Source. It is he who 
has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in Christ Jesus. It is a mistake to represent 
the Father as a harsh creditor, who has no point of contact with his debtor except at 
de moment when the bond is being discharged ; or to represent the Son as the tender 
and compassionate. Redeemer, who prevails with his Father to grant a salvation he is 
unwilling to bestow. The true source of salvation is in the Father’s heart, and the 
mission of the Son was to execute the loving will of the Father who is in heaven. ‘he 
atonement was the effect, not the cause, of Divine love, Jesus did not die on the cross 
that God might be induced to love us, but because he did love us. The cross coul 


oH, 1. 1—23.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 18 


2 


not originate Divine love, which is an eternal perfection of the Divine nature, seeking 
an object on which to exhaust its riches. But the cross was the mode in which, for 
reasons known to himself and partially discernible to us, it was expedient and neces- 
sary that his love should be expressed. But then the same God who exacted the 
atonement has also provided it ; and therefore we may glorify the love of the Father, 
for “herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and gave his Son to be 
the Propitiation for our sins.” 

11. Bur 1F ‘HE FOUNTAIN OF ALL OUR BLESSINGS IS IN THE FaTHER’s HEART, THEY 
FLOW DOWNWARD TO US IN THE CHANNEL OF CHRIST'S MEDIATION. ‘lhe God and 
Father of our Tord Jesus Christ is our covenant God. God, being his Father, becomes 
our Father; for “ we are all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus” (Gal. iii. 26). 
The blessings flow first from the Father to Christ, and then from Christ to us. Jesus 
said to Mary, “1 ascend unto my Father, and your lather; to my God, and your God” 
(John xx.-17); not, says Augustine, “I ascend to our Father and our God,” but first 
mine, then yours, as if to indicate the distinction between his own essential sonship and 
their derivative sonship by adoption. But it is a distinguished part of the Chris- 
tian’s privilege that not only “he is Christ’s,” but “Christ is God’s” (1 Cor. iii. 23), 
according to the prayer of Jesus himself, “ All mine are thine, and thine are mine;” 
for it was an islea near to the apostle’s heart that Christ and the Church are one—one 
Head and one hody—and that Christ in the Church and the Church in Christ are God’s 
possession. Therefore we can understand the grandeur of the conception that all God’s 
blessings descend to us in Jesus Christ. 

Il. Tory ΑΒΕ SPIRITUAL BLESSINGS. There is no allusion to earthly blessings— 
riches, honours, beauty, pleasures—as if New Testament believers had ascended to a 
higher platfornt than that held by Old Testament saints. God “has provided some 
better thing for us.” The spiritual blessings include all that is involved iu the Father’s 
clecting love, thie Son’s satisfaction for sin, and the Holy Spirit’s application of redemp- 
tion. We thus see the relation of belivvers to the three Persons of the blessed Trinity. 
It is “all spiritual blessings,” but they are so linked together in the Divine order that 
if you have one you have all: “Whom he did predestinate, them he also called: 
and whom he called, them he also justified: and whom he justified, them he also 
glorified.” Christ’s ministry began with words of blessing, in the eight beatitudes of 
his first sermon; his gospel brings with it fulness of blessing (Rom. xv. 29); and the 
final glorification of the saints is accentuated in the glorious words of the Judge, 
“Come, ye blessed of my Father.” 

IV. THESE HLESSINGS CONNECT US WITH HEAVEN. They are spiritual blesstngs in 
heavenly places. The reason is that Jesus Christ, as our Forerunner, has gone within 
the veil, with she anchor of our hope iu his hands, to fasten it upon the “ two immut- 
able things in which it was impossible for God to lie”—the promise and the oath of 
God, so that we might have a strong consolation who have fled for refuge to the hope 
set before us (Heb. vi. 18—20). His forerunnership is identified with his represen- 
tative position as the Head ofall true believers; and his presence in heaven is not only 
a sublime gua antee of spiritual blessings accruing to us while on earth, but a pledge 
that “where he is we shall be also.” Thus we can understand why our hope should 
be laid up “in heaven” with its “ many mansions” (Col. i. 5); why our hearts ought to 
be there in supreme aspiration (Col. iii. 2); why our citizenship should be on high 
(Phil. iii. 20); and why. we should identify the scene of our future blessedness with all 
that is spiritually aspiring on earth. 

V. THE REC(PIENTS OF THESE BLEssINes, “ Us” emphatically—Jewish and Gentile 
believers, with special reference to those who loved Christ, and maintained their 
integrity in the great focus or centre of Grecian vice and Eastern fanaticism, to which 
the I‘pistle was addressed. There is no depth of iniquity to which God’s mercy and 
grace cannot duscend.—T. C. 


Ver. 4.—The origin of owr blessings: the election of grace. The difficulties 
that attach to this doctrine do not arise from any ambiguity in the Scripture proofs 
which support it, but from the nature of the doctrine itself, and its apparent incon- 
sistency with other doctrines of Scripture. Many of the difficulties, indeed, that we 
associate with the doctrine are involved in the doctrine of Divine providence ; so much 


14 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, [cu. 1 1—23, 


so that William ITI. could say to Bishop Burnett, “Did I not believe absolute predesti- 
nation, I could not believe a providence; for it wonld be most absurd to suppose 
a Being of infinite wisdom to act without a plan, for which plan predestination is 
only another name.” Predestination is but God’s plan of action; providence is the 
evolution of that plan. ‘If this providence has ordered and ordained everything which 
telatcs to the temporal lot and life, it is absolutely inconceivable that man’s eternal lot 
should be determined without God’s eternal counsel being fulfilled therein” (Oosterzee). 

I. THE ELECTION OF GRACE, WHICH Is THR FOUNDATION OF ALL OUR SPIRITUAL 
BLESSINGS, HAS CHRIST FOR ITS CENTRE; for “God hath chosen us in him.” We are 
regarded as existing in him, even in the Divine plan. The Son of God is the Firstborn, 
as well as the eldest Brother of the vast family of God. He who is the Centre of 
creation, providence, history, is also the Centre of the Divine plan. 

II. THE ELECTION 18 FOUNDED ON THE GOOD PLEASURE OF HIS WILL, WHICH 15 
ABSOLUTELY ONE WITH HIS MORAL PERFECTIONS, AND CANNOT, THEREFORE, PARTAKE 
OF AN ARBITRARY CHARACTER. The great question is—Is God or man the author of 
salvation? Are not faith and repentance, thouxh man’s acts, God’s gifts? Is not the 
Christian God’s workmanship—“ created in Christ Jesus unto good works”? Is it 
possible to maintain the doctrine of grace without referring man’s salvation to God ? 
The system which rejects an election of grace does not make provision for the salvation 
of a single soul. 

III. THe ELECTION Is FROM ETERNITY. It is ““ before the foundation of the world.” 
It is as eternal as God himself, and not, therefore, founded in man’s excellence, or even 
originated by sin, like an after-thought to rectify disorder or mistake ; for believers are 
chosen, not on the ground of foreseen holiness, but that they may become holy, their 
faith itself being the effect, not the cause, of tleir election. 

IV. Iv 18 AN ELECTION TO ADOPTION OR TO HOLINEss ; for “ God hath chosen us in him 
. . . that we should be holy and without blame ”—the positive and the negative sides of 
Christian life—or he hath “ predestinated us to the adoption of children.” A holy God 
eannot choose us to be anything but holy. Holiness is the end of our calling, as it is of 
our election. The Church of God is to be finally “ without ‘spot, or wrickle, or any 
such thing.” Holiness is the way to happiness. “A holy heart is a happy heart,” even 
in this worid of care. 

V. Iv 18 AN ELECTION OF INDIVIDUALS. There is a national election, or an election 
to covenant privileges ; but there is an individual election inside it: “Israel hath not 
obtained that which he seeketh for, but the election hath obtained it” (Rom. xi. 7). 
This fact is further manifest from the manner in which the Apostle Paul comforts 
believers, and urges them to sanctification by reminding them of their personal election. 
Believers are comforted besides with the assurance that their names are written in 
heaven, or in the book of life (Phil. iv. 8; Luke x. 20; Heb. xii. 23).—T. 0. 


Ver. 6.—The adoption. “ Having predestinated us to the adoption of sons by Jesus 
Christ to himself.” ‘ Adoption ” in Scripture expresses more than a change of relation— 
it includes the change of nature as well as the change of relation. It thus combines the 
blessings of justification and sanctification, or represents the complex condition of the 
believer as at once the subject of both. In a word, it presents the new creature in his 
new relations. ‘This passage teaches— 

I, THAT ADOPTION ORIGINATES IN THE FREE GRACE oF Gop; for we are predestinated 
thereunto. By nature we have no claim to it. ‘It is not a natural but a constituted 
relationship.” The idea is nut of sonship merely, but of sonship by adoption. None 
can adopt into the family of Gud but God himself, and therefore it may be regarded 
as an act of pure grace and love. “ Bchold, what manner of love the Father hath 
bestowed upon us, that we should be called the sons of God!” (I John iii. 1). He may. 
ask the question, ‘‘ How shall I put thee among the children?” but he has answered it 
graciously in the line of covenant promise: “1 will be a Father unto you, and ye shall 
be my sons and daughters, saith the Lord,” (2 Cor. vi. 18). 

IL. THAT ADOPTION IS IN CONNECTION WITH THE PERSON AND MEDIATION OF CHRIST. 
He is not merely the Pattern of sonship to which we are to be conformed, but the 
adoption is “by Jesus Christ.” The apostle declares elsewhere that “ we are all the 
children of God by faith in Christ Jesus” (Gal. iii, 26), and that ‘God sent forth hia 


cH. 1. 1—23,) THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, 15 


Son, made of a woman, made under the Law, to redeem them that were under the Law, 
that we might receive the adoption of sons” (Gal. iv. 4,5). Itis evident from these 
passages that we do not receive the adoption merly in virtue of Christ’s incarnation, 
Some modern divines hold that the adoption sprivgs, not from the death, but from the 
birth of Christ; that its benefits are conferred upon every member of the human race by 
virtue of the Incarnation ; that Christ being one with every man, the Root aud Archetype 
of humauity, all men are in him adopted and saved, and that nothing remains for faith 
but to discern this oneness and his salvation as already belonging to us. 1. This 
theory makes Christ, and not Adam, the Head of humanity. Yet Scripture makes Adam 
the true head of humanity, and Christ the Head of the redeemed. Christ is no doubt 
ealled “the Head of every man” (1 Cor. xi, 9), in so far as he is “the Firstborn of every 
creature,” and as “all things were created ” by him and for him; but the allusion is not 
to the Incarnation at all, but to the pre-existent state of the Sun, aud to the fact that, 
according to the original state of thinzs, the world was constituted in him. But 
tne whole race of man is represeuted as in Adam (liom, v. 12). How else can we 
understand the parallel between the two Adams? ‘That was not first which was 
spiritual, but that which was natural.” “ The first man was made a living soul ; the 
ast Adam was made a quickening spirit.” Is it proper to regard Christ as the Archetype 
of fallen humanity alienated from God, and needing to be created anew in the Divine 
image (Col. iii. 10; ch. iv. 24)? 2, This theory is inconsistent with Scripture, which 
makes the Incarnation and the cross inseparable. They are buth means to an end: the 
expiation of sin, the vindication of Divine justice—tlie meritorious obedience to be 
rendered to the Law, Jesus was born that he might die. The 2vent of Golyotha not’ 
only explains but cuinpletes the event of Bethlehem. Our Saviour came to save the 
tost (Matt. xviii. 11); he came to give his life a rans.m (Matt. xx, 28); he came into 
the world to save simmers (1 Tim, i, 15); he took part of flesh and blood to destroy death 
(Heb. ii. 14); he was manifested to destroy the works uf the devil (1 John iii. 8); it 
was on the cross he triumphed over principalities and powers (Col. ii. 15), There are a 
nundred passages in Scripture which ascribe our salvation to his death to one passage 
ascribing it to his birth. It is a suggestive circumstance that he should have appointed 
a festival to commemorate his death—the Lord’s Supper—and should have appointed no 
similar festival to commemorate his birth. ‘lhe effect, if not the design, of this theory 
15 to destroy the necessity for the atonement, and thus to avoid the offence of the cross. 
The Incarnation is presented to us as a remedial arrangement by virtue of its connec- 
tion with the cross, and the connection of man with Christ is represented as corrective 
of his connection with Adam. Our primary connection is with the first Adam, and 
we only attain to connection with Christ by regeneration. 

III, THAT ADOPTION 18 FOR THOSE WHO ARE UNITED To Curist By FAITH. Scripture 
is exceedingly plain in its testimony upon this point. “Ye are all the children of God 
by faith in Christ Jesus” (Gal. iii, 26); “ As many as received him, to them gave he 
power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his Name” (John i, 
12); ‘¢ As many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God” (Rom. viii. 
14). Yet it is said that faith does not make the sonship, but discerns it as already 
ours. ‘The proper office of faith, however, is not to recognize the blessing of aduption 
as ours, but “to receive and rest upon Christ alone for salvation, as he is offered to us 
in the gospel.” ‘lhe blessings of salvation are not conferred on all men prior to their 
faith or without their faith, The union between Christ and believers, of which the 
Scripture is so full, is not accomplished by our Lord’s assumption of our common 
nature, but is only realized through an appropriating faith wrought in each of us by the 
grace of God. 

IV. THAT THE ISSUE OF THE ADOPTION I8 TO BRING BELIEVERS AT LAST INTO COM- 
MUNION WITH GOD HIMSELF. “ Ye are Christ’s, and Christ is God’s.” Weare brought 
into the Divine family—* the family in heaven and in earth ” (ch. iii. 15)—of which 
God is the Father; for “adoption finds its ultimate enjoyment and blessing in God.” 
If we are thus brought to God and belong to God in virtue of our adoption, ought we 
not with a profound earnestness to aim at a high and spiritual tone of living ?—'I’, 0, 


Ver, 7.—Redemption through blood. “Redemption” is a large and exclusive term, 
émplying deliverance from sin, Satan, and death. It includes, not the mere rewission of 


16 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. (cu. τ. 1—23 


sins, which is, however, the primary element in it; nor the mere adoption, though that 
is the consequence of it—for “‘ we are redeemed that we may receive the adoption Οἱ 
sons” (Gal. iv. 4), but the completed sanctification of our souls and the consummated 
redemption of our bodies, The price of redemption is the blovd of bim who is here 
described as “ the Beloved.” 

I. THE REDEMPTION IS NOT, ANY MORE THAN THE ADOPTION, EFFECTE)) BY THE INCAR- 
NATION, BUT BY THE DEATH OF Curist. More was nec(ed for redemption than the 
mere birth of the Redeemer, else he need not have dicd. Tilicrefore we preach, ποὺ the 
person of Christ, nor the child born, but Christ crucified, “the wisdom of God, and 
the power of God.” Some lay stress upon his life rather than upon his death. But 
the one righteousness on the ground of which we are justified, consists at once of the 
obedience of his life and of the sufferings of his death. Our Saviour was our Substitute 
both in life and in death. Yet Scripture assigns the greater prominence to the death. 
We are “bought with a price;” “ We are redeemed by the precious blood of Christ.” 
Not only is redemption set forth objectively in Christ’s person, becanse he is of God 
made unto us “redemption” (1 Cor. i. 30), but the ransum price is definitively 
described as“his blood,” considered as the reality of the ancient +acrifices and as 
procuring the full salvation which they only figured forth. 

II. THE REDEMPTION IS NOT A MERE MORAL RENOVATION, Some divines say the 
work of redemption is wholly subjective, its sole aim being the moral transformation 
of the sinner, or the rooting of sin out of the soul. They say, indecvd, that no such 
thing as remission of sin is possible, except through the previous ectirpation of sin 
itself. But, according to Scripture, redemption includes everything necessary to 
salvation, both the change of condition and the change of character—hoth justification 
and sanctification. And both these come to us in virtue of Christ’s blood. If nothing 
was required for salvation but the exercise of spiritual power upon us, no person need 
have come from the bosom of the Godhead, and there need have been no crucifixion. 
The double aspect of Christ’s death is presented in such passages as these: “He bare 
our sins in his own body on the tree, that we, being dead to sins, should live unto 
righteousness ” (1 Pet. ii. 24); “‘ He gave himself for us, that he might: redeem us from 
all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works” (‘Titus 
ii, 14,15). That is, his ultimate design is to deliver us from sin itself. But the moral 
power of the cross depends upon those substantial objective benefits which it procures 
for us. On the theory of some modern divines, the redemption cannot extend to Old 
‘Testament saints at all, for they have not seen the manifestation of Divine self- 
sacrificing love which we have seen in the cross, 

III. Ir 1s A REDEMPTION STILL IN PROGRESS, The original word iniplies this—* we 
are having” this redemption. Naturalistic writers give us a dead Christ. But we 
have a living Saviour who, because he was crucified once, is dead no more, but “ ever 
liveth to make intercession for us.” He is now carrying on in heaven the work of our 


redemption. The Huly Spirit applies to us all its blessings, and seals us unto the day 
of redemption.—T. Ο, 


Ver. 7.—The forgiveness of sins. Redemption consists essentially in forgiveness aa 
its primary fact in respect of importance and of order, not as a mere element belonging 
to the more advanced stages of Christian life, nor as dependent on the renovation of our 
nature. 

1. ScrIPTURE ASSERTS A DIRECT CAUSAL CONNECTION BETWEEN THE BLOOD OF CHRIST 
AND THE FORGIVENESS OF BINS. ‘Chere is no absolute forgiveness. Christ’s blood 
was shed for the remission of sins (Matt. xxvi. 28), The original word for forgiveness 
ts a judicial term, referring to deliverance from the punishment due tr sin rather than 
jeliverance from its power. Scripinre does not say that Christ contemplated a mere 
moral redemption—though sanctification as well as justification is included in his 
work ; nor does it teach that his death was a mere example of self-socrifice, or merely 
designed to confirm the truth of his doctrine or to ratify the promise of an absolute for- 
giveness, In that case, the Old Testament saints could have no share in the benefits 
of Christ’s death. But Scripture clearly teaches that forgiveness is the direct result 


of the atoning death, without any addition of works of ours or works of Law to secure 
exemption from punishment, 


cu. t, 1—23.)] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 1 


IL Fore@rvEness 18 TO BE DISTINGUISHED FROM ATONEMENT. Forgiveness is the 
act of God as Judge; atonement is the act of Christ as Surety. The atonement is tha 
foundation or ground of forgiveness. It is from the neglect of this distinction that 
some divines declare the impropriety of our praying for the forgiveness of sin, inasmuch 
as all our sins, past, present, and future, were put away in one day. The atonement 
was certainly made in one day ; but forgiveness is acontinuous act. To purchase a gift 
is a different thing from bestowing it. We cannot expunge a debt till it has been 
contracted, and we were not in existence when Christ died, either to sin or to receive 
forgiveness. ‘“ But we were not in existence to be atoned for.” The cases are dif- 
ferent. A father can lay up property for an unborn son, but the son cannot come into 
possession till he is born. Besides, if all our sins were forgiven at Christ’s death, how 
could pardoned believers ever have been guilty? And why should there be examples 
in Scripture of prayers for forgiveness ? 

III. Tae ΟΒΙΟΙΝ oF THE ForaiveNess. “According to the riches of his grace.” 
Though it comes to us through the blood of Christ, it is really traceable to the “ riches 
of his grace.” It has been said that ransom and the exercise of grace are not consis- 
tent. Yet the apostle here expressly asserts the consistency of the two things—a 
complete satisfaction anda free pardon. Though the pardon is free to us, it was not 
procured without the payment of a price. The grace of God is the source or impelling 
cause in our redemption; the blood of Christ was the meritorious ground of it. We 
may, therefore, glorify God for “the riches of his grace” in the full forgiveness of all 
our sins. We may, therefore, “be of good cheer,” for our sins are forgiven us; we 
may love him much for the much that he has forgiven us; and call upon our souls to 
bless the Lord for all his benefits, and especially for this—‘‘ Who forgiveth all our 
iniquities.”—T, O, 


Ver. 9.—The revelation of the mystery. It was the high distinction of the Apostle 
Paul that to him, and not to any one of the twelve apostles, was committed the 
revelation of a great mystery. Ten times is this mystery named in his Epistles. It is 
called significantly “his gospel ;” for which he was, indeed, an ambassador in bonds ; 
but a gospel even more gloriously practical than it was speculative in its tendency 
and cheracter. It was a revealed secret, “hid from generations ”—indeed, hid “ from 
the foundation of the world ;” a matter, not indeed unknowable, but simply unknown 
ull it came to light through the revelation of this last apostle. 

I, THERE Is A TIME WHEN THE WORLD 18 NOT READY FoR Gop’s KysTERIES. The 
Divine purpose might be defeated by a premature disclosure to minds untrained for 
their reception. The presence of mysteries isa sort of moral training for man, in so 
far as it stimulates a sort of sober and -devout inquisitiveness in minds blunted by sin, 
while reason needs likewise to be humbled under a sense of the necessity of illumina- 
tion from on high. While we sit under the solemn shadows of Divine mysteries, 
we feel the need of lifting up our mantled eyeballs to the great Father of lights, 

II. THE MYSTERY DOES NOT COME WITHOUT DUE PREPARATION HAVING BEEN MADE 
For 11. Not only is the New Testament contained in the Old, but the whole pre- 
Christian period is one long preparation for the coming of Christ. Not only the types 
and prophecies of the Mosaic dispensation, but the whole history of the world, with all 
the marvellously intricate movements of providence, had a certain Christward tendency 
and leaning, as if to prepare the way for him who was the end of the Law, the 
turning-point between the old and the new time, “the pivot on which the entirs plan 
of God moves.” ‘Thus we find “the Incarnation to be the centre of gravity to the 
world’s great movements.” 

ΠΙ. Bur THE MYSTERY OF THE GOSPEL WHICH THE APOSTLE MADRE KNOWN WAS A 
VERY LARGE AND INCLUSIVE THING, EMBRACING JEW AND GENTILE, HEAVEN AND EARTH, 
IN ITS FULL AND GRADUAL DEVELOPMENT. Sometimes it appears as if it meant only 
Christ; “Τὸ whom God would make known what is the riches of the glory of this 
mystery among the Gentiles; which is Christ in you, the hope of glory ” (Col. i, 27). 
Sometimes it appears as if it included nothing but the reception of the Gentiles into 
the Christian Church upon conditions of perfect equality with the Jews: “The 
mystery of Christ, which in other ages was not made known unto the sons of men, 
as it is now revealed unto his holy apostles and prophets by the Spirit; that the 

EPHESIANS, σ 


18 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, (cn. 1. 1-23 


Gentiles should be fellow-heirs, and of the same body, and partakers of his promise in 
Christ by the gospel” (ch. iii. 4—6). It was no mystery to pre-Christian ages that 
the Gentiles would be afterwards included in the Christian Church—for the prophetic 
Scriptures are full of the subject; but it was never known till after the day of Pente- 
cost that the theocracy itself was to be abolished, and that a new dispensation was tc 
be established, under which the old distinction of Jew and Gentile was to be abolished. 
Sometimes it appears as if it meant a Divine purpose or plan, with Christ fur its Centre, 
stretching out over the whole length of the Christian dispensation, and finally 
re-collecting into one “ things on earth” and “ things in heaven ” (vers. ,10). In fact, 
it means all three things; for the Divine plan for “the summing up” of all things 
included, as one of its earliest and most momentous facts, the inclusion of the Gentiles 
in the Church, and Jesus Christ as the very Centre of the whole Divine dispensation, 
to whom shall be “ the gathering of the people” in all ages of the world. ‘This is the 
mystery of the gospel: not the Church, as some say, restricting the term to believers 
of the Christian dispensation; for it was by the Church the mystery was to be made 
known: “To the intent that now unto the principalities and powers in heavenly places 
might be known by the Church the manifold wisdom of God” (ch. iii. 10). Yet the 
Church was included in this glorious mystery of God,as the form in which there 
should be the final “ summing up” ef all things in heaven and in earth.—T, Ο. 


Ver. 10.— The dispensation of the fulness of times.” This marks the period during 
which the summing up of all things is to be accomplished—the period of the dis- 
pensation of grace, 

I, THE TERM SUGGESTS THE IDEA OF A PLAN OR SYSTEM, NOT CONSISTING OF MERE 
FRAGMENTARY AND UNRELATED PARTS, BUT A THOROUGHLY COMPACT AND ORGANIZED 
SYSTEM, IN WHIOH THE INDIVIDUAL PARTS HAVE THEIR DUE PLACES IN THE WORKING 
OUT OF A DESTINED RESULT. Just as in creation there is a unity of plan with certain 
typical ideas and regulative numbers lying at its basis, so there is in God’s dispensa- 
tion a certain succession of times and seasons working out the purposes of his will. 
“God is the Steward of all time.” The God who has made of one blood all nations of 
men “ hath determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of their habitation ” 
(Acts xvii. 26). Christianity marks a new era in history, dividing it into two unequal 
parts, the appearance of Christ marking the turning-point between them. 

II, 'THIs DISPENSATION DATES FROM THE FULNESS OF TIMES, THAT IS, FROM THE PERIOD 
WHEN ALL THE TIMES DESTINED TO PRECEDE IT HAD RUN OUT. ‘The pre-Christian ages 
have seen their end in Christ’s advent, which becomes thenceforth “the fulness of 
times.” It was a chronological as well as a moral fulness. The epoch in question is 
the best time in the Divine calendar; for it is God’s time, and he is the Lord of all 
time. The age that saw the advent of the Saviour was ripe for the event. It was 
“the time appointed by the Father” (Gal. iv. 2). The Roman power had opened 
highways for the gospel in every land by its immense conquests and its large toleration, 
while Greece gave the world the richest of languages to become the vehicle for New 
Testament inspiration, Meanwhile religion had outlived itself, and scepticism mocked 
at the decaying superstitions of the people, “The world by wisdom knew not God.” 
All Gentile experiments in living had been tried, but with the unvarying result of 
disappointment. Meanwhile there was at the heart of heathenism a mysterious 
longing for some change in the world’s destinies, and the eyes of men turned instinc- 
tively to the East. Whether this tendency sprang up among the dispersion of the 
Jews over the Kast and the West, or from some instinctive longing, it was God’s will 
that the Gentiles should, with a conscious need of redemption, feel after him for them- 
selves, “if haply they might find him” (Acts xvii. 27). Among the Jews, likewise, 
there was a significant “waiting for the consolation of Israel ;” idolatry had totally 
disappeared; new and more liberal ideas prevailed, in spite of the bigotry of the sects; 
and many hearts were prepared to welcome the “ Desire of all nations.” ‘The full age 
had come,” when the heir would enter on his inheritance. Thus the advent was in 
every sense “the fulness of times.” It was “the due time” when Christ died for tha 
ungodly, The world had waited long for it, The et Hem of God had only to receive its 
fulfilment by the coming of Christ, Equally so still is there a longing in the heart 
of men for a Saviour, Men may try experiments in life; they may taste of tts 


cn. 1, 1—23.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 18 


pleasures; they may try to extract from it all the wisdom the world can give; but 
there is still a void which nothing can fill till he comes whose right it is to possess 
and subdue and save the soul for himself.—T, 0, 


Ver. 10.—The summing up in one of all things tn Christ. This was the mystery of 
God hid for ages, but now revealed, 

L Iv ΙΜΡΙΙΕΒ A PRIOR SEPARATION OF THE THINGS RE-COLLECTED OR REGATHERED TO 
Gop in Jesus CunisT ΑΒ Centre on Heap. Sin is the great divider. It separates man 
from God; it separates man from man; it causes 8 schism within man himself. 
Rebellion introduced disorder. ‘There was a break of moral continuity between earth 
anil heaven caused by the Fall, “Earth was morally severed from heaven and the 
worlds which retained their pristine integrity.” The primary reference here may be to 
the separation or enmity which so long held apart the Jew and the Gentile, but it 
undoubtedly has a wider reference to the relations between heaven and earth which 
were so profoundly affected by the fall of man. 

II. THe opsecTs OF THE REUNION. 1, Jews and Gentiles, so long apart, are now 
“made both one” through the blood of the cross, Men try in our day to bring about 
a union of humanity on a basis of moral rule, or of socialism, or of the creed of 
‘liberty, equality, and fraternity ;” but the cross is the only reconciler of man to man. 
It is only under Christianity that any approach has been made toward a juster view of 
human rights, and toward a more genuine interest in the welfare of individual men, 
2. The whole Church of God in heaven and in earth is reunited in Christ. This 
includes the saints of all dispensations, who, whether they lived under the comparative 
twilight of the Jewish dispensation, or in the days of antichristian apostasy in our 
own dispensation, found their home at last in glory. There are those who imagine that 
the pre-Christian saints do not belong to the Church of God, because this Church, they 
affirm, first came into being on the day of Pentecost, and therefore they assign to the saints 
of Jewish times an inferior place of glory in heaven. The Church of God for which 
Christ died (ch. v. 2) must include the saints of all time. This is the Church which he 
hath purchased with his own blood, and, if the Old Testament saints are not in it, they 
are lost. There is no redemption apart from union with the person of the Kedeemer; for 
the one sentence in the Corinthian Epistle covers the destinies of the whole human 
race: “As in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive” (1 Cor. xv. 22). 
Ana if we are Abraham’s seed, we must have union with Christ; for “they that are of 
faith are blessed with faithful Abraham ” (Gal. iii.). Those, therefore, who are to be 
gathered together in Christ must include the saints of every dispensation. 3. The 
angels of heaven are probably included among ‘the things of heaven.” When we con- 
sider that Jesus Christ is Head of angels as well as men, that the angels are ministering 
spirits to the heirs of salvation, that they had a profound interest in the work of 
redemption, that the Church itself was to be the means of instructing them in the 
wonders of God’s plan of salvation (ch. iii. 10), that the angels themselves may have 
been confirmed in their holy steadfastness by the Son of God, that our Divire 
Redeemer continues to wear in the sight of angels the human nature he wore on earth, 
—it ia no extravagant speculation that all the heavenly hosts are united under a new 
Head, and in a new bond in virtue of the grand transaction of Calvary. 4, There seems 
no just reason for believing that the passage sanctions the restoration of lost men and 
lost angels, The parallel passage in Col. i. 20, which speaks of “ things in heaven and 
things on earth ”—that is, the redeemed saints of earth and heaven—seems to exclude 
such an interpretation, 

Ill. Tue CENTRE OF REUNION 18 Curist. The re-collecting or regathering is twice- 
told as in him. An ancient prophetic voice spoke of him as the One to whom “ shall the 
gathering of the people be” (Gen. xlix. 10). He is the Centre of everything in the 
uuiverse. He is the Centre of nature, for not only were all things made by him, but in 
him they consist; he is the Centre of providence, for he upholds all things by the word 
of his power; he is the Centre of Christendom, just as he was the Centre of the old 
theocracy ; he is the Centre of the Church invisible, for he is its Head and its Life; he 
is the Centre of heaven, for it is the Lamb that is in the midst of the throne; he is 
the Centre of the Godhead itself, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Τὸ is, therefore, in him 
that “all things in earth and all things in heaven ” are re-collected or summed up, for the 


20 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. [ση. 1. 1—28 


showing forth, with a lustre before unknown, of the majesty and glory of God. “Tin 
them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one” (John xvii. 23).—T. C. 


Vers, 11, 12.—The believer’s inheritance. This is for the children, who are not only 
partakers of the knowledge of redemption, but heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ 
Jesus (Rom, viii. 17). Property in this world usually goes by inheritance, but it is not 
so with Heaven’s highest blessings. They are “not of blood, neither of the will at 
man,” but of God. The serious question suggests itsel/—Have we any part or lot in the 
great gathering together in Christ of which the apostle has just spoken? “We have 
obtained an inheritance,” 

I, THE NATURE OF THIS INHERITANCE. It is difficult to describe it, because ‘it doth 
not yet appear what we shall be;” but it is described more negatively than positively 
in Scripture, rather by the absence of certain things, that we may the better under- 
stand the things that are really present in it, It is “incorruptible, undefiled, and 
unfading ;” there shall be in our future life no more death, nor curse, nor night, nor 
weeping, nor sin, nor transitoriness. But it is possible to gather up from Scripture 
some of the positive elements in our future inheritance. Man’s twofold nature, as body 
and spirit, demands a twofold satisfaction. 1, There are many mansions in our Father’s 
house; there are heavenly places not made with hands; there is a better and more 
enduring substance in store for us, The promise of Jesus, “ Where I am, there ye shall 
be also,” carries with it the assurance that our future home will be adorned with all the 
art and workmanship and glory our Redeemer has lavished upon this world, with all its 
sins and miseries. It cannot be that the Son, the Creator, will be less powerful when 
he stands at the head of a redeemed world, or less willing to show forth his glory as 
the Author of all the beauty which has been ever seen or dreamt of. Whether our 
future home is to be a star, or a galaxy of worlds, or a vast metropolis, it is reasonable 
to suppose that it will display infinitely more material glory, as the expression of his 
creative genius and his infinite love, than he has ever lavished upon this beautiful world, 
with allits deep scars and its traces of sin and sorrow. 2. But there are certain 
spiritual aspects of our future inheritance, concerning which we may speak with more 
confidence. (1) There will be a vast increase of knowledge as well as of the capacity 
of knowing. We shall know even as we are known (1 Cor. xiii. 12). It will be a 
knowledge which will dispel error, disagreement, ignorance, which will make us marvel 
at our own past childishness. (2) There will be holiness, for “ without holiness no man 
shall see the Lord;” and the Church will be presented to him at last “ without spot,” 
because without a trace of corruption; “ without wrinkle,” because without one trace of 
decay, but “holy and without blemish” (ch. v. 27). (3) There will be rest and satis- 
faction of heart, The weary heart of man says, “1 have seen an end of all perfection,” 
but the believer can say in happy assurance, “1 shall be satisfied when I awake in thy 
likeness” (Ps. xvii. 15). “Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, for they shall 
rest,” not from their works, but only “from their labours.” Their rest will be that of 
joyful strength, of congenial employment, in a perfect world. (4) It will be a social 
blessedness; for the elect shall be gathered from the four winds, that they may dwell 
together, seeing the same glory, singing the same songs, and rejoicing in the presence of 
the same Lord. “To be with Christ” is not inaptly described as the hope of the 
believer, for he is the chief and central Source of the heavenly joy. 

II, BELIEVERS HAVE THE INHERITANCE THROUGH CuRist. “In whom we have 
obtained an inheritance.” It is not a hereditary possession, like an entailed estate; for 
grace does not run in the blood. It comes to us through Christ. He purchased it with 
his blood. His righteousness gives us a title to it, as his grace gives us “a meetness 
for the inheritance of the saints in light;” and now he keeps possession of it for us, 
writing our names upon the royalties of heaven, and will put us into full and final 
possession at the last day. 

III. THE INHERITANCE 18 ACCORDING TO THE DIVINE PURPOSE; for we are “ predesti- 
nated according to the purpose of him who worketh all things after the counsel of his 
own will.” We are predestinated, not to adoption merely, but to the inheritance that 
{t involves. The Lord provides a heavenly portion. It is a sure portion, because it is 
according to a purpose that cannot be frustrated. Grace is the key-note of this Epistle, 
Our salvation is first and last of grace. 


cH. 1. 1—23.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 2) 


IV. THE END OR DESIGN Is TO PROMOTE Gop’s aLory. “That we should be to the 
praise of his glory.” Believers are either in their lives to be “living epistles of Christ, 
to be known and read of all men,” as instances of the power of Divine grace, or they 
are to set forth his praises by ascribing everything to his grace and nothing to their own 
merit.—T. 0. 


Ver. 12.—Hope in Christ. “Who first hoped in Christ.” Hope, as one of the 
great springs of human action, is to be distinguished from simple foresight or simpl 
expectation ; for the one may be a foresight of evil, the other an expectation of coming 
misfortune. Hope, on the contrary, is the expectation of future good. We do not 
hope for mistake, or for misfortune, or for pain; we hope for what will fill our future with 
brightness. ‘‘ Hope is the noblest offspring, the first born, the last buried child of fore- 
seeing and forecasting man.” Hope is often illusive, but the hope of the gospel is real 
on account of its deep, strong, and immutable foundations. 

I, Jesus Curis? Is THE TRUE FounnaTIon oF ouR HOPE. So strongly linked with it, 
indeed, that he is expressly called “our Hope” (1 Tim. i. 2), and “the Hope of glory ” 
(Col. i. 27). To have hope in Christ is a higher thing than to have hope directed 
towards Christ. What is there in the person or work of Christ to awaken or sustain 
our hope? 1. ln his atonement there is a foundation laid for the hope of pardon in 
the heart of the chiefest of sinners. 2. In his present work as our High Priest and 
Intercessor there is a foundation laid for the hope of purification, 3. Christ in us— 
“dwelling in us by faith ”—is the assurance of our hope; for it is Christ ἐπ us who is 
the Hope of glory. 4. Christ is the Pattern of our hope, for when he shall appear, we 
hope to be like him, being “ predestinated to be conformed to his image.” 5. The 
climax of our hope will be reached at his appearing, for that is the blessed hope of the 
Church, We are “to hope to the end for the grace that is to be brought unto you at 
the revelation of Jesus Christ” (1 Pet. i. 13). 

II. THE soURCE OF OUB HOPE IN CuRistT. We are predestinated thereunto (ch. i. 11). 
It is the “‘God of hope” who causes us “to abound in hope” (Rom. xv. 13); it is he 
who gives us “a good nope through grace”—not of nature or man’s merits, for it 
is ascribed to his “abundant mercy” as the spring of it (1 Pet. i. 3); and he gives 
ua “the patience and comfort of the Scriptures, that we may have hope” (Rom, xv. 4). 

III. Iv 1s a HIGH PRIVILEGE TO HAVE AN EARLY HOPE IN Curist. “ Who first hoped 
in Christ.” This was the great privilege of the Jews. The Gentiles were last, not 
first, in their enjoyment of Christ. The Apostle Paul deemed Andronicus and Junia 
highly favoured, because “ they were in Christ before him” (Rom. xvi. 7). It must . 
always be subject of pious regret that we had not an earlier experience of Christ; for we 
should thus have been preserved from many sins and follies ;, we should have had such 
a fuller enjoyment of his gospel, and we should have had many more opportunities of 
doing good.—T. ©, 


Ver. 13.— The means of salvation. “The Word of truth, the gospel of your salva- 
tion.” This double title is significant because the faith which cometh by hearing has 
a relation at once to the understanding and to the will. The Word of truth is to satisfy 
the understanding ; the gospel of salvation is to satisfy the will, which embraces Christ 
as he is freely offered in the gospel. It is the “ Word of truth ’—not cunningly devised 
fables or illusory dreams of men; for it comes from the God of truth, it has Christ the 
Truth for its substance, and the Spirit of truth applies it by imparting a true spiritual 
discernment of its meaning. It is “the gospel of your salvation ;” for it is ‘the power 
of God to salvation to every one that believeth” (Rom. i. 16). Thercfore we ought 
all “to take heed what we hear” (Mark iv. 24), and to ponder one of the signs of a 
godly character, ‘‘ He that is of God heareth God’s words” (John viii. 47). 

I. Tue Scriprures ABE NECESSARY ΤῸ OUR BELIEVING. “Faith cometh by hearing, 
and hearing by the Word of God” (Rom. x. 17). “ Receive with meekness the ingrafted 
Word, which is able to save your souls” (Jas. i. 21). Not but that in some extra- 
ordinary cases God seems to have converted men without the agency of preaching or 
of the written Word—Divine mercy suddenly coming into contact with men that were 
not seeking for it, and found in quarters where it might least be expected. It is very 
doubiful, however, whether in cases of this sort, the Word of God, once learned but long 


22 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. (cu. 2 1- 23. 


forgotten, may not have been revived by the Spirit of God as the means of salvation. 
The Scriptures “make wise unto salvation” (2 Tim. iii. 15), and souls need to be nourished 
up with the words of faith and good doctrine, even with the wholesome words of our 
Lord Jesus Christ. The parable of the sower shows the uses of the seed (Matt. xiii.), 

II. Tue Spirit or Gop 18 NECESSARY TO THE DUE RECEPTION or THE WorD. Thus the 
Word of God is called the sword of the Spirit (ch, vi. 17; Heb. iv. 12), which he holds 
in his hand as an instrument of power. We are “ born again, not of corruptible seed, 
but of incorruptible, by the Word of God” (1 Pet. i. 23). The influence of the Holy 
Spirit is uniformly distinguished from that of the truth itself; because it is necessary 
to the reception of the truth (1 Cor. ii. 12—15), It is true that faith cometh by 
hearing, but there is a hearing which brings no faith; therefore the Spirit is needed 
to give effect to the truth. “Open thou mine eyes, that I may see wondrous things 
out of thy Law.” Men see by the light, yet the eyes of the blind are not opened by 
the light. The Spirit must give efficacy to the Word, that it may save the soul. 

ILL WE ovcur ro stupy THE ScrIpTURES IN A RIGHT SPIRIT. 1. Reverently, because 
they are the Word of God, and not the word of man. 2. Meekly (Jas, 1. 21), with a 
humble and submissive temper. 3. In faith (Heb. iv. 2); for else the study were 
utterly unprofitable. 4. Prayerfully (Ps. x. 17); for the Lord will thus prepare the 
heart. 5, Practically (Matt. vii. 24, 25), that our life may be 3 comment upon the 
Word.—T. C. 

Ver. 13.—Faith in Christ. “In whom having believed.” Faith is a God-given 
reliance on an all-sufficient Mediator. 

I. Iv 15 MORE THAN A MERE BELIEF OF THE TRUTH: it is an act of the will; it is 
trust in a Person. It has been strongly urged in our day that faith is simply the 
belief in God’s testimony that Christ has died for us. ‘It is simply believing that 
Christ died for me.” There are two statements here: Christ is the Saviour of sinners‘ 
he bas saved me. The first is true, whether I believe in him or not; the second only 
becomes true on my believing. Faith is not believing that I am saved; it is believing 
in order tu he saved. The grant of salvation is absolute or it is not. If not, the grant 
does not make the pardon mine before I believe; if it is absolute, it makes the pardon 
mine before I believe; so 1 am justified before faith and therefore without faith. On 
this theory of faith, faith is utterly impossible; for the soul would require to accept the 
proposition, “I am saved,” in order to be saved. A man may firmly credit the 
testimony of God, and yet doubt whether he is himself a believer, though he is 
convinced that Christ will save all true believers. The position of some is practically 
this: “I believe that Iam a believer.” If this is true faith, we cannot deceive our- 
selves; for the more firmly ἃ man believes he is a believer, the stronger must his faith 
be. But nothing but a theory of universal salvation could warrant a sinner, while 
he is still a sinner, to believe that Christ died for him and ‘will assuredly save him. 
The apostle said to the Galatians, “ Let no man deceive himself ;” but on this principle 
there is no need for any warnings against self-deception. 

II. Farru 1s trust ΙΝ A Person. It thus becomes the instrument of our justifica- 
tion. It is the receptive organ or the pu by which the graciously provided ransom 
is received by the sinner; or, it is the bond which attaches him to Christ. When the 
object of faith is stated in Scripture, it is presented in connection with certain significant 
forms of grammatical construction. We are said to believe in or upon Jesus Christ. 
This form occurs fifty times in the New Testament, and the object is always a Person, 
and not a statement to be believed. If faith, indeed, is not taken to include trust, we 
have not a single exhortation in the whole New Testament to trust in the Lord iike 
what occurs so often in the Old Testament; and if faith does not include trust, where 
is the evidence that the Old Testament saints had faith at all, apart from the Epistle 
to the Hebrews (Heb. xi.); for in the Old Testament they are not said to believe, but 
always to trust in the Lord ὃ 

IIL. Farra 18 THE SUSTAINING PRINCIPLE OF OUR CHRISTIAN LIFE. It is not the mere 
root-principle; it is the continuing principle of it ; for the apostle says, “The life which 
I now live in the flesh I live by the faith of the Son of God” (Gal. ii. 20) He who 
believes receives the saving blessings which Christ’s death procured. Faith apprehends 
Christ under three gracious aspects: “Christ for us,” for our justification ; “Christ in 


ou. τ. 1—23.] ‘THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 23 


us,” for our sanctification ; “ Christ with us,” forcomfort and confidence. These are not 
three separate blessings, any one of which we may have without the others, but three 
parts of the Christian’s privilege, bound up together in the same bundle of life, and 
given upon our believing. There is ἃ mysticism which speaks of Christ in his people 
which fails to realize Christ for his people; but our fellowship of life with Christ is not 
redemption, but as the Bible everywhere represents it, as the result, reward, and fruit 
of the ransom offered by our Divine Redeemer.—T. O, 


Vers. 13, 14.—The sealing of the Holy Spirit. “In whom, having believed, ye were 
sealed.” It is spoken of as a past process, but, though dating from a certain specific 
point of time, it is continuous in its operation. 

1. Tue NATURE OF THE SEALING. It is something different from faith, as the sealing 
of a letter is different from the writing of it. In the order of nature there must be a 
difference; in the order of time, the faith and the sealing may ὍΘ contemporancous, 
The sealing implies the direct contact of the seal with the thing sealed, and an 
impression made by it. It has both an objective and a subjective meaning. It is 
objective so far as it is for identification. ‘‘The foundation of God standcth sure, 
having this seal, The Lord knoweth them that are his” (2 Tim. ii. 19); for the Lord 
sets his mark upon believers to keep them safe for himself; and i is also for security, 
for ‘we are sealed unto the day of redemption” (ch. iv. 30), that is, to be preserved unto 
that day, the sealed ones of the Revelation being expressly sealed for safety (Rev. 
vii. 3). Then it is subjective as it involves the assurance of faith, saints being thus 
assured of their interest in the favour of God and in the blessings of his kingdom. 
“Faith is the hand that takes hold of Christ; assurance is the ring which God puts 
on faith’s finger.” Believers as sealed by the Spirit have the witness within theme 
selves that they are children of God (1 John v. 10; Rom. v. 5; viii. 18). 

Il. Tae Seaver. This is God, not the Holy Spirit; for it is said, “Now he which 
stablisheth us with you in Christ, and hath anointed us, is God, who hath also sealed 
us, and given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts” (2 Cor. i. 21, 22). The Holy 
Spirit is not the Sealer, but the Seal. 

Il. Tae Person Into WHOM BELIEVERS ARE SEALED—Jxsus Crist. “In whom 
ye were sealed.” The sealing has direct relation to our union with Christ, as the 
passage implies; but the apostle also says, “ He which stablisheth us with you in 
[rather, ‘into”] Christ is God .. . who hath also sealed us” (2 Cor.i.22). Jesus said, “ At 
that day ye shall know that.I am in my Father, and ye in me, and I in you.” Thus 
all the three witnesses in heaven, as well as the three witnesses on earth, concur in the 
testimony to our interest in the blessings of salvation. Our sealing is indeed in virtue 
of the sealing of Christ himself; for “ him hath God the Father sealed ” (John vi. 2+). 

IV. THE sEAL IS NOT BAPTISM, OR THE LorD’s SUPPER, OR EXTRAORDINARY GIFTS, 
BuT THE Hoty Sereir wimseLF. “ Grieve not the Holy Spirit of God, in whom ye were 
sealed till the day of redemption ” (ch. iv. 30), as marking the element or sphere of the 
sealing. God stamps the image of his Spirit upon the Christian soul; and all that is 
involved in the Spirit’s operation—love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, 
faith, meekness, temperance (Gal. ν. 22)—is worked into man’s spirit; for “ we all, 
with open face beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the 
same image from glory to glory, as from the Spirit of the Lord” (2 Cor. iii. 18), that 
is, as reflecting his image. 

Y. THE SEALED ARE BELIEVERS. It is not truths, or promises, or experiences, that 
are sealed upon the heart; it is believers themselves who are sealed. A hard, cold, 
lifeless heart cannot receive the seal. The believing heart must be melted by the love 
shed abroad by the Holy Ghost, just as wax is melted to receive the device carved on 
the seal, before it can be in a state receptive enough for taking the impress, that is, the 
witness of Divine favour and security. 

VI. THE INDELI3ILITY OF THE SEAL. This seems implied in the very nature of 
tke term employed, “ye were sealed”—in the past tense. ‘ Whatever bears God’s 
image will be safely carried home to his bosom.” The seal that may be broken is no 
security. ‘‘ Ye were sealed till the day of redemption ”—till no day short of that; but 
it is a sealing that implies a perseverance in holiness. It is this security that supplies 
the strongest argument why we should not grieve the Spirit. The apostle does not 


24 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, (on. 1, 1—23. 


suggest the fear of the Spirit’s withdrawal, but rather the ingratitude of believers whe 
could grieve Oue who had done so much for them.—T, O. 


Ver. 14.—The believer's earnest of his Divine inheritance. The Spirit is the earnest— 
the sample as well as pledge of future blessedness. It is now we see the purpose of the 
seal. It is because the Spirit is an earnest of our inheritance that his indwelling is 
a seal. The earnest is the same in kind with the prospective inheritance. It is “ the 
inheritance in miniature.” It isa sample of the stock, a pledge that all the rest will 
come in due time. The indwelling of the Spirit is part of the blessings of redemption, 
and a security for our enjoying the rest. Therefore it is called “the firstfruits of the 
Spirit.” Three times does the word “ earnest ” occur in the New Testament in relation 
to the work of the Spirit. 

I. Iv HAS RELATION TO AN ETERNAL INHERITANCE—to “the redemption of the 
purchased possession,” that is, the final deliverance from all evil which is to take place 
in the end of all things. Itis an earnest of that completed redemption. 

Il. Iv 18 aLso AN EARNEST, NOT OF THE RESURRECTION MERELY, NOR OF THE 
CHANGE OF LIVING BELIEVERS AT THE RESURRECTION, BUT OF A CONDITION OF GLORY 
BETWEEN DEATH AND THE RESURRECTION; for the apostle refers specially to this fact in 
2 Cor. v. 5, “ Now he that hath wrought us for the selfsame thing is God, who also hath 
given unto us the earnest of the Spirit.” 

II. Toe mpwELiine or THE SPIRIT Is REPRESENTED iN Rom. vo“ 11 as THE 
PLEDGE OF THE FUTURE LIFE OF THE BODY; for there is a redemption of the body 
(Rom, viii. 23), because the Spirit is equally the Source of the life we derive from 
Christ, both for body and soul. ‘his earnest redounds to the praise of God’s glory, as 
God is glorified in the security of believers.—T. C. 


Ver. 15.—The prayers of an apostle. In other Epistles the apostle introduces his 
expression of thanksgiving at the beginning, but here he brings it into the very heart 
of a doctrinal statement, enumerating in successive steps the immense blessings of 
salvation. 

I. ΤΥ 18 THE INSTINCT OF A HOLY HEART TO PRAY FOR THE SPIRITUAL WELL-BEING 
OF OTHERS. “It is an angel’s grace to rejoice over the conversion of sinners.” But 
Paul had the care of all the Churches daily upon his heart ; they all had a place in hia 
supplications, as well as individual Christians among them; and he “ceased not” to 
pray for them till he had received an answer to his prayers. He must have spent 
a large portion of his busy life in prayer. How could he find time to remember all the 
Churches in his supplications ? A godly pastor in America was in the habit of isolating 
a day now and then for prayer for the whole world. When asked how he could find 
matter for a whole day’s supplication, he answered, “I spread out a map of the world 
before me; and as I know something of the religious condition of all the countries on 
the map, I cannot be at a loss for matter.” What a large heart was that of the apostle, 
that could bear all the Churches up to the throne of God in earnest and affectionate 
entreaty ! 

II. THE GROUND OF HIS THANKSGIVING—“ the faith and love” of the Ephesian 
Christians. ‘These two graces, like the two great commands of the Law, sum up ina 
sense all the graces of the Spirit, ‘“ Faith and love are the two arms and the two eyes 
without which Christ can be neither seen nor embraced.” ‘They have their origin in 
the grace of Christ, which “ was exceeding abundant in faith and love” (1 Tim. i. 14); 
faith holding the first place, because “faith in the Lord Jesus Christ” is the first 
principle of Christian life, because it worketh by love, because love springs out of faith 
(1 Tim. i. 5)—not love to God, but love to the saints, which is implied in this higher 
love; for “he that loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, how can he love God 
whom he hath not seen?” (1 John v. 20), It was a catholic love—* to all saints,” 
with all their differences of character, habit, and life. The apostle was thankful for the 
exhibition of these two graces at Ephesus, not only because he had been the instrument 
of their conversion, but because they marked the interest of his disciples in the blessings 
of salvation. He was delighted, besides, to find them persevering in grace: “ Now I 
live if ye stand fast in the Lord.” The spiritual friendships of the apostle were marked 
by great intensity of interest and feeling, 


on. £ 1—23.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 28 


IIL THesE PRAYERS OF AN APOSTLE WOULD BE EFFECTUAL IN BRINGING DOWN 
BLESSING UPON THE EPHESIAN saints. “The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous 
man availeth much.”—T. C. 


Ver. 17.—Prayer for the Holy Spirit. The Ephesian saints had already received 
the Spirit, for they had been sealed by him; but the apostle wishes the Spirit to 
become a spirit of wisdom and revelation, for further enlargement in ἃ spiritual sense 
can only be realized in the direction of new knowledge. Some persons say it is wrong 
to pray for the Holy Spirit, as it seems to imply that he has not already come. The 
apostle here expressly prays for the Spirit. Our prayers always acknowledge the Spirit 
as already come, and already operating with power in the Church, and what we desire 
from time to time is the individual application of his blessings to our hearts, Similarly, 
the apostle wishes grace and peace to Churches which already rejoiced in the experience 
of both blessings. “Ye have received an unction from the Holy One, and ye know 
all things.” Jesus is the Holy One; his Spirit is the unction; the knowledge of all 
aoe the result. This unction imparts the germ and substance of all knowledge. 


Ver. 17.—Prayer for the knowledge of God. The apostle prays that the spirit of 
wisdom and revelation may be given, so that the Ephesian saints may have a fuller 
knowledge of God. Knowledge is an essential factor for promoting growth in grace. 
He does not pray for holiness, but for knowledge, because he knows it is only through 
the fuller knowledge of God, imparted by the Divine Spirit, that holiness can be 
promoted. Thus he prays for the Colossians that they may be “ filled with the know- 
ledgo of God’s will in all wisdom and spiritual understanding ” (Col. i. 9); that they 
may “walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing.” He prays for the Philippians that 
“their love may abound in knowledge and all judgment ” (Phil. i. 9); the knowledge 
and judgment being indispensable both for the regulation and for the increase of love. 
Similarly, Peter prays for the Christians of the dispersion, that “grace and peace may 
be multiplied through the knowledge of God, and of Jesus our Lord” (2 Pet. i. 2). 
“The knowledge of God is thus the first and best of all the sciences.”—T. C. 


Ver. 18.—The connection between the heart and the intellect. “The eyes of ycur 
heart being enlightened.” j 

I, THis Is A SINGULAR EXPRESSION. Yet it is true in philosophy and true in life, 88 
well as consistent with Biblical language. Scripture speaks of applying our hearts unto 
wisdom (Ps. xc. 12), and of “ the understanding of the heart ” (Luke i. 51). 

11. THe HEART POWERFULLY INFLUENCES THE UNDERSTANDING. Larochefoucauld 
says, after his own cynical manner, “ The head is the dupe of the heart.” There is often 
undoubtedly a divided interest in the soul of man, where two powers are fighting for 
the mastery. Coleridge said, at a certain point in his speculative career, “ My head was 
with Spinoza, while my heart was with Paul and John.” Scripture is most emphatic 
in marking the connection between knowledge and holiness. We “ grow in grace and 
in knowledge” together, the two growths not hindering but helping each other. 
“Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God.” Purity of heart gives the insight. 
And purity of heart rather than accuracy of thought, is the order of the kingdom. “If 
any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God” (John 
vii. 17). How often do we find in human life that interest, vanity, fear, party spirit, 
determine the conclusions of the intellect! Our opinions often depend upon our lives 
quite as much as our lives depend upon our opinions. Fichte says that our system of 

‘thought is often no more than the history of our hearts, Our judgment is often swayed 
by our affections, 

III. Ir 1s Gop WHO GIVES THE INSIGHT. “ The eyes of your heart being enlightened.” 
It is God who “hath given us an understanding to know him that is true” (1 John v. 
20); not a new faculty, but a new quickness or insight; for “unless a man is born 
again, he cannot see the kingdom of God” (John iii. 3). It is God who “giveth the 
light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Christ Jesus” (2 Cor. iv. 6). 
We are “not able of ourselves to think a good thought ” (2 Cor. iii. 5), and our highest 
knowledge is a Divine gift, “To you it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom 


26 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. (on. 1. 1—23. 


of God” (Luke viii. 10). It ought, therefore, to be the prayer of every Christian, 
“ Open thou mine eyes, that I may sec wondrous things out of thy Law ;” and we are 
encouraged in our supplication by the knowledge that “eye hath not seen, nor ear 
heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared 
for them that love him” (1 Cor. ii. 9).—T. Ο. 


Ver. 18.— The knowledge of God and its outlets, The effect of the Divine illumina- 
tion is to enlarge our Knowledge in three different directions—pointing at once to the 
hope that is lodged in the heart of our Divine calling, to the glory of our future 
inheritance, and to the greatness of the change involved in our regeneration by the Holy 
Spirit. The Apostle Peter reproduces exactly the same order of thought when he 
blessed God (1) for having begotten us by the resurrection of Christ from the dead 
to a lively hope; (2) to an inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and unfading ; (3) reserved 
in heaven for those who are kept by the power of God unto salvation. The ideas are 
presented in exactly the same order. There is a grand alliance of blessings included in 
the knowledge of God.—T, 0. 


Ver. 18.—The hope of God’s calling. It is impossible to appreciate the hope till we 
understand the true nature of the calling to which it is so beautifully attached. 

I, THE CALLING I8 THE EFFECTUAL CALL oF Gop BY THE Spirit. 1. It is posited 
securely between predestination on one side and justification on the other; for “ whom 
he did predestinate, them he also called: and whom he called, them he also justified ” 
(Rom. viii. 30). 2. It is a call to peace: ‘ Let the peace of God rule in your hearts, to the 
which also ye are called in one body ” (Col. iii. 15), 3. It 18 ἃ call to blessing : “ Knowing 
that ye are thereunto called, that ye should inherit a blessing” (1 Pet. iii. 9). 4 It 
is a call to eternal glory: “The God of all grace who hath called us unto his eternal 
glory by Christ Jesus” (1 Pet. v.10). It may, therefore, be well described as a higt 
oO nearenly calling (Phil. 111,14; Heb. iii. 1), New hope is lodged in the heart of this 

Dg. 

Tl. Tae NaTURE OF THE HOPE. It must be regarded both subjectively and objectively, 
that is, both as a hope allied to joy—* rejoicing in hope” (Rom. xii. 12), as “a living 
Lope” (1 Pet. {. 3), as a hope full of consolation (Heb. vi. 18), as a hope “ that maketh 
not ashamed” (Rom. v. 5), and as a hope connected with eertain deep and strong 
foundations, These are described in the Epistle to the Hebrews—the Hpistle of the . 
letter hope—as “ the two immutable things,” the oath and the promise of God, termi- 
nating or converging upon our great High Priest of the Melchisedec order, who is, by 
virtue of his atoning work, the real “ Hope of glory ” made known to sinners (Col. j. 27). 
We cannot know this hope, either subjectively or objectively, without the aid of the 
lioly Spirit ; and therefore the apostle prays, “‘ The God of hope fill you with all joy and 
peace in believing, that ye may abound in hope, by the power of the Holy Ghost” 
(Rom. xv. 13). The apostle, therefore, prays here that the Ephesian Christians may 
have an abounding assurance of their interest in Christ based on the best. possible 
grounds, 1, Every believer is called to have an assurance of his personal interest in 
Christ. A whole Epistle has been written to help toward this assurance: “ These things 
have I written to you that believe on the Name of the Son of God, that ye may know 
that ye have eternal life” (1 John v. 13). 2, It is implied that believers may not fully 
know “the hope of their calling.” Yet they may still be true believers. Faith and 
assurance are not to be confounded. The hope in question is held by anu anchor that 
cannot be dragged from its sure holding-ground (Heb. vi. 18, 19). 

‘Hope of all passions most befriends us here; 
Passions of prouder name befriend us less; 
Joy has her tears and Transport has her death. 


Hope like a cordial, innocent, though strong, 
Man’s heart at once inspirits and serenes.” 


T. Ὁ. 


Ver. 18.—The riches of the glory of God’s inheritance. How little we know of this 
inheritance! We desire to know more. There are five points included in our fuller 


study of this inheritance. 


on. 1. 1—23,] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 27 


I. Our tire τὸ 17. It is “ἃ purchased possession” (ver, 14), the price being the 
blood of Christ. The death of the Testator was necessary that ‘‘ they which are 
called might receive the promise of eternal inheritance” (Heb. ix. 15). 

11. Ir 1s a ΒΙΟῊ InHERITANOE. God is rich in mercy, rich in grace, rich in love, 
rich in power, rich in goodness and forbearance; but as to heaven, he is rich in 
glory. Itis there emphatically he will make many rich. Both here and there it will 
be delightfully true: ‘‘My God shall supply all your need according to his riches 
in glory by Christ Jesus” (Phil. iv, 19). The rich glory of the New Jerusalem is 
described in the Revelation (Rev. xxi.). Its riches lie essentially in the perpetuity 
of its blessedness—it is ‘‘ an eternal inheritance.” 

ΠΙ. Ir 18 A @LoRtous INHERITANCE. “The righteous shall shine as {86 sun” 
(Matt. xiii. 43), because they are received to the glory of God (Rom. xv. 7), and 
called to his kingdom and glory (1 Thess, ii, 12), The glory of God himself is to be 
the light of heaven (Rev. xxi. 11). 

IV. Iris a Faruen’s mneritancg, And therefore he is here called “the Father of 
glory.” We are heirs of God as we are children of God by faith in Christ Jesus, “Eye 
hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which 
Gad hath prepared for them that love him.” 

V. 1118 FoR THE saints. ‘ He that overcometh shall inherit all things, and I will 
be his God” (Rev. xxi, 7). We need to have “the eyes of our heart enlightened,” 
that we may know all the fulness of glory and blessing involved in these five suggestive 
considerations.—T. Q, ‘ 


Ver. 19.— The power of God in salwation. ‘‘The exceeding greatness of his power 
to usward who believe.” This is the third thing the apostle wished them to know 
‘‘for their furtherance and joy of faith.” 

I. Tuk sPHERE OF THIS woRKING. ‘To usward who believe.” Power will always 
excite our admiration, but it will not inspire comfort unless it is exerted on our be- 
half. The devils know the power of God, but its exercise inspires them with no com- 
fort. This power is manifested in the various parts of Christian life, both in grace 
and in glory, from conversion to glorification. It provides all things that pertain 10 
life and godliness. Itis God’s saving power. 1. At the beginning of Christian life—in 
our conversion. God ‘‘hath delivered us from the kingdom of darkness and translated 
us into the kingdom of his dear Son” (Col. i. 13). The apostle speaks of this power 
in relation to his own conversion and apostleship: “ Whereof I was made a minister, 
according to the gift of the grace of God given to me by the effectual working of his 
power ” (ch. iii. 7). The gospel is the instrument of Divine power. It is “the power of 
God unto salvation” (Rom. i. 16); for “our gospel came unto you, not in word only, 
but in power” (1 Thess. i. 5). 2. In its progress—in our sanctification. The thought 
of preserving grace is, perhaps, uppermost in the passage. Believers are “kept by the 
power of God unto salvation ” (1 Pet. i. 5). Therefore the apostle prays that God would 
“fulfil all the good pleasure of his goodness and the work of faith with power” 
(2 Thesa, i. 11). God “is able to do exceeding abundantly above all we ask or think " 
(ch. iii. 20). The apostle prays for himself that ‘he may know “the power of his 
resurrection” (Phil. iii. 10). There is power everywhere at work in our salvation; 
for it is thus that “ the whole body increaseth with the increase of God by the effectual 
working in the measure of every part” (ch. iv. 16). 8, At our final glorification. 
“Who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like to his own glorious 
body, according to the working whereby he is able even to subdue all things unto 
himself” (Phil. iii, 21). 

Il. Tae Narvre oF Tas Power. “ The exceeding greatness of his power.” It was 
power that could overcome all obstacles. “If God be for us, who can be against us?” 
(Rom. viii. 31); “‘My Father is greater than all, and no man is able to pluck them 
out of my Father’s hands” (John x. 29). We argue from his power to his forgiveness, 
and, therefore, in the Lord’s Prayer, after we have asked for the forgiveness of our sins, 
we plead for it on the ground, “'Thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory.” 
Let us not hesitate to accept the fulness of Biblical teaching through any fear of trenching 
on the free-will of man. Man’s freedom works freely within the sphere of God’s power. 
But the apostle dees not content himself with merely pling up a succession of 


28 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, (ca. 1. 1--23, 


expressive of the wonderful effects of this power. He places it side by side with the 
power manifested in the resurrection and glorification of the Redeemer.—T. O. 


Vers. 19, 20.—The power of the Resurrection. “ According to the working of his 
mighty power, which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead.” The 
resurrection of Christ was at once an illustration and a pledge of our resurrection, 
spiritually and physically, with himself. It seems a strange thing to find an exercise 
of purely physical power compared with an exercise of purely spiritual power. The 
strangeness disappears when we consider the place of the Resurrection in the scheme of 
Christian doctrine. The fact of Christ’s resurrection is to us both doctrine and life 
-- the very pillar and ground ” of Christianity. 

I, Ir 15 THE CONSTITUTIVE ESSENCE OF CHRISTIANITY, HISTORICALLY AND MORALLY. 
Strauss admits that “Christianity in the form in which Paul, in which all the apostles 
understand it, as it is presupposed in the confessions of all Christian Churches, falls 
with the resurrection of Jesus.” In this fundamental fact we have the concurrent 
witness of the apostles, of Paul in his gospel and his life, of the Gospels, of Jesus 
himself, of the belief of the disciples, of the attitude of Jewish enemies, of the found- 
ing of the Church among Jews and Gentiles. If the Resurrection is denied, Vinet’s 
Hee becomes true: “A new history is manufactured for us in the interest of a new 
theology.” 

II. Ir 448 GREAT THEOLOGIOAL VALUE; FOR IT 18 THE SEAL AND CROWN OF CaRIS1's 
REDEEMING SACRIFICE. “ He was raised again for our justification” (Rom. iv. 25). If 
he was not raised, we are yet in our sins. 

ΠῚ. His RESURRECTION SUPPLIES THE IMAGE AND THE GROUND OF OUB RENEWAL 
INTO HIS FELLOWSHIP. (Rom. vi. 1—13; Col. ii. 10—13; iii. 1—10; Gal. ii. 20.) Jesus 
himself expressively blends together the historical and the moral constituents of our faith 
in the sublime sentence, “I am the Resurrection, and the Life: he that believeth in me, 
though he were dead, yet shall he live: and whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall 
never die” (John xi. 25). It is not simply that resurrection is the truest description 
of the living personal experience of the believer from day to day, but by virtue of his 
oneness with Christ he is “‘quickened together with Christ, and raised up together 
with him, and made to sit together with him in heavenly places” (ch. ii. 5). Jesus’ 
extinction of the penalty of sin, his breaking the seal of death, his recovery for man 
of the power of the Holy Spirit, all attested by the Resurrection, reveal it to us at the 
same time as a source of moral light and power. This is “ the power of the Resurrection ” 
that the apostle prays for (Phil. iii. 10). 

IV. THE RESURRECTION IS THE PLEDGE TO US OF PERSONAL IMMORTALITY, AND HIS 
RESURRECTION-BODY THE TYPE OF THE FUTURE GLORIFIED MAN. (Phil. iii. 21.) The 
apostle says, “If the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, 
ne that raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies through 
his Spirit that dwelleth in you” (Rom. viii. 11). Thus, first and last, the resurrection 
of Christ is more than a mere illustration of the power of God “to usward who 
believe;” it is a pledge of the continuance and consummation of all that is involved 
in the redemption of Christ.—T. C. 


Vers. 20, 21.—The exaltation of Christ. “ And set him at his own right hand in the 
heavenly places.” There was power buth in the resurrection and in the ascension of 
our Lord. As the Resurrection was the seal of his redeeming sacrifice, his ascension 
was the seal of the Resurrection, usually linked with it in Bible allusions, but specially 
referred to by Peter (Acts ii, 383—36; 1 Pet. iii. 22), In John’s Gospel there is an 
emphatic reference to the event: “I came forth from the Father, and am come into the 
world; again, I leave the world, and go to the Father” oe xvi. 28). In the Epistle 
to the Hebrews it receives greater prominence than the Resurrection itself (Heb. ii. 9 ; 
iv. 14,19). It was a phrase in one of the earliest hymns of the Church—he was 
“received up into glory ἢ (1 Tim. iii. 16). The sitting at the right hand of God is the 
immediate and necessary sequel of the ascension from the earth, Several important 
facts are implied in tnis heavenly session. 

I, Kinaty pientry. This accrues to him from his obedience unto death (Phil. ii, 9—11), 
and is never referred to Christ before his incarnation, but only te the God-Man after his 


on. 1 1—23.)} THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, 29 


ascension, Yet he was in reality King as well as Priest before his incarnation. If he 
saved men fom the beginning, he was King from the beginning. The dominion of the 
Mediator was conferred upon him in consequence of his obedience unto death, and was 
yet enjoyed and exercised by him long before his death; just as he saved men from 
the beginning by the blood of the cross, as being the “ Lamb slain from the foundation 
of the world.” Theexaltation he received after death was not an accession of new glory 
or pewer, but the manifestation under new conditions of a glory he had from the begin- 
ning. This was the position assigned to him in the hundred and tenth psalm, ‘‘ The 
Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand.” Its fulfilment is manifest in such 
sentences as the following :— Him hath God exalted with his right hand to bea Prince 
and Saviour” (Acts v. 31); “ He was made higher than the heavens ” (Heb. vii. 26); 
he “sits on the right hand of power” (Mark xiv. 62); he is “ now set down at the 
right hand of the throne of God ” (Heb. xii. 2). Thus, though “ crucified in weakness,” 
he “liveth by the power of God” (2 Cor. xiii. 14). 

IL Krxety aurnoriry, Over all the principalities and powers, evil and good, in 
two worlds; for not only is he far above all these, but God “hath put all things under 
his feet.” Ile had himself declared immediately before his ascension, “ All power is 
given unto me in heaven and in earth” (Matt. xxviii. 18). There is nothing excepted 
from the vast sweep of his power. All things whatsoever are his footstool. The brow 
that was once crowned with thorns wears the crown of universal dominion. The 
pierced hand holds the sceptre of the universe. Herein lies the sublime guarantee for 
the preservation and completion of his Church on earth, He will ultimately triumph 
over all his enemies (Heb. x. 18). 

III. BizsszpneEss. This points to “the joy set before him” (Heb. xii. 2), the joy 
of holy love, because “ he has received of the travail of his soul and is satisfied ” (Isa. 
liii. 11). It was in allusion to himself that the bright words are used, “Thou wilt 
show me th» path of life: in thy presence,is fulness of joy; at thy right hand are 
pleasures for evermore ” (Ps, xvi. 11). 

IV. ῬΕΒΡΗΤΟΙΤΥ. He liveth ever to God without dying again (Rom. vi. 10). We 
have to do with a risen Christ who dieth no more, and therefore can be ever helpful, 
unlike our fiiends of earth, whose death ends all their relations to us. 

V. Inver essory work. Heis our heavenly Advocate (1 John ii. 1). He has entered 
heaven “ for us,” now “to appear in the presence of God for us” (Heb. ix. 24). It is 
this presence of our High Priest which is so helpful to us in our many infirmities, and 
is the guaraitee of our daily pardon in virtue of the great sacrifice on Calvary. Thus, 
being reconciled to God by his death, we are saved by his life, in consequence of the 
power which is unceasingly passing forth from the Head to the members (Rom. v. 10). 
The salvation of Christ on earth and in heaven is one inseparable whole. Thus the 
session of Clirist is connected with the peace, the sanctification, the security, the hope 
of all believi rs. 

VI. Lessons AND ENCOURAGEMENTS TO BELIEVERS. Our Saviour assumes and 
exercises a lordship over the lives and over the deaths of all his disciples; “ for whether 
we live or whether we die, we are the Lord’s” (Rom. xiv. 8); and in the case of two 
eminent dissiples, Peter and John, he claimed this lordship, “ And if I will that he 
tarry till I come, what is that to thee?” (John xxi, 18, 22). Therefore all the energy 
and devotion of our lives are to be given tohim. He demands of us a heavenly direction 
of mind (Col. iii, 2), with a sense of our heavenly citizenship to keep us apart from the 
sins and vanities of life. We ought to cherish a sentiment of holy fear, on account of 
our relation to a Redeemer so highly exalted in glory; and yet a sentiment of holy 
boldness, knowing that our High Priest is on the throne of glory and of grace.—T. C. 


Vers, 22, 23.—Christ’s headship. The Resurrection was the point of conjunction 
between his crucifixion and his coronation, The headship to which he was exalted 
had a twofold relationship: he was made “ Head over all things to the Church,” and 
he was made Head of the Church itself. 

J, His HWADSHIP OVER ALL THINGS. It is no new thought that our Lord is at the 
head of the natural order of things; for “ without him was not anything made that 
was made;” “ By him all things consist ;” he upholds “all things by the word of his 
power,” for “ the government is upon hisshoulders.” But by virtue of hia mediatorship 


30 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. (on. 1. 1—23, 


the elements are made subject to him—all kings and nations, all angels in heaven, 
all fallen angels, all the advances and discoveries of science, are made tributary to the 
welfare of the Church. Therefore no weapon formed against her shall prosper. Chris- 
tian people ought to derive comfort and aspiration from the thought that he who is the 
Foundation of their religious hopes holds in his hands all the complicated threads of 
providence and directs the course of human history. It is the one Divine hand which 
clasps together the two great books of nature and revelation. This thought ought to 
give fresh breadth and strength and healthiness to all our thoughts about him. Above 
all, let us see in this fact the Divine guarantee for the safety of the Church. “If God 
be for us, who can be against us?” Jesus “filleth all in all,” and therefore has the 
inexhaustible resources of the universe at his disposal for the good of the Church. 

11. Heapsui or ΤῊΒ Cuuroa. There is a double relationship involved in this 
headship—one representative, the other vital. 1. The representative relation. He was 
Head as he was Saviour (ch. v. 23). Believers were in him from eternity, for they 
were chosen in him (ver. 4). “The covenant which was confirmed before of God in 
Christ ” (Gal. iii. 17) was that in the terms of which they are saved; the promise of 
life is said to be in him (2 ‘Tim. i. 1), as all the promises are “ yea” and “amen” in him 
(2 Cor. i. 20). Thus grace is said to be given us in Christ Jesus before the world began 
(2 Tim. i. 9); and believers are said to suffer with him, to be quickened and raised 
together with him, to sit together in heavenly places in Christ (ch. ii. 6). Christ, 
indeed, as Head, stands for the whole body: “ So also is Christ ” (1 Cor. xii. 12). Thus 
the representative relation extends from eternity to eternity, These passages of Scrip- 
ture prove the groundlessness of the notion that Christ only became Head after his 
resurrection with the view of proving that the saints of the Old Testament dispensation 
do not belong to the body or Church of Christ. He was Head just as he was Saviour ; 
for “he is the Head of the Church, and he is the Saviour of the body ” (ch. v. 28). 
Christ was not and could not be Saviour without death, yet he was the Saviour of Old 
‘Testament saints ages before his death, There is no passage asserting that he became 
Head through resurrection. The resurrection only declared his headship as it declared. 
his sonship. If Christ was not Head before his incarnation, the Uld ‘Testament saints 
had no Mediator. Christ was the Head of all believers because, as being the last Adam, 
all believers were in him. 2. The vital relation. Christ is the Head of the body, the 
Church, holding the same relation as the head does to the natural body. (1) As to life. 
His life is the life of the members, “ Because I live ye shall live also ” (John xiv. 19); 
“The life I now live in the flesh I live by the faith of the Son of God” (Gal. ii. 20), 
If the head is severed from the body, life becomes extinct. The lile of the Church 
depends upon its union with Christ; therefore it is a blessed truth, ‘‘ He that is joined 
to the Lord is one spirit” (1,Cor. vi. 16,17). Thus the apostle can say, as if his tife 
were merged in the very life of the Redeemer, “I live; yet not 1, but Christ liveth in 
me,” the Mainspring of all my activity, the Source of all my holy desires, the Fountain 
of my blessedness. In a beautifully spiritual sense, believers can say, “ In him we live, 
and move, and have our being.” (2) As to motion. It is the head which directs all 
the movements of the body ; so it is Christ who “ worketh all in all” (1 Cor. ii. 6) and 
“fills all in all.” (3) As to strength, The members of the body have no power of 
sclf-motion ; they derive their power from the head. So all our power to fight against 
sin is derived from Christ. Therefore the apostle prays for the Ephesians that they 
may be “strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inner man” (ch. iii. 16) ; and he 
says of himself, “I can do all things through Christ which strengtheneth me ” (Phil. iv, 
13). (4) As to sympathy. The sensations of the limbs are telegraphed back to the 
brain, which shows itself in constant sympathy with every part of the body. A pain 
in the smallest nerve is felt in the head. So Jesus Christ knows all our sorrows and 
our trials, and “cannot but be touched with a feeling of our infirmities.” He says to 
Saul, “ Why persecutest thou me?” and says to the whole company of the redeemed, 
“Tnasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done 
it unto me” (Matt. xxv. 40). It is out of this close connection that the members 
themselves ought to realize the power and the blessing of mutual sympathy. (5) As 
to subordination, Jesus Christ is not only Head of the Church, but Head over the 
Church. The apostle says, “ The Head of every man is Christ, and the head of the 
woman is the man, and the Head of Christ is God” (1 Cor, xi-2). It is implied here 


tH. 1. 1—23.] THE EPISTLE TO THE ErHdESIANS. 31 


that the body is subordinate to the head, though the subordination is in its nature 
different in the three cases mentioned. Christianity is not uly Christ, but it is subjec- 
tion to him as Saviour, Lord, and Guide. 

IIL, Tue Cuurcn as THE Bopy or CuRist. The Church thus regarded refers not 
to any one body of Christians; for there is no denomination on earth that contains all 
the disciples of Christ, nor is there any denomination of which it can be said that all 
its members are disciples of Christ. It refers to the whole number of God’s people, 
redeemed by the blood of Christ (ch. v. 25). The Ephesian Epistle sets forth the doc- 
trine of the Church in this sense, We never read in it of Churches, but of the Church. 
The idea is that of one organic whole, represented under various images, borrowed at 
me time from a temple, at another from a house, at another from the head with its 
different members, but it always signifies a union of those united to Christ by faith, 
whether they belong to earth or heaven. The Church is here described as at once the 
body and the fulness of Christ. 1. The body of Christ. The most impressive illustra- 
tion of the body is supplied by the same apostle in 1 Cor. xii. 12—27. He shows an 
analogy between the Church and the human body in important particulars. (1) As 
the body is one organic whole, because animated by one spirit, so the Church is one by 
virtue of the indwelling Spirit. It follows, therefore, that believers must be one in 
faith, love, and obedience. But this union must have outward expression in the recog- 
nition of all Christians as such, and in mutual helpfulness and harmony. (2) As the 
unity of the body admits of a diversity of members and organs, the unity of the Church 
admits of a like diversity in gifts and offices. (3) As all the members of the body are 
mutually depenvent, each existing for all, so members of the Church have beneficiary 
relations to each other for the purposes of edification or service. (4) It is God who has 
made the distinction among the members of the body; it is he who bestows spiritual 
gifts according to his good pleasure. Thus the body exists with a community of con- 
dition, feeliug, character; all the members bound up in one bundle of life, so united to 
Christ that all his relationships are theirs—his people their people, his Father their 
Father, his home their home. @2. The Church the fulness of Christ. As the body is 
not complete without the head, so the head is not complete without the body. The 
Lord Jesus Christ is not complete without his Church. How can this be? He himself 
says, “ My strength is made perfect in weakness ;” but is his power not always perfect ὃ 
It is declared to be perfect in our weakness. So the Church serves as an empty vessel, 
into which the Saviour pours his mediatorial fulness. Every fresh convert added to 
the Church adds to his fulness. His fulness is manifested by the variety of gifts and 
graces he bestows on his members, who are always growing up into him who is t'e 
Head (ch. iv. 15), growing toa stature, to a proportion, till we are filled with the fulness 
of God. This view of the Church suggests (1) that if we are vessels of mercy, we are 
empty vessels till the Lord fills us with his Spirit. (2) It suggests the high dignity 
of the Church, (3) It suggests the rich love of God who gave Christ as the Head of 
the Church. (4) It sugyests the absolute safety and ultimate triumph of all true 
believers.—T. Ο. 


Vers, 1, 2.—The salutation of the saints. In the present case Paul, without associat- 
ing any brethren with himself, proceeds to state his apostleship, and to transmit his 
salutation to the saints at Ephesus. These saints had been gathered for the most part 
out of paganism, and this will account for the introduction, as well as many of the con- 
tents, of this magnificent Epistle. We note the following lessons as here suggested :—- 

L THE aposTLEsHIP OF PAUL HAD BEEN RECEIVED DIRECTLY FROM JESUS CHRIST. 
(Ver. 1.) The name “ Paul” was the Roman counterpart of the Hebrew “Saul,” and 
its use in these superscriptions to the Epistles was doubtless to conciliate those Chris- 
tians who had once been heathen. ‘This Paul, then, the man who had made the 
interests of the Gentile world a chief concern, declares that he had received his apostle- 
ship from Christ directly. He thus repudiated any man-given or man-made apostleship, 
It is Jesus who alone could make an apostle, just as it is he alone who can make a 
minister. All that any Church can do is to recognize a God-given qualification.? 

‘ Of, Harlesa, ‘Epheser-brief,’ ἐπ loc.; also Monod’s ‘Explication de ’Epitre de Saint 
Paul aux Ephesiens,’ in loo. 

2 Cf. homily on Gal. i. 1. 


82 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. [on 1. 1—23. 


Paul was the apostle of Jesus, the man sent forth by the risen and reigning Tord te 
evangelize the heathen. Such a consciousness of Christ’s consecration gave him great 
power. 

II. He HERE SALUTES LIVING SAINTS. (Ver. 1.) Monod has pertinently remarked 
that, while others seek their saints among the dead, Paul seeks saints, and so should we, 
among the living. Saintliness should characterize all Christians, In fact, a Christian 
is a “person set apart, separated from the world, and reserved for the service of Jesus 
Christ and for the glory of God, according as it is written, ‘This people have I formed 
for myself, they shall show forth my praise.’” Accordingly, Paul did not hesitate to 
call the Christians at Ephesus “saints,” for he expected from them saintly lives. The 
very name raised the standard of Christian profession throughout tbe Church at 
Ephesus. And would it not be well for us to use it, and to strive always to deserve its 
use? It is to be feared that our saints, like those of Rome, are for the nwst part dead 
and gone; whereas what the age needs is saintliness embodied in flesh and blood before 
it. It is only then that it shall come to acknowledge the power of the Christian faith. 
Of course, Paul did not imply that every professor at Ephesus was sainily. He used 
the term presumptively, as a charitable spirit will, But the very use of the term 
raised the whole standard of holy living there and did immense good. 

III. THs SAINTS ARE FULL OF FAITH IN Curist Jesus. (Ver.1.) We take moro 
in this passage in the sense of men of faith. Paul thus states the principle of their 
saintliness. ‘They had learned to trust Christ and to regard him as their King, and so 
they came to be consciously consecrated unto all good works. Fidelity flows from this 
living faith in Christ. They prove reliable men because they have first learned to rely 
upon the Saviour (cf. John xx. 28; Gal. iii. 9). Let us apply this principle ourselves. 
If we trust Jesus as we ought, we shall find the trust working itself ovt into lovable 
and lovely lives, and we too shall be saintly. 

IV. Pav DESIRES FOR THESE SAINTS THE GRACE AND PEACE OF Gop. (Ver. 2.) 
There is something beautiful in the old forms of benediction. We lose their fragrance 
in our cold “ Good-byes.” The Greeks and Romans:were accustomed to wish their 
correspondents “ Safety ;” the Jews took the simpler form of “ Peace.” J3ut tke gospel 
came to give to both a deeper meaning and breathe grace and peace wf the deepest 
character into human souls. Hence these salutations of the saints. Govl’s undeserved 
favour coming forth as grace finds its effects in the responsive human heart in a 
heavenly peace, so that the once troubled spirit comes into wondrous calm. What 
Paul is about to state in his Epistle will not interfere with but rather deepen this holy 

eace, 

It is well for us to see the Fountain-head of blessing in the Father’s heart, to see the 
channel of communication in his Son, Jesus Christ our Lord, and to experience its 
effect in the peace which passeth all understanding, which he has ordained should keep 
our hearts and minds by Christ Jesus (Phil. iv. 6). The saints are meai:t to be peace- 
‘ul spirits as they consecrate their energies to the service of the Lord.—h. M. Εἰ, 


Vers. 3—6.— The electing and adopting love of God. As soon as thw salutation of 
the saints is over, Paul proceeds to speak about the blessings he and they have received 
from God. One curious expression meets us and constitutes the key of the whole 
passage; it is “the heavenly places” (ἐν τοῖς ἐπουρανίοι9) wherein the spicitual blessing 
is experienced. This cannot mean merely that out of the heavenly places the gracious 
Father pours his spiritual blessings upon selected souls ; but, as a comparison of ch. ii. 6 
will show, it means that the adopted ones are elevated in spirit even tc the heavenly 
places, where they as spiritually ascended ones can survey the Divine purposes and 
appreciate the Divine blessings in a way impossible otherwise. Let us, then, betake 
ourselves to these “heavenly places” by the blessing of the Spirit, anil see how the 
Divine plan looks from such a vantage-ground. It is in this way we shall escape much 
of the obscure thinking which prevails upon the electing love of God. And we are 
nere taught— 

1. THe FounTaIx-HEAD OF BLESSING 18 Gop THE FatueR. (Ver. 1.) Paul puts 
‘the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ” at the head ot all things. Out of that paternal 
heart all spiritual blessing comes. The dispensation of grace is overshadowed by & 
Father All the love which wells up out of parents’ hearts for their children all the 


on. 1. 1—23.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 33 


love they lavish with varying success upon their prodigals, but faintly images the 
wondrous love that wells out of the heart of God. Yet the image, though but faint, is 
real, and we may climb by the firm footing of analogy up from human experience to 
some comprehension of the Divine love and plan. Just as earthly fathers plan blessings 
of all kinds for their children, and give them these on certain understandings, so is it 
with the infinite Father above. It is a Father with whom we have to deal, the 
“Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.” 

II. THE RULE OF BLESSING WAS THE GOOD PLEASURE OF HIS WILL, (Ver. 5.) Now, 
when we get up in spirit to the heavenly places, we have no difficulty in seeing the 
truth and propriety of this arrangement. For the world above is one whose inhabi- 
tants have all learned to acquiesce in the good pleasure of the Father’s will. They 
know that the pleasure of his will can be nothing else than good; they are content to 
abide by it. They assure themselves of everlasting blessedness in accepting of it as 
their rule and law. And we have only to get to their standpoint and to perceive how 
good God is, to acquiesce at once in the good pleasure of his will. God is so good that 
he could not will anything but what is good. If he has to will vengeance against any 
of his creatures, it is because vengeance is better than impunity; it is better that he 
should strike home than that he should be still. Of course, it is hard for our natural 
hearts which are so opposed to God to acquiesce off-hand in such an arrangement. We 
think it hard to have to depend absolutely upon the good pleasure of God’s will; but 
we nave only to climb up a little by the Spirit’s help and see how good he is, and then 
shall we gladly and gratefully adore his pleasure as always good. 

II. Tae FatrHer PLANNED THE BLESSING OF HIS ADOPTED CHILDREN BEFORE THE 
FOUNDATION OF THE WORLD. (Ver. 4.) Starting from the sovereignty of the good God, 
as the rule of all blessing, we have next to notice that the blessing of his adopted 
children was deliberately planned from all eternity—“ before the foundation of the 
world.” The foresight of a father when carried into every detail of the children’s needs 
glorifies him in our estimation. "We would not honour an earthly father who left any- 
thing to hap-hazard which he could have foreseen. Hence we conceive of the infinite 
Father as leaving nothing to chance, but arranging all down to the minutest details. 
He did not leave a loose thread in the whole arrangement. Why should he, if he is 
the omniscient and almighty God? What is contended for in predestination, therefore, 
is that the almighty Father left nothing to chance, but provided for everything in his 
plan. How this is compatible with human freedom is beyond our feeble comprehen- 
sion; but that it is compatible we do most firmly believe. There are many problems 
of advanced mathematics which as rusty mathematicians we cannot now ~e how to 
scive, and there are many problems of science which are to the most splendiu scientists 
still unsolved; but we should be foolish in the extreme to pronounce either insoluble. 
So is it with the Divine predestination and the freedom of the creature. There is a 
soiution somewhere, but it is beyond our terrestrial calculus. We believe in both as 
facts, and we leave the future to bring the reconciliation, And in the heavenly places 
to which the Spirit helps us to soar, we rejoice in the thought of that Divine plan 
which left nothing out, but embraced everything. 

IV. THE ELECTION OF INDIVIDUALS WAS TO HOLINESS AND BLAMELESSNESS OF 
CHARACTER BEFORE HIM IN LOVE. (Ver. 4.) Holiness and perfection are the ends 
aimed at in God’s electing love. It is because this is lost sight of that we have so 
much confusion on this subject. God could not elect any soul to a salvation without 
holiness; the idea has no meaning in the Divine mind. Men may desire to separate 
salvation from holiness, to carry their sins with them into the heavenly world; but 
such desires are vain, and under God's government they can have no realization. The 
election is unto holiness. So long as a soul loves sin and hates holiness, he has no 
warrant to affirm any election. He may subsequently turn from sin to God, and thus 
receive the evidence within him; but a soul that loves sin and hates holiness has no 
business in dabbling with this doctrine of election. God saves no man except in the 
process he makes him holy. Hence we must remember “they were not chosen because 
they were viewed as holy, and therefore deserving to be distinguished as God’s 
favourites, on account of their obedience or personal purity, but that they should be 
holy. 

v. AND THESE INDIVIDUALS FIND THEMSELVES ADOPTED INTO THE DIVINE FAMILY 

EPHESIANS. > 


34 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. (on. τ. 1—23, 


AND ACCEPTED IN Curist THE Betovep. (Vers. 5,6.) We have seen that the infinite 
Father is the Source of all blessing. But that Father has ene only Son, the only 
begotten, in his Divine family. The eternal Father had an eternal Son, and they held 
fellowship from all eternity through the eternal Spirit. This Son was and is the well- 
beloved. He always did the things which pleased the Father (John viii. 29), But, 
blessed be his Name, he was content to have “ joint-heirs” with himself in his inheri- 
tance (Itom. viii. 17). Jesus showed no jealousy about enlarging the family circle and 
about an abundance of brethren. Hence the Father set about adopting children, 
bringing into the charmed circle those who had no claim to the position or to its 
rewards. But every adopted child is made to feel that he is accepted of the Father for 
the elder Brother’s sake. Jesus as the [irstborn in the mighty family has so endeared 
himself to the Father that for his sake the Father accepts the persons of the prodigals 
who are adopted into his family. There is no reason in us for our adoption—there can 
never be; it is owing simply and entirely to Jesus Christ that we are accepted and 
adopted. Hence there is in the plan, as so far brought before us, no ground for boasting. 
Election and adoption alike rest on the good pleasure of God’s will. They are sovereign 
acts. They have their root in sovereignty; and as we rise into the heavenly places, we 
see that this is exactly as it should be.—R. M. E. 


Vers, 7—14.—The forgiveness and inspiration of the adopted children. From the 
electing and adopting love of God, Paul proceeds next to show how it manifests itself 
in the thorough culture of the adopted children. We saw how they are accepted into 
the charmed circle for the Beloved’s sake, and to him, indeed, owe all, We are now 
to notice how thorough is the provision made for the upbringing of these adopted ones. 
And— 

I. THROUGH THE BLOOD OF THE BELOVED THEY ARE BEDEEMED AND FORGIVEN. 
(Ver. 7.) For the selected individuals, so far from having any personal merit, are lost 
in sin. Prodigals by nature and practice, they feel that they deserve not to be called 
suns of God. They are brought to such a sense of unworthiness as to wonder at the 
riches of God’s grace which could make sons and heirs out of such material. But the 
great Father has provided redemption and forgiveness through the blood of his dear 
Son. A terrible price, doubtless, it was for the Father to pay, and for the Son to offer 
to secure our redemption, Yet it was cheerfully and freely given. The family is thus 
blood-bought. How holy and consecrated we ought to be! Our redemption price, the 
terms of our forgiveness, involved no less than the death of the Son of God. 

II. ΤῊΒ ADOPTED CHILDREN ARE EDUCATED TO KNow Gov’s WILL. (Vers. 8—10.) 
Forgiveness and redemption refer to our state, but after we are set down in the tamily 
circle we nee to be instructed. Earthly families make the education of the children 
a first concern, So is it in the family of God. Hence the riches of his grace are 
shown, not only in our pardon, but also in the revelation of his will and in our 
education therein. Moreover, his will contemplates the unifying of all things under 
Christ. His family is not to be split up into sections jealous of each other, but unity 
is to pervade it all. Gentiles and Jews, the Ey; hesians and Paul,—one and all are to be 
united under Christ the Head. Now, there is a great tendency towards unity in the 
thought of men. Philosophy, properly so called, is the discovery of unity of prin- 
ciple among the facts of the universe. Well, this tendency shall have its magnifi- 
cent fulfilment in the consummated unity of the dispensation of grace, when the 
heaven above and the earth beneath shall alike recognize in Jesus the elder Brother 
and righteous Head. All education is towards this grand unity. This is God’s 
purpose, and everything will in due season subserve it. The knowledge of God’s 
will, then, is the apprehension of his magnificent design in the unification of all 
things. The gospel is thus but a portion of a mightier plan. 

III. AcooRDINGLY, THE ADOPTED ONES ARE INSPIRED. (Vers. 11—14.) Paul speaks 
of having received an inheritance in Christ, and then he speaks of the Ephesians hav- 
ing got the sealing of the Spirit as the earnest of their inheritance. His meaning is 
plain. For Jews and Gentiles, as God’s adopted children, the one great need in this 
life is inspiration. When the Holy Spirit condescends to dwell within us, we are 
fitted for the duties which belong to the members of God’s family. And it is the 
spirituality thereby communicated which gives to us the true ideal of what heaven is 


on. 1. 1—23.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 85 


to be. Our holiest moments, when the indwelling Spirit moves within us, are our 
heavenliest. Then conformity to God’s will is the great delight, and whatever he 
sends is welcomed. Of circumstances we are then so far independent as to realize that, 
with God as our Portion, we have all things, though we may have little but him. We 
are already within the gates when with Habakkuk we can say, “ Although the fig tree 
shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the vines; the labour of the olive shall fail, 
and the ficlds shall yield no meat; the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there 
shall be no herd in the stalls: yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of 
my salvation ” (Hab. iii. 17, 18). Inspired to do or suffer cheerfully God’s will, this is 
heaven begun below and the true ideal of the heaven to come. The family composed 
of such elements as these must be harmonious in its relations, May its unity of spirit 
be always ours!—R. Μ. Εἰ, 


Vers. 15—23.—Paul’s first prayer for the Ephesians, Having spoken of the inspira- 
tion of the adopted children, the apostle proceeds next to his first prayer on their 
behalf. He has a still more remarkable prayer in ch. iii, but the present one is most 
instructive too. It begins, as usual, with thanksgiving for the faith towards the Lord 
Jesus, and love to all the saints which the Ephesians cherish. This need not detain us, 
but we may at once proceed to the substance of his petition for them. In a word, it 
is that they may know spiritually the Divine purpose regarding them, and thus be able 
the better to co-operate with God in the fulfilment of it. This Divine purpose is 
determined by the Divine power, and the progress of the Christian is simply an 
experience of “ the exceeding greatness of his power to us-ward who believe, according 
to the working of his mighty power.” ‘The point of the passage and of the prayer 
consists in the measure of the mighty power. This is found in the experience of Christ. 
His experience, in fact, becomes the measure of the Christian’s hope. When the Father 
can do such wonders in the person of Christ and in the interests of Christ’s people, how 
muth may we expect him to do for ourselves! 

1. Tue FatHer sHOWED HIS MIGHTY POWER IN RAISING CHRIST FROM THE DEAD, 
(Ver. 20.) The mighty power of God is illustrated in the work of creation; but, as 
A. Monod pointedly puts it, “Creation is an emanation; resurrection is a victory.” 
Christ was dead; apparently he had been vanquished; the king of terrors seemed 
supreme, But the first day of the week dawned upon a “risen Saviour,” and the 
Father’s mighty power received ample illustration. Now, it must have been a marvele 
lous experience for our Saviour to pass from death into newness of life. For the life 
after he rose was different from the life before he suffered. It was immortal. He could 
henceforth die no more. Hence he said in apocalyptic vision, “Iam he that liveth, 
and was dead, and, behold, I am alive for evermore.” It was thus a transformation 
from mortality to immortality, from death to everlasting life. The previous resurrec- 
tions, as far as we know, were only to mortal life. The children raised by Elijah, 
Elisha, and Christ, and the adults as well, rose to die once more. So that previous 
resurrections were only foreshadowings of the resurrection of Jesus out of death into 
life eternal. 

II. Toe FarHer sHOWED HIS MIGHTY POWER IN CAUSING CHRIST TO ASCEND TO 
HIS OWN RIGHT HAND IN THE HEAVENLY PLACES. (Vers. 20, 21.) Had Christ been 
left in this world with his immortal nature, he would have had a wide sphere for 
influence and authority. The opposing terrestrial powers would have gone down before 
him in due season, and an emancipated world been the result, But when we consider 
how limited in size this earth is compared with the rest of the system, we can undere 
stand how the Father would resolve to put his best beloved Son in a wider sphere of 
influence than this world affords. What principalities, powers, mights, and dominions 
lie beyond this “ little sand-grain of an earth” we cannot yet tell; but we are assured 
here of one fact, that the Father has set the Son above them all, at his own right hand 
in the heavenly places. Now, the “right hand of God” means the seat of power. 
It is the very focus and centre of that mighty energy which we are now considering. 
Consequently the Father has lifted the Son in his immortal human nature into the very 
centre-of power, and given him the universe as his empire. This, again, must have 
been a marvellous experience for Christ. What a joyful enlargement! To pass out of 
the narrowness and provincialism of this tiny world into the magnificence of a universal 


36 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. ἴσῃ. 1 1—23. 


empire; to have all created things and beings as his subjects; to be supreme Adminis- 
trator under the infinite Father ;—this must have been a mighty and a joyful experience 
for the risen Christ. 

JIL Tue Faruer sHowED HIS MIGHTY POWER IN PUTTING ALL THINGS UNDER 
Curist’s FEET. (Ver. 22.) The administration is thus guaranteed to be triumphant. 
Some portions of the vast empire may be rebellious. They may refuse the reign of the 
Man Christ Jesus. Their rash words may be, “ We will not have this Man to reign 
over us.” But they are only putting themselves under the feet of the reigning Christ. 
Their defeat is certain; the Father’s mighty power is pledged to Christ’s supremacy. 
And though, in the words of the Epistle to the Hebrews, “ we sce not yet all things put 
under him, we see Jesus, who was made a little lower than the angels for the suffering 
of ier crowned with glory and honour,” and this is the Father’s pledge of ultimate 
triumph. ? 

IV. Tue ΕΆΤΗΕΒ sHOWED HIS MIGHTY POWER IN GIVING CHRIST THE HEADSHIP OF 
THE CuuRcH. (Vers. 22, 23.) Now, the administration of a state and the headship 
of a Church are very distinct things. If the Church is the body and Christ the Head, 
then it stands in closer relations to Christ than subjects do to any sovereign. Christ 
thinks for the Church ; the Church acts for Christ. Just as the body is the instrument 
of the head, carrying out in the details of practical life the commandments of the head, 
the seat of the mind and will, so the Church is designed to be the instrument in the 
hand of Christ for the carrying out of his purposes. What a mighty power is needed 
to bring about a relation so close as this! What gracious power is needed to subdue 
the individual self-will, and enforce submission to the will and the word of the living 
Head! This intimate and glorious union between believers and their Lord is what the 
mighty power of the Father has brought and is bringing about, and this again must be 
a glorious experience on the part of Christ. 

Here, then, we have resurrection, ascension, enthronement, and headship all secured to 
the once dead Christ by the mighty power of the Father. In such a system what 
possibilities are opened up for each of us! If this is the measure of the Father’s 
mighty power, which Paul invoked on behalf of his Ephesian converts, truly they may 
lift up their heads in hope of redemption, complete and glorious, drawing nigh, The 
more we meditate upon the mighty power of the gracious Father, the more we are 
assured that mighty grace shall be manifested to us as we need it. When our Lord has 
had such experience granted him, his members may expect similar experiences in their 
season, We shall see a parallelism in the experience when we advance to the succeeding 
section.—R. M. E. 


Vers, 1, 2.—Address and salutation. The great verity of which the Epistle to the 
Ephesians treats is the Church of Christ. It has its place along with other everlasting 
verities in the twelfth chapter of the Hebrews. It exists in no visible community as it 
exists in the mind of God. This letter is addressed to the Ephesian Church; but there 
is nothing peculiarly Ephesian about it. There are no Ephesian errors which are 
combated, ‘There are no salutations sent to particular members of the Church of 
Ephesus, This gives it a catholic form; and it may have been that it was addressed 
as a circular letter to a number of Churches of which Ephesus was the centre, __ 

I, Appress, 1. The writer, “Paul.” He was the founder of the Ephesian Church, 
as of many Churches besides, Of all Christian workers he clearly bears the palm. It 
seems as if it would take many of our lives to make up what he succeeded in putting 
into the latter half of his, And yet what was Paul? He at once brings himself into 
relation to two personalities, two and yet one. For the first mentioned, Jesus (Accom- 
plisher of salvation) is the Christ (the Anointed) of the second mentioned. (1) His 
relation to Christ, “ An apostle of Christ Jesus.” He was subordinated to Christ. He 
is the great efficient Cause who saves (in the fullest sense) by his Word, by his blood, 
by his Spirit. To him, therefore, must be all the praise of salvation, ‘Unto him that 
loved us.” But yet he stood in an ¢mportant relation to him as an apostle. He was 
not the only apostle, but he was as much an apostle as any. He was sent from Christ 
(with special authority), as Christ was sent from God. With special powers his mission 
was to bring the salvation that was in Christ to man, and to build up the Church, 
(2) His relation te Ged, “Through the will of God.” This was at once his abase- 


oH. 1. 1—23,] THE EPISTLE TO ΤῊΝ EPHESIANS. 37 


ment and his support. He had no personal merit entitling him to the position of 
apostle. At the same time, that position was not a self-chosen one. It was the will 
of God that Christ (such is the idea) should station him, now here and now there, 
among the Churches. And whether he was anxiously engaged in the composition of 
an Epistle, or whether he was pleading tremblingly with his voice for Christ, he was 
supported by the feeling that he was acting at the Divine instance and under the 
Divine authority. 2. The persons addressed. (1) Generic designation. “To the 
saints which are at Ephesus.” The members of the Ephesian Church are designated 
“saints.” We are to think of the Old Testament meaning. Temple, city, land, 
priests, people, were all holy, or devoted to God. We are to take this name to ourselves, 
not vauntingly as what we are, but humbly as what we aspire to be. (2) Specific desig- 
nation. “And the faithful in Christ Jesus.” This is a designation associated with 
Christ. They were distinctively a Christian community. We are marked off not merely 
from those who have no faith (infidels) or an unholy faith (such as those who think it 
right to offer human sacrifices), but also from the Old Testament Church (the one 
Sacrifice having now been offered), and also from angels, who admire and adore Christ 
but have not the same close interest in him as sinnersof mankind. In the cross we see 
the Divine purpose of salvation fully disclosed ; and, under a sense of our great demerit, 
we rest upon Christ (in his boundless merit) as he is offered to us in the gospel. 

Il, Tue saturation, 1. The two words of salutation. (1) Grace. ‘Grace to 
you.” The idea to which grace (on God’s part) is opposed is merit (on our part), 

“For merit lives from man to man, 
And not from man, O Lord, to thee.” 


We feel that, if it were only to fare with our friends according to their deserving before 
God, it would not be well with them. There would be innumerable things for which 
they could not answer. We therefore recognize the great condition of their welfare 
to be that there should be the outgoing of undeserved favour and of loving care 
toward them.’ And so that is the first thing we put into our greeting. (2) Peace. 
And peace.” This is not peace of any description, which may only be a curse in 
disguise. But it is a peace which is conjoined with grace. It is a freedom from 
anxiety, which results from the consciousness of being loved and mercifully dealt 
with. Itis the child’s feeling at rest under the shelter of his father’s roof, and, when 
he acts amiss, in the enjoyment of his forgiveness. 2. The twofold source to which we 
leok in salutation. (1) First source. “From God our Father.” The fatherly in 
God is higher up than his omnipotence. The Father’s heart we have found to be the 
so1ve of blessing to ourselves, and we feel that it is only from that source that others 
can be truly blessed. He who is gracious to us be gracious also to them. (2) Second 
source. “ And the Lord Jesus Christ.” He is the glorious Manifestation of the Father’s 
grace. It is by him that blessings have been obtained, and through him that they 
come to us. “No man cometh to the Father but by me.” We must, therefore, in 
secking blessings for our friends, recognize him as the lordly Dispenser in his Father’s 
honse.—R. F. 


Ver. 3.—Ascription of praise by the Church. I. THE BLESSED oF THE CHURCH. 
1. God, “Blessed be the God.” It seems better to read, “Blessed be God.” ‘Thinking 
of God as infinitely glorious, how can we add to him by our praises? how can we by 
any words or deeds make him more glorious than he ia? And yet he is pleased to say, 
‘‘ Whoso offereth praise glorifieth me.” Our praises are pleasing to God, according as 
they are sincere and intelligent. When we come upon new and more impressive views 
of the Divine character, we cannot help saying with lowly adoring hearts, “ Blessed be 
God.” There is this outburst of adoration here at the beginning, and there will be fresh 
outbursts as we proceed. 2, God in relation to the Church’s Lord. ‘ And Father of 
our Lord Jesus Christ.” The Lord of the Church is he who was anointed Saviour 
of mankind. He is in the Church, not like a servant, as Moses was, but as a Son over 
his own house. He has absolute authority to act in the Father’s Name in the making 
of all arrangements, in the dispensing of all blessings. And in all that Christ has 
done, or is doing, for the Church, God has the glory, and is to be adored as Father of 
our Lord Jesus Christ 


38 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. ἴσει. 1. 1—23, 


II. For wHart THE CHURCH BLESSES Gop? “ Who hath blessed us with every spiritual 
blessing.” We are not to think merely of blessing that has been actually enjoyed. It 
ig rather blessing without respect to time. It is all that God has in store for the 
Church, and that is really inexhaustible blessing. “In our Father’s house there ia 
enough and to spare.” He is not exhausted in blessing one, but has more thau enough 
for all; and he has not one kind of blessing merely, but every kind—all that we can 
possibly need to complete our happiness. And he has an infinite willingness and 
longing to bestow. He is glorified in our coming to him with large petitions, in his 
bestowing on us large blessings. The blessing being characterized as spiritual seems to 
point to the connection of the blessing with the Spirit. For, as there has been repeated 
reference already to the Father and the Son, so now there is reference, though not very 
explicit, to the Third Person of the Godhead. It is by the Spirit’s instrumentality, and 
with the Spirit’s blessed influences, that the Church is enriched, 

III. CENTRE FROM WHICH THE CHURCH IS BLESSED, “In the heavenly places.” This 
indicates the centre or height from which the blessing proceeds. 

“Come, thou holy Paraclete, 
And, from thy celestial seat, 
Send thy light and brilliancy.” 


It also indicates the Church’s destination in being blessed. For, though the Church can 
bless God for what it has under eartkly conditions, there is not yet the full realization 
of the idea. It is when drawn to the centre, taken up to the Father’s house, that it will 
be known how God can bless, 

IV. HistoricaL CONNECTION OF THE BLESSING. “In Christ.” It is in the historical 
Christ that the treasury is opened out of which the Church is blessed.—R. F. 


Vers. 4—10.— Origination of the Church. I. Tuk CuuRcH TRACED UP TO THE 
ELECTIVE LOVE OF Gop. 1. Chosen for himself. ‘Even as he chose us.” He chose us 
out of the sinful mass of humanity. He chose us for himself, as hé chose ancient Israel 
for himself. 2. Chosen in Christ as covenant Head. “In him.” He was God’s sovereign 
choice: “ Behold my Servant, whom I have chosen.” Abraham, notably among nien, 
was chosen; and, viewed as existing in him as their covenant head, were the Israelites 
chosen as a nation. And 80, viewed as existing in Christ as our greater Representative, 
have we been thought about and chosen by God. 38. Chosen from eternity. “ Before 
the foundation of the world.” He chose us ere ever we had thought of him, ere ever 
we had being, ere ever this world on which we stand was founded. There in the 
depths of eternity the Church lay in the thought of God, the object of the Divine 
election. 4. Chosen with a view to holiness. “That we should be holy and without 
blemish before him.” For in the thought of God we could not be thought as simply 
standing before him in our sinful state. Called out of that, the intention was that we 
should have those positive elements of holiness wrought in us to our highest capacity 
which God has in absolute perfection ; and that we should be free from all that inca- 
pacitates for his presence. 5. Chosen in love. “In love.” It seems best to connect 
this with what goes before. He chose us to be fit for his presence in love. The love 
being placed last covers the intention as well as the act of choosing. It was love that 
was the moving principle in the election of the Church. God was so full of love that 
he could be satisfied with nothing but his having the Church for himself. 

11. Tue CHURCH TRACED UP TO THE PURPOSE OF ADOPTION. 1. Our adoption pre- 
determined. “ Having foreordained us unto adoption as sons.” This predetermining 
(prearranging, prelimiting) is thought of as anterior to the elective act, covering, we may 
say, the whole counsel that there was about us, God has foreordained with a view to 
our having the position of sons. It was the highest position in which God could place 
us. ‘Behold, what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us, that we 
should be called the sons of God.” It was placing us in most favoured nearness to 
himself. It was placing us where we could enjoy all the tenderness of his fatherly love, 
all the plenitude of his fatherly blessing. This adoption was placing us in the family, 
after we had been displaced, disowned, disinherited. 2. The predetermining extended 
to the means by which our adoption as sons was to be accomplished. “Through Jesus 

Christ.” It was arranged beforehand that Christ should be Accomplisher of our adop- 


68. 1. 123.) THE EPISTLE TO THE MPHESIANS. 88 


tion, His own Son had to be parted with that we might be adopted as sons. It was 
ander no sudden impulse of obedience that Abraham lifted the knife against Isaac. He 
had time to think of what he was doing, a three days’ journey to take to the place which 
God was to show him, and he was animated throughout by ἃ calin, abiding spirit of 
obedience. So it was no momentary impulse that led God to make so inconceivable a 
sacrifice; but it was the deep, unchangeable feeling of his heart. It was all well thought 
over and arranged beforehand. It was deliberately written down in the book of the 
Divine counsels. 8, J¢ was an adoption unto himsel’. “ Unto himself.” It was taking 
men from the street, as it were, that he might surround himself with them in his 
own home. 4, Jé was a sovereign adoption. “ According to the good pleasure of his 
will.” While we were the gainers by it, God, in so acting, had a supreme regard to 
himself. It was his sovereign desire that man should be lifted so high, and lifted by se 
wondrous τη 88, 6. 12 was an adoption that magnified the grace of God. “To the 
praise of the glory of his grace, which he freely bestowed on us in the Beloved.” The 
great and ultimate end of adoption was to magnify the Divine love in its freeness, It 
was not called forth by any excellence or merit God saw in us. In Christ that love 
could find its fitting object. Heis the beloved, the wnadopted Son of God; and it is only 
because of the infinite excellence and merit the Father sees in him that we are adopted 
into his family. This love of God, then, is most free, and, a3 such, is to be praised. 
Other attributes of God we see elsewhere; but it is in the Church that the Divine grace 
shines forth. 

III. Tue CHurcnh IN CONNECTION WITH THE REDEMPTIVE PURPOSE OF Gop. 1. It is 
tn Christ that we enjoy redemption. “In whom.” It was only in a very limited way 
that the children of Israel were redeemed in Moses. He had not the redemption in 
his own person. But the person of Christ is of infinite consequence in the matter of 
our redemption. It is in him that redemption has its everlasting subsistence and 
sphere of operation. “ Neither is there salvation in any other.” And it is only as we 
are united to him and live in him that we are redeemed. 2. We are the Church of 
God by redemption. ‘We have our redemption.” Redemption implies a previous 
state of bondage. “Out of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage:” so the 
children of Israel were often reminded. Sin brings us under a worse than Ecyptian 
bondage. . The most galling tasks are those imposed upon us by our own foolishness. 
The most crushing tyranny is that which we bring upon ourselves by our own evil 
habits. It is out of the gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity, that we have come. 
Redemption is to be taken in its widest sense. To the Israelites it meant deliverance 
from Egyptian bondage. It meant also the setting up for them in Canaan of those 
conditions which were best fitted to develop their national life. So redemption for us 
means deliverance from all the evil under which sin bringsus. It also means the setting 
up of those conditions, and the bringing unto us of those influences, which are most 
conducive to our spiritual development. 3. The procuring cuuse of redemption is the 
blood of Christ. “Through his blood.” The word translated “ redemption ” points to 
deli: erance through a ransom ; and the ransom is here stated to be blood. And it is 
the sacrificial association of blood that we are to lay hold of. The apparent procuring 
cause of the redemption of the children of Israel was the blood of animals slain in 
sacrifice, which was sprinkled on their doorposts. That was manifestly an insufficient 
account of the matter. It was, however, typical, as all blood similarly shed was 
typical, of what is the real procuring cause of all redemption for men, viz. the blood 
of Christ. (1) It points to life given for life. The animal was the substitute of the 
worshipper. That lies at the root of all sacrifice. When, therefore, the animal gave 
its life, it was as though the worshipper gave his life. So Christ was our Substitute, 
and, when he shed his blood, it was as though we shed our blood. (2) It points to 
life given in the same kind. This was wanting in the case of the old sacrifices. But 
it is manifestly an indispensable condition of all true substitution. And so Christ had 
the same flesh and blood as those for whom he became a sacrifice. (8) Jt points to 
unforfeited life given for forfeited life. The animal had done nothing to forfeit its 
life. It was therefore, in this respect, a fit substitute. It hada life to part with, in 
order that the sentence of forfeiture might be removed from the offerer, upon whom 
ain rested. So Christ had no sin of his own, and therefore he had an unforfeited life 
to give for those who had sinned, in order that forfeiture might be removed from them, 


40 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. (cm. τ, 1—22. 


(4) It points ἴο α more valuable life given. It was the life of One who, in becoming 
man, could not part with his essential divinity. It was, therefore, a life of infinite 
value, And, when he saed his blood, it was far more than if the whole world of 
sinners had shed their blood. (5) It was life carried to the highest stute of human 
perfection, The animal had to be without blemish. But that was only an imperfect 
symbol, The Head of humanity required to have more than mere innocence. He 
roquired to have perfection in human kind. And when he finished the most beautiful 
human life with an act of perfect love to man and of absolute devotion to God, he 
ence for all touched the summit for us. He first touched the lowest depth of human 
misery; but it was that, with him, we might touch the summit. Such was the life, 
not untried, but grown rich in all excellence, that was substituted for ours, that we 
might be redeemed. 4. Redemption in its first and characteristic blessing is the for- 
giveness of sins. “The forgiveness of our trespasses.” God does actually forgive sins. 
This is a fact, for the certain knowledge of which we are indebted to Divine revela- 
tion. What are our sources of knowledge? There is, first of all, nature. The great 
system and fabric of force, of cause and effect,—does it tell us anything about forgive- 
ness? In the first chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, there is a verse which bears 
that itis the fault even of the heathen if they do not learn from God’s works the 
lesson of the eternal power and Godhead ; but it does not bear that it is expected that 
we learn, and that it is our fault if we do not learn, from nature the lesson of the Divine 
forgiveness, Nature has no such message. Its message is this—a working toward 
good ends, but, according to unchangeable law, a gospel for angels, for unfallen men, 
and not for sinners. Can human nature, then, give us any assistance? It shows us 
God’s laws broken; but it shows us also conscience testifying to the inviolability ot 
law, as when it haunts the criminal with the feeling of remorse. If not, then, from 
conscience, are we led to look for forgiveness from any other part of human nature? 
Is not forgivingness the preperty of noble, royal dispositions? Does it not belong to 
the idea of the fatherly character? A father forgives a son; will not God, then, as 
our Father, forgive us our trespasses? Yes, if it were only a private matter, so ta 
syeak, He who is the Fountain of all fatherly feeling will not do less than that feeling 
prompts to in his creatures. But sin is not a private matter at all, There are 
involved in it public considerations, There is raised by it the question of government 
on the widest scale. A father naturally feels disposed to forgive his erring child; but 
he cannot do so on any basis whatsoever. He is not to allow him to remain under 
his roof and defy his authority. It is evident that there must be something in the 
name of law, and for the safety of other members of the household. And so we are 
left uncertain as to whether God can forgive our sin. Now, the whole of Divine 
revelation may be summed up in this—that, in spite of inflexible laws, in spite of the 
condemning voice of conscience, God can forgive, will forgive, does forgive, sin, The 
moral consequences of the past can be reversed. This has not been certainly by the 
setting aside of Law. The blood of Christ speaks to the majesty of Law, and to a basis 
of righteousness, of satisfaction made to the Law, on which the offer of forgiveness is 
made, In this the Bible stands alone. Confucianism, Buddhism, Mohammedanism, 
know nothing of forgiveness. They have something about human purification. But 
there is this clear ring only in the Bible: “Go in peace; thy sins are forgiven thee.” 
5. Redemption has its measure in the Divine grace. “ According to the riches of his 
grace.” Israel was redeemed by the stretched-out arm of God. It had a miraculous 
origin as a nation, God stretched out his arm, and miraculously interposed for us in 
Christ. Now that the ransom is paid, there is no hindrance to the forgiving disposition 
οἱ God, unless it is in ourselves. It goes forth, not according toa penury of nature 
such as exists in men, but according toa wealth and liberality of disposition which 
belongs to God. Weare thus forbidden to despair. 6. The grace which determines 
redemption is conjoined with wisdom and prudence. ‘“ Which he made to abound 
toward us in all wisdom and prudence.” A parent often makes mistakes in bestowing 
his favours on his children; not so our heavenly Father. Wisdom is to be taken 
generally ; prudence is rather the application of wisdom, according to time and circum- 
stance, A seaman who is wise prudently looks to wind and tide. An agriculturist 
who is wise prudently considers the season and the nature of the soil and suitable 
implements. ‘ His God doth instruct him to discretion, and doth teach him.” And 


on, 1, 1—23.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, 41 


what God gives thus, one in one kind, and another in another, he has in himself in an 
uobroken completeness, And, therefore, he must always abound in all wisdom and 
prudence. The whole scheme of redemption is a manifestation of wisdom; but there 
is specially a look forward here to the time and manner of its disclosure with which 
the Divine prudence has to deal. 7. The purpose of redemption part concealed and 
part revealed, “Having made known unto us the mystery of his will, according to his 
gvod pleasure which he purposed in him.” There is a phase in which the purpose of 
redemption is the mystery of his will, and a phase in which it is made known. It 
was hidden in the eternal counsels. It was in part revealed when the promise was 
given that the Seed of the woman would bruise the head of the serpent. It was more 
fully revealed when he appeared who was the great Discloser of the Divine counsels. 
But we are not to suppose that mystery has been entirely removed from the purpose. 
“Should the sun glace in our eye in all its brightness on a sudden, after we have been 
in a thick darkness, it would blind us, instead of comforting us; so great a work as 
this must have several digestions.” We are not in a position to estimate aright the 
prudence that has marked the disclosure. It must be held to be a well-timed dis- 
closure, as being what he purposed in himself. And we should feel thankful for our 
being included within its scope. 8. Jt is @ purpose in which there is development and 
a consummation. “ Untoa dispensation of the fulness of the times, to sum up all 
things in Christ, the things in the heavens, and the things upon the earth.” God is 
here represented as having the administration of times or seasons. These must be 
regarded as making up the whole extent across which the redemptive purpose of God 
stretches. The time proper for redemption is broken up into epochs. These are all 
determined and brought in by him, who, from one to another, is ever filling up his 
purpose and getting nearer to his end. We must not have too rounded conceptions 
of what these epochs are. When we are tempted to despond, the psalmist tells us 
that we are to “remember the years of the right hand of the Most High.” We are to 
think of the vast time which God has in which to work out his purpose. (1) There 
8 a completing-point in the development. The times administered by God are to come 
to their fulness. When that will beis yet mystery. (2) At the point of completion 
there is to be a unification which is described in terms of universality. There is to be 
a gathering up into one of all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which 
are on earth, ‘There is confusion now; all things will be harmonized at last. We 
who are in the midst of the confusion cannot expect that the future shall stand out 
all clear before us. How many will be included in the redeemed Church of mankind ? 
Will the unification extend to the angels as well as to men? Will it extend to the 
material creation? In what form will God at last conquer evil? These are questions 
of which we have not the full solution. The final shaping of the purpose has not 
been all brought out of mystery. Enough that he who has the administration of 
the times is to bring all things to an issue which will be satisfactory to his own 
mind and to that of every rational creature. Such a prospect as is here pictured, 
while it may not gratify curiosity, is fitted to fill the imagination and to kindle hope. 
(3) This unification is to be in Christ. It was promised that in Abraham all families 
of the earth would be blessed. The Church has a greater word of hope here, It is 
Christ who has made this possible and certain. He is harmonizing now by his blood 
aud Spirit, by his Word and Church; and he will not cease until, under the great 
Administrator, he has harmonized all. It is in him that the purposes of God will 
come forth at last into all their clearness, and have their complete justification.—R. F. 


Vers. 11—14.—Priority in the purpose of redemption. The connecting thought is 
the divulging of the purpose of redemption (ver. 9), in which there is development and 
a consummation (ver. 10). Under successive epochs or dispensations men must occupy 
different standpoints relative to the purpose as more or less fully manifested. And thers 
are those to whom it is earlier divulged than to others. The conspicuous instance is 
that of Jews and Gentiles. There is a special reference here to Jewish Christians and 
Gentile Christians; and as the entire community of believers are called children (ver. 5), 
we may indicate the point of priority by the earlier born and the luter born, 

1. THE EARLIER BORN. “In him, I say, in whom also we were made a heritage, 
having been foreordained a-cording to the purpose of him who worketh all things afte: 


49 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. (on. 1, 1-23, 


the counsel of his will; to the end that we should be unto the praise of his glory, we wha 
had before hoped in Christ.” Jewish Christians are described as those who had before 
hoped in Christ. They did not vaguely hope, but they so grasped the promise of the 
Messiah that even from Abraham’s day they gladly looked forward to him; and as the 
time drew near they waited for the consolation of Israel. There were a few of them 
who had stood in a double relation to Christ, first as expectants of his coming, and then 
as blessed with the object of their hope. They could say in a special sense, “ We who 
before,” etc. But the same language could be used by the others (Paul among them) as 
identifying themselves with the pious of former generatious. The hoping in him before 
he came implies the trusting in him as come, and it is as believers that they were made 
possessors of the inheritance. It isa theocratic word that is used as suiting Jewish 
Christians. The theocratic life was saturated with the idea of the inheritance all down 
the generations. Great importance was attached to the lot in each tribe and family 
being preserved entire. And now, when the earthly Canaan as a type was fading into 
the past, were they the first to be put into possession of the enduring substance, Why 
were they thus the first in privilege? Why have we had only a few years, while others, 
sainted, have had hundreds of years of redeemed existence? Why are we blessed with 
the gospel while multitudes are placed after us still unblessed? There is an evident 
pointing to conditions of redemption as lying beyond our control, as determined by the 
Divine sovereignty. And we can only say, as here, that it is foreordered according to 
the purpose of him, etc. He is absolutely free to assign some a more favoured “lot” than 
others. He causes it to rain upon one city and causes it not to rain upon another -city 
(Amos iv. 7). He causes it to rain, with the rains of his Spirit, earlier upon some and 
later upon others. Their being put first was “to the praise of his glory.” We are not 
to think of this priority under the Divine administration as though it were not glorify- 
ing to God. We must think of it, as of all else connected with redemption, that there 
is that rich grace in it which is characterized by wisdom and prudence (ver. 8). We 
must believe it to be the best method by which God can compass the erd he has in 
view. We who are to thank God for all men are to thank God especially for the éarlier 
born of the redeemed, They will thank God too; but the glory that God has in 
them is not merely their matter, it is ours as well, and calls for our song of praise. 
Especially shall we feel the reasonableness of such pnestly service if we go on to think 
of those who are brought to Christ through the instrumentality of the first born. 

11. THE LATER BoRN. “In whom ye also, having heard the word of the truth, the 
gospel of your salvation.” These were the Gentile Christians. Christ was the Desire 
of all nations. The Gentile world in its want and woe called for a Saviour. But it 
could not be said that they, Gentiles by extraction, had in their generations hoped in 
Christ. When he came it was to “his own;” and it was only after the Jews, even 
under the new dispensation, that they “heard.” Every generation has a duty to per- 
form to the next. It is to tell what they themselves did hear (Ps. lxxviii.), We in 
Christian lands have a duty to perform to those placed behind us in Christian privileges, 
And “ how shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard?” (Rom. x.), This 
duty of telling rises out of our possession of “ truth,” our possession of “ salvation.” The 
truth which has a saving power in it is not the private property of any; but we are 
bound, as soon as we know the value of it, to seek to make it the property of others. It 
cannot be too widely possessed; it is as fitted to bless all as it is to bless one. And 
this saving truth we do not have in the varying element of our own thought. But we 
owe it to God that he has given the truth its proper form in the “ word,” salvation in 
“the gospel.” And it is this gospel, this good word from God, which we have to make 
men to “hear.” The Jewish Christians acted the part of the first born; for it was 
Jewish preachers who went forth to the Gentiles. “That all the Gentiles might hear,” 
said the most heroic of them. And in Ephesus, in the face of difficulties (fighting with 
beasts), he made them to hear this word of truth, this gospel, ete. Hearing does not 
bring the certainty, but it brings the opportunity and the responsibility, of believing, 
And their opportunity in that heathen city they solemnly embraced. Faith came by 
hearing, the faith which sinners need for salvation, It was the right attitude toward 
the Saviour, and, as it was not diffcrent from that of Jewish Christians, by that God 
with whom there ia no difference, they, though later, were placed on the same level of 


blessing, 


on. 1. 1—23,] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 48 


III. Tae EARLIER BORN AND THE LATER BORN HAVE CERTAIN THINGS IN COMMON, 
“In whom, having also believed, ye were sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise, which 
is an earnest of our inheritance, unto the redemption of God’s own possession, unto the 
praise of his glory.” 1, A common seal. (1) What the seal is—the Holy Spirit of 
promise. And what could be more equalizing to Gentile Christians (Acts ii. 15—17)? 
This sealing with the Spirit implies a certain similarity of nature along with his power 
of working on us as the mighty Artificer. (2) What is sealed on us—the Divine image. 
That image is impressed on us in what is called character, as being something impressed. 
It is for us to be as wax under the working of the Spirit. It is the holiness of God that 
he who is the Holy Spirit seals on us. (8) What is sealed to us—that we are the sons 
of God (Rom. viii. 16). In what the Spirit works in us of conformity to the Divine 
image do we obtain the comforting assurance that we are born of God. 2. A common 
guarantee. (1) To what the guarantee pertains—our iuheritance. “If sons, then 
heirs.” It is the inheritance formerly referred to. And the equalizing further is this, 
that the later born share it with the earlier born. (2) How far the guarantee extends 
—until the redemption (full) of the purchased possession. The ‘ purchased posses- 
sion” are the possessors of the inheritance. It is a theocratic word that was well 
understood. It was used to describe ancient Israel as property which the Lord had 
acquired for himself. We Christians now answer to the ancient designation. We are 
the successors of Israel, and therefore the Lord claims us as a people for his peculiar 
possesion (1 Pet. ii. 9). We are the peculiar property of God by right of redemption. 

he price was formerly mentioned—Christ’s blood (ver. 7). And the redemption, which 
was there viewed as begun in the forgiveness of sins, is now viewed as carried forward 
to completion; and it is only as fully redeemed that we come into the full enjoyment of 
the inheritance.. (3) In what the guarantee consists—the earnest of the Spirit. The 
arnest money is small in comparison with the full payment; but it is part, and is to 
te taken as a token that the whole will in due time be forthcoming. And so in what 
we enjoy now of the Spirit we have the foretaste and pledge of what the full inheritance 
will be. 3. They can join in a common domology: “Unto the praise of his glory, 
Gregory of Nyssa, referring to the close of the Psalter, pictures the time “when the 
creatures shall be harmoniously united for one choral dance, and the chorus of mankind 
concerting with the angelic chorus shall become one cymbal of Divine praise, and the 
final song of victory shall salute God the triumphant Conqueror with shouts of joy.” 
Tn this song the first born shall join with the later born, parents and teachers shall 
blend their voices with those who have come after them to glory; with no feeling of 
self-exaltation or of envy because of priority, but all rejoicing in the marvellous grace 
that has given them a place and God the victory.—R. F. 


Vers. 15—23.—Prayer for the Ephesians, I. FounvED ON INFoRMATION, 1. Re- 
garding their faith. “ For this cause I also, having heard of the faith in the Lord Jesus 
which is among you.” He had already more than once referred to their Christian 
faith ; he refers to it now as ground for his prayer on their behalf. We are to pray for 
“all men,” even for unbelievers; but whoever through faith are admitted into the 
same Christian circle, claim a special interest in our prayers, 2. Regarding their faith as 
manifested saintward. “ And which ye show toward all the saints.” “Love” is omitted 
in the Revised translation; but the thought must be “ faith working through love.” It 
was toward the saints. They were saints themselves (ver. 1); they were kind to the 
saints as to those who were actuated by the same lofty sentiments. They recognized 
them as having the first claim on their sympathies, according to the order laid down in 
Gal. vi. 10. It was toward all the saints. They exhibited catholicity. hey did not 
confine their interest to their own immediate circle, but extended it to the whole 
circle of the saints. They did not boast of their superiority to other Churches, but 
were able to appreciate Christian excellence wherever it was to be found. They 
were not restrained in the outgoings of their brotherly love by any difference in 
unessentials, 

11. Ir compineD Two THINas. 1. Thanksgiving for them. “Cease not to give 
thanks for you.” His information supplied him with matter for thanksgiving. He 
heard of their faith and its manifestations, and so he thanked God for them. This is 
a very interesting part of our priestly office All joys of others we then make ours. 


44 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. [σπ. τ. 1—23 


“1 saw thee eye the gen’ral mirth 
With boundless love.’’ 


We can only do this when we turn to God in thanksgivings for all men (1 Tim. fi. 1). 
The apostle had peculiar delight in the Ephesians; and as their faith was genuine, 
and was ever receiving new manifestations, his thanksgiving for them was wnceasing. 
2. Intercession for them. ‘‘ Making mention of you in my prayers.” He was in the habit 
of praying for the Churches by name, as a parent prays for his children by name. 
They were among the number prayed for, from the time of their becoming a Church. 
He had special points of interest connected with them. He had been long resident 
there, and he had not forgotten the affectionate leave-taking at Miletus. And having 
kept up his information regarding their affairs, he was supplied with matter for 
intercession. Observe the twofold use of information. It is important to circulate 
missionary information, that we may be supplied with subjects for thanksgiving. 
“Daily shall he be praised” as the result of praying for Christ continually (in an 
unsaved world) and giving of the gold of Sheba; but how shall we praise unless we 
have the means of hearing? It is important also to know the condition of Churches 
and of individuals, that our prayer for them may be more intelligent, and may not, 
irom vagueness and indirectness, miss the mark. : ᾿ 

IIL. IN wHaT CHARACTER GoD Is ADDRESSED IN PRAYER. “That the God of our 
Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory.” As is not unusual in prayer, God receives 
a name from what is to be prayed for. ‘The prayer is to relate to glory; and so God is 
styled sublimely the “ Father of glory.” ‘I'be glory in store for us is not from ourselves ; 
it is from God. To him all glory essentially belongs, and by him as Father it must 
be produced in us. The first part of the designation is striking; it cannot be said to 
be startling. That God should be called “the God of our Lord Jesus Christ” is in 
keeping with the langnage of human dependence on the cross: “ My God, my God,” and 
also with the language of identity with his own before his ascension: “I ascend unto 
my Father and your Father, and my God and your God.” Using this language, we 
identify ourselves with Jesus Christ as our Lord. Taken along with the other part of 
the designation, the meaning is that God is the First Cause (Father) of that glory 
which Jesus Christ has obtained for us, and which it belongs to him as our Lord to 
bestow. 

IV. Iv 18 A PRAYER GENERALLY TO KNow aBour Gop, “ May give unto you a spirit 
of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him.” Than the thorough knowledge 
of God which is here implied, there is nothing more worthy of attainment. “ Every 
one’s elevation is to be measured first and chiefly by his conception of this great Being ; 
and to attain a just and bright and quickening knowledge of him is the highest aim of 
thought. In truth, the great end of the universe, of revelation, of life, is to develop in 
us the idea of God. Much earnest, patient, laborious thought is required to see the 
infinite Being as he is; to rise above the low, gross notions of the divinity, which rush 
in upon us from our passions, from our selfish partialities, and from the low-minded 
world around us.” A spirit of wisdom is that in which we rightly estimate things, 
vain things as vain, worthy things as worthy, and all things according to their relative 
vanity or worth. As applied to God, it is the spirit in which we learn to appreciate his 
infinite worth. It is also a spirit of revelation. It is the dawning of his beauty upon 
our minds. It is the reception of much about God that we could never have found out 
by our reason. Condition. “Having the eyes of your heart enlightened.” There is a 
noticeable change from “understanding” to “heart” in the translation here. It is true that 
God is an object for the heart more than for the intellect. The Church says in the Song 
of Solomon, “I sleep, but my heart waketh.” It was the heart that detected the voice 
of the Beloved. The eyes of our heart, more than of our intellect, have been filmed 
over by sin. We cannot naturally appreciate the Divine unselfishness, what in self- 
forgetfulness he has it in his heart to do for us. For this there is necessary the 
cleansing and quickening of our spiritual vision by the revelation without us and 
through the inward operation of the Spirit. To God, then, we must look for the presence 
of this condition of Divine knowledge. 

V. Iv 18 A PRAYER SPECIFICALLY TO KNOW ABOUT GoD THR GLORY WHICH HE HAS 
DESTINED For vs. “That ye may know what is the hope of his calling, what the 
riches of the glory of his inheritance ia the saints.” There is a hope which his calling 


ou. 1. 1—23.} THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 45 


-— 


produces in our hearts. This is the hope of the inheritance which has already been 
referred to in the fourteenth verse. Having, then, connected the Divine purpose with 
the inheritance, he now prays that they may have sume worthy conception of it, as tliat 
to which they were called. There is an accumulation of language to impress us with 
the greatness of the inheritance as worthy of the donor. The glory of the inheritance 
tn the saints. The glory of a thing is its highest, most beautiful form, as when the 
fields are in their summer loveliness, The glory of the inheritance in the saints is all 
that an inheritance can flower out into for them, the final thought of God regarding 
the condition of his own, It must excel what was the glory of Canaan, as it is au 
inheritance formed with richer materials. The riches of the glory. ‘The riches ot his 
grace ends in the riches of the glory. The open flower, of which there was a repre- 
sentation in the Jewish temple, is but a suggestion of the glory which God will manifest 
in the saints. The higher the existence the richer the efflorescence. So rich is the 
glory in the saints that it is difficult to form a conception of what it shall be, It is 
difficult for us to think of ourselves beautified as we shall be in our nature and in our 
surroundings. But that it may be worthily conceived is an object for which we are to 
pray for ourselves and for others. It is true that “eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, 
neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for 
them that love him;” but that is not the whole statement, for it is added, “God hath 
revealed them unto us by his Spirit.” We are therefore to seek, with the materials we 
have, some clear, vivid, uplifting conception of the future inheritance. 

VI. Iv 1s A PRAYER TO KNOW ABOUT GoD THE POWER WHICH IS TO EFFEOT THIS 
GLORY TO THE Saints, ‘‘ And what the exceeding greatness of his power to us-ward who 
believe.” Again the apostle heaps up language, as though the idea were too great for 
expression. The power of God has not only greatness; it has exceeding greatness. 
“'The power of God is that ability and strength whereby he can bring to pass whatso- 
ever he pleases, whatsoever his infinite wisdom can direct, and whatsoever the infinite 
purity of his will can resolve” (Charnock). ‘‘@od hath spoken once; twice have 
1 heard this : that power belongeth unto God.” It belongs to him originally, inalienably. 
Job discourses of the power of God as seen in the lower parts of the world, in hanging 
the earth upon nothing, in holding up the clouds, in compassing the waters with 
pounds till day and night come to an end, in commotions in air and earth, in his 
garnishing the heavens. Then sublimely he concludes: “Lo, these are parts of his 
ways: but how little a portion is heard of him? but the thunder of his power who can 
nnderstand?” The apostle goes to a different field in which to study the power of 
God. ‘It is the exceeding greatness of his power to us-ward who believe. It is the 
power of God as manifested toward the Church of Christ. 

VIL. Iv 18 A PRAYER TO KNOW ABOUT THE DIVINE POWER THAT WHIVH WAS MANI 
FESTED IN THE RESURRECTION OF Curist. “ According to that working of the strength 
of his might which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead.” He has 
spoken of the power of God abstractly ; this gives colouring to it. He would show 
-what God can do for the Church, by pointing to what he has already done for Christ. 
It was power displayed upon Christ in extraordinary circumstances. For how powerless 
was Christ, when his body was taken down from the cross and laid in the tomb! He 
continued for a time under the power of death. His humanity was unnaturally 
divided. The spirit was disembodied, leaving the once active body a pale and motion- 
less corpse. But upon this utter powerlessness the power of God was signally put forth, 
that power by which he can subdue even death to himself. He recalled the spirit, and 
gave it to retenant the body subdued toa nobler mould. This, then, is the power which 
is to give us the riches of the glory of the inheritance. And is it not pertinent as well 
as sufficient? For our being raised by a similar forthputting of power is preparatory 
to our being instated in the inheritance. 

VIII. Iv is A PRAYER TO KNOW ABOUT THE DIVINE POWER THAT WHICH WAS MANI- 
FESTED IN THE RAISING OF CHRIST TO HIS RIGHT HAND. ‘And made him to sit at 
his right hand in the heavenly places, far above all rule, and authority, and power, 
and dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this world, but also in that 
which is to come.” The working of the strength of the Divine might did not terminate 
with the raising of Christ from the dead. For a time he remained on earth, and was 
seen by mortal eye. But by another grand forthputting of power Christ was raised 


46 ' HE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. [on 1. 1~23, 


above earth, was raised to the right hand of God. This denotes an intimacy with God 
in power such as is beyond any mere creature. And yet it was mysteriously in our 
creaturely nature that he was raised to the right hand of God. There he was scen 
afterwards, and recognized, by the prisoner of Patmos; and there he still sits. This is 
in the heavenly places, the height from which, according to the former thought, the 
Church is blessed. He has been raised above every form of superiority or prerogative. 
Four words are used which cannot be distinguished. Earthly orders or powers seem 
to be included as well as heavenly. Christ is King of kings, whether these are of 
the human or of the angelic type. He has also been raised above every name that is 
named, #.e. every one who has personal subsistence or, it may be, is the representative 
of power. And this has reference, not merely to the present, but to the future order of 
things as well. Thus, with necessary vagueness, is the superiority of Christ set forth. 
“We know that the emperor goes before all, though we cannot enumerate all the 
satraps and ministers of his court; so we know that Christ is set before all, although 
we cannot name all who are under him.” 

IX. Ir 1s a PRAYER TO KNOW ABOUT THE DIVINE POWER THAT WHICH WAS MANI- 
FESTED IN THE GIVING OF CHRIST TO BE HEAD OVER ALL THINGS ΤῸ THE CHURCH. 
“And he put all things in subjection under his feet, and gave him to be Head over all 
things.” There isaclimax. He raised him from the dead; he raised him to sit at his 
right hand; raised to sit at his right hand, he gave him to be Head. The apostle thinks 
of the Father as First throughout, and in viewing him as Head he thinks of the Father 
preparing for the position by first putting all things in subjection under his feet. His 
seat at the right hand of God is a seat of government. From it he exercises unlimited, 
universal sway. The elements of earth and air and water, all living things on our 
planet, the bodies and souls of men, the whole material universe, the invisible world 
and its inhabitants, are in his hands to be sovereignly disposed of according to his 
thought. But let us look at the full bearing of the headship of Christ on the Church. 
1. Christ is given as Head over ail things to the Church. “To the Church.” By the 
Church we are to understand the collective body of believers, or of those who are called 
out of the world. The latter conception, to which the derivation points, excludes the 
holy angels, whose life must be essentially the same with ours, but who have never 
been called out of a depraved condition. It is the Church of the redeemed, then, about 
which sublime statements are made. Christ is here set forth as the great Donation 
to the Church. “Given to the Church” is the language of the apostle; and the gifts 
of God, we are told, are without repentance. He does not withdraw his Bible, nor his 
Son to whom it testifies. This is a gift which strikes us with a sense of the dispropor- 
tion between its value and the recipient. God’s own Son given to the Church—how 
inconceivable a mark of the Divine favour! But it is in his headship over all things 
that he is gifted to the Church. Had he reigned only within the Church, its interests 
could not have been sufficiently guaranteed. Danger might have arisen from the 
quarter to which his reign did not extend. But, as he reigns over all things, he can 
make all things—without the Church and within the Church too—work together for 
its good. “The whole economy of creation stands at his disposal as the basis and 
sphere of activity for the economy of redemption.” He does not need to be indebted 
to the earthly powers for a sphere for carrying on the operations of the Church in the 
era that is proceeding. ‘For the earth is the Lord’s,and the fulness thereof.” He 
has proprietary rights over it of the most absolute nature as Mediator. It has been put 
in subjection under his feet; it has been handed over unconditionally to his control. 
And the earthly powers only hold from him their portion of the surface and riches 
of the earth, They are no more than tenants-at-will; he appoints to them the bounds 
of their habitation; and they can be used by him for his ends; their schemings and 
commotions can be overruled for the advancement of the Church. As for the Church, 
Christ, having unlimited power, can place it where its discipline can best be secured, 
and where it can have the widest door of usefulness. And even the worldly elements 
which find entrance into the Church, although they may be allowed to work for a time, 
can be checked, controlled for his Church’s triumph over them. If the Church has 
a vast work before it, and is yet far from coming up to the prophetic mark, may 
it not trust to the greatness of its Head? Andif the Church is promised a great 
future after this era has run its course ir the eternal order of things, is not its great 


ou. 1. 1—23.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 41 


Head invested with power sufficient to bring it about? 2. The Church stands in 
an intimate relationship to Christ. “Which is his body.” As we stand in relation 
to our body, so Christ stands in relation to his Church. The body of man is a 
marvellous piece of workmanship. “ Fearfully and wonderfully made” is language 
applicable to its structure. But the apostle contemplated it, not from the strictly 
scientific, but from the religious or more particularly the Christian standpoint. He 
says that the Church is the body of Christ. This raises the body of man to an exalted 
position. It is not the degraded thing it has been sometimes thought to be. It is 
after the pattern of things in the heavens. This is the true way of putting it; not, 
certainly, that the Church is made after the pattern of the body, but that the body is 
made after the pattern of the Church. Just as fatherhood existed in God before 
it existed in man, so body existed in the Divine conception of the Church before it 
existed in the human body. Let us look into the bearing of it. (1) .1ὲ ts in relation 
to Christ that the Church has life. The head or brain is the great seat of bodily 
life. It is here that there takes place the mysterious union of soul to body. 
From this as a centre the soul animates the body. There is an equally mysterious 
union of Christ to the Church. Upon him as animating Head the Church depends. 
(2) ft ts in relation to Christ that the Church is organized. An organism is a living 
structure that, by means of organs, serves its uses, The human body is an elaborate 
structure of this kind. It is a numberof organs arranged to form an organic whole. 
It is from the brain that it is organized. From it proceed the various ramifications 
throughout the body. In the same way the Church is the great living structure, even 
more elaborate than the human body. It is an organization intended to serve certain 
uses. It is from Christ as Head that the Church takes the type of its organization. 
(8) It ts by Christ that the Church is governed. The brain is the thinking, ruling 
centre in the body. There the thinking is done. From it the whole regulation 
proceeds. Its commands are carried by the nerves to every part. So Christ is the 
brain or centre where the thinking goes on for the Church, whence commands are 
issued to all the dependent parts. ὃ. Zhe Church is that in which Christ is to be fully 
manifested. “The fulness of him that filleth all in all.” We are to understand it to 
be Christ that filleth all in all, It is he who fills the sun with its light-giving pro- 
perties. He fills the seed with its germinating power. He fills the flowers with their 
power to blossom forth into beauty. He fills the souls of men with all their natural 
qualities, It is Christ, then, who is to be seen in the sunshine, in the waving corn, in 
the flowers that deck the field, and also in the blossoming forth of genius. But the 
Church stands in a special relation to Christ. It is his body, and therefore he is to fill 
it fuller than he does anything else. It is here called his pleroma, or fulness. As he 
himself is called the Pleroma of God, so the Church is called his pleroma, There is a 
high sense in which the body is intended to be the manifestation of the soul. We 
think of Christ in the days of his flesh as having a body with an ideal beauty corre- 
sponding to his spiritual excellence so far as flesh would allow. It was not a mere 
sensuous beauty, but rather a beauty that was expressive of holiness. At the same time, 
it was not a beauty that excluded marring by sorrow and struggle. In the same way 
the Church is to manifest Christ. It is to be a fitting temple for the Christ within. 
It is to be that in which he is to body himself without any barrier, other than that 
which marks the Church’s finitude. He is to bring up his Church into the highest 
form so as to body forth his beauty. All deformity and weakness are to be excluded, 
as unworthy of him who is receiving manifestation. All imperfection is also to be 
excluded, such as belongs to lower things which can only, though filled by him, have 
broken rays of his glory. What a glorious destiny is this for the Church! How 
fitting that it should be held up before it in all the grandeur of the conception! And 
how fitting that we should see to it that we belong to the Church, and are guided and 
Sania ee so that.in us, as part of the whole, the glory of Christ shall shine 
forth !—R. F. 


Vers, 1, 2.—The highest things tn the world, “Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by 
the will of God, to the saints which are at Ephesus, and to the faith{ul in Christ Jesus : 
grace be to you, and peace, from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ.” 
The words set before us three of the greatest things in human life, : 


48 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. fon. 1, 1—23. 


J, THE HIGHEST OFFICE IN THE woRLD. “ An apostle of Jesus Christ.” 1. He was 
a messenger of the greatest Person. How great was his Master! Messengers of inferior 
personages are often but little esteemed, whilst those of illustrious ones are held in high 
honour. He who represents a king receives something of kingly homage. An “ apostle” 
is a representative of “ Jesus Christ,” who is the Son of God, the Creator of the universe, 
and the Head of all “ principalities and powers.” But what was his message? 2. He 
was the bearer of the grandest message. He who bears an important mesuege—a 
message on which the interest of a neighbourhood or the destiny of a nation depends, 
will stamp the hearts of men with awe. An apostle of Christ delivers the highest 
messaye—pardon to the guilty, light to the benighted, freedom to the slave, immortality 
to the dying, salvation to the lost. 3. He was a messenger of Christ by the “ will of 
God.” Many go out in the name of Christ, but not according to the Divine will. The 
Eternal has never culled them to missions so holy and momentous, and hence they 
misrepresent the doctrines and the genius of his blessed Son. This was not Paul’s 
case. He was called to be an “apostle,” “separated unto the gospel of God” (Rom. 
i. 1). He felt this. “When it pleased God, who separated me from my mother’s 
womb, and called me by grace,” ete. What office in the world approaches this in 
sublimity ? A messenger of Christ by the “ will of God”! He who by the “ will of 
God” bears Christ’s message to the hearts of men sustains a position, compared with 
which the most elevated offices amongst men sink into contempt. 

II. THE HIGHEST CHARACTERS IN THE woRLD. “ΤῸ the saints,” eto. “Saints” and 
“faithful.” Who are they? They are those who are consecrated in soul to truth, and 
love and God, and this because they are faithful. They are made holy through their 
faith in Christ. All moral excellence in man is derived in this way and in no other. 
Philosophy, history, aud the Bible show this, Notice, these saints resided at “ Ephesus.” 
This, the chief city in Asia Minor, was the centre and stronghold of paganism ; it had the 
temple of Diana, one of the greatest wonders of the world. Its influence upon millions 
was immense, and its appeal was to men’s superstition, sensualism, and selfishness. 
Albeit there were Christians there, holy and believing men. This shows: 1. Man 
is not necessarily the creature of circumstances. 2. That, with the possession of the 
gospel, a religious life is practicable everywhere. What characters in society are 
equal to those of genuine “saints”? None. They are “lights;” without them the 
social heavens would be midnight. They are “living stones; ” without them the social 
temple would fall to ruins. They are “salt;” without them the social body would 
become putrescent and pestilential. 

TU. THE HIGHEST BLESSINGS IN THE WORLD. “Grace and peace.” Here are two 
blessings. 1, Divine favour. “Grace,” The love, the benediction, the approbation 
of God. What a boon this! 2. Spiritual peace. “ Peace,” not insensibility, not 
stagnation, but a repose of thesoul in God. Men through sin have lost peace. “The 
wicked are like the troubled sea.” Sinners are at war with themselves, society, the 
universe, God. But through God’s love, through Christ souls are at one with all. 
“ Peace ”—sweet word, blessed thing! To the mariner after a storm, to a nation after 
a war, how blessed! But far more blessed to the soul after a life-war with self and its 
Maker. ‘ He will keep him in perfect peace whose mind is stayed upon God.” 

Who will say that there are any higher things on earth than are found in this text ? 
And these highest things, thank God, we may all possess, We may all, in a sense, be 
apostles of Christ. We may be all “saints and faithful.” We may all partake of the 
“race” of God and possess the blessed “ elphvy.” —D. Τὶ 


Vers. 8—6.—The redemptive predestination of God a reason for man’s exultant 
gratitude. “ Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who hath blessed 
us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ: according as he hath 
chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and 
without blame before him in love: having predestinated us unto the adoption of 
children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will, to the 
praise ef the glory of his grace, wherein he hath made us accepted in the Beloved.” 
The leading subject of these words is the redemptive predestination ef God a reason 
for mun’s exullant gratitude. “Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus 
Christ,” etc. We say redempéive predestination, for there is predestination in every 


on, 1. 1—23.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 49 


department of Divine operation; from the most microscopic objects to the massive 
systems of immensity. Belore we go on to notice the reasons suggested in the passage 
why man should adore the Eternal for his redemptive predestination, it may be well, in 
order to remove much of erroneous sentiment and terrible feeling that exist in the 
minds of some men in relation to this great subject, to state the following things. 1, 
The predestination of God contemplates good, and good only. (1) The benevolence of 
his nature proves this. He is Love, and it is eternally antagonistic to love to plan for 
misery, (2) The structure of the universe proves this. ‘l'rue science sees a Divine 
pe in every part of nature, from the minutest to the largest objects, Yet it has never 

iscovered, as Archbishop Paley has well said, any contrivance for suffering. Not a 
single “ vessel” has been discovered that has been “ made for dishonour.” (3) The 
declarations of the Bible prove this, The Bible only reveals God’s will concerning man, 
and it tells us that his will is that we shall all besaved. (4) Consciousness proves this. 
All men feel that God intends their happiness. If they did not, moral sense would be 
an impossibility. 2. The predestination of God never interferes with the free agency of 
moral beings. It is true that no philosophy has yet harmonized, to the satisfaction of 
the human understanding, the doctrine of free agency with the doctrine of eternal 
predestination. This is the great intellectual puzzle of the ages. But that the one 
interferes not with the other in the slightest degree is attested:. (1) By history. 
Amongst the many examples that might be selected, take one—the crucifixion of 
Christ. That stupendous evil was predetermined. Yet were not his crucifiers free ? 
“Him being delivered,” etc. (2) By Scripture. The Bible everywhere appeals to men 
as responsible beings—appeals to their choice, and warus them of a judgment, when 
every one “must give an account of himself.” (8) By consciousness. Men feel that. 
they are free. ‘This feeling defies all logic. It is the ultimate argument. Beyond its 
decisions there is no appeal. 3. The predestination of God is not exclusively confined to 
human redemption. This we have already intimated. It does not follow, because Paul 
refers God’s predestinating agency in man’s salvation to an eternal plan, that he would 
not have referred it in any other department to an eternal plan. It is a characteristic 
of a pious man that he traces all that is good to God; and of a truly intelligent man, 
he would trace everything to the Divine plan. Had Paul been writing on botany, 
he would have traced every blade and flower and plant that grew to the predestination 
of God. Had he been writing on anatomy, he would have traced every organ, limb, 
joint, vein, nerve, and sinew to the predestination of God. But he was writing of man’s 
salvation, and it was only to his purpose to refer to predestination in connection with 
that. Predestination is not a dream of the schoolman, or a dogma of Calvin, but an 
etornal law of the universe. 4. The predestination of. God is revealed in Scripture 
according to forms of human thought. As no finite being can comprehend the Infinite, 
no finite mind can give a representation of his acts that is absolutely correct. What, 
for example, in the predestination of God, is there answering to our ideas of that act? 
The ideas of commencement, observation, resolve, enter into our conceptions of it. But 
these are foreign to the subject. What is there, too, in God’s choice, answering to our 
ideas of choice? The ideas of beginning, comparison, rejection, acceptance, enter into 
our conception of choice; but in God’s choice there was no beginning, no comparison, 
etc, What conception can we have of the processes and the workings of a mind that 
knows no succession, to whom all the future is as the past, who has but one eternal 
thought? Alas! that men should be so impious as to dogmatize upon a subject like this! 
“Who by searching can find out God?” We now pass on to the question—Why should 
we exultingly adore the Eternal on account of his redemptive predestination? Paul 
suggests three reasons in the text. 

I, Happiness 18 ITS EXCLUSIVE AIM. What are the “spiritual blessings in heavenly 
places,” which the apostle in the text traces to it? 1. Moral excellence. “That we 
should be holy and without blame.” The two words represent spiritual excellence, 
ἵν; Negatively. ‘‘ Without blame.” Perfectly free from all that is wrong in thought, 
eeling, and practice. Appearing before God “without spot, or wrinkle, or any such 
thing.” (2) Posit#vely. “ Holy.” Consecrated to the will and service of God. 2. Spiritual 
elevation. ‘“ Heavenly places.” A truly Christian man is now in heaveuly regions. 
Though on the earth, he is not of the earth, he is of heaven. His fellowships, ideas, 
services, aspirations, are heavenly. He fs come to an “ innumerable company ef angels,” 

EPHESIANS, 5 


50 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. ἴσπ. 1. 1—23. 


“ Our citizenship is in heaven,” eto. 8. Divine sonship. “The adoption of children.” All 
men are the offspring of God, but none are his true children but those who have the 
true filial spirit. To possess this involves man’s highest blessedness. This is the work 
of Christ. ‘As many as received him to them gave he power to become the sons of 
God ”—the true sons—“ heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ.” These are some of 
the “spiritual” blessings which flow to man through God’s redemptive predestination. 
Paul does not refer to a single evil or woe as coming to man from that source. Good, 
and good only, he saw flowing from that fountain, The inhuman, the blasphemous 
dogma of reprobation never entered his mind in connection with this grand subject. 
What reason for exultant thankfulness is here! Well may we exclaim, “ Biessed be 
God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.” 

Il. Jesus Curist 1s 118 Meprom. Predestination, which in nature makes the sun 
the medium of lighting, quickening, and beautifying the earth, in redemption makes 
Christ the Medium of conveying all those spiritual blessings which constitute the 
happiness and dignity of man. The “heavenly places” to which we are raised are “ in 
Christ Jesus.” The adoption of children is “through Jesus Christ.” All the Divine 
grace—favour—bestowed on man is through “Christ Jesus, the Beloved.” What a 
Medium is this! This is the great gift of predestination. God’s only begotten, well- 
beloved Son: “ He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how 
shall he not with him also freely give us all things?” What reason for exultant thank- 
fulness is here! Well may Paul exclaim, “Blessed be God, the Father of our Lord 
Jesus Christ,” etc. 

Ill. ErzrnaL Love 18 rrs spring, “In love, having predestinated us unto the 
-adoption of children by Jesus Christ.” 1, This love existed before the objects of it came 
into actual being. Millions of ages before mankind came into existence, before the 
“foundation of the world,” he loved them. His love created them, organized them 
for happiness as creatures, and provided for their spiritual recovery as sinners. The 
uncreated, those that are to be, are as real to God as the created that are. 2. This love ia 
the happiness of his own nature. Its manifestations are the “ good pleasure” of his own 
will. ‘The good pleasure of malevolence is misery ; the good pleasure of love is happiness, 
Are not the reasons suggested by Paul for gratefully exulting in God’s zedemptive 
predestination abundant? ‘“ Predestination,” “ choice,” “ counsel,” “ purpose,” “ decree” | 
The more ignorant men are, the more they profess to have fathomed the meaning 
of these terms, as representing the mental acts of the Eternal; and the more flippant 
they are in their use. But what do they stand for when applied to God? Volition— 
will, nothing more. ‘God is love,” and his wil/ must be happiness. He is “ of one 
mind,” and his will must be unalterable. A certain theology, which, thank God, is 
dying out, has invested these grand old words with attributes of hideousness, before 
which weak souls in all ages have trembled with horror, But they only indicate the 
will of infinite love to flood immensity with bliss, 


« Love is the root of creation, God’s essence; worlds without number 
Lie in his bosom like children; he made them for this purpose only, 
Only to love and to be loved again; he breathed forth his Spirit 
Into the slumbering dust, and upright standing, it laid its 
Hand on its heart, and felt it was warmed with a flame out of heaven.” 


D. T. 


Vera 7—14.—The redemptive predestination of God in tts subjective and objective 
aspects, “In whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, 
according to the riches of his grace; wherein he hath abounded toward us in all wisdom 
and prudence; having made known unto us the mystery of his will, according to his 
good pleasure which he hath purposed in himself: that in the dispensation of the fulness 
of times he might gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, 
and which are on earth; even in him: in whom also we have obtained an inheritance, 
being predestinated according to the purpose of him who worketh all things after the 
counsel of his own will: that we should be to the praise of his glory, who first trusted 
in Christ. In whom ye also trusted, after that ye heard the word of truth, the gospel 
of your salvation: in whom also after that ye believed, ye were sealed with that Holy 
Spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance, until the redemption of the 


cu. L 1—23.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 61 


purchased possession, unto the praise of his glory.” This passage, treated homiletically, 
presents redemptive predestination to us in some of its subjective and objective aspects, 
We use those words with no liking, for they savour of a school of thought with which 
we have but little sympathy. But the terms, experimental and doctrinal, internal and 
external, would not represent our thoughts so well. Let us then look at the passage as 
presenting redemptive predestination— 

I, In some oF ITS SUBJECTIVE ASPECTS. There are certain words employed which 
indicate its influence and issues upon the heart of its true disciple. Thereis: 1. Deliver- 
ance, ‘In whom we have redemption.” ‘This means simple deliverance, and perhaps 
is used in allusion to the Exodus of the Jews. Unregenerate humanity is in moral 
bondage, is carnally sold under sin. Itis in a captivity compared with which the most 
cruel physical bondage is but a shadow. ‘The gospel is the deliverer. It crushes the 
despots. It sounds the trump of jubilee. 2. Pardon. “The forgiveness of sins,” 
This, like redemption, means release, but it indicates release, not from calamity alone, 
but from crime. Redemption delivers man at once from the slavery of sin, forgiveness 
from its guilt. Divine forgiveness, what is it? It is remedial mercy separating the 
sinner from his sin, ‘Far as the east is from the west,” ete, Separating not 
from its memory, nor from all its effects and influences, but from its soul-accusing 
power. 8. Unification. “He might gather together in one.” Uniting the dis- 
harmonious soul of man with the universe, by uniting it to Christ, As planets are 
bound together, though millions of leagues apart, by a common centre, so true souls 
in all worlds and ages are united by being united to Jesus Christ. He is the Head. 
4, Heritage. “Obtained an inheritance,” “the earnest of our inheritance.” What is the 
inheritance of a Christ-redeemed suul? Ah! what? What springing energies, what 
rising hopes, what high fellowships, what glorious liberties, enter into that inheritance! 
“ All things are yours.” The allusion is perhaps to Canaan. What is the true Canaan 
of the soul? 6. Divinity. “Sealed with that Holy Spirit.” (1) Divinely tmpressed. 
(2) Divinely distinyuished. (3) Divinely secured, ᾿ 

II. Iw ΒΟΜΒ ΟΕ ITS OBJECTIVE ASPECTS. We observe that it has objectively: 1. One 
primordial source. Whence does this grand redemptive system spring? From “the 
riches of his grace.” “ His good pleasure.” “The counsel of his own will.” Its spring is 
in God. Creation and salvation well up from the same eternal fountain. 2, Manifold 
manifestations. How many terms are here employed to represent this one system! 
(1) “ His blood.” Christ’s blood, or his self-sacrifici:g love, is its vital power, its very 
substance, without which it would be a clowd without water, a body without a soul. 
Christ is Christianity. (2) “ Wisdom.” Two words are here employed—* wisdom ” and 
“prudence.” But they mean in reality the same thing, “ wisdom.” ‘The word “ wisdom ” 
may indicate intelligence, and “ prudence” its application. Christianity is “the mani- 
fold wisdom of Gud.” (8) “ Mystery.” It is not only necessarily a mystery to all to 
whom it is not revealed, but it must ever be to a great extent a mystery to its most 
advanced students. It is that which angels “desire to look into.” It has heights no 
intellect can scale, depths no philosophy can penetrate. It has lengths and breadths for 
ever outreaching the swiftest and strongest wing of thought. (4) “ Dispensation.” 1 
isa Divine scheme. The intellect that planned the universe planned it. (5) “ The 
word of truth.” Truth is reality. Divine truth is eternal reality. Reality has many 
words, and the gospel is the word of this eternal reality. (6) “ The gospel of your 

_ salvution.” 'Vhe good tidings of infinite love. 3. A gradual unfoldment. It was once 
a “mystery,” unknown to the universe, unknown to man. It was in the mind of God. 
He spoke its first seutence, perhaps, to Adam, and from that hour it bas been gradually 
unfolding itself. It has had its striking epochs, aud it is moving on to “the fulness 
of times.” It will flood the universe with its brightness one day. 4. A sublime result. 
“Unto the praise of his glory.” The highest aim of the creature is to worship with the 
fullest loyalty and love the Creator. The guilt and misery of this world is that it fails 
in this. The ultimate aim of Christianity is to tune the world’s heart to music, and 
cause loud hallelujahs to break from every lip.—D, T. 


Vers. 15—23.— Apostolic philanthropy. ‘“ Wherefore I also, after I heard of your 
faith in the Lord Jesus, and love unto all the saints, cease not toe give thanks for you, 
making mention of you in my prayers; that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the 


52 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. (on. τ. 1—28 


Father of glory, may give unto you the spirit of wisdom and revelztion in the know- 
ledge of him: the eyes ot your understanding being enlightened ; that ye may know what 
is the hope of his calling, and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the 
saints, and what is the exceeding greatness of his power to us-ward who believe, 
according to the working of his mighty power, which he wrought in Christ, when he 
raised him from the dead, and set him at his own right hand in the heavenly places, 
far above all principality, and power, and might, and dominion, and every name that 
is named, not only in this world, but also in that which is to come: and hath put all 
things under his feet, and gave him to be the Head over all things to the Church, which 
is his body, the fulness of him that filleth all in all.” This passage, which is confessedly 
somewhat involved and obscure in some of its expressions, may be h:miletically 
regarded as illustrating apostolic philanthropy. There is a great deal of what is called 
philanthropy in this age. Most men who are candidates for public suffrage profess 
to feel its inspiration, and advocate its claims. Indeed, there are not a few who trade 
in its holy name. Under the cover of serving their race, they gratify their own vanity 
and enrich their own coffers. Amongst so much of spurious philanthropy it may be 
well to take a glance at the genuine thing. Paul was a philanthropist of the true type; 
his love for his race was disinterested, self-sacrificing, and unconquerable. The passave 
before us gives us a glimpse of philanthropy as it existed in his noble soul. We 
observe— 

1. His PHILANTHROPY REGARDED SPIRITUAL EXCELLENCE ΑΒ THE ESSENTIAL NECES- 
SITY OF MANKIND. Two elements of spiritual exceilence are mentioned here, which 
must be regarded, not merely as the specimen of others, but as the root of all genuine 
goodness of heart. 1. Practical faith in Christ. ‘Faith in the Lord Jesus.” In the 
New Testament this is everywhere made the one thing needful. Faith in him is 
represented as essential in the moral restoration of man to the knowledge, image, and 
fellowship of God; and both the philosophy of the human mind and the experience 
of mankind concur in demonstrating that practical faith in the Son of God can alone 
confer real and lasting good on man. 2. Genuine love for the good. “Love unto all 
the saints,” 1.6. all the genuixe disciples of Jesus Christ. The love is virtuous, it is for 
men on account of their goodness—* saints.” This love is catholic, it is for “all the 
saints.” Now, Paul regarded these two things as existing in the Ephesian Church 
as the most hopeful and essential things. He makes no reference to their secular 
education, to their mercantile progress, to their artistic improvements, to their political 
advancement; he knew that these were comparatively useless without spiritual excel- 
lence, and that with spiritual excellence these would grow up to highest perfection. 
He looked to the reformation of souls as that which was a good in itself, and which 
alone could give value to any other reformation. 

11, His PHILANTHROPY LIVED IN THE RELIGIOUS EXERCISES OF HIS ΒΟ. “ Cease 
not to give thanks for you, making mention of you iu my prayers.” Observe threo 
things concerning Paul’s religious devotions, 1. They were profoundly reverential. 
How great did that God whom he worshipped appear to him! (1) “The God of our 
Lord Jesus.” The God of that mighty Being who wrought such wonders when on this 
earth. (2) ‘The Father of glory.” One who dwelt “in light which no man could 
approach unto.” The central Fount of all honour and dignity. (8) The Dispenser 
of the Spirit. “Given unto you the Spirit,” ete. Such is the God he worshipped. 
Great ideas of God generate reverence in souls, 2. Z'hey were unceasing in thanks and 
prayer. “Cease not to give thanks for you,” etc. In prayer and supplication he made 
known his requests to God. Unceasing thanks for the past, and prayer for the future, is 
the grand duty of all, and the happy life of Christians. 8. They were ever animated 
with love to men, Ashe appeared before this great God in worship, he bore the interest 
of the Church at Ephesus in his prayers. He presented Ephesus to the care and love 
of him who alone can save and bless. True philauthropy has ever used, and must 
ever use, prayer as its chief instrument. The prayer of Abraliam all but saved Sodom 
aud Gomorrah. On the day of judgment it will be seen that the world’s greatest bene- 
factors were the men of greatest prayer. 

TIL. His ῬΗΙΓΑΝΤΗΒΟΡΥ EARNESTLY SOUGHT MAN’8 ADVANCEMENT IN SPIHITUAL 
INTELLIGENCE. He desired the tncrease of their knowledge in three things, 1. In 
Divine truth, He prayed that God “ would give them a spirit of wisdom and revelation 


oH. 1. 1—23.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 58 


in the knowledge of him.” He wished for them clearer and broader views of the Eternal. 
2. In Christian privilege. “The eyes of your understanding being enlightened, that ye 
may know what is the hope of his calling.” The general idea is that you may know 
the transcendent and inexhaustible blessings that Ged has provided for you. 3. In 
personal attainment. ‘‘ What is the exceeding greatness of his power to us-ward.” 
The idea is that you may more deeply feel the change that God’s power has wrought in 
you. How great was the change that God’s almighty energy had wrought in these 
people (see Acts xix.)! Such was the knowledge that Paul was anxious to promote, 
and this, indeed, is the knowledge to bless humanity. 

IV. His PHILANTHROPY TRACED ALL GENUINE IMPROVEMENT IN HUMAN CHARACTER 
TO THE DIVINE POWER THAT WAS MANIFESTED IN Curist. The mighty power which 
had done such wonders for them was the “ power which he wrought in Christ, when he 
raised him from the dead,” ete. The power: 1. Was manifested in the resurrection 
of Christ. Christ’s resurrection might be regarded (1) as a symbol of the spiritual 
resurrection of the soul: “If ye then be risen with Christ,” ete. ; (2) as the procuring 
cause of the spiritual resurrection of the soul. Had Christ not risen from the dead the 
spiritual resurrection would be impossible. “Blessed be the God and Father of our 
Lord Jesus Christ, who according to his abundant mercy hath begotten us again to a 
living hope by the resurrection of Christ from the dead.” 2, Was manifestcd in the 
exaltation of Christ. He exalted Christ “far above all principalities,” etc. ‘That power 
will also exalt the soul, give it a dominion over self and circumstances; that power 
makes men “ kings and priests unto God.” Paul’s philanthropy led him to trace all the 
improvement at Ephesus, not to his own labours, though he had laboured there long 
and hard, but to God’s power, and to God’s power as manifested by Jesus Christ. 

V. His PHILANTHROPY IDENTIFIED MAN’S INTEREST WITH THE LIFE OF THE Son 
Ὲ Gop. Those only, he felt, were truly blessed of men who were vitally connected 
with Christ, as body and soul. ‘ Which is his body,” etc. The figure implies: 1. 
Christ's animation. The soul animates the body; Christ animates the good. 2. Christ’s 
contr. The soul controls the body; Christ controls the good. 3. Christ's manifesta- 
tion. The soul manifests itself through the body; Christ manifests himself in the good. 
4. Christ's Church. It is aunity. The body, with all its members, is one whole.—D. T. 


Ver. 3.—The Christian blessings. I. CHRISTIANS HAVE BEEN BLESSED WITH MANY 
BLESSINGS. 1. Christianity involves blessedness. The declaration of its truths is a 
gospel. It is the religion of the cross; yet it is far happier to bear Christ’s cross than 
to wear the yoke of sin, and there is no other alternative. ‘Ihe way of the cross is 
itself the way of peace and highest happiness. 2. Christian blessedness is now enjoyed. 
“ Tlath blessed us ”—literally, “ did bless us.” The gifts of the gospel are not all reserved 
for the future world. Indeed, if we enjoy none now, we are not likely to be able to 
appreciate any after death (1 Tim. iv. 8). For (1) Christ has already done all that is 
necessary to secure us the highest blessings; and (2) many of the best blessings are 
already within our reach, and do not depend upon any change of state to be produced 
by death. 3. The Christian blessings are numerous and various, “ Every spiritual 
blessing.” If we have received some blessings there are more to follow. Already what 
we have had is beyond reckoning. All do not receive just the same kind of blessings, 
Each may look for fresh varieties. 

11. Tae CHRISTIAN BLESSINGS ARE SPIRITUAL AND HEAVENLY. 1. They are spiritual. 
This word describes them subjectively ; it shows what they are in us, They are inward 
graces, not material possessions. We may receive temporal prosperity, and, if so, 
should ascribe it to the Source and Author of every good gift. But we may be denied 
it, and yet be none the less blessed of God. It is a mistake for any of us to look for 
specially Christian blessings in this category, or to be perplexed at not receiving them. 
The true Christian blessings are such things as peace and joy, light and love, purity 
and power. 2. They are heavenly. This word describes them objectively ; it points 
to what they are in themselves and in relation to their Divine origin. Coming from 
God, they belong to “heavenly places.” They are such things as the forgiveness of 
sins, and the sympathy and fellowship of Christ, the beatific vision vouchsafed to the 

* pure in heart, and the baptism of the Holy Ghost. Because they are heavenly things 
they are not beyond our reach; for heaven is let down to earth now that the kingdom 


54 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, [on. τ. 1—23 


ot heaven is in our midst, and we are lifted up to heaven when we have our treasura 
there, for there our heart is. But it is only the upward gaze that will discern true 
Christian blessings. Kirke White writes of “this low-thoughted world of darkling 
woe.” The woe is so “ darkling ” just because the world is 80 “ low-thoughted.” We 
cannot find the stars by searching in the dust. 

Il]. THESE BLESSINGS DESCEND UPON US FRoM Gop THROUGH CuRist. 1. The source 
of them is in God, Christianity has its origin in God. He conceived the first thought 
of it. He sent his Son to bring it tous. 2. The blessings come especially from God in 
his character of Father. God is revealed as Creator, King, Judge; from none of these 
Divine characteristics oould we expect the blessings of mercy which as Christians we 
receive. ‘l'hey are given by a Father. 3. These blessings flow directly from God’s 
relations with Christ. He is the “ Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.” The blessings 
are given to us through Christ’s great work of mediation. 4. It is through our 
relations with Christ that we enjoy the Christian blessings. They are “ in Christ.” 
He first receives them, and we have them by union with him. We must be “in 
Christ” ourselves in order that the blessings may be ours. ἡ 

IV. THE ENJOYMENT OF THE CHRISTIAN BLESSINGS SHOULD INSPIRE OUR MOST HEART- 
FELT PRAISES. The whole verse is an utterance of thanksgiving. Surely it is fitting 
that we should bless God for such wonderful blessings to us. We cannot repay, but 
we can at least thank. “ Where are the nine?” must often be the sad question that 
should shame our gross ingratitude. The essence of religious worship. Yet our age 
has forgotten to worship. We pray, begging favours for ourselves; we discuss truth, 
seeking light for ourselves ; we work—let us hope sometimes unselfishly ; but where is 
our worship, adoration, praising of God? See the grounds for thus blessing God (1) in 
the richness of the blessings ; (2) in our total ill desert; (3) in the greatness of God, 
and the consequent depth of his condescension in stooping to our low estate ; (4) in the 
cost of the blessings—the precious blood of Christ (ver. 7); and (5) in the wonderful 
Jiivine love which inspired the whole work of redemption.—W. F. A. 


Vers. 4—6.—God’s idea of humanity. Wecommonly regard our lives from a human 
standpoint, which we cannot well leave even in thought. But, if it were possible, it 
would be most interesting to see how God looks upon them, Now, it is one of the 
objects of revelation to help us to do this—to lead us to see ourselves as God sees 
us. Next to the vision of God himself, such a picture of humanity as it appears in the 
eyes of God is of the greatest importance. The manifestation of our present condition 
in the searching light of God turns out to be a shameful exhibition of sin and failure. 
Rut the declaration of God’s idea of our lives, of what he wishes and purposes for us, 
and of his design in fashioning us, is truly sublime, and should fill us with genuine 
“ self-reverence.” In the verses before us, by a magnificent feat of inspired imagination, 
St. Paul describes this idea and the method by which God is working it out. 

I. Tur origin or THE IDEA. It was conceived “ before the foundation of the world.” 
The architect’s desigu precedes the builder’s structure, God had bis plan of mankind 
before a man was created. 1. Secing that God is infinite, that plan must extend to 
every detail of the vocation of every individual soul, 2. Seeing that God is independent 
of time, he must Anow from the first all future issues, and what course will be taken 
by the free-will of each man. 8. Seeing that all things are united by successive waves 
of influence, what God does from the foundation of the world onwards must all have its 
bearings on the latest development of mankind, and must therefore be determined in 
some measure with respect to God’s idea of humanity. 

11. Tue ΟΒΥΈΟΤΒ or Tan IDEA. 1. In our character, God’s will regarding us is our 
sanctification. He foreordains us to be pure and free from all defilement and imper- 
fection. Thus we learn that the moral and spiritual state of » soul is far more 
important in the eyes of God than any intellectual gifts, or any amount of comfort and 
happiness. 2. In our condition, God wishes us to be his sons, The high privilege 
of Christ he desires to bestow upon Christ’s brethren. To be thus nearly related to 
God is to have the highest possible destiny. 8. In relation to God himself. The praise 
of his glory is thus attained. If God seeks his own glory, it is because this is the glory 
of goodness seen in the welfare of his creatures. : 

ML. Tue mMorives oF THE IDEA. 1. In God’s sovereign frecdom. He purposes 


on, τ, 1—23.) THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. BB 


“according to the good pleasure of his will.” Like the potter with his clay, God has 
aright to choose his own idea of humanity, 2. In God’s great love. God’s will is 
elways holy and always gracious. If, therefore, anything depends solely on his will, 
it-is sure to be done,jn the best possible way, and in the way that brings most good tu 
his creatures. Instefd of fearing God’s free choice, we ought to rejoice in it, seeing that 
it is always determined by love. It is love that leads God to design for mankind so 
glorious a destiny as was conceived before the foundation of the world. 

IV. Tux METHOD OF REALIZING THE IpEA. 1, Through grace “freely bestowed on 
us.” God does not call us to a high vocation without giving us the means whereby to 
fulfil it. As he first ordained the future destiny, he alone can now give us power 
to accomplish it, 2. Through Christ. Christ is the greatest gift of God’s grace, By 
our faith in Christ we receive God’s grace. Christ, as the Beloved of God, brings us into 
the blessings of God’s love-—W. F. A. 


Ver. 7.—Redemption. I, WHat rr MEANS To us. “Our redemption” is here in 
apposition with “the forgiveness of our trespasses.” The phrases mutually explain one 
another. 1. The idea of forgiveness ewplains that of redemption. (1) Redemption is 
a setting free. Sin isa bondage. The guilt of sin is the burden of an unpaid debt. 
When we are forgiven the debt is cancelled and the yoke broken. (2) Redemption is 
8 recovery. The redeemed man is not merely a captive liberated; he is a prisoner 
restored to his country and his home. Sin banishes us from God. Forgiveness restores 
us to the home of our souls in bringing us back to communion with God. 2. The idea , 
of redemption explains that of forgiveness. Such forgiveness as amounts to a redemption 
cannot be a mere withholding of penalties. It must be (1) positive—giving us the 
status of free, restored souls; and (2) personal—a reconciliation between man and God. 

1. Waar rr cost Curist. Redemption implies payment. The redeemed is recovered 
by means of a ransom. The cost of the Christian redemption is the blood of Christ. 
Unfortunately, the expression, “ the blood of Christ ”—or even the mutilated expression, 
“the blood”—has been used by some so ignorantly and coarsely that many persons 
have come to turn from it with disgust. It would seem that some so-called evangelical 
people attach as much efficacy to the charm of the word “ blood,” repeated without any 
intelligent idea, as the most superstitious Roman Catholics ascribe to what they believe 
to be real blood in the sacred chalice. On the other hand, we must not explain 
away the expression by saying that it simply means the death of Christ, or why was 
not the word “death” used? And did not Jesus say that we must eat his flesh and drink 
his blood? According to a venerated Hebrew idea, the blood was life. The shedding 
of the blood, therefore, was the giving of the life. If Christ’s blood is a ransom, that 
means that Christ gave his life and himself asa ransom. The value of such a ransom 
must be just the value of such a life. How well pleasing to God must be the obedient 
yielding up of himself by Christ! How persuasive to us in drawing us out of the power 
of sin should the same sacrifice be! 

111. Wuencz 1T ΟΒΙΘΊΝΑΤΕΡ. We are redeemed “according to the riches of his 
grace,” ¢.e. of God’s grace. 1. Then it is God who first plans our redemption and 
desires our forgiveness and provides the means for our restoration. 2. The motive of 
redemption is pure grace. It is not that we have a rivht to be restored, as Englishmen 
would claim a right to be set free from ignominious slavery in a foreign land; nor 
that we shall be worth so much to God when restored as to compensate him for the 
cost ; but simply that, freely loving us, he mercifully delivers us. 8. The grace of God 
is replete with wealthy resources. ‘There are men whose favours are so poverty- 
stricken that they are not worth having. God’s grace is rich enough to provide the 
necessary ransom for our redemption. Christ our Ransom is given to us as the greatest 
gift from the treasury of Divine grace.—W. F. A. 


Ver. 10.—The consummation of all things. We have in this bold, sweeping picture 
of the great onward movement of the universe a solution of the most ambitious 
questions of philosopuy. What is the meaning of the ever-changing flux and rush 
of all things? and whither does ittend? It is, says St. Paul, a progress towards organic 
unity. Can any thought be more modern or more in accordance with strict science ὃ 
fit. Paul recognizes the all-important point, too often ignored in ancient philosophy, 


56 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, (om. τ, 1—23 


that we have to deal with organic conditions—with living forces and their resultants, 
He discerns a purpose in the seeming confusion of forces. In spite of many indications 
of failure, he discovers a sure progress. And the end of this progress he declares to 
be union and harmony. Yet he is not merely philosophizing. His idea is theological ; 
he sees God’s mind planning the whole, and God’s hand effecting it. It is als» 
essentially Christian. The end is accomplished through Christ. 

I. Gop PURPOSES ΤῸ BRING ALL THINGS INTO ORGANIO UNION. This purpose is 
illustrated by the latest philosophy of evolution, Mr. Herbert Spencer has shown 
that evolution is a process of increasing integration, accompanied by increasing differen- 
tiation. Scattered nebulous matter concentrates into solid worlds. From existence 
in separate cells, life advances to the union of cells in organic creatures. Society 
progresses from individual separation, through tribal union, to the formation of great 
nations, St. Paul carries out the idea on a larger scale, Heaven and earth, things 
spiritual and things material, will ultimately integrate in one grand unity. Consider 
some of the wonderful results involved in such a process as it completes itself. 1. 
An approach of all things nearer together and a more ready intercommunication. The 
earthly will no longer be separated from the heavenly. 2. Mutual co-operation. Each 
will minister to the other. 3. The more effective work of higher organization. 4, The 
end of all discord, the overthrow of all evil, the subjection of the lower to the higher. 
Sin must then be cast out and God’s will done on earth as it is now only done in heaven. 
5. No necessary uniformity. On the contrary, differentiation increases with integra- 
tion. The most highly organized bodies have the greatest variety of parts. While - 
we look for progress, therefore, we must not be surprised at seeing increasing differences 
of constitution, idea, method of action, etc., among Christians, but even expect this 
to accompany a growth in harmonious mutual helpfulness. We are not to see the 
uniformity of the blades of grass in a meadow; but the unity of the root, trunk, 
branches, leaves, and fruit of one great tree. 

II, THE UNION OF ALL THINGS WILL BE EFFECTED THROUGH CHRIST. We cannot 
measure the far-reaching effects of the life-work of Christ. But the character of all of 
them is peacemaking and progressive. Christ comes to quell the discord of life, to 
draw all into one, and to Icad the whole on to a hicher life. We may see, partly, by 
what means this is done. 1. The Incarnation. Thus heaven comes down to earth. 
The process begins here in one man, Jesus. 2. The sacrifice of Christ. This is a 
peace offering. By it the separation between man and God is done away. ὃ, Jhe 
brotherhood of Christ. All Christians are brethren in Christ. Thus human differences 
are done away; Jew and Gentile, bond and free, barbarians and civilized, are one in 
Christ. In the end, the union of Christians in the Church should realize the cosmo- 
politan oneness which will banish war and mutual jealousies. 4. The headship of 
Christ. As Christ is recognized to be the Head by all, all become members of him, 
and so members one of another. 6. The final triumph of Christ over sin, death, and 
all evil things. ᾿ 

III. THe ACCOMPLISHMENT OF THE ORGANIO UNION OF ALL THINGS WILL COMA 
WITH “ THE DISPENSATION OF THE FULNESS OF TImEs.” 1. It is only possible in course 
of téme. Evolution takes time; so do the Divine education of the race, the spread 
of the gospel, and the growth of the Church in truth and grace. 2. It is not to be 
indefinitely postponed. There will be a fulness of times. The present confusion is 
only temporary. It may last long, but not for ever. We may do something to hasten 
the consummation of all things. It will only come when the times are ripe for it; 
but as we do our part to aid the great Christian progress, we help on the ripening of 
the ages.—W. F. A. : 

Vers. 13, 14.—Sealed. 1. THE AssSURANCE THAT CHRISTIANS ARE SEALED. 1, They 
are owned by God. “The Lord knoweth them that are his.” God is said to keep 
a book of remembrance, so that they who fear him shall be remembered in the day 
when he makes up his jewels (Mal. iii. 16,17). 2. They are to be known by men. A 
seal is conspicuous. It is intended to he seen and understood. ‘There are signs in the 
life by which the inward spiritual religion may be detected. If we know how to read 
the seal, we shall be able to discover whether or no it is on ourselves. Yet it is 
possible to be a true servant of Christ, and yet to be sadly doubtful as to one’s own 


a. L 1—23.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. δῖ 


condition, not because we have not the seal, but because we are too blinded with fears 
to read it, or because we are looking for a different kind of seal. 8, They are preserved. 
by God, The seal is a security. All the authority of its owner accompanies it, 
Christians being once owned will never be deserted by God. : 

Il. Tue conpITIon ΟΝ WHICH CHRISTIANS ARE SEALED. This is faith. As a pre- 
liminary, the gospel must be heard. But all who hear are not sealed. We must, 
individually and voluntarily, yield submission to the truth we have received. ‘Two 
motives for faith may be gathered from the words of St. Paul, viz.: 1. The claims of 
truth. It is “the Word of the truth” that we have heard. Truth is royal and 
authoritative, and rightly demands obedience. 2, Our own salvation. This “ Word 
of the truth” is also “the gospel of your salvation.” Our highest infe¥est lies in our 
accepting the gospel and giving our faith to it. 

TIL. Tue METHop BY WHICH CHRISTIANS ARE SEALED. It is “ with the Holy Spirit 
of promise.” The early Christians were endued with the Holy Spirit after they had 
given their faith to Christ. None but those who were thus “believers” received it. 
The gift was, therefore, a sign of true faith, We do not have it in the same form—as 
a sift of tonzues, of healing, ete. But we receive it in spiritual graces. Christians 
are still endued by the Holy Spirit, and, as a consequence, realize their sonship to God 
(Rom. viii. 16, 17), and enjoy communion with God (Rom. viii. 26, 27). The reality 
of these things and of the spiritual gifts from which they flow is proved by the result- 
ing fruits of the Spirit (Gal. v. 22, 28). 

IV. Taz purrose FoR WHICH CHRISTIANS ARE SEALED. They are sealed by a Spirit 
of promise. The blessings assured by the Divine recognition are as yet chiefly future, 
We are heirs, not owners; or, regarding it from another point of view, God has paid 
the ransom 1m his own possession, but the redemption of it is not yet fully accom- 
plished. Yet he bas so far claimed it as to set his seal upon it. Christians bear the 
mark of God’s owuership, though they are not wholly recovered to him. Their present 
condition is an assurance of final recovery. It is an earnest οὗ redemption. Enough 
grace is already given to result in some measure of redemption. If we have not this 
foretaste of heaven, these first droppings of the showers of blessings, we have no right 
to expect more. But if we have, the beginning points on to the fulfilment, when God 
will be glorified in our perfect redemption.—W. F. A. 


Vers. 15, 16.—Spiritua: prosperity. Although St. Paul could soar into strange 
heights of contemplation, his interest was not confined to cold theological abstractions. 
If he meditated on the final zonsummation of all things, he was never negligent of 
the spiritual condition of the Utristians of his day. No man could show more deep, 
earnest, personal concern for those committed to his charge, than the great apostle 
evinced for the Churches of whict he had the oversight. They were ever in his 
thoughts and in his prayers. Their prosperity or adversity was his joy or sorrow. 
It was happy when, as in the case οἱ the Christians of Asia, to which the Epistle to 
the Ephesians was addressed, St. Paui nad little to blame and much to rejoice over. 
We may learn sometiing by considering what, in St. Paul’s estimation, were the marks 
of Christian prosperity, and how he regarded that prosperity. 

1. THe TRUE PROSPERITY OF A CHURCH CONSISTS IN THE GROWTH OF SPIRITUAL 
GRACES AMONG THE MEMBERS. We make much of numbers, as though prosperity were 
a matter of arithmetic. ‘The statistics of the Churches” will never serveas a divining 
rod with which to discover the precious metai of piety. St. Paul cared less for the 
number of adherents to Christianity than for the quality of the true Christians. 
While we busy ourselves in counting the attendants at church, who is to measure the 
growth or decrease of spiritual life? Then St. Paul’s idea of prosperity was not 
accumulating wealth, the creation of more imposing buildings, a higher social status— 
things about which some of us are so greatly concerned. Ali he cared for was spiritual 
progress. The two essential elements of this are growing faith in Christ and growing 
love towards one another, 

II, ΤῊΒ GROWTH OF SPIRITUAL PROSPERITY 18 DESERVING OF JOYFUL RECOGNITION 
AND THANKSGIVING. If St. Paul is fearless in rebuking where rebukes are necessary, 
he is ungrudging in his congratulations where these are earued. Some people seem 
to he afraid of provoking the vanity of others in praising them, it they are not prevented 


58 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. (on. 1. 1—23, 


from giving them their due by jealousy. We might better encourage one another ir 
we were more ready to anticipate the great Master’s genercus “‘ Well done, good and 
faithful servant.” At the same time, it must be remembered that the glory is due to 
God, as the grace came only from him. Thus our congratulations should pass into 
thankscivings. 

ΠΙ. WHILE THANKFULLY RECOGNIZING SPIRITUAL PROSPERITY, WE SHOULD PRAY FOR 
THE INCREASE OF IT. The present graces are not enough. We shall deceive our 
brethren if our congratulations lead them to think that there is no need for further 
progress. On the contrary, the present attainments are reasons for praying for greater 
increase. Thus St. Paul makes mention of the faith and love of the Christians of Asia 
in his prayeragy The reward ot one grace is the addition of another. One prepares the 
way for anothef. Certain spiritual attainments are grounds on which new and higher 
attainments may be built.—W. F. A. 


Vers, 17—19.—Spiritual knowledge, After thankfully recognizing the faith and 
love of the Christians he is addressing, St. Paul describes his prayers for their further 
endowment with Divine graces, and shows that he is especially anxious that they shoujd 
receive a Spirit of wisdom. Possibly the Christians of Ephesus and its neighbourhood 
were backward on the intellectual side of the spiritual life; but more probably wisdom 
was desirable for them just because they were exceptionally capable of high thinking, 
and would therefore profit above others by enjoying the light of heavenly revelation. 
In any case, it is to be observed that faith and love are the more essential graces, 
that they must precede wisdow and knowledge, which are not, as is often assumed, 
to be expected as the first and tundamental grounds of religion; but that, nevertheless, 
the intellectual side of religion is important as an addition to the moral. 

I. THE SOURCE OF SPIRITUAL KNOWLEDGE. 1. This knowledge comes from God, 
St. Paul makes it a matter ot prayer. It is not to be attained, then, merely by 
intellectual culture, nor even by our own spiritual experience alone. 2. It is given as 
a revelation. In revelation God makes known what was naturally and previously 
hidden. While the curtain is drawn no guesses can tell what lies behind it. Specu- 
lation, unaided by revelation, is as much at sea in discussing the unseen universe 
to-day as it was at the dawn of Greek philosophy. 3. It results from an inspiration 
of the Spirit of God. We receive a “ Spirit of wisdom.” The Holy Spirit is a Spirit 
of knowledge, leading us into all truth, at once purging us of the sin that blinds our 
vision, quickening the life within to a more keen sensitiveness, and bringing us into 
that sympathetic state in regard to spiritual things which makes us feel their presence 
and understand their character. : 

II. THE ORGAN OF SPIRITUAL KNOWLEDGE. The eyes of our heart have to be 
enlightened that we may know spiritual things. 1. The heart has its eyes. There is 
an inner sight. This is not merely speculative. It is alive with feeling; it is in the 
heart. Thus the poet will see what the naturalist overlooks; the mother will know 
her children as the schoolmaster cannot know them; the saint will have visions 
of Divine truth towhich the philosopher is blind. 2. All that the heart needs in 
order to see the highest truths is light. What is wanted is no new declaration, but an 
enlightening of our eyes. The landscape is as present when invisible at night as 
when seen in clear daylight. Divine truth lies open before us. We require no new 
voices from heaven. All that is wanted is a change in ourselves—the unstopping of 
our deaf ears and the opening of our blind eyes. 

III. THE sUBJECTS OF SPIRITUAL KNOWLEDGE. 1. Christ. It is “the knowledge 
of him” for which St. Paul first prays, We must begin with knowing Christ. In 
knowing him we know all; for all the treasures of the gospel dwell in him. 2. The 
future inheritance. How vainly we speculate about this! e can know it only by 
spiritual illumination, Not that the formal nature of it can be discerned, but the true 
character and worth of it will be appreciated. There are riches in this inheritance 
of which we little dream. In our coldness of heart they look dim and faint. We 
have yet to learn how infiuitely glorious they are. Such a discovery will gladden, 
cheer, and encourage us in the dark battle of the present. 8, The Divine power. By 
heaping up expressions, the apostle makes ua realize the importance of this subject, 

God gives us the inheritance, It is vast and glorious. But terrible difficulties stand 


a 


on, τ, 1—23.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 69 


between us and it. Till we understand somewhat of the power of God, the hope will 
seem to be unattainable. But this we may understand in so.far as we are enlightened 
tightly to appreciate the manifestation of it in the resurrection and triumph of Christ— 
the pledges and grounds of our future blessedness.—W. F. A, 


Vers, 20—22.—The supremacy of Christ. We commonly think of Christ as the 
Man of sorrows, humiliated and crucified; but we should more often remembor ‘that 
this familiar picture describes what is completely past. If we would love and worship 
our Lord as he now is, we must look at him in his exaltation—triumphant, joyous, 
glorious, We should see the typical Christ in Raffaelle’s ‘ Transfiguration ἢ rather than 
in the many piteous ‘Ecce Homo’s!’ that arrest our attention. We have not to weep 
at the tomb, “ He is not here; he is risen.” The supremacy of Christ is twofold—in 
rank and in authority. 

I. Tue SUPREME RANK oF Carist. 1. Wherein it consists, Christ sits at God’s 
“right hand in the heavenly places, far above all rule,” etc. By an accumulation of 
titles of beings below Christ, St. Paul not only declares, but helps to make us feel, the 
lofty rank of Christ. For since we have only seen the humiliation, it is difficult to 
realize the exaltation, 2. Whence it arises. (1) From the nature of Christ. He is 
Son of God as well as Son of man. In the end every nature finds its level, (2) From 
the character of Christ. The highest honour is due not to wisdom, nor to power, but 
to goodness. It is not the Socrates, nor the Alexander, but the holy Jesus of Nazareth 
who is raised to the right hand of God. (3) The sacrifice of Christ. ‘“ Every one 
tbat humbleth himself shall be exalted.” God exalts Christ to his throne, because 
Christ humbled himself to the cross, 3. What effects should flow from it. (1) It 
should excite our joy. It is our Lord, our Saviour, our Brother, who is thus honoured. 
If we thought less of ourselves and more of Christ, our worship would be less plaintive ; 
we should make heaven’s arch ring with songs of gladness. (2) It should inspire our 
reverence. We must have a low nature if we cannot love reverently when we love 
warmly, Yet with many a genuine affection for Christ seems to inspire an unbecoming 
familiarity. (8) It should shed glory on the service of Christ. How can we be 
ashamed to be Christians, if this is to be followers of the highest in rank? (4) It 
should encourage our hopes. At first it may strike a chill fear as we sce our Lord 
removed far above us. But faith knows that he is the same Man who sat weary by 
the well of Sychar, and lay sleeping in the fishing-boat of Gennesaret. The risen 
Christ had his still pierced hands. It is unworthy to think that in his heavenly 
exaltation he will forget his earthly friends. If he does not, his glory is ours. He will 
call his people to share his triumph. 

11. THe suPREME AUTHORITY OF CuRist. 1, Wherein it consists. (1) “He put 
all things in subjection under his feet.” All earthly and heavenly things work 
according to the will of Christ. (2) He is the Head of the Church. He not only 
teaches and saves and blesses; he rules. And he has never abdicated nor delegated 
his authority. Any assumption of the headship, which belongs only to Christ, is 
rebellion against him. If the pope claims this authority, he must be an antichrist. 2. 
Whence tt arises. (1) From the nature of Christ. He isa born King. (2) From the 
character of Christ. He is just and merciful, and has the ideal royal character. He 
is most fit to rule. (8) From the triumph of Christ. He is victorious over sin and 
death. He reigns by right of conquest. 3, What effects should flow from it. (1) We 
should obey Christ, and (2) have full confidence in him. Here is good ground fur 
believing that he will make all the strange, dark events of our lives work right in the 
end; that he will conquer all his foes and all the evil of the world; and that thuse 
who suffer with him here shall also reign with him hereafter.—W. F. A. 


Ver. 23.—The Church as the body and the fulness of Christ. We have here the 
intimate relation of Christ with his Church described in two aspects—first external, 
and then internal. 

1. ExrernNaL.y, THE CHURCH 18 A BODY OF WHICH CHRIS1 Is THE Heap. 1. The 
Church is joined to Christ. Christ maintains the closest possible relations with his 
people. His ascension, instead of removing him from us, by taking him to a distant 
heaven, brings him nearer to us, by his passing inte the spiritual universe, through 


60 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. (cx. τι. 1—22 


which he can have immediate contact with individual souls. 2. There ts one life in 
Christ and the Church. The same blood pulsates through the head and through the 
members of the body. The blood of Christ must not only be “applied to” Christians, 
as some people say, but in them, drunk as wine of life (John vi. 56). Thus, by close 
communion with Christ in faith, submission, and obedience, the very life of Christ will 
flow through us, so that we can say, “ Not I, but Christ liveth in me.” 8. Christ 
presides over theChurch. He is the Head of the body. TheChurch is not a republic; 
it is a kingdom, and Christ is its King. His thought teaches, his will commands, his 
Spirit gives grace and order to all the movements of the body. 4. The Church is one 
in Christ. The head has but one body. Through Christ a common sympathy should 
spring up among Christians, just as, through their connection with the head, the 
various organs of the body co-operate harmoniously. When the influence of the head 
is lost, convulsions or confused movements are the consequence. So sectarian enmity 
is a proof of severance from Christ. | Nevertheless, variety is possible and even 
necessary in a highly organized body. There are many members, and all the members 
have not the same office. ‘The essential unity consists in the subordination of all the 
parts to the one head. 5. Severance from Christ is death to the Church. A Christless 
Church is a headless trunk. We may retain the doctrine and ethic of the New ‘lesta- 
ment, but, nevertheless, amputation of the Head means death. Even a partial 
severance of connection involves paraysis—loss of spiritual power and loss of spiritual 
feeling. 

11. IvTERNALLY, THE CHURCH 18 THE FULNESS oF Curist. It is filled with Christ. 
He is not only the Head above it; he is the life within it. He does not only teach, 
bless, command, and lead from without; he inspires his people and lives in his 
Church. Christ fills “all in all;” te. the Spirit that was in Jesus of Nazareth is in 
the whole universe, inspiring al] creation and all providence with wisdom and goodness, 
purity and grace. The same Spirit isin the Church. As yet, unhappily, the Church 
is not filled with Christ. Though Christ is received into the heart of Christians, every 
dcor within is not yet flung open to the gracious Gucst. But in the perfect time, when 
his authority is everywhere established, his presence will be universally immanent. In 
the ideal Church, Christ fills the affections with holy love, the thoughts with higher 
truths, the imagination with heavenly visions, the will with obedient actions. He 
fills all and his graces are seen in all. Already he begins the blessed indwelling. We 


look forward to his great triumph, when he will as fully fill his people as he will 
absolutely conquer his foes.—W. F. A. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER IL of God was exerted on Christ and on the 


Vers. 1—10.—SririTvaL History OF THE 
Eruestans. This passage corresponds to 
Gen. i. It is o history of creation, and we 
note the same great stages. 1. Chaos (vers. 
1—8). 2. The dawn—the Spirit of God 
moving on the face of the waters (vcr. 4). 
8. The work of creation—in successive stages 
(vers. 4—10). 

Ver. 1.—You also, who were dead in your 
trespasses and your sins. The apostle re- 
turns from his digression, in which he had 
shown the marvellous working of the Divine 
power on Christ, to show the working of the 
same power on the Eplesian converts them- 
selves. The duds is not governed by any 
verb going before; it manifestly depends 
on the συνεζωοποίησεν of ver. 5, but it is 
separated from it by a new digression (vers. 
2, 3), on which the apostle immediately 
starta, While the same quickening power 


Lphesiaus, it was excrted to very different 
ettucts: in the case of Christ, raising him 
literally from the dead and exalting him to 
heavenly glory; in the case of the Ephe- 
sians, raising them from spiritual death and 
exalting them to high spiritual privileges. 
We may observe the change from the second 
to the first person, and vice versd, in this 
chapter as in ch. i. Second person (vers. 1, 
8, 11); first (vers. 3, 10, 14); and the two 
streams brought together (ver. 18). The 
chapter closes beautifully with an emblem 
of the Church as the one temple of which 
all believers are parts, The death ascribed 
to the Ephesians in their natura] state ie 
evidently spiritual death, and “‘trespasses and 
sins,” being in the dative (νεκροὺς Τοῖς πα- 
ραπτώμασι καὶ ταῖς ἁμαρτίαις), seems to indi- 
cate the cause of death—“ dead through 
your trespassea and your sins” (R.V.); 
“ dead of your, trespasses,” ϑίο. is suggested 


on. τι. 1—22.] THE EPISTLE TO 


THE EPHESIANS. 


61 


by Alford. Ié ia not easy to assign a 
different meaning to the two nouns here; 
sume suggest acts of transgression for the 
one, and sinful tendencies or principles for 
the other, but this distinction cannot be 
carried out in all other passages. ‘The kill- 
ing effect of sin is indicated. As sins of 
setsuality kill truthfulness, industry, in- 
tegrity, and all virtue, 60 sin generally, 
affecting as it does our whole nature, kills, 
or does not suffer to live, the affections and 
movements of the spiritual life. A state of 
“death” implies previous life—the race 
lived before; it implies also a state of insen- 
sibility, of utter powerlessness and helpless- 
ness. 

Ver. 2.—Wherein aforetime ye walked 
according to the course of this world. The 
idea of a dead creature walking is not alto- 
gether incongruous. It implies that a kind 
of life remained sufficient for walking; but 
not the true, full, normal life; rather the 
life of a galvanized corpse, or of one walking 
in sleep. The figurative use of walking for 
living, or carrying on our life, is frequent 
in this Epistle (ch. iv. 1; v. 2, ete.). “The 
course of this world,” elsewhere“ the world,” 
denotes the present system of things, as con- 
ducted by those who have regard only to 
things seen and temporal, and no regard to 
God or to the future life. Where there is 
spiritual death there is insensibility to these 
things. According to the prince of the 
power of the air. It is obvious that this is 
equivalent to “the god ot this world” 
(2 Cor. iy. 4), but the explanation of the 
term ia difficult. Allusion is made to a 
corporate body, “the power [or, ‘ govern- 
ment”) (ἐξουσία) of the air,” and to one who 
is “prince” of this government. There is no 
difficulty in identifying the evil one and his 
host, of whom Milton gives such graphic 
pictures. But why should they be specially 
counected with the air? The notion, enter- 
tained by some of the Fathers and others, 
that storms and disturbances of the atmo- 
sphere are caused by them, is preposterous ; 
it is unseriptural (Ps. exlviii. 8) and quite 
unscientific. ‘The term seems to denote that 
evil spirits, who have some power of in- 
fluencing us by their temptations, have their 
abode in the atmosphere, or at least haunt 
it, being invisible like it, yet exercising a 
real influence on human souls, and drawing 
them in worldly directions, and contrary to 
the will of God. The spirit which is now 

_ working in the sons of disobedience. The 
fact that this spirit is still working in others 
makes the escape of the Ephesians from him 
the more striking. He is not destroyed, but 
vigorously at work even yet. Though Jesus 
beheld him fall from heaven as lightning, 
and though he said that the prince of this 
world had been judged, these expressions 


denote a prophetic rather than an actnal con 
dition. This spirit energizes in the “ sons 
of disobedience.” This designation is strik- 
ing ; it denotes persons born of disobedience, 
bred by «lisobedience, having disobedience 
in their very nature; comp. Rom. viii. 7, 
“The carnal mind is enmity against God,” 
and passages where fallen man is called a 
rebel (Isa. i. 2; lxiii. 10; Ps. Ixviii. 6; Jer. 
νυ. 23, etc.). It denotes the essential an- 
tagonism of man’s will to God’s, arising 
from man’s devotion to this world and its 
interests, and God’s regard to what is higher 
and holier—an antagonism often held in 
check and suppressed—but bursting out 
wildly at times in fierce opposition, as at 
the tower of Babel or the crucifixion of 
Jesus. The devil inflames man’s inherent 
dislike to God’s will, and encourages out- 
breaks of it. 

Ver. 3.—Among whom we also all once 
spent our life in the lusts of our flesh. The 
apostle here brings Jews and Gentiles to- 
gether. “We also,” as well as you—we were 
all in the same condemnation, all in a 
miserable plight, not merely occasionally 
dipping into sin, but spending our very lives 
in the lusts or desires of our flesh, living for 
no noble ends, but in an element of carnal 
desire, as if there were nothing higher than 
to please the carnal nature. Fulfilling the 
desires of the flesh and of the mind. Desires 
of the flesh, the grosser and more animal 
propensities (the flesh, in Seripture, has often 
a wider sense; see Gal. v. 19—21); and of 
the mind or thoughts, διανοιῶν, the objects 
that we thought about, whatever they might 
be,—the waywardness of our thoughts seems 
to be denoted, the random roaming of the 
mind hither and thither, towards this plea- 
sure and that, sometimes serious, sometimes 
frivolous, but all marked by the absence of 
any controlling regard to the will of God. 
The life indicated is a life of indulgence in 
whatever natural feelings may arise in us-— 
be they right or be they wrong. And we 
were by nature children of wrath, even as 
the rest. ‘This is a substantive clause, 
standing on its own basis, a suparate fact, 
not merely an inference from the previous 
statements. The life described would have 
exposed us to wrath; but beyond and befure 
this we were by nature children of wrath. 
“By nature” denotes something in our 
constitution, in our very being; and “even 
as the rest” denotes that this was universal, 
not a peculiarity affecting some, but a gene- 
ral feature applicable to all. “Children of 
wrath” denotes that we belonged to a race 
which had incurred the wrath of God; our 
individuality was so far absorbed by the 
social body that we shared the lot under 
which it had come If there be something 
in this that seems contrary to justice, that 


62 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 


ἴση. τι. 1—42. 


seems to condemn men for the sins of others, 
we remark (1) that in actual life we con- 
stantly find individuals suffering for the sin 
of the corporation, domestic, social, or na- 
tional, with which they are identified; (2) 
that apart from this altogether, our indi- 
vidual offences would expose us to God’s 
wrath; and (3) that the moral and legal 
relations of the individual to the corporation 
is a subject of difficulty, and in this case 
makes a strong demand on our faith. We 
should accept the teaching of the Word of 
God upon it, and leave our righteous Judge 
to vindicate himself. ‘“ Wrath,” as applied 
to God, must be regarded as essentially 
different from the same word when used of 
mun. In the latter case it usually indicates 
a disorderly, excited, passionate feeling, as 
of one who has lost self-control; when used 
of God, it denotes the holy, calm, deep oppo- 
sition of his nature to sin, compelling him 
to inflict the appropriate punishment. 

Ver. 4.—But God, being rich in mercy, 
The preceding verses convey the idea of a 
rushing towards inevitable ruin—towards 
some frightful cataract, when all help from 
man is hopeless. Man’s extremity becomes 
God’s opportunity. The “but” is very em- 
phatic, and wonderfully reverses the picture. 
The sovereignty of God is very apparent, on 
its gracious side. It interposes to rescue 
those who would otherwise plunge into 
irretrievable ruin We have here the filling 
up of that Divine saying, “O Israel, thou 
hast destroyed thyself, but in me is thine 
help.” The genesis of salvation is declared 
to be in two of God’s attributes, of which 
the first is mercy, or compassion. God has 
a tender, yearning feeling towards men 
brought to misery by their own sins. And 
this feeling is not shallow or spare—he is 
rich in mercy. It is an exuberant, full-flow- 
ing feeling in God (“Thy mercy . . . isin 
the heavens,” Ps. xxxvi. 5), and may there- 
fore be appealed totrustfully. For his great 
love wherewith he loved us. The other 
attribute from which the plan of salvation 
sprang is God’s love. Love is more than 
compassion. Compassion may be confined 
to the breast, but love goes forth in active 
beneficence. It makes common cause with 
its object. It cannot rest till its object is 
put right. Two expressions are used in- 
tensifying this Divine love: (1) hia great 
love; (2) love with which he loved us; the 
verb of love governing the noun of love 
makes the idea rich and strong. This view 
of the exuberance of the Divine attributes 
from which salvation has its rise is in har- 
mony with the whole character of the Epistle. 

Ver. 5.—Even when we were dead in our 
sins. Repcated from ver. 1, in order to set 
in its true light the declaration that follows 
of what God did fer us, te make more em- 


phatic the free and sovereign mercy of God. 
Though sin is the abominable thing which 
he hates, loathsome to him in the last 
degree, he did not turn from us when we 
were immersed in it; nor did he wait till 
we began to move towards him: he begar 
to influence us even when we were dead, 
Made us alive together with Christ (συνε- 
ζωοποίησε τῷ Χριστῷ). Made us alive with 
the life which is in Christ and which flows 
from Christ. A parallel is run between the 
way in which God’s power operated on the 
body of Christ, and the way in which it 
operates on the souls of believers in him in 
respect of (1) the quickening; (2) the 
raising up from the grave; (3) the seating 
of them in heavenly places. The Father, 
having “given to the Son to have life in 
himself,” and “the Son quickening whom 
he will” (John vi. 21, 26), by God’s decree 
we were first quickened by him, made par- 
takers of Christ’s life (John xi. 25; comp. 
John xiv. 19; xv. 5; Ool. iii. 4; Gal. ii. 20, 
etc.). All the life we had lost was restored — 
the life forfeited by transgression, the life of 
a calm and well-ordered heart, the sublime 
life of fellowship with God. By grace have 
ye been saved. This is a parenthetical 
clause, more fully dwelt on in ver. 8, thrown 
in here abruptly by the apostle in the ful- 
ness of his heart, to throw light on this 
great wonder—that Christ should impart 
his own life to souls dead in sin. Grace 
in opposition to human merit i» at the 
root of the whole arrangement; free, unde- 
served mercy. It is not anything that God 
is bound to by the necessity of his nature. 
It is the result of his will, not of his nature. 
Had it not been for his good pleasure, sal- 
vation had never been. “Saved” 15» the 
past participle (σεσωσμένοι), denoting, not 
the act of being saved, but the fact of having 
been saved. Salvation in a real sense isa 
present possession. When we are one with 
Christ we are justified freely by God’s grace, 
our trespasses are all forgiven. The spirit 
of new moral life has been given to us; 
we are made alive to God. But while salva- 
tion is a present attainment in a real sense, 
its full realization is future, for that includes 
perfect holiness, and also the glorification 
of the body. In this sense salvation is to 
come (Rom. viii, 24; xiii. 11). 

Ver. 6.—And hath raised us up with him 
(comp. Phil. iii. 10); so that we no longer 
walk “according to the course of this 
world,” but according to the life of Ohrist; 
we walk “in newness of life.” And seated 
us with him in the heavenly places in Christ 
Jesus, As God placed Jesus at his right 
hand in heaven, so he has placed his people 
with him in heavenly places; te. places 
where the privileges of heaven are dis- 
pensed, where the air of heaven is breathed, 


on. τι. 1—22,] THE EPISTLE TO 


THE EPHESIANS. 63 


whore the fellowship and the enjoyment of 
heaven are known, where an elevation of 
spirit is experienced as if heaven were 
begun. Such was the case of the three 
disciples on the Mount of Transfiguration; of 
the two on the way to Emmaus, when their 
heart burned within them; of the beloved 
disciple when he was “in the Spirit on the 
Lord’s day ;” of many at the Holy Supper, 
or in fervent communion with brother and 
sister believers, when they seem at the very 
gate of heaven. This is sometimes the ex- 
perience at conversion, but the vividness of 
the feeling does not always abide. The 
repetition of “in Christ Jesus” in this con- 
nection emphasizes the fact that this gra- 
cious proceeding of God towards us is in 
immediate connection with the work and 
person of Christ. It is as being one with 
Christ Jesus that all this raising up comes 
to us. 

Ver. 7.—That in the ages to come he might 
show forth the riches of his grace. A special 
purpose served by God’s free grace bestowed 
on such persons as the Ephesians. It was 
intended as a lesson for future ages. “The 
ages to come” denotes eras to begin from 
that time, running on now, and to continue 
hereafter, It would be a profitable lesson 
for the people of these ages to think of the 
Ephesians, far as they were by nature from 
God, receiving his blessing so abundantly. 
From this they would learn how great are 
the riches of God’sgrace. In kindness towards 
us in Christ Jesus. The particular chanuel 
in which the riches of his grace flows is 
kindness shown to us in Christ Jesus. Kind- 
ness in the matter of the blessing, forgiving 
us freely, and accepting and adopting us in 
him; kindness in the manner of the blessing, 
dealing with us as Jesus dealt with the 
woman that was a sinner, or with the thief 
on the cross, or with Peter after he had 
fallen, or with Saul of Tarsus; kindness in 
the extent of the blessing, providing amply 
for every want; kindness in the duration 
of the blessing—for evermore. But again, 
the Medium or Mediator of blessing is 
specified—“ in Christ Jesus.” It is not the 
kindness of providence, not the natural 
bountifulness of God, but that kindness and 
bountifulness which are specially connectcd 
with the atuning work of Christ: “ God 
was in Christ, reconciling the world unto 
himself.” 

Ver. 8.—For by grace have ye been saved, 
through faith. He repeats what he had 
said parcnthetically (ver. 5), in order to open 
the subject up more fully. On the part of 
God, salvation is by grace; on the part of 
man, it ia through faith, It does not come 
to us by an involuntary act, as light falls 
on our eyes, sounds on our ears, or air enters 
our lungs. When we are ao tar enlightened 


as to understand about it, there must be a 
personal reception of salvation by us, and 
that is by faith. Faith at once believes 
the good news of a free salvation through 
Christ, and accepts Christ as the Saviour. 
We commit ourselves to him, trust ourselves 
to him for that salvation of which he is the 
Author. In the act of thus entrusting our- 
selves to him for his salvation, we receive 
the benefit, and are saved. It is not that 
faith is accepted by God in place of works, 
but because faith indicates that attitude of 
men towards Christ in which it pleascs 
God to save them, transferring to bim all 
their guilt, imputing to them all his merit. 
And that not of yourselves: it is the gift of 
God. Which of the two things is meant— 
salvation or faith? The grammatical struc- 
ture and the analogy of the passage favour 
the former view, “ Your salvation is not of 
yourselves,” though many able men have 
taken the latter. ‘I'he apostle is so anxious 
to bring out the great distinguishing doc- 
trine of grace that he puts it in all lights, 
affirms it positively, contrasts it with its 
opposite, and emphasizes it by repetition. 
It is a gift, not a purchase; a free gift, 
without money and without price; what 
would never have been yours, but for the 
generosity of God. .It is very usual in the 
New Testament thus to represent salvation ; 
ef. our Lord’s words to Nicodemus (John 
iii. 16); to the woman of Samaria (John iv. 
14); St. Paul’s “ Thanks be to God for his 
unspeakable gift” (2 Cor. ix. 15); “The 
gift of God is etcrnal life through Jesus 
Christ our Lord” (Rom. vi. 23); and 1 John 
v. 11, “God gave unto us eternal life, and 
the life is in his Son.” This usage con- 
firms the view that it is not merely faith, 
but the whole work and person of Christ 
which faith receives, that is meant here as 
the “ gift of God.” 

Ver. 9.—Not of works, lest any man should 
boast. Exegetical of the last clause, “ Not 
of yourselves; certainly not of your works.” 
The suppression of boasting was a purpose 
of God in his scheme of salvation; not the 
chief or final purpose, any more than the 
manifestation of his grace in coming ages 
was his chief or final purpose in showing 
mercy to the Ephesians, but inseparable 
from the nature of his plan. The spirit of 
glorying is essentially unsuited to the re- 
lations between the creature and the Creator, 
between the Redeemer and the redeemed. 
It is the very opposite of the spirit, “ Not 
unto us,O Lord” (Ps. cxv. 1)—the spirit 
that casts its crown before the throne, and 
that breathes in the songs of heaven, “ Unto 
bim that loved us... be glory and do- 
minion for ever and ever ” (Rev. 1. 5, 6). 

Ver. 10.—For we are his workmanship. 
Another illustration and evidence of grace 


64 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 


[cu. mm. 1—22, 


We have to be fashioned anew by God 
before we can do anything aright (see 
2 Cor. v.17). Anything right in us is not 
the cause of grace, but its fruit. There 
seems to be no special reason for the change 
from the second to the first person. Created 
in Christ Jesus for good works. So little 
inward capacity had we for such works, that 
we required to be created in Christ Jesus 
in order that we might do them. The 
inward new birth of the soul is indicated. 
When good works were required, this gracious 
change had to be wrought to secure them. 
The purpose of the new creation is to pro- 
duce them. Christ “gave himself for us, to 
redecm us from all iniquity, and purify unto 
himself a people of his own, zealous of good 
works.” It is not good works first, and grave 
after; but grace first, and good works after 
(see Titus ii. 11, 14). Which God hath 
before ordained that we should walk in 
them. A further proof of the true origin 
of good works. They are the subjects of a 
Divine decree, Before the foundation of 
the world it was ordained that whoever 
should be saved by grace should walk in 
good works. The term “walk” here de- 
notes the habitual tenor of the life; it is to 
be spent in an atmusphere of good works, 
Here we have one of the Divine safeguards 
against the abuse of the doctrine of salvation 
by grace. When men hear of salvation irre- 
spective of works, they are apt to funcy that 
works are of little use, and do not need to 
be carefully attended to. On the contrary, 
they are part of the Divine decree, and if 
we ure not living a life of good works, we 
have no reason to believe that we have been 
saved by grace. 

Vers. 11—22.—ConTRAST BETWEEN THB 
Past AND THE PRESENT. 

Ver. 11.—Wherefore remember, that once 
ye, the Gentiles in the flesh. The practical 
tenor of the apostle’s teaching is indicated by 
his “ wherefores.” He is always guthering 
up his views into some lesson. They are to 
“remember” the chauge between the past 
and the present—what they were by nature, 
and what they had become by grace. This is 
most useful to all, even though the contrast 
between the two be not so vivid as in the case 
of Paul and the Ephesians. The contrast 
is indicated in various particulars, both of 
outward condition and of inward privilege 
and character. First, the old condition. 
They were “Gentiles in respect of the flesh” 
—not bearing on their bodies the mark of the 
Israel of God, therefore not marked out for 
blessing, not apparently ncar it. Who are 
called Uncircumcision by that which is called 
Circumcision in the flesh made by hands. 
Nicknamed, as it were, Uncircumcision by 
those who in a fleshly or mechanical, but 
not always in the true spiritual sease (comp. 


Rom. fi. 28, 29; Phil. Hi. 8; Ool. ii. 11), 
were called Circumcision; they had a name 
which denoted the very opposite of that 
given to God’s people—another illustration 
of their apparent distance from blessing; 
they revolved round the sun, as it were, not 
in the nearer orbits of planets warmed. 
brightened, and beautified by the solar 
beams, but in the outermost ring of all— 
like the cold, dark orbit of Uranus or Nep- 
tune, which the sunbeams hardly reach to 
lightea or to warm. 

Ver. 12.—That at that time ye were 
without Christ. Very comprehensive de- 
scription, having no knowledge of Chirist, 
no interest in him, no life or blessing from 
him. Boeing aliens (or, alienated) from the 
commonwealth of Israel; the πολιτεία, or 
citizenship condition, including a country, 
a constitution, a divinely appointed and 
divinely administered economy, rich in 
blessing. And strangers to the covenania 
of the promise. The promise of Christ, of 
which circumcision was the seal. The 
“covenants” (plural) substantially the 
same, but renewed to various persons and 
at various times in which God promised, 
“1 will bless him that blesseth thee, and 
curse him that curseth thee; and in thee 
and in thy seed shall all the families of the 
earth be blessed.” In respect of these they 
were strangers, not embraced in their pro- 
visions, not, therefore, in a state of encourage- 
ment to expect a great blessing. Having 
no hope; no grounc fur looking forward to 
better times, no reasonable expectation of 
improvement in your religious condition, 
And without God in the world; ἄθεοι, 
atheists; but not in the active sense of 
denying God, rather in the passive sense 
of unconnected with God; without any 
friendly and beneficial relation to him, 
without any vital nexus that would bring 
into their soul the fulness of God. ‘The 
words “in the world” intensify “ without 
God.” It were bad enough to be without 
God (without his holy fellowship and blessed 
influence) anywhere, but it is worse to be 
without him in the world, in “ this present 
evil world” (Gal. i. 4), in a world dominated 
by so subtle and evil a god (ver. 2 and 
2 Cor. iv. 4). The fivefold negative de- 
scription of this verse has a cumulative 
effect; the situation becomes graver and 
more terrible, and the last cluuse is the 
climax. 

Ver. 13.—But now; antithesis to ποτὲ in 
ver. 11, and τῷ καιρῷ ἐκείνῳ in ver. 12. 
Another of the very powerful “buts” of 
this Epistle, completely reversing the pic- 
ture going before (see ver. 4). In Christ 
Jesus. This expression is the pivot of the 
Epistle, denoting, not only that Christ Jesus 
is the Source of blessing, but aleo that wo 


ox. 11. 1~22,] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 65 


gut the blessing in, i.e. by vital union and 
fellowship with, him. The“ without Christ” 
of ver. 12 contrasts powerfully with “in 
Christ Jesus” of this verse; and the addi- 
tion of “ Jesus” to the name is significant, 
denoting his saving power, denoting One who 
is not merely an official Saviour, but to whom 
we get linked by all manner of endearing 
qualities and personal attractions, whose 
humana name is Jesus, because he saves his 
people from their sins. Ye that once were 
far off are become near. ‘The apostle has 
slidden into a new figure; formerly the con- 
trast was between death and life, now it is 
between distance and nearness. Not merely 
geographical distance, or remoteness in re- 
spect of outward position, but moral distance 
too: ye were far off from God, ἐ.6. from his 
favour, his fellowship, his gracious pardon- 
ing and renewing grace. In this sense too 
ye are now brought near. God is become 
your God and Father. Your orbit is changed 
to a near and blessed position, where the 
light of God’s countenance falls upon you. 
In the blood of Christ. This is the par- 
ticular instrument of the change; not 
merely Christ manifesting the Father's readi- 
ness to receive you, but shedding his blood 
to make atonement for you (see ca. i. 7). 
The preposition ἐν (not merely διὰ) is again 
significant, denoting more than tae instru- 
mentality, viz. personal connection with 
the blood, as if sprinkled on us, so that we 
are symbolically in it. Cleansing us from 
all sin, it brings us nigh. 

Ver. 14.—For he is our peace. Explanatory 
of the preceding verse—of the way by which 
we are brought nigh. Christ is not only 
our Peacemaker, but our Peace, and that 
in the fullest sense, the very substance 
and living spring of it, establishing it at 
the beginning, keeping it up to the end; 
and the complex notion of peace is here 
not only peace between Jew and Gentile, 
but between God and both. Consult Old 
Testament predictions of peace in connec- 
tion with Messiah (Isa. ix. 5, 6; Micah 
v. 5; Zech. ix. 10, οἷς.) Who made both 
one; literally, both things, both elements ; 
so that there is now no ground for separating 
between a Jewish element and a Gentile; 
thzy are unified. And broke down the middle 
wall of the partition. The general idea is 
obvious; the particular allusion is less 
sasily seen. Some think it is to the veil 
that separated the holy of holies from the 
holy place (Heb. x. 20); but that could 
hardly be called a wall. Others the wall 
that separated the court of the Jew from 
that of the Gentiles; but that wall was 
literally standing when the apostle wrote, 
and besides, tlie Ephesians could not be 
supposed to be so familiar with it as to 
make it ἃ suitable illustration for them. In 


EPHESIANS, 


the absence of any specific allusion, it is 
best to understand the words generally, 
“broke down that which served as a middle 
wall of partition”—what is mentioned im- 
mediately in the following verse. 

Ver. 15.—(To wit, the enmity.) It is a 
moot point whether τὴν ἔχθραν is to be taken 
as governed by λύσας in ver. 14, or by καταρ- 
γήσας in the end of this verse. Both A.V. 
and R.V. adopt the latter; but the former is 
more textual afd natural. Another question 
is—What enmity? Some say between Jews 
and Gentiles; others, between both and 
God. ‘The latter seems right; where “the 
ennity ” is so emphatically referred to, it 
must be the great or fundamental enmity, 
and the whole tenor of the passage is to the 
effect that in the removal of the enmity of 
the sinner to God, the abolition of the 
enmity between Jew and Gentile was pro- 
vided for. In his flesh. These words are not 
to be connected with the enmity, for then 
they would require τὴν before them, but 
with λύσας (ver. 14) or καταργήσας (ver. 15). 
In his flesh, crucified, broken, for our sins, 
Christ virtually broke down the enmity 
(comp. Col. i. 22). Having abolished the 
law of commandments in ordinances. Some 
think that “in ordinances” (ἐν δόγμασι, doc- 
trines) denotes the means by which the Law 
wis abolished—by means of doctrines, t.e. 
the doctrines of Christianity. But New 
Testament δόγμα is not equal to “ doctrine.” 
“In ordinances” limits the law of com- 
mandments, The law abolished or super- 
seded by Christ was the law of positive 
requirements embodied in things decreed, 
evidently the ceremonial law of the Jews; 
certainly not the moral law (see Rom. iii. 31). 
By removing this, Jesus removed that which 
had become the occasion of bitter feelings 
between Jew and Gentile; the Jew looking 
down proudly on the Gentile, and the Gen- 
tile despising what he deemed the fantastic 
rites of the Jews. That he might create the 
two in himself intoone new man. The idea 
of a corporate body comes here into view. 
Christ’s object was not merely to restore 
individuals, but to rear a Church, composed. 
of many units incorporated into one Boay: 
This idea is prominent in the rest of the 
Epistle. Hence the strong word κτισῃ, 
create; not only is every believer a new 
creation, but the corporate organization 
into which they are built is also a creation. 
The two are made “one new man;” the 
Gentile is not turned into a Jew, nor the 
Jew into a Gentile, but both into one new 
man, thus removing all grounds of jealousy. 
This transformation is “in himself ;” in vital 
union to Christ they are formed into one 
body. No Church connection of man with 
man is the true connection, unless it is 
founded on a mutual connection with Christ, 


66 THE EPISILE TO THE EPHESIANS. 


ἴση. m. 1—22, 


So making peace; that is, between Jew and 
Gentile. The peacemaking with God, as 
we have seen, is referred to in the first words 
of the verse; this at the end is the sub- 
ordinate peacemaking, the result of ,the 
other. 

Ver. 16.—And that he might reconcile 
both to God in one body by the cross. 
Exegetical of preceding statements, and 
making emphatic the fact of reconciliation 
to God on the same footing and by the same 
means; both were to be reconciled én one 
body (see ch. iv. 4) and by the cross. No 
preference was to be given to the Jew facili- 
tating his union to Christ: the Gentile was 
to be taken into Christ’s body as readily as 
the Jew. In reference to the sense in which 
reconciliation was effected by the cross of 
Jesus, some say it was only as the cross 
demonstrated to men the love of God and 
his willingness to bless them; while others 
maintain very strongly that it was as pro- 
viding a satisfaction to God’s justice for 
their guilt, and thus enabling him to receive 
and bless the sinner. Not only the analogy 
of other passages of Scripture as well as of 
this Epistle justifies the latter view, but pre- 
eminently the words, “by the cross.” If 
Christ had only to proclaim God’s friend- 
ship toward sinners, why should le have 
suffered on the cross? The cross as a 
mere pulpit is hideous; as an altar it is 
glorious. The love of God is ill revealed, if 
it subjected Jesus to unnecessary agony. 
The love of both Father and Son is indeed 
commended, if the agony was voluntarily 
borne by the Son, and permitted by the 
Father, as being indispensable for the pardon 
of the sinner. . ᾿Αποκαταλλάξῃ denotes the 
whole process of reconciliation (see Hadie). 
Having slain the enmity thereby (or, thereon). 
“The enmity” is the same as at the begin- 
ning of ver. 15—the enmity of man to God. 
The destruction of this enmity is one of the 
effects of the cross, though not the only 
effect; it is necessary to root out the enmity 
of the carnal mind. That this is the mean- 
ing here seems plain from Rom. v. 10, “ If, 
when we were enemies, we were reconciled to 
God by the death of his Son.” The apostle 
there makes no allusion to the enmity of 
Jew and Gentile to each other, but to this 
wider fact —7d φρόνημα τῆς σαρκὸς ἔχθρα 
εἰς Θεόν. If any words can denote the result 
of a propitiatory sacrifice, it is surely “re- 
conciled to God by the death of his Son.” 

Ver. 17.—And having come, he preached 
peace to you that were far off, and peace to 
those that were nigh. The coming denoted 
by ἐλθὼν is subsequent to the transactions of 
the cross. It cannot denote what Ohrist did 
personally, but what he did by sending his 
Spirit to the apostles and other early 
preachers. It was only after the cross and 


after the resurrection that peace could be 
proclaimed on the footing of faith in a 
Saviour who had died and was alive. And 
only in the sense of having sent his 
preachers and given them his Spirit could 
Jesus be said to have preached to the 
Ephesians. The repetition of the word 
“peace” in the R.V. is expressive; if the 
subject had been merely peace between the 
two classes of men, we sliould not have had 
the repetition ; the repetition denotes peace 
between each of the two classes‘and a third 
party, viz. God. It is remarkable that the 
Gentiles, “those that were far off,” are men- 
tioned here before the Jews, “those that 
were nigh.” In point of chronology, the 
Jews came first; but the order is here trans- 
posed, probably to emphasize the offer of the 
gospel to the Gentiles, and to show that 
spiritually they were as near as the Jews. 

Ver. 18.—For through him both of us have 
our access by one Spirit unto the Father. 
Further illustration of identity of position 
of Jews and Gentiles, and of the work of 
Christ in bringing it about. Subject of this 
verse, access to the Father; predicate, this 
access effected through Christ by the one 
Spirit. Our having access to the Father is 
assumed as a matter of spiritual experience; 
the converted Ephesians knew that in their 
prayers and other exercises they did really 
stand before God, and felt as children 
to a Father. How came this to pass? 
“Through him.” Sinful men have not this 
privilege by nature; “ Your iniquities have 
separated between you and your God ” (Isa. 
lix. 2). They need a Mediator; Jesus is 
that Mediator; and through him, both Jews 
and Gentiles enjoy the privilege. But right 
of access is not enough; in approaching God 
and holding fellowship with him there must 
be some congeniality of soul, a fellow-feeling 
between God and the worshipper; this is 
effected through the same Spirit. Some 
render “in the same spirit, or disposition of 
mind.” This is true, but not all the truth; 
for the question ariscs—How do we get this 
suitable disposition? And the answer is— 
It is wrought by the Holy Spirit. As the 
state of the soul in true intercourse with 
God is substantially the same in all, so 
it is brought by the same Holy Spirit. In 
fact, this verse is one of the characteristic 
texts of Ephesians, in which Father, Son, 
and Holy Spirit are brought together. 

Vor. 19.—8o then ye are no more strangers 
and foreigners. “Sojourners” is nearer 
πάροικοι than “foreigners;” it denotes per- 
sons dwelling ina place, but without citizen 
rights and privileges; but #8 such persons 
are usually foreigners, it is immaterial which 
term is used. But ye are fellow-citizens 
with the saints. The saints are the chosen 
ones of all time (comp. Heb. xii. 22, “ But 


cn τι. 1—22,] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 67 


ye are come unto Mount Zion,” eto.). “Their 
names are engraven on the same civic roll 
with all whom ‘the Lord shall count when 
he reckoneth up the people.’ It is as if they 
who had dwelt in the waste and howling 
wilderness, scattered defenceless and in 
molancholy isolation, had been transplanted, 
not only into Palestine, but had been ap- 
pointed to domiciles on Mount Zion, and 
were located in the metropolis, not to admire 
its architecture, or gaze upon its battlements, 
or envy the tribes who had come up to wor- 
ship in the city which is compact together; 
but to claim its municipal immunities, ex- 
perience its protection, obey its laws, live 
and love in its happy society, and hold com- 
munion with its glorious Founder and 
Guardian” (Eadie). And (members) of the 
household of God. A nearer relation to God 
anda higher privilege is denoted here. You 
are not guests or occasional visitors, but 
permanent dwellers in the house and 
members of the family. Compare the Queen 
of Sheba’s words to Solomon (1 Kings x. 8). 
Ver. 20.—Being built on the foundation of 
the apostles and prophets. A new figure, 
the third here introduced to denote the 
change—that of a temple, of which Chris- 
tians are stones. There is no contrast in 
form in this figure, as in the other two; it 
- just expresses directly the privilege attained. 
There is a real contrast, however, between 
the first three and the last three verses of 
the chapter—the lowest degradation ex- 
pressed in the one, the highest elevation in 
the other. Observe, the apostle passes, by 
association of ideas, from the household 
(ver. 19) to the house (ver. 20), from the 
domestics to the stones; but by a bold figure 
be gives lifo to the stones, otherwise we 
might be in the same region of lifelessness 
as in vers. 1—3. Two questions arixe here. 
1, About this foundation—In what sense is 
it “of the apostles and prophets”? Cer- 
tainly not in the sense that they constituted 
the foundation ; for, though this might be 
warranted grammatically, it would be un- 
true: “Other toundation can no man lay 
than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ” 
(1 Cor. iii. 11). The best meaning seems to 
be, the foundation which the apostles and 
prophets laid, which they used for them- 
selves and announced for others. But what 
was this foundation? Substantially that of 
1 Cor. iii. 11; but the mention of Christ as 
chief Corner-stone at the end of the verse 
might at first scem to indicate that some- 
thing different was meant by tle foundation. 
But it is impossible to propose any suituble 
interpretation which would not make Christ 
the Foundation too, 2. Who are the pro- 
phets? We might naturally suppose the 
Old Testament proph ts, but in that case 
they would probably lave been mentioned 


before the apostles. In other passages of 
this Epistle “apostles and propheta” denote 
Now Testament officers (ch. iii. 5; iv. 11), 
and it is most suitable to regard that as the 


-Meaning. It was the privilege of the Ephe- 


sians to use tho foundation on which stood 
the two highest bodies of officers in the new 
dispensation—the apostles and prophets; 
nothing better could be found. Jesus Christ 
himself being the chief Corner-stone, Notas 
opposed to the foundation, but in addition 
thereto, Jesus is really both, but there is a 
reason for specifying him as the chief Corner- 
stone; comp. Ps. xviii. 21, “Tlestone which 
the builders rejected is become the headstone 
of the corner;” ¢.¢e. the stone which, boing 
placed in the corner, determined the lines 
of the whole building. The idea of founda- 
tion is that of support; the idea of the chief 
corner-stone is that of regulation, pattern- 
hood, producing nasimilation, Jesus is not 
only the Origin, Foundation, Support of the 
Church, but he gives it its shape and form, 
he determines the place and the office of 
each stone, he gives life and character to 
each member. 

Ver. 21.—In whom all the building. Not 
even the figure of a building can keep the 
apostle from his favourite idea of vital 
fellowship with Christ as the soul of all 
Christianity—* in whom.” Πᾶσα οἰκοδομὴ ia 
rendered in R.V. “each several building.” 
But surely the want of the article does not 
make imperative a rendering which is out 
of keeping with the apostle’s object, viz. 
to illustrate the organic unity of believers, 
Jewish and Gentile, as one great body 
(comp. ch, iv. 4, “ There is one body”). If 
there had been many several or soparate 
buildings in the apostle’s view, why not a 
Jewish building and a Gentile building? Or 
how could the separate buildings have their 
lines directed by the one chief Corner-stone ἢ 
In Acts ii. 36 πᾶς οἶκος Ἰσραήλ is not “ eve 
house of Isracl,” but “ all the house of Isracl.” 
Fitly framed together. There is a jointing 
and joining of the various parts to each 
other, forming a symmetrical, compact, well- 
ordered building. The Church has many 
members in one body, and all members have 
not the same office. It is a co-operative 
body, each aiding in his own way and with 
his own talent. The Church is not a colleo- 
tion of loose stones and timbers; its members 
are in vital union with Christ, and ought to 
be in: living and loving ond considerato 
fellowship with each other. Groweth into 
a holy temple in the Lord. Increase is an 
essential property of the Church; wherever 
there is life there isgrowth. But the growth 
of the Church is not mere increase of mem- 
bers or size; the growth is towards o temple, 
of which the character is holy, and it ia 
in the Lord. Tho world-famed temple of 


68 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 


[ou. τι. 1—2 


Diana at Ephesus may have been in the 
apostle’s mind—its symmetry, its glory, the 
relation of each several part to the rest and 
to the whole, as a suitable external emblem 


of the spiritual body which is being-built up- 


in Christ ; but the Christian Church 18 ἃ holy 
temple, dedicated to God, purified by his 
Spirit, entirely foreign to those defilements 
which disgraced the temple of Diana. The 
ἐν ᾧ at the beginning of the verse is followed 
by ἐν Κυρίῳ at the end, asif the union of the 
Church to Christ could not be too often 
brought out. In him we are born into it; 
in him we grow in it; in him the whole 
temple grows towards the final consumma- 
tion, when the topstone shall be brought out 
with shouts of “ Grace, grace unto it.” 

Ver. 22.—In whom ye also are builded to- 
gether. Once more the vitalizing element 
—“in whom;” for this is better than “in 
which,” inasmuch as this verse is substan- 
tially a reduplication of the preceding one, 
making special application of the same sub- 
ject to the Ephesians. The person changes 
from the third te the second, to make em- 
phatic that the Ephesians shared this great 
privilege. Their relations towards believing 


Jews and other believers in the Church were 
not accidental; they were “builded to- 
gether,” compacted into each other, and 
ought to work together towards God’s great 
ends. For a habitation of God in the S9irit. 
Not many habitations, but one. The 
Church as a temple is the dwelling-place of 
God. Here he bestows Lis fulness, so that 
when the temple is completed it will ex- 
hibit, as fully as a created thing can, the 
manifold glory of God. “In the Spirit” in 
this verse corresponds to “in the Lord” in 
the previous one. The actual communication 
of Divine properties to finite beings is the 
work of the Third Person. In this verse, 
again, we find the three Persons of the 
Trinity : the temple is the habitation of the 
First Person; the source of its life and growth 
and symmetry is the Son; the actual up- 
building and glorifying of it is by the 
Spirit. This is the climax of privilege, anc 
no contrast could be greater than that be- 
tween the death in trespasses and sins’ witb 
which the chapter begins, and this sublime 
temple, whore God dwells and bestows his 
fulness, with which it ends. 


HOMILETICS, 


Vers. 1—10.— Spiritual history of Ephesians. 1. Tae cHaos, or original state. 1, 
Tt is a state of death, implying previous life, but present insensibility and helplessness, 
‘The element of death is “ trespasses and sins”—their killing power. 2. Yet a state of 
unholy activity, (1) in respect of the objects pursued—* the course of this world ;” (2) 
the authority obeyed—* prince of the power of the air;” (3) the companions accepted 
—‘ the sons of disubedience.” 8, A state of unholy indulgence ; secking the fulfilment 
(1) of the lusts of the flesh, the lowest part of our nature; (2) the lusts of the mind, 
a little higher, but still most unworthy tobe the chicf aim. 4. A state of condemnation ; 
“by nature,” by our very constitution, we are children of wrath. And this true of all. 

II. ΤῊΝ pawn. “But.” Force of contrast. ‘The darkest hour precedes the dawn.” 
1. God’s work, God says, “Let there be light, and there is light.” (1) The source 
of light and order—God, not man. (2) The attributes giving birth to the new 
creation: (@) his mercy; (Ὁ) his love. (8) The fulness and intensity of these attri- 
butes: he is “rich” in mercy and his love is “ great.” (4) Our condition when visited 
by mercy and love: “even when dead in sins.” 2, Results of God’s interposition. 
(1) “He hath quickened us with Christ.” (2) ‘‘ Raised us up together.” (8) Seated us 
with Christ in heavenly places. 8, Purpose of God in this process—to “show the 
exceeding riches of his grace,” 

III. THE NEW cREATION, or salvation by grace. 1. The great change. “Ye are 
saved.” 2. How effected. (1) On the part of God, salvation is “by grace.” (2) On 
the part of man, salvation is “ through faith.” God offers it, and faith receives it, as 
a free gift. 3. Lelution of salvation to works. (1) Works do not prccure salvation ; 
for then boasting would come in. (2) Works are the product of God working in us; 
“We are his workmanship.” (3) Works are the result of a Divine foteordination. 
(4) We are not only to do good works, but walk (habitually) in them. 4“. Grandeur 
of this work. Creation was grand; new creation is grander. To bring a world out 
of nothing was great; to restore a world from chaos is greater. At the first crea- 
tion, God saw all that he had made, and it was good. At the new creation, he 
experiences even a deeper emotion of joy. Imperfection of the new creation in this life 
in human gouls, Let us seck that in us it may become continually more complete and 


cu. 1, 1—22.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, 69 


more glorious. It is not that we are called to work, but rather to allow God to work— 
to have all within us open and unobstructed for the full and free exercise of God’s 
almighty renewing power, 


Vers. 11—13.— Contrast between the past and the present. The Ephesians are here 
called to look back, to remember what they were; not, however, with the feeling of a 
man who has raised himself in the world, and whom such retrospect usually fills with 
pride, but with the feeling of those whom God has raised, a feeling that ought to 
produce the deepest humility and gratitude, 

I, Tue past is presented under two aspects—one having respect chiefly to their 
οἱ $ward condition, the other chiefly to their inward. 1. Outward condition. They 
were Gentiles—‘ the Uncircumcision” (ver. 11), 2. Inward condition, denoted by 
five negatives: (1) without Christ; (2) without a country; (3) without promises; 
(4) without hope; (5) without God (ver. 12). What an accumulation of miseries! 
Yet men often ignorant of their misery and without desire for change. Need of Holy 
Spirit to convince us of our sin and misery, 

Il. Tue σβάκαβ. (Verel3.) This is one of the brightest verses in the Bible, as ver, 12 
is one of the darkest. From being “ far off,” they are “brought nigh.” (1) Brought 
nigh in justification ; (2) in adoption; (3) in sanctification ; (4) to be finally brought 
nigh in glory. To be nigh or near to God is to be in a blessed relation to him, to 
be restored to an orbit in which we get all the blessed influences of his presence, so 
that the light of his countenance falls richly upon us, and we become changed into 
the same image, from glory to glory. 

HI. Tuz GRouND AND MEDIUM OF THE CHANGE. “ In Christ Jesus.” ““ By the blood 
of Christ.” Great difference between God’s dealings with us in nature and in grace. 
The blood of Jesus omnipotent to save, “All hail the power of Jesus’ Name!” 


Vers, 14—19.—Christ and his work of reconciliation. Here we have three topics: 
(1) Christ our Peace ; (2) thereby bringing us nigh ; (8) the subject summed up, 

I. Curist our Peace. Observe the several statements (vers. 14—17). 1. He made 
both Jew and Gentile one (see Exposition). 2. He broke down the middle wall of parti- 
tion. ὃ, He abolished the cause of enmity between Jew and Gentile—the Law of com- 
mandmentsin ordinances. 4. He constituted himself anew Man, to which both Jew and 
Gentile belong. 5. He thereby reconciled both to God. 6. All this he effected by his 
cross, 7. He not only effected it, but came and preached peace to the far off and the 
nigh. ‘he idea conveyed is that no single thing was left undone that could contribute 
to the great double result of reconciling Jew and Gentile, first to God, and thereby to 
each other. Thus reconciliation to God effects reconciliation between man and man, as 
sometimes a child, mutually beloved, may effect reconciliation- of parents after a 
difference. ΄ 

II. Cunist as our PEACE BRINGING Us ΝΙ6Η. (Ver.18.) 1. True Christians have access 
to the Father. 2. This is secured meritoriously “ through Christ.” 8, And efficaciously 
“Dy the one Spirit.” How much is implied in having access to the Father! Access 
to his love, his wisdom, his transforming influence, his capacity of satisl'ying the soul in 
all its lawful propensities, and blessing it for ever! 

III. Summina up. (Ver. 19.) The relation established with God is not a temporary 
or uccasional one, but close, abiding, indestructible, The reconciliation is effected, not 
for a day, but for evermore (Rom. viii. 35—39). 


Vers. 20—22.— The Christian temple. This the climax of the comparison between past 
and present pursued in this chapter. Temple of Diana at Ephesus may have suggested 
the figure. The three persons of the Godhead are concerned in this work of building. 
(1) The temple is the habitation of God the Father; (2) its Foundation and Corner- 
stone are the Son; (3) the lustre and glory of the temple are due to the Holy Spirit. 
The three are brought together in ver. 22, Glorious threefold cord, securing the salva- 
tion and final glory of the Church! The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, the love of 
God, and the communion of the Holy Ghost are with her for ever. While all the three 
are connected with the building, Christ is so pre-eminently. ‘lhis connection appcars 
iu five particulars, 1, Christ is the #vundation of the temple; his Name, the only 


70 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPIESIANS. (cw. τι. 1—22. 


name given under heaven whereby we must be saved; he the tried and sure Founda- 
tion-stone, elect, precious. Are we resting on him? 2, He is the chief Corner-stone, 
determines the lie and direction of other stones. We must be in harmony with Christ, 
our wills, notions, taste, habits. There may be secondary corner-stones; comp. Ps, 
cexliv. 12, “That our daughters may be as corner-stones, polished after the similitude 
of a palace.” Reference here to the high polish as well as true position of a temple 
corner-stone. Records of Christian Church present many such women. From the Marys 
of the Gospels, the Priscillas and Lydias of the Acts, the Phceebes and elect ladies of the 
Epistles, through all the trials and strug:les of the Church, down to the present day, in 
all which none have shown more of the true polish of coruer-stones, more sympadhy 
for the lost, more zeal and self-denial and devotion to God and man, than earnest Chris- 
tian women. Blessed ambition for all young women, to be placcd in such a relation to 
Christ, and vital communion with him, as to help to square and polish others, and thus 
make their lives likewise beautiful and blessed! 8. In Christ, the whole building is 
jitly framed together. Every one gets siability and adaptation to his neighbours— 
angles rubbed off; each gets and gives support. Stones are not all alike; not a brick 
building, Different talents, gifts, and graces: some Christians excel as speakers, some 
in prayer, some in praise, others in visiting sick, or in téaching the young, or in 
collecting contributions, or in speaking to strangers; some can write books, others - 
can translate; some can guide the Church at home, others go to the heathen. In 
Christ, all work together toa common end. Out of Christ, strifes and divisions arise, 
ending in schisms and ruptures. Let each try to ascertain his part, and patiently and 
conscientiously to fulfil it. 4. In the Lord, the building grows to a holy temple. Two 
ideas. (1) Growth, Christian Church a growing Church. Where there is life there is 
growth, (2) Towards a temple which ts holy, or consecrated to God. All its members 
are thus consecrated ; let each realize this. It is by each carrying out his own consccra- 
tion that the building grows toward the dimensions of a complete temple. 5. It isa 
habitation of God through the Spirit. Its collective qualities serve to indicate the pre- 
sence of the living Spirit; it isa kind of incarnation. Historically this is a delightful 
view. Bring together all the holy qualities of the Church from first to last—the 
simple trust of the hundred and twenty in the upper chamber; the warm brotherly love 
of the Pentecostal converts; the missionary ardour of Paul and his companions; the 
faith and constancy of the noble army of the martyrs; the seraphic spirit of many a 
man and woman who has dwelt at the gate of heaven; the steadfast devotion of 
Waldenses and Culdees, of Lollards and Wickliffites and Hussites, of reformers and 
Huguenots and confessors of every clime; the consistent godliness of many a humble 
cottager; the brilliant service of the Christian philanthropists and the glorious struggles 
of all the champions of freedom who have fought the battle of the cross in evil 
times ;—in all this we have a vision of the glory of the Church as the habitation of 
God throvgh the Spirit. Alas! there have been so many corruptions that this glory has 
been sadly tarnished. Let each one resolve by God’s grace to fulfil his part, and so to 
live that, so far as his life and character are concerned, they may show the result of God 
dwelling in them through the Spirit, 


NOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS, 


Ver. 1.—Spiritual death. The apostle sets forth the greatness of Divine power in 
man’s salvation by sctting forth the greatness of his sin and misery, represented under 
the aspect of spiritual death. Let us understand the nature of this death, 

I, Mark TIE EXPRESSIVENESS ΟΡ THE TERM. It is strange to find it applied to 
living men. But there are certain suggestive points of similarity between natural and 
spiritual death, 1, The dead have all the organs of sense, but no sensibility, As the 
psalmist said of the idols of the heathen, so are the dead: “ Eyes have they, but they 
see not: they have ears, but they hear not” (Ps. cxv. 5, 6). So the spiritually dead 
have no susceptibility in regard to the things of God; they see not the beauties of 
holiness; they see not God or Christ. 2, Lhe dead have all the machinery of motion, 
but the muchine is at rest. So the spiritually dead have all the natural faculties of life 
—judgment, memory, imagination, feeling, conscience—but they are unable to renew 


on. 11, 1—22.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 11 


themselves into spiritual life. The inability is not natural, but moral, and therefore 
sinners are responsible for it. They cannot, because they will not. “ Ye will not 
come unto me, that ye may have life” (John v. 40). 8, The dead are cold to the touch. 
The living body retains its hcat very much in the same manner as a fire retains its 
heat, and, in a very true sense, we are all literally burning out like the fuel that is 
consumed in our fires. The dead are cold as the grave that covers them. So are the 
spiritually dead; they have no warmth of Christian love going out either to God or 
man. Though intellectually alive to all purely worldly interests, they are coldly 
indifferent, or even hostile, to the interests of the kingdom of grace. 4. The dead go 
onward to corruption. The process of corruption may be arrested for a time by the 
skill of man, but it will prevail in the end, and man returns to the dust whence he 
came, as the spirit has returned to the God who gave it. So the spiritually dead are 
corrupt, constitutionally, in virtue of the sin of Adam, and they are still more corrupt 
through temptation to actual transgression. The absence of love to God interposes no 
check to the progress of corruption in a human heart. What a terrific picture is that 
of a dead soul! 

II, THE CIRCUMSTANCES OR CONDITIONS OF SPIRITUAL DEATH. We see our dead 
surrounded successively by the shroud, the coffin, the hearse, the grave. So likewise 
the spiritually dead are surrounded by “ trespasses and sins.” These two expressive 
terms indicate, not simply the cause of death, but its conditions and circumstances, 
1. Trespasses. This term is exceedingly expressive as embodying what is involved in 
the original term. (1) It suggests the idea of a landmark fixed by God, which he has 
commanded us not to pass. Yet who can say that he has not passed the landmark ? 
Who can say that he has not trespassed upon God’s preserves? For what God had 
reserved for himself out of all the trees of the garden of Eden, our first parents tres- 
passed upon; and who among ourselves has not again and again trespassed upon that 
reserved territory of love wherewith God has surrounded himself and surrounded cach 
one of our neighbours? (2) The word suggests the further idea of a barrier which God 
has placed in our way, and told us that we are not to force it or pass it; There is the 
barrier of his Law, which he has strengthened by terrible penalties, and upon which he 
has inscribed his own fearful curse: “Cursed is every one that continueth not in all 
things which are written in the book of the Law to do them” (Gal. iii. 10). Yet who can 
say that he has not passed this barrier, though God’s curse was inscribed upon it? There 
is the barrier of conscience which God has built up strongly in every man; and who 
can say that he has not again and again passed this barrier, often bringing the artillery of 
worldly advantage or pleasure to bear against it and break it down? 2. Sins. This term 
points to the sinful movements of the soul—sins of thought and purpose, as trespasses 
seem to point to the various developments of a sinful nature. The sins are the fruit of 
a moral corruption which has its seat in the heart, and radiates thence to every 
department of human conduct. The principle of sin is not merely negative, for it is 
a positive negation of the Divine will, putting something else in its place. The term 
“sins” would, more exactly than the other, include sins of omission, which are 
necessarily much more numerous than sins of commission. It is a solemn thought 
that men are ‘dead in sin” by every duty they omit, by every opportunity they 
neglect, by every blessing they despise, as well as by every positive transgression of 
the Divine Law. The radical significance of both terms implies a real hostility to God, 
which is only brought into prominence the moment the sinful spirit comes into sharp 
and painful collision with the pure Law of God. This dark picture of the sinner’s 
state suggests that (1) we ought to mourn for the dead, as we mourn for our dcar 
ones who are carried forth to burial; (2) that we ought to pray for the dead, that God 
may grant them “a quickening together with Christ ;” (3) that we ought to warn the 
dead that, if they dic in their trespasses and sins, they will be buried in their trespasses 
and sins.—T. O. 


Ver. 2.—The walk of the dead. The expression is very significant, “In which 
ye walked.” Superstition tells us that the dead walk in the shades of night. This 
is mere folly, Yet, day by day, we are really surrounded by the dead—not by spirits 
of the dead, walking their hour in the darkness of night, but by living men like 
ourselves, pursuing their courses of worldly activity with all their wonted onergy and 


72 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. (on. τι, 1—22 


zeal, yet “ dead while they live,” and unconscious of their death. The term “ walking” 
implies the habitual course and tendency of life. Men were dead in sin just as they 
lived in sin, for the apostle says of the same sins, “In the which ye also walkea some time, 
when ye lived in them” (Col. iii. 7). The direction of their walking is—away from 
God, with their backs turned upon him, for unbelief is a departure fiom the living God ; 
and the end of their walking is death, as it is all through, for “it is the way of death” 
(Prov. ii. 18), and “ their steps take hold on death” (Prov. v. 5). Well may we pray 
with David, “ Lord, search me and know my heart: . . . see if there be any wicked way 
in me, and lead me in the way everlasting” (Ps. cxxxix. 23).—T. C. 


Ver. 2.—Three fatal guides in this walk, They are represented as the world, the 
flesh, and the devil. These are inextricably linked in the common death of men, for 
“the whole world lieth in the wicked one,” and it includes, as its totality of possession, 
“ the lust of the eye, the lust of the flesh, and the pride of life.” There is no schism in 
this dread conspiracy against man’s life. 

1. THE worup. Sinners walk “according to the course of this world.” 1. The world 
ts here to be distinguished from worldly objects and pleasures, or mere “ things of the 
world,” which are more definitely included in “the lusts of the tlesh” (ver. 3). It 
refers to men of the world, as where it is said, “lhe whole world lieth in the wicked 
one” (1 Jobn v. 19), and, “ The world will love its own” (John xv. 19). These are 
“the children of the world,” who are “ wiser in their generation than the children of 
light ” (Luke xvi. 18). The world is a great creator of opinion, sentiment, and habit, 
and thus becomes an immense obstacle to the Church of God. 2. The course of the 
world. “Every age hath almost a new dress, though it is the same world, and stil] 
carnal men ‘ive according to it.” Thongh no age is independent of the ages which go 
hefore it, each age has its own peculiar drift or tendency, which makes it influential 
for good or evil. We hear of the spirit of the age—the zeitgeist—which is supposed to 
shape the thought and the action of men; but it cannot command Christian homage, 
except so far as it works in the line of truth and righteousness. The Ephesians were 
neither before their time nor after their time, but in their time, living like other Gentiles, 
in the same errors, delusions, and idolatries; above all, being specially attached to the 
worship of Diana, 3. [tts the duty of Christian people to oppose the course of this world. 
The apostle solemnly commands us, “ Be ye not conformed to this world ” (Rom. xii. 2), 
and the reason is because “ we have not reccived the spirit of this world, but we have 
received the Spirit which is of God ” (1 Cor. ii. 12). Let the world be ever so refined, 
it cannot divest itself of carnal principles and ideas, and the saying of our Lord will 
always be true, “ ‘lhe things that are in great esteem with men are an abomination 
unto God” (Luke xvi. 15). His own mission was “to deliver us from this present 
evil world ” (Gal. i. 4). Therefore, while we use this world, with all its law/ul callings 
and occupations, so as not to abuse it, and honour every true principle that is held 
by “them that are without,” let us resolutely stem the tide of the world’s evil tendencies 
in the strength of that faith which will yet give us the complete conquest of the world 
( John v. 4). 

Il. ΤῊΝ prviz. This enemy, older than the world, has 8 vast influence in con- 
trolling its tendencies and movements. 1. He ts described by two names—* the prince 
of the powcr of the air,” which seems to point to his headship over the fallen angels; and 
“ the spirit that now worketh in the children of disobedience,” in rclation to his power 
as the “ prince of this world.” The moral nature of his influence may be inferred from 
the character ascribed to him in Scripture: as a sinner from the beginning; as a 
homicide from the beginning; as an arch-liar— the father of liars”—as a renegade, 
who, with the angels under him, fell from his first estate, probably through pride, as 
the principal cause of his fatal fall. His name is expressly identified with the sin 
of Adam, the murder of Abel, the treachery of Judas, and with a constant opposition 
to the kingdom of God. He is accuser, tempter, corrupter, and has, in virtue of sin, 
a certain power even in death (Heb. ii. 14). The existence of such a being is no more 
a difficulty than the existence of wicked men, who live to corrupt and destroy their 
fellow-men. 2. Jt ds not easy to understand the mode in which he acts upon the minds 
and hearts of men, nor to distinguish a direct temptation of Satan from those which 
spring from the world or from our own hearts. He works in and through tkese two 


on. 11, 1—22.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 73 


things. An evil man or an evil woman can inject an evil thought and suggestion into 
the nature of another, either by word or by glance. If God, who is a Spirit, can have 
access to our minds so as to iniuence us supremely for good, why may not Satan, as 
an evil spirit, have a similar access for evil? Accordingly he is represented as 
putting it “into the heart of Judas to betray Christ” (John xiii. 2), He can, like 
a bird, pick vp the good seed out of the heart (Luke viii. 12); he can fill a man’s 
heart so as to instigate falsehood (Acts v. 3); and he can dwell in a man’s heart, like 
a strong man in a castle (Luke xi.). His action is, indeed, “ with all deceivableness of 
unrighteousness ” (2 Thess. ii. 10), as if he were bent upon destroying the moral order 
of the universe. 38. Though Satan ts the tempter of men, the sins of men are not the less 
their own sins. If the tempter were human, there would be no question about respon- 
sibility, They are called “the children of disobedience,” because they refuse to obey 
God, and therefore “‘ the wrath of God” is said to come upon them (ch. v. 6). These are 
they who are “ carried away captive by the devil at his will” (1 ‘Tim. ii. 26). Believers 
are therefore warned not “to give place to the devil ” (ch. iv. 27); “ to resist the devil” 
(Jas. iv. 7), as they are led to glorify that grace which originally translated them out 
of the kingdom of Satan into the kingdom of God’s dear Son (Col. i. 13). 

Ill. Tue Furs. The spiritually dead find an instigation to sin in “ the lusts of 
the flesh,” as well 88 in the suggestions of Satan and the temptations of the world, 
The flesh is a large term, which coveras‘more than mere sins of the body, for it includes 
“hatred, variance, emulation, wrath, strifes, seditions, heresies,” as well as “ adultery, 
fornication, murder, drunkenness, and revellings” (Gal. v. 19, 20). There is a 
“spiritual wickedness” that cannot be traced to the body of man. The reason of the 
term being thus applied is probably, first, to distinguish it from the spirit; then 
because “ the things of the flesh” are the supreme objects of desire to worldly men, or, 
as they are differently phrased, “earthly things” (Col. iii, 2); and, thirdly, because it 
comes by birth: “That which is born of the flesh is flesh ” (John iii. 6). Thus the 
lusts of the fiesh have their outlet in the desires at once of the flesh and of the mind. 
They are described as “ ungodly lusts ” (Jude 18), because they are based on a disregard 
for or on an enmity to God; “worldly lusts” (‘Titus ii. 12), because, in the absence of 
God, they “run out to all things in the world ;” “ foolish and hurtful lusts” (1 Tim. 
vi. 9), because they end in shame, disappointment, and ruin; “deceitful lusts” 
(ch. iv, 22), because they fail to answer all a sinner’s expectations, Therefore we 
see the glory and fitness of the gospel, which leads us “ to cleanse ourselves from all 
filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God” (2 Cor. vii. 1). 
The Apostle Paul suggests the danger of the flesh in setting forth the grand principle 
of his life—“ The life I now live in the flesh I live by the faith of the Son of God.” All 
life is in this world exposed to risk of some sort. Spiritual life exists in a body with 
passions prone to evil, as well as in a world with many seductions and cares. Christians 
must strike the true mean between the sensualism which dishonours the body, and 
the asceticism which, regarding it as an enemy, denies it those innocent enjoyments 
which Scripture and nature equally sanction. It is not the body of flesh, but 
the body of sin in the flesh, that is the real trouble of the Christian. We must learn, 
by God’s grace, to honour the body as the temple of the Huly Ghost ; to make it the 
servant, not the master, of the soul; to dedicate it as a vessel unto honour sanctified 
and “ meet for the Master’s use.”"—T. C. 


Ver. 3.—The true fountain of spiritual death. ‘“ And were by nature children of 
wrath, even as others.” The apostle traces the pedigree of all the elements that enter 
into this spiritual death up to our birth itself. He does not say that it is on account 
of “nature” or natural depravity that we are children of wrath, but “by nature ;” 
that is, we are simply born in a state of condemnation. There is no express reference 
here to Adam or to our relation to his sin, though it is certainly implied that we had 
our probation in Adam, and are therefore born in a state of condemnation. To say 
that we are condemned on account of our hereditary depravity is to say that we are 
condemned without a probation. The doctrine of original sin is one of the “ deep things 
of God.” Pascal well says, “ Original sin is folly in the sight of man, but this folly is 
wiser than all the wisdom of man. For without it who could have said what man 
is? His whole condition depends upon this imperceptible point.” The recognition 


τι THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. (on. 11. 1—22, 


of the doctrine is the starting-point of the doctrines of special revelation, of redemp- 
tion through Christ’s blood, of regeneration through the Holy Spirit. This passage 
implies— 

1, THAT WE NEED REDEMPTION FROM THE MOMENT OF OUR BIRTH. The sacrament 
of baptism is meaningless on any other theory. “The wicked are estranged from the 
womb.” Why do all men certainly sin from the beginning ? 

II, Tat ALL MEN, JEWS AND GENTILES, ARE BORN IN THIS STATE OF CONDEMNATION, 
Because “all in Adam die” (1 Cor. xv. 22). 

IL. Tuar Gop’s wRaTH I8 A REALITY. It is grounded in his essential holiness, as 
appears from the fact that God swears in his wrath (Heb. iii, 11), and it belongs to the 
idea of the personal God as he acts in history, who cannot look with cqual indifference 
or equal galisfaction upon virtue and vice, piety and impiety, wisdom and folly. It is 
not to be regarded asa mere modification of Divine love, as either love-sorrow or the 
anger of love. It is not Biblical to say that a God who has wrath is not a God of love. 
The objective reality of Divine wrath on account of sin is an axiom of natural theology 
(Rom. i, 82) as well as of revealed; it is presupposed in the atonement, and must be 
carried into any conception we may form of future retribution.—T. C. 


Ver. 4.—The true origin of salvation, It is interesting to obscrve the variety of 
terms here employed to describe the source of all the blessings of salvation, It is no 
longer a question of power, as it was in the first chapter (ch. i. 19, 20), but of love, 
mercy, grace, and kindness. ‘ 

I, Our SALVATION 18 OF Gop’s Mercy. “ God who is rich in mercy.” There is a 
distinction between mercy and love, for love is the foundation of mercy. Gud is called 
the “Father of mercies” (2 Cor. i. 3); mercy is his deliglit, for “he delighteth in 
mercy ” (Micah vii. 18); he betrotheth us to himself in mercies (1105, ii. 19); he 
begets us again “according to his abundant mercy” (1 Pet. i. 3); and we are led to 
pray, “ Lord, according to the multitude of thy tender mercies, blot out my transgres- 
sions” (Ps. li. 1), Believers are theretore well described as ‘‘ vessels of mercy ἢ 
(Rom. ix. 28). 

11. OuB SALVATION I8 OF Love. ‘“ According to the great love wherewith he hath 
loved us.” The apostolic saying, “ God is love,” supplies us with the best Christian 
idea of God, as well as with the right key to explain all hisactions. God’s love is more 
than kindness, which is, indeed, one of his attributes, but love is, properly speaking, 
the nature of him who unites all these attributes in himself. The incarnation of the 
enly begotten Son is the greatest fact of the Divine love, but is not disjoined from the 
deep humiliation and suffering to which it enabled him to descend. The love of God 
to sinners is (1) a great love (ch. ii. 4), “a love strong as death” (Cant. viii. 6, 7); 
(2) an everlasting love (Jer. xxxi. 8); (8) an unchanging love (Mal. iii. 6); (4) an 
invincible love (Rom. viii. 39) ; (5) it is like the Father’s love to the Son, “ As thou hast 
loved me” (John xvii. 23). 

III. Our SALVATION 18 OF GRACE. “By grace ye are saved.” 1. It is not of 
works, but of grace (ch. ii. 8). It is“ of faith, that it might be of grace” (Rom. iv. 16). 
2, We are accepted by grace (ch. i. 6); our calling is by grace (2 Tim.i.9) 8, We 
have a good hope through grace. 4. Our election is of grace (Rom. xi. 5). 5. The 
grace of God abounds in faith and love (1 Tim. i. 14). 6. We are under a reign ot 
grace (Rom. vi. 14); we have our standing in grace (Rom.v. 2). 7. It is the greatest 
of all concerns to establish men’s hearts in “ the true grace of God” (1 Pet. v. 12). 

IV. Οὐκ saLvaTion 18 oF Gop’s KiInDNESss. (Ver. 7.) “The word here,” says an 
old writer, “implies all sweetness, and all candidness, and all friendliness, and all 
heartiness, and all goodness, and goodness of nature.” Scripture speaks of God as kind 
(Ps. xxxvi. δ; Luke vi. 35), and of his “ loving-kindnesses ἢ (Isa. Ixiv. 7). It is made 
the root of mercy in God (Titus iii. 4); for the apostle here speaks of his kindncss 
toward us in Christ Jesus. Thus our salvation, first and last, is attributed to nothing 
in ourselves, but to love, mercy, grace, and kindness in God.—T, C. 


Ver. 5.—The believer's union with Christ. The apostle teaches that, in virtue of the 
union between Christ and his pore his death was their death, his life their life, his 
exaltation their exaltation. It is the familiar doctrine of Rom. vi. 4, “Therefore we 


OH. 11, 1—22.] THE EPISTLE TO TOE EPHESIANS. 75 


are buried with him by baptism into death: that like as Christ was raised up from the 
dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life.” 
These words indicate a bond of connection between the spiritual life of the believer and 
the resurrection of Christ. The new life is, in fact, a participation in the risen life of 
the Saviour. 

I. QuickENED TocETHER ΨΙΤῊ Curist. 1. Consider the nature of this quickening. 
It implies a previous identification with Ourist in his death. ‘We are buried with 
Christ by baptism into death.” We have, in fact, died unto sin exactly as Christ died 
unto sin; for “in that he died, he died unto sin once” (Rom. vi. 10). Christ died 
unto sin when he underwent death as the wages of sin and exhausted all the woe that 
sin entails as its punishment. He died for sin that he might become dead to sin; the 
parties having become dead to cach other, taking their own path henceforth, never to 
meet or cross each. other unto eternity again. And we are dead unto sin in precisely 
the same sense in which Christ is dead unto sin; for the apostle says, “ Likewise 
reckon ye also yourselves to be dead indeed unto sin,” because we are exempted from 
all its curse on the ground of its curse being already executed. How can this be, as 
we never suffered the curse of sin? Because we have been baptized into Christ. Mere 
water-baptism cannot accomplish this blessed result, It is the Holy Spirit who is the 
Baptist, for he engrafts us into Christ and makes us one body with him (1 Cor. xii, 12, 
13). We are united to Christ by faith. 2. Consider the effects of this quickening. 
This new position involves our sccing what the dead can never see. When we are 
quickened by the Spirit of God: (1) We see God: “ Blessed are the pure in heart: for 
they shall see God.” We see him as a Father, because we have seen Christ, for “ he 
that hath scen me hath seen the Father.” We sce a Father’s power, love, and compas- 
sion. (2) We see Christ in his person and in his work, as a sufficient Saviour, as a 
willing Saviour, as a loving Saviour, with a work accomplished on the ground of which 
we sha! be accepted and saved. (8) We see the sin that is in ourselves and the sin 
that is in the world. The dead see nothing. “They have no speculation in their 
eyes.” Men of the world do not see sin as sin, but often as a source of profit or amuse- 
ment, “ Foolsmakea mock αὖ βίη," But the quickened sinner sees the sin of the world 
as he sees the sin of his own heart, and inourns over it. (4) He secs heaven and hell. 
The eye of man sees many stars in the sky on a dark night, but there are many blank 
spaces in which no twinkling glories can be scen. Men of the world see heaven and 
hell as blank spaces, or, at best, as dim and shadowy. But the quickened see them as 
supreme and transcendent realitics. ‘They sce heaven as the home of Jesus and the 
saints; they see hell as the place prepared for the devil and his angels. (5) He sees 
the world in its true character. How different the view of the saine city from two 
opposite standpoints! Not more different is the view of the world from the standpoint 
of eternity, for the saint sees it as a doomed world at enmity with God, and is thus led 
to place his citizenship on high, “setting his alfections on things above, not on things 
on the earth ” (Col. 111. 2). 

11. Ratsep ToceTuEer witn Curist, For as Christ was raised from the dead by the 
glory of the Father, so we also should walk in newness of life. The connection between 
the believer’s life and the Redeemer’s resurrection is one not merely of certainty and 
similarity, but of participation, and thus we come to know the power of his resurrection 
(Phil. iii. 10), There was a change in Christ’s own relation to God established by his 
resurrection; “for in that he dicd, he died unto sin once: but in that he liveth, he 
liveth unto God ”’—in an entirely new relation to God, which shall endure for ever, for 
when he shall appear the second time, it will be without sin unto salvation, Formerly 
he was condemned, now is he justified in the Spirit; he liveth now to God with no 
curse to bear, no sacrifice to offer, no suffering to endure, no service to achieve; and 
therefore the God of peace, in token of the acceptance of the Surety, brings again from 
the dead that great Shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting 
covenant. Se likewise we are to count ourselves “alive unto God through Jesus 
Christ,” in that same relation of irreversible acceptance into which Jesus has entered. 
The apostie here not only represents believers as ideally raised in Christ, but as actually 
raised just as Christ actually came forth from his sepulchre, leaving his grave-clothes 
behind him. Similarly we are not to be as “the living among the dead;” we are to cast 
from us our grave-clothes, which ouly impede the free movements of our spirilial life, 


76 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. {on π΄ 1—22 


III. THe ΒΕΒΒΙΟΝ WITH CHRIST IN THE HEAVENLY PLACES. Weare enthroned with 
Christ. Christ is already represented as “ set at God’s own right hand in the heavenly 
places” (ch. i. 20), We sit there representatively, because our Head is there, and there- 
fore we are, though still on earth as to our practical calling and life, citizens of heaven 
(Phil. iii. 20). We are guided by the laws of heaven; our hearts are cheered by the 
hope which, as an anchor, is fastened within the veil, and we now by faith enter the 
holiest of all by the blood of Jesus. We are even now “ kings and priests ” (Rev. i. 6). 
We are justified in regarding our future glorification as only a continuation of our 
present spiritual life. The guarantee of both is alike in Christ. Meanwhile, though 
representatively in heaven, we are personally and actually here. Sin is here; we are 
to watch and fight against it; but “ our life is hid with Christ in God,” only hereafter 
to be manifested in full glory.—T. 0. 


Ver. 7.—The design of the dispensation of mercy. The salvation of these Ephesians 
was to stand ouf as a remarkable monument of “ the exceeding riches of God’s grace ἢ 
to all succeeding generations. It was in this sense that the apostle regarded himself 
“as a pattern to them which should. hereafter believe on him to life everlasting ” 
( Tim. i. 16). 

I, Ir WAS TO ENCOURAGE THE GREATEST SINNERS TO HOPE IN GopD’s MERCY THROUGH 
Curtst. Sinners often, when pressed with the urgent calls of the gospel, plead that 
they are too wicked to he reached by it. The examples of salvation in the Scriptures— 
those of the Ephesians, the dying thief, Lydia, the Philippian jailor, the Apostle Paul 
himself—are all designed to meet the difficulties that men interpose in the way of their 
receiving Christ, as if any worthiness could attach to the persons thus described. 10 is 
a great comfort that what God did then he does now and will do tili the end of the 
world. His mercy and grace are not exhausted, 

II. Iv 18 IMPLIED THAT SALVATION IS NOT OF WORKS, BUT BY Grace. This fact 
cuts up by the roots all theological systems which imply that man has any power to 
save himself. 

III. Iv 18 IMPLIED THAT THERE WILL BE A CHURCH ON EARTH THROUGH “ ALL 
THE AGES TO COME,” in spite of all the malignity, the ungodliness, the unbelief 
of men. 

1V. Ir 18 ἸΜΡΙΤΕΡ THAT TIE ScRIPTURES ARE TO CONVEY THE RECORDS OF (ΡΒ 
GRACE DOWN TO THE LATEST GENERATIONS. We could not know of God’s gracious 
work at Ephesus but by the Scriptures. How much we ought to prize such records ! 

V. THe HISTORY OF THE CHURCH SINCE THE DAYS OF THE APOSTLES proves how 
God has fulfilled the design involved in the dispensation of mercy. 116 stream ot 
grace has flowed more or less freely and fully in every age. 

VI. Mark THE TRUE SUBJECT OF PREACHING. Not mere moral counsels, not mere 
philosophizings, but “ the excecding riches of his grace in his kindness to us in Jesus 
Christ.” A noble text for the pulpit of all ages! 

VII. THE ULTIMATE DESIGN oF GOD 185 TO MANIFEST HI8 OWN GLORY. Not the 
mere glory of his power and wisdom, but of his abounding grace and mercy. 

VIII. Iv 18 IMPLIED IN THE TEXT THAT THE APOSTLE DID NOT EXPECT, AS SOME 
AFFIRM, THAT THE END OF THE WORLD WAS AT HAND. There were ages to come in 
which the exceeding riches.of his grace could be shown forth in the salvation οἱ 
sinners.—T, C. 


Vers. 8-10.—Salvation tn tts completeness: the place of j'aith and works. One 
thought runs through these two verses like a thread of gold. We are not saved by 
works, but unto works. 

I, THE PRIVILEGE OF BELIEVERS. “Ye are saved.” 1. It is implied that the 
salvation is a present reality. It is not, “ Ye shall be saved.” They were already in 
an actual state of salvation ; they had passed from death unto life; and the life was 
everlasting. 2. The salvation was more than a deliverance from the guilt of sin, so as 
to exempt sinners from future punishment. This is, indeed, the first step in salvation. 
There must be likewise a deliverance from the power of sin. _ ‘Io be saved from sin is 
the climax, the consummation, the essence of salvation. Holiness is the most essential 
thing in salvation, Therefore, while believers may rejoice that they have received 


en. τι. 1---22.} THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 7 


pardon through the blood of Christ, let them still more rejoice that Jesus “ saves them 
trom their sins ” by a continuous supply of his living grace, 

II. Power FoR GOOD WORKS 18 INCLUDED IN SALVATION. “We are God’s workman- 
ship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works.” We are saved because we are thus 
created. This was the Divine purpose in the mission of the Son; God sent Christ to 
bless us “ by turning every one of us away from our iniquities” (Acts iii. 26). We 
have learnt to believe that our works have nothing to do with our pardon—our evil 
works have not hindered it, our good works have not helped it; our pardon is of pure 
grace. But the apostle teaches, in the tenth verse, that what is true of pardon through 
the death of Shrist is equally true of power by his life—that if we are delivered from 
the punishment of sin by the atoning death of Christ, we are also delivered from the 
power of sin by the loving grace that streams from the fountain of the cross. Salva- 
tion, if it be salvation at all, is “ unto good works; ” good works not being the root on 
which salvation grows, but the fruit which grows upon the tree of life. 

III. How 18 THIS FULL SALVATION TO BE OBTAINED? “ΒΥ grace are ye saved, 
through faith.” You are “God’s workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good 
works.” 1. Grace is the fountain at once of pardon and of holiness. The purpose of 
God is of grace, for “he hath saved us according to his own purpose and grace ” (2 Tim. 
i. 9); the atonement is of grace, for “ye know the graceof . . . Christ, that, though he 
was rich, for your sakes he became poor ” (2 Cor. viii. 9); the application of it is of grace, 
for it is “ grace that bringeth salvation ” (Titus ii. 11); and it is according to this grace 
“we are called with an holy calling” (2 Tim. i. 9). Now, we have learned to say of 
pardon that it is “ not of works ;” equally true is it of our purification that it is not of 
works—that is, not of our working—for we are “ his workmanship, created... unto good 
works.” The old mau cannot work. The new man receives the power in the very 
structure of his spiritual being; for, having died with Christ, he is risen with him that 
he should walk in newness of life. 2. Fazth is the instrumental cause of our salvation. 
“ By grace are ye saved, through faith; ” and thus the gospel becomes “the power of 
God unto salvation to every one that believeth.” Power as well as pardon flows forth 
from Christ to every one that believeth. We are not to suppose, however, that salva- 
tion is given as a kind of reward of faith, for, in a true sense, faith is part of the 

. salvation itself. But the apostle uniformly represents faith as that which apprehends 
the salvation. It is in no sense the ground of salvation; “the righteousness of God 
which is by faith of Christ Jesus” is the only ground of it, and it is therefore called 
“ the gilt of righteousness ” (Rom. v.17); but faith is the hand by which it is received. 
There is thus no merit in faith any more than there is in the hand of the beggar who 
receives an alms. 3, Good works are the predestined way along which the saved walk. 
“ Which God hath before prepared that we should walk in them.” This might be true 
in a double sense: either that, by the revelation of the moral law, he has fixed the firm 
and unalterable pathway of the believer’s obedience—prepared, as it were, the sphere of 
our moral action; or that, by creating us in Christ Jesus, he has preordained our dis- 
position and aptitude for this obedience. It is evident from the apostle’s doctrine that 
(1) good works are not necessary to qualify us for believing in Christ, (2) or are the 
ground of our expecting a future inheritance in glory. But they are necessary, not- 
withstanding, on the following grounds:—(1) We are elected unto holiness (ch. i. 4) ; 
and we are “called unto holiness” (1 ‘hess. iv. 7). (2) They are necessary as acts of 
obedience to the Lord’s commands (John xiv. 15); (8) as acts of gratitude for all his 
goodness to us; (4) as evidences of the sincerity of our faith in Christ; (5) as tending 
to adorn the doctrine of God our Saviour, and to glorify his Name; (6) as contributory 
to our inward peace and comfort.—T. C. 


Ver. 11.—The uses of remembrance. ‘Wherefore remember.” The present is built 
upon the past, and the memory of the past has much to do with the joys and sorrows 
of the present, as well as with the hopes and achievements of the future, It is well for 
believers to remember what they have been in view of their present mercies, Remem- 
brance may thus become a means of grace, 

I. Iv TENDS TO DEEPEN THE HUMILITY OF SAINTS ΑΒ WELL AS TO INCREASE THEIR 
GODLY SORROW FOR SIN. — 

11. lv TENDS TO MAKE U8 GRATEFUL FOB OUR MERCIES AND TO MAKE US MAGNIFY ΤῊΝ 


78 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. (on. m. 1—22, 


GREATNESS AND FREENESS OF Divine Love. Where sin did much abound, we have 
found that grace did much more abound. ξ 

ΠῚ. Ir TenDs To INSPIRE US WITH A 8TONGER LOVE FoR CHRIST, WHO HAS PLACED US 
ΒΟ HIGH IN HEAVENLY PLACES. The woman in the gospel loved much when she 
remembered how much was forgiven her. “The grace of our Lord was exceeding 
abundant in faith and love” (1 Tim. i. 14) to the Apostle Paul in the remembrance of 
his old blasphemies and ir‘uries to the gospel. 

IV. Ir TENDS TO QUICKEN US TO GREATER ZEAL AND ACTIVITY IN THE LORD’S SERVICE. 
We think sadly of our lost time in the service of sin, and are led now ts werk with 
increased energy for the cause of our Redeemer. , 

V. Ir TENDS TO MAKE US MORE HOPEFUL OF THE CONVERSION OF OTHERS WIIO0 ABE XOW 
WHAT WE ONOE WERE ΑΒ SINNERS. Yet this remembrance of our past condition is not to 
be a rueful, self-accusing thing that will kill hope and heart, but rather that which 
leads onward to a higher joy and a more complete consecration to the Lord’s work.—T. C. 


Ver. 12.—The religious position of the heathen. The apostle does not speak of the 
distinguished place of the heathen as to art and science, culture, and worldly civiliza- 
tion—in which they far surpassed Israel—but he describes the utter destitution of 
their religious life by contrast mainly with the privileged superiority of Judaism. 
The points of contrast are six in number. 

I. THEY WERE UNCIRCUMCISED—were “Gentiles in the flesh.” Circumcision, accord- 
ing to the apostle, might mean very little or very much. It might mean very much, 
in so far as it was a “seal of the righteousness of faith” (Rom. iv. 11) and was a 
spiritual thing—“ the circumcision of the heart” (Rom. ii. 29), involving “ the worship 
of God in the Spirit, rejoicing in Christ Jesus, and having no confidence in the flesh ” 
(Phil. iii. 3). But it might mean “the circumcision in the letter,” after the habit of 
those Jews who ascribed objective power to the mere external rite, regarding it asa 
channel of grace, irrespective of the subjective condition of the recipient. It was only 
in the spiritual sense of the rite that the Gentiles were disadvantaged by their want of 
it, not only because it meant the obligation of withdrawing all the relations of life from 
the dominion of nature, but because it implied a covenant union with God, involving 
the blessings of redemption itself. 

11. THEY were witHout Curist. The Jews were not without him; for “salvation 
was of the Jews;” Abraham, the first Jew, saw the day of Christ afar off, ‘and was 
glad” (John viii. 56); the Jews drank, in the wilderness, of the “ Rock which was 
Christ” (1 Cor. x. 4). But the Gentiles were without him, because (1) they had no 
knowledge of him; (2) they had no faith in him; (3) they had no union with him; 
(4) they were therefore without pardon, life, grace, hope, and comfort. How dark and 
cheerless was heathenism even under its reign of culture! It had no experience of the 
threefold blessing of the gospel—“ Christ for us, Christ in us, Christ with us”—the 
grand totality of Christianity. 

II], THEY WERE ALIENS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF IspaEL, They were so 
civilly as well as spiritually, for the Jews had no dealings with Gentiles, 1. The 
word “aliens” points in the original to a lapse from a former unity or fellowship. 
Universalism characterized the first dispensation of the race of man: deliverance was 
to come through the Seed of the woman; but when the race took a direction contrary 
to the will of God and fundamentally wrong, the circle was narrowed into particularism, 
which in its turn tended toward a universalistic goal, fur all nations of the earth are 
to be blessed in Abraham’s seed. Jew and Gentile thus stood apart for ages, till, “in 
the fulness of times,” they met at last round the cross of Christ in an act of supreme 
rebellion, only to be unitid in Christ for ever in the future development of the kingdom 
of God. 2. Their estrangement from the Israelitish commonwealth was an immense 
spiritual loss; for to it belonged the oracles of God (Rom. iii. 2), and “ the adoption, 
and the glory, and the covenants, and the giving of the Law, and the service of God, 
and the promises ” (Rom. ix. 4). It was a privilege to belong to a people expecting 
nothing from their own power or wisdom, but everything from the interposition of their 
God, It is a great blessing to be born within the pale of the visible Church, so as to 
yartake of her privileges. The Gentiles were outside the whole apparatus of religious 
instruction provided for the special guidance of the Jews, 


en. m1. 1—22.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, 70 


IV. THEY WERE STRANGERS TO THE COVENANTS OF PROMISE. 1. The plural reference 
is to the successive renewals of the covenant with the patriarchs. It was but the one 
covenant of promise—‘the promise made to the fathers” which God fulfilled in 
“raising up Jesus” (Acts xiii. 32), The word “covenant” occurs two hundred and 
thirty-six times in our English Bible, and in more than two hundred instances it is a 
Divine covenant. The covenant with Abraham was the Magna Charta of Israel; the 
covenant with David rests upon this earlier covenant, marking out more clearly the 
line in which the Divine purpose of blessing would be fulfilled to Jews and eventually 
to all nations. The new covenant of the New ‘I'estament, which has in Christ a 
Mediator greater than Moses and is “established upon better promises,” is no other 
than the ancient covenant made with Abraham (Gal. 111, 14). 2, Thus we can see 
how the Gentiles were strangers to the covenant in all its historic developments. They 
had no national covenant with God, and no land of promise in the present world. As 
Gentiles, the covenant had never been revealed to them, and, except so far as they may 
have been included in the Israelitish commonwealth, it could bring them no blessing. 

V. Tey were wirHout Hors. They had no covenanted hope—no hope of the 
Messiah and of salvation by him, of a future state of eternal life. “Such as are 
Christless must be hopeless; such as are without faith must needs be without hope; 
and such as are without the promise must necessarily be without faith; for the promise 
is the ground of faith, and faith is the ground of hope.” It is a miscrable state to be 
without hope. “If in this life only we have hope, we are of all men most miserable.” 
The future to the hcathen was a night without a star. In the Roman catacombs hope 
is the commonest inscription. There is no such word on the tombs of the heathen dead. 

VI. THEY WERE WITHOUT Gop IN THE worLD, This marks the climax of their 
misery. They were without God, though they were not atheists, for they had a 
t!ousand gods that were no gods,. Aud they were not bold deniers of God, for many 
of them were “feeling after the Lord.” But (1) they were without the knowledge of 
the true God; (2) they had no faith in him; (3) they lived without relation to him; 
and (4) they had no consciousness of his presence to bless and guide and comfort them. 
They were without God “in the world”—in contrast with the position of the Jews 
entrenched within their commonwealth privileges—and were thus homeless and 
forsaken in that world which had Satan for its prince. This is the picture of the 
heathen world given by the apostle—without Christ, without Church, without covenant, 
without hope, without God. At the period to which he refers, religion had outlived 
itself, unbelief mocked at the superstitions of the vulgar, and scepticism gradually 
became the sole wisdom of the culturcd classes, Along with the power of truth the 
power of morality was irrecoverably lost; and yet there was a deep yearning at the 
heart of paganism for the God unknown whom it was the high destiny of Christianity 
to make known to the Gentiles. ‘They were without God, yet were not outcast from 
his favour, for these Ephesian Gentiles were in due time called by his grace.—T. C. 


Ver, 13.—Nearness to God in the blood of Christ. This chapter speaks of a double 
alienation and of a double reconciliation: on the one hand, a deep alienation of man- 
kind from God, dating from birth, subsisting along with a moral separation between 
Jews and Gentiles; on the other hand, it points to the historic fact of Christ’s atone- 
ment as the divinely instituted method by which both alienations were to be 
extinguished, aud man united to God and to man in a higher unity, so that the two 
separated elements should henceforth become one new man, one city of God, one temple 
or habitation of God. 

1. Tie GENTILES REMOTE FRoM Gop. “You that were afar off.” They were ina 
geographical sense far off from Palestine, the centre of the true religion. This land 
was, with a truly providential design, selected as the home of God's chosen people, 
because it held a central place between Europe, Asia, and Africa. But the vations 

-were still more apart from Palestine, so as to have no share in its theocratic life. In 
this case, the expression “ far from God,” or “ far off,” was a phrase in common use to 
designate the Gentiles (Isa. xlix. 1; Acts ii, 89). But there was a moral distance—an 
alienation of the Gentile heart irom God—which was more serious than any geographical 
remoteness from the seat of theocratic institutions. It is both the sinfulness and the 
misery of sin that men are at a distance from God. Unbelief is a “departure from the 


fs 


80 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. fou. π, 1—22 


living God.” The Gentiles were far from Christ, from the Church, from the covenant, 
from hope, from God. ‘here is no divider like sin, 

II. ΤῊΝ GENTILES MADE NIGH IN THE BLOOD oF CHRIST, Just as Israel at Sinai was 
by the sprinkling of blood made to be the people of God, brought near to him, kept 
year by year in covenant, so the blood of Christ was the element or sphere in whict 
the new covenant took its shape with its all-inclusive relations both to Jew and t 
Gentile. It was the blood that obliterated the interval between the Gentiles ‘and God. 
They have now communion with God, and are established in their nearness to him. It 
is not merely in Christ Jesus, but in the blood of Christ, that our nearness is 
established. It was not the incarnation but the death of the Son of God—the designad 
complement and issue of the incarnation—that has secured our privilege of access to 
God. It often happens in the history of grace that those very far from God in character 
and hope are made nigh by the blood of the cross. There is a marvellous power in the 
blood of the lifted-up Redeemer: “And 1,1 I be lifted up, will draw all men unte 
me” (John xii. 32), irrespective of national distinctions.—T. C. 


Vers. 14—16.—Christ our Peace. He is so by effecting two reconciliations, and thua 
obliterating two deep and long-standing alienations. He “hath made both one”— 
Jew and Gentile—and “he hath reconciled both unto God in one body by the cross.” 
Christ is our Peace, not simply as our Peacemaker, but as our Peace objectively con- 
sidered and with regard to our relation to God; for the apostle represents our nearness 
to God as grounded in Christ as our Peace. He is therefore our Peace, as he is called 
our Righteousness and our Redemption (1 Cor. i. 30), and while thus he is our Peace 
toward God, he is the ground of peace in every other relation, and especially between 
man and man. Thus he abides our continual Peace, for he dfd not make peace and 
end his relation toward us, but is the Source of our abiding reconciliation with God as 
well as of the continuous enjoyment of peace, Thus the Old Testament prophecies 
which connect peace with the Messiah find their just fulfilment (Isa. ix. 5, 6; lvii. 2, 7). 
Peace was the legacy which he left to his disciples (John xiv. 27). It is “the peace to 
which we are called in one body ” (Col. iii. 15). It is that which “keeps our hearts and 
minds through Christ Jesus” (Phil. iv. 7). Consider— 

1. How HE HAS MADE PEACE BETWEEN JEW AND GenTILE. 1. He did so by levelling 
in the dust the middle wall of partition that separaled them widely for ages, in a word, 
by abolishing the narrow particularism of Judaism. ‘The wall in question was the 
ceremonial law— the law of commandments contained in ordinances ”—given to Israel 
as a separate people and of positive appointment. The moral law was no part of the 
partition wall, and contains in itself nothing either to excite enmity or to establish 
separation between man and man. ‘he death of Christ did not abolish it; it was the 
law of ceremonies only that was abolisked in the cross, for when he died, it disappeared 
like a shadow when the substance was come. The moral law, as embodied in the 
Decalogue, was older than the Mosaic institute, and therefore survived its fall. The 
partition wall that kept Jew and Gentile apart was (1) an ancient barrier of separation. 
It lasted sixteen hundred or two thousand years, according as we date its origin from 
Abraham or Moses, A Puritan Father says, “The foundation of the wall of separation 
was laid in Abraham’s time when circumcision was first given, for that began the 
quarrel; reared up higher by Moses’ rites; further lengthened and stretched out in all 
times of the prophets, throughout ail ages, till Christ, who came to abolish it and break 
it down.” (2) It was a high barrier. It kept the Jew eectively apart fur more than 
a millennium and a half, that he might be trained for the universalist dispensation that 
was to be established in the fulness of times. (3) It engendered a deep hostility on 
both sides. It was this “enmity” that made the barrier so serious an element of 
separation, The Jew regarded the Gentile with a proud and supercilious superiority, 
and the Gentile regarded the Jew as an enemy of the human race. Literature is full 
of the evidences of this continuous hostility. The Gentiles were called in contempt 
“the uncircumcised” and “sinners of the Gentiles.’ Juvenal, Tacitus, Martial, 
Horace, repay the debt in the language of bitter and contemptuous sarcasm. 2. Con- 
sider the grand instrument of reconciliation between Jew and Gentile. “In his flesh.” 
The language refers expressly to the condition of penal curse-bearing to which the 
atoning Saviour spontaneously subjected himself. As the apostle once represents sin 


ἃς 


cH. τι, 1—22.] TH EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 81 


as being condemned in Christ’s flesh (Rom. viii. 3), so here our Lord is regarded as 
having in his flesh taken upon him the sins of bis people, as the great cause of enmity 
and disunion, and having exhausted at once the sin of man and the wrath of God on 
the cross, he thus at once abolished the law of ceremonies and annihilated the enmity 
which found its occasion in it. The cross is still the instrument of reconciling man to 
ran. The world has made many efforts to unite men on a basis of liberty, equality, 
fraternity—often trying to bring about a union even by the most terrible bloodshed ; 
but no principle has yet been discovered to unite man to man save the gospel of Christ, 
with its doctrine of atonement through the blood of the cross. 8. Consider the ultimate 
result of the death of Christ. “To make of twain one new man, so making peace.” 
Those previously sundered were by the cross lifted into a higher unity, and placed 
upon a platform of equal privilege that obliterated all the old causes of division. The 
reconciling power of the cross ran through all the relations of men and all the relations 
of life. The person of Christ crucified became henceforth the great Centre of unity. 

11. How Curis? 18 οὐκ PEACE IN EFFECTING RECONCILIATION BETWEEN GoD AND 
man. “That he might reconcile both unto God in one body by the cross, having slain 
the enmity thereby.” Nothing can be more explicit than the declaration that Christ’a 
mission was intended to reconcile God and man, who were previously alienated by 
sin, It is often contended that, as God is essentially a God of love, it becomes us 
to think only cf reconciliation on man’s side. There are, in fact, two reconciliations, 
the one based on the other—a reconciliation of God to man, and a reconciliation of 
man to God. The apostle says elsewhere that “ God has reconciled us to himself by 
Jesus Christ” (2 Cor. v. 18), and that it pleased “the Father, having made peace 
through the blood of the cruss, to reconcile all things unto himself” (Col. i. 20). The 
scheme of salvation, whether we take account of the incarnation or the atonement, 
emanated from the Divine good pleasure as the supreme source of all blessings. It 
is always important to emphasize the fact that the atonement is the effect, not tho 
cause, of God’s love. The peace here spoken of is peace on a basis of law and justice; 
for the offering up of Christ so magnified the Law and exhausted all its demands, that, 
on the ground of that propitiation, God could be at once just and the Justifier of «le 
ungodly, This is according to another passage: “God hath sent forth his Son to be 
ἃ propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness ” (Rom. iii. 25). 
If this be so, it is an error to hold that the only purpose of Christ’s death was the 
manifestation of Divine love. It was, in fact, a manifestation of Divine justice as well 
as of Divine love; and if it was not a manifestation of Divine justice, that is, if there 
was no righteousness making that death necessary, it is difficult to see how there 
could Le a manifestation of love in his dying. It follows also that it is an error to 
depreciate the importance of Christ’s death, and to lay the main emphasis of his 
mission upon the virtues of his life. The Bible knows nothing of a gospel without a 
cross, or of a gospel which makes the cross a mere affecting incident at the close of 
a sublime career; it rather exhibits the cross as the grand procuring cause of life and 
redemption to man. If you take away the cross, you dry up the stream of blessing 
which has flowed down through all Christian ages, you put an end to the abiding 
peace of God’s people, and you paralyze the right arm of the ministry. Therefore we 
are justified in regarding the reconciliation between God and man as resting on Christ’s 
work, and this work as charged with reconciling power, not as it moved the human 
heart or led to a new conduct in man, but as it introduced a new relation in which 
mon were placed before God.—T. Ο, 


Ver. 17.—The proclamation of peace. I, Hz wo 18 οὔκ. PEACE 18 THE PUBLISHER 
or Peace. “And came and preached peace.” He came as the Prince of peace, 
spoke of peace before his death as his parting legacy to the Church, and after his 
ascension to heaven sent forth his ambassadors with the gospel of peace to say, “ We 
pray you in Christ’s stead be ye reconciled to God” (2 Cor. v. 20). What Christ does 
by the apostles he does by himself. 

11, THe BURDEN OF THE GOsPEL—PEACE, The first word of the angelic annun- 
ciation was, “ Peace on earth.” 1, It is peace through the blood of Christ, which 
thus “speaketh better things than that of Abel.” 2. It is peace through the right- 
eousness of Christ: “Therefore, being justified by faith, we have peace with God 

EPHESIANS, ἃ 


82 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. [cn. 11. 1—22, 


through our Lord Jesus Christ” (Rom, v.1), 8, It is the staple of the gospel, which 
is a gospel of peace proclaimed by ministers who are the publishers of peace, 4, It 
introduces sinners into the covenant of peace, which cannot be removed. 6, It has 
peace fur its fruits, for believers have “joy and peace in believing;” “Great peace 
have they that love thy Law;” “ΤῸ be spiritually minded is life and peace ;” “ ‘They 
that trust in the Lord are kept in perfect peace ;” “ They dwell in peaceable habita- 
tions, in quiet resting-places.” 

IlI. THe PERSONS TO WHOM PEACE IS PREACHED. “ΤῸ you that are afar off and to 
them that are nigh.” There was peace for both Jew and Gentile. It was peace for 
the world. There is no restriction upon the message of peace, “'The Lord shall 
bless his people with peace” (Ps. xxix. 11). “Great shall be the peace of thy 
children.” The proof that the peace has this wide and blessed efficacy is our free 
access to the Father by Jesus Christ.—T. 0. 


Ver, 18,—Our access to the Father. “ For through him we both have access by one 
Spirit unto the Father.” If the enmity had not been slain there could not have been 
access to the Divine presence. Both Jews and Gentiles enjoy this access on a footing 
of grace and mercy to the tlirone of God. 

I. Tue APPROACH 18 To THE Farner, It is not to a stern Judge or a God wielding 
terrible power against us, but to a gracious Father, we have access in virtuo of Christ’s 
atoning work. It is the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ who is represented 
in this Epistle as having blessed us with all spiritual blessings ; it is the Father who 
has made known to us his purpose to reconcile all things to himself in Christ; it is 
the Father who has made peace through the blood of the cross. We must ever scek 
the true origin of our salvation, not in the suffering of the cross, but in the bosom of 
the eternal Father. 

11. Our access TO HIM 18 THROUGH CuRIsT. 1. We are brought near to God 
through his blood (ver. 13). 2. Through his intercession. Jesus, as Mediator; Advo- 
cate, Forerunner, takes us, as it were, by the hand, and presents us to God. This is 
the doctrine of the Epistle to the Hebrews, which introduces the era of the better 
hope, under which we draw nigh to God with true heart, in full assurance of faith, 
because we have such an High Priest over the house of God. But our Saviour is more 
than High Priest; he is Forerunner; he is not merely Representative of believers, as 
the high priest of Judaism was representative of the theocratic people, but he is 
Forerunner, entered within the veil, whither his people can follow him to the very 
place which he has gone before to prepare for them. There is no longer a restriction 
upon our access to God. It is ἃ free access, an open access, an access that may well 
inspire confidence, because it is in Christ: “ We have boldness and access with 
confidence by the faith of him” (ch. iii. 12). 

Ill. Tue access 18 By one Spirit. 1. It is by his influence we are first brought 
home to the Father. It is by him we are baptized into one body. 2, The indwelling 
of the Spirit is, necessary to the perpetuation and power of “our fellowship with the 
Father and the Son.” 3. It is the Spirit especially who helps our infirmities in 
prayer (Rom. viii. 26). Thus we see how the three Persons of the Trinity are con- 
cerned in our salvation.—T, C, 


Ver. 19.—The Church α city. The Gentiles were now no longer strangers, but 
fellow-citizens with the saints. 

1. THE CITY MAY BE REGARDED EITHER ΑΒ THE CHURCH ON EARTH OR THE CHURCH 
IN HEAVEN. They are equally the city of God “which hath foundations, whose 
Builder and Maker is God.” It is a city strongly fortified with the walls and bulwarks 
of salvation, and is surrounded by a river of love, which ministers to the wants of 
its citizens. There God dwells in the midst of them. It is a city possessing glorious 
franchises and ordered government. It is not limited, like the Jewish theocracy, to 
one nation; it is not bounded by the frontiers of any land; it is the kingdom which 
is not of this world, and destined ultimately to triumph over all other kingdoms. 

II. THe GENTILES ARE NO LONGER STRANGERS IN IT, like those who have no home, 
no property, no privileges, no interests, in common with its inhabitants. They are 
now naturalized citizens of the Christian commonwealth, living on terms cf perfect 


on. τι. 1L—22.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 83 


equality with all the other members, as to privilege, protection, and government. 
They are thus brought into relation, not with the Jews either of the present or the 
past, but with saints of all dispensations and all times; for the Church of God which 
Jesus “ purchased with his own blood ” does not date from the day of Pentecost, but 
covers the whole period of human history sinco the beginning of time. The abrogation 
of old theocratic distinctions leaves a new community in which “there is neither Jew 
nor Greek, circumcision nor uncircumcision.” 

IIT, Tne HEAVENLY CITIZENSHIP HAS IMPORTANT ETHICAL BEARINGS. Those whose 
“ citizenship is in heaven ” are not to “ mind earthly things” (Phil, iii, 20), but to think 
of the Saviour who is to be revealed with transforming power in the final resurrection. 
The laws of heaven are to be our guide on earth. Our calling is, therefore, a “ high 
calling.”—T. 0. © 


Ver. 19.— The Church a family. The Gentiles were no longer mere inmates of the 
family without domestic rights, like the guests of the priests in ancient times (Lev. 
xxii, 10), but “ members of the household of God.” 

I. Toe CHurcH 185 OFTEN LIKENED TO A FAMILY OR HOUSE, which is a much more 
intimate brotherhood than the city with all its precious franchises. The Church, 
which is the pillar and ground of the truth, is the house of God (1 Tim. iii. 15); we 
are Christ’s house (Heb. iii. 6), and it is at this house of God that judgment often 
begins in the dispensations of Divine providence (1 Pct. iv. 17). This is the house 
of which Moses was a servant (Heb. iii. 5); therefore it was in existence before 
Pentecost. This is the true “ household of faith” (Gal. vi. δ), 1. It has God for a 
Father. This relation is more tender than that of a civil ruler. And therefore we 
are more than fellow-citizens of the saints; we are children of God by faith in Christ 
Jesus (Gal. iii. 26). 2. Christ is the Firstborn and elder Brother, “a brather born 
for adversity,” allied to us by the dearest ties of sacrifice and sympathy. 3. Itisa 
large family, for it includes “the whole family in heaven and in earth ” (ch. iii, 15) 
—saints old and young, of all lands, of all times, 4. We enter this family, not by 
birth, but by adopting grace. 5. It is a separated family, its members divided by 
time and space, opinion and fecling; but all the members will be at last brought 
home to “ the house of many mansions,” the “ holy place not made with hands,” which 
our Saviour has gone before to prepare. 

11. Tue GENTILES ARE NO LONGER SOJOURNERS, BUT MEMBERS OF THI8 HOUSEHOLD 
or Gop. They are not like guests, abiding for a time, but eventually going forth 
again, The blessing of Abraham “having come upon the Gentiles” (Gal, iii. 14), 
they have been born again; they have become children of Gud by faith (Gal. iii, 26) ; 
they have become heirs of God and joint-heirs with Christ; they are ‘clothed with 
the beautiful garments of salvation;” they shall go no more out, for they have 
received an eternal inheritance. 

III. Tis rosrrion oF PRIVILEGE ought to make us jealous of our Father’s honour, 
mindful of our Father’s guidance, loving in all our relations to the members of the 
great household, and studiously careful to promote its harmony and prospcrity.—T. C. 


Vers, 21, 22.—The Church a holy temple. It is elsewhere called “a spiritual house,” 
composed of “living stones,” built upon him who is a living Stone laid in Zion, elect, 
precious, though rejected of men (1 Pet. ii. 4,5). Each believer is a living stone, 
dug out of the quarry of nature, hewn by the Word and ministry, laid in the foun- 
dation, and built into the heavenly structure. The Church is God’s building, not 
man’s. There are four things observable in the apostle’s account of this blessed 
structure. 

I. Iv was A 6000 FouNDATION. Built on the foundation of “apostles and prophets, 
Jesus Christ himself being the chief Corner-stone.” It is built on the foundation that 
apostles and prophets laid, namely, on Jesus Christ himself, who is at once Foundation 
acd Corner-stone: “ Other foundation can no man lay than that is laid, which is Christ 
Jesus” (1 Cor. iii. 11). This was the Foundation which the apostle was always laying: 
“Ὁ have laid the foundation, and another buildeth thereon” (1 Cor. iii. 10). But it 
w2s God himself who laid this stone in Zion: “ Behold, I lay in Zion a chief Corner- 
stone, elect, precious” (1 Pet. ii. 6). The foundation is not, therefore, in man, but in 


84 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. (cx. τι. 1—22, 


God, not in Rome, but in heaven. Therefore it is an indestructible building. Jesus 
Christ is called “the chief Corner-stone,” which has its true supporting-place in the 
foundation, because it is the binding-stone of the building, holding two walls because 
it is built into both. Perhaps there is a reference to the union of Jews and Gentiles 
in Christ, who has made both one, and thus builds the whole number of believers into 
the glorious temple, and bears the weight of the whole structure. 

11. Iv 18 FITLY FRAMED TOGETHER. It is not a mere heap or mass of hetercgeneous 
materials, 1. The materials must be prepared for their place in the building so as 
to promote its unity and compactness, All the members of the Church must first be 
joined to Christ as the Foundation, and then cemented to one another by love. Tis 
their unity gives beauty as well as strength to the structure. ‘ Happy, indeed, the 
stones that God chooses to be living stones in this spiritual temple; though they be 
hammered and hewed to be polished for it by afflictions and the inward work of 
mortification and repentance.” 2, The members are to have each their proper place 
in the building. Thus only can it become a compact structure. Some have a higher, 
sone a lower place; some are appointed to teach, others to be taught; some to lead, 
others to be led; some to counsel, some to execute; but all the stones are to kecp 
their due place, and thus grow up into a holy temple, “ edifying itself in love” (ch, 
iv. 16). Tbe Lord requires stones of all sorts and sizes, the smallest as well as the 
largest, for hig temple; and it ought to reconcile us to our respective positions, that 
it is the Lord’s own hand which not only fits us into our place, but keeps us there. 

111. Iv 18 IMPERFECT BUT STILL GRowING. “It groweth into an holy temple.” It 
is growing by the accession of new stones, or by the addition of new members, and by 
the addition of new graces in the individual members. Provision is made for a vast 
increase in its size and height, but asitis fitly framed together in its growing dimensions, 
it will lose nothing in symmetry and strength by its continuous elevation. 

IV. THE END OR DESIGN OF THE BUILDING. “For a habitation of God.” When we 
build houses, it is that men may dwell in them, Thus the Church is the temple of 
God. “Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God 
dwelleth in you?” (1 Cor. iii, 16). “1 will dwell in them, and walk in them ” (2 Cor. 
vi. 16). Thus “ we will be filled with all the fulness of God” (ch. iii. 19), Thus we 
have the true temple of the Father, built in the Son, inhabited in the Spirit, the 
offices of the three blessed Persons being distinctly pointed out: God the Father in 
all his fulness dwells in, fills the Church; that Church is constituted to him a holy 
temple in the Son; is inhabited by him in the ever-present indwelling of the Holy 
Spirit. 

A ewetial Lessons. 1, Think of the safety and glory of the church, Christ is its 
Foundation. All the stones are knit to the Corner-stone. It is well proportioned, 
because the Holy Spirit is the Architect; it is-vast in its proportions, for it is spread 
over the earth; and it is inviolable, for it is devoted to the Lord. 2. Think of God 
dwelling in the Church, The Christian is an epitome of the Church. He is himself 
a temple of the Holy Ghost. (1) What condescension in God to dwell in human 
hearts! “It isa marvel that the habitation he has chosen for himself is an impure 
one.” (2) What a fearful thing it would be to be in collision with such a God! (8) 
How careful we ought to be not to defile this temple! We ought to live purer lives, 
to breathe a sweeter air, to open our hearts to all that is heavenly. (4) What an 
awful thought, that the holy God dwells in our unholy hearts, watching us in our 
secret moments, and reading our very thoughts! (5) Yet let us remember with 
gratitude and love that “the high and lofty One who inhabiteth eternity, whose 
name is ἐν ἢ selects his dwelling-place “ with him that is of ἃ contrite aud humble 
spirit.”"—T. 0. 


Vers. 1—7.—The resurrection and ascension of the soul. Paul’s prayer for the 
Ephesians was, as we have seen, that they might appreciate the mighty power of God 
to us-ward who believe, This power was first manifested in the person and experience 
of Christ in raising him from the dead, in exalting him to the Father’s right hand, in 
putting all things under his feet, and in constituting him Head of his Church. We are 
now to notice a parallel experience of power in the case of the believer. 

1. ConsiDER THE RESURRECTION OF THE BOUL. (Vers. 1—5.) In these verses the 


OH, 11, 1—22.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 8 


apostle represents our souls as by nature dead like Christ’s body in the tomb. They 
are not sick through sin, but dead. And the death of the soul is manifested in the 
corruption of the nature, so that we live as the world lives, according to the devil’s 
desires, fulfilling the desires of the flesh and of the mind, and becoming most deservedly 
the “children of wrath” like others, All this corruption of the nature is the manifese 
tation of the death in sin. But the Spirit, who raised up Christ’s body from the tomb, 
comes to quicken our dead souls, We are quickened together with Christ. ‘The 
Father in his wondrous love works this miracle within us, so that we are raised out 
of death into a new life. Now, just as Jesus entered by resurrection into a new 
because immortal life, so we by resurrection enter into a new and immortal existence. 
We feel assured that we caunot die, since we have been raised into the new life with 
Christ. This idea of the death of the soul is found in the ancient and in the modern 
classics. In such authors as Plutarch, Cicero, Heraclitus, and Persius, as well as in 
such a modern as the poet Gautier, it may be found; but in them it is an utterance of 
despair. It is only Paul who can take it and show how the death can be terminated 
in the victory cf resurrection. 

11. ConstDER THE ASCENSION OF THE souL. (Ver.6.) Not only is the soul raised 
together with Christ, but it is “made to sit together in heavenly places in Christ 
Jesus.” In other words, we are made to have an ascension experience as well as a 
resurrection experience. Now, when Christ ascended far above all principality and 
power, he must have entered a joyful experience such as this world could never afford. 
He would never have enjoyed such a delizht had he lingered in a limited world like 
this. In the same way the risen soul is enabled to ascend into a seraphic experience, 
a joy in the Lord such as was never dreamed of. It is to be feared that many have 
experienced the spiritual resurrection who have not gone on to the experience of the 
ascension; in other words, they are living lives comparatively joyless. They do not 
live as if they were already within the golden gates and rejoicing always in the Lord. 
But the thing is not only possible, it is pre-eminently desirable. The world would be 
vastly the better of souls that had realized the ascension. 

IIL. Consiper THE BELIEVER’s CONSEQUENT REIGN. (Ver. 6.) For Jesus ascended 
that he might occupy a throne. And we ascend in spirit that we may be kings of 
men, 1ὑ is Christ’s purpose that we should be kings and priests unto God and his 
Father (Rev. i. 5, 6). Now, joyful Christians cannot but influence others for good. 
They come to their kingdom, and others are glad to submit to their sway. They hold 
men by the heart and assert a proper sovereignty over others. The reign of Christ is 
carried out in some measure when we have learned lovingly to reign. 

IV. THE PURPOSE OF SUCH SPIRITUAL GIFTS 18 THAT THE EXCEEDING RICHES OF Gop’s 
GRACE MIGHT BE REVEALED. (Ver. 7.) For if we had never died in sin, God’s mighty 
power in raising us would never have been appreciated. If the creatures had never 
fallen, who would have known the wealth of God’s love and power in lifting them up 
again? The physical universe can only illustrate a small part of the power and love 
of God. It requires the moral universe as a background to set off the brightness of his 
redeeming mercy. It is out of a sinful world the greatest examples of Divine power 
shall be forthcoming. God ἐδ rich in mercy; how rich only sinners can illustrate and 
with some fulness appreciate. Every risen, ascended, and reigning soul is intended 
to be a fresh example of the exceeding riches of God’s grace.—R. M. EB. 


Vers, 8—10.—Salvation, its root and its fruit. Paul now proceeds to put the gospel 
in a nutshell when he tells us that we are saved by grace, through faith, and unto good 
works. We have in these three terms the whole plan brought out. Let us look at 
them in their order. 

L Grace Is THE ROOT OR CAUSE OF SALVATION, (Ver. 8.) By “grace” is meant the 
free, undeserved: favour of God. It is etymologically the same as “gratis” and 
“gratuitous; it occurs in the business phrase, “three days of grace” given in 
connection with the payment of a bill; it signifies therefore a Divine manifestation 
to which man has no title. In other words, we do not deserve salvation. We can 
never deserve it. No works of ours could entitle us to it. Yet we are saved by grace, 
by the free and sovereign favour of the Lord. It is most important that we should 
have clear views of the cause of salvation. Its cause is the gracious love of God. Ita 


86 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, [ox m. 1—22, 


cause is outside of us, and we have no part or lot in causing salvation. It is entirely 
of grace. ἢ 

IJ. ΒΑΙΤΗ 18 THE HAND OF THE HEART WHICH RECEIVES SALVATION. (61. 8.) God 
might conceivably save men without asking us to trust him. But would it be worth 
our while to get emancipated from deserved punishment to live on in perpetual 
suspicion? The fact is that to have any comfort in our relations with God, we must 
trust him. But there is no merit in trusting him. If we refuse him our trust we do 
him grievous wrong. This shows that trusting God is only giving him his due. 
Besides, the more we know ourselves the more we realize that faith just as well aa 
salvation is his gift. Had not the Spirit come and transformed our suspicion into trust, 
we should not have ceased suspecting him. It isa blessed change, but the change is 
God’s gift through the Spirit. 

II]. Goop works ARE THE FOREORDAINED FRUITS OF SALVATION. (Ver. 10.) A free 
and gratuitous salvation is supposed by some to be a dangerous and immoral doctrine. 
But the consequences of salvation have been all provided for. God saves men that we 
may serve him. Good works constitute the outcome, the dividend, the fruit which 
God gets from the salvation. “We are his workmanship.” Just as a mechanic 
constructs a machine that he may get a certain amount and kind of work out of it, 
80 God saves us that he may get a certain amount and kind of work out of us. Nor 
has he left it to any hap-hazard, He has foreordained the good works in which we 
ought to walk. He has planned our lives as believers. Bushnell wrote a famous 
sermon in which he tried to show that “every man’s life is a plan of God.” We 
modify the thought and recognize in every believer's life a plan of God. Every good 
work is down in God’s design, it has its place, and it will exercise its influence. While, 
therefore, God will save no man for his good works, he saves every soul wnto good 
works, ‘They are the fruzt, though they cannot be the root of salvation, Foreordina- 
tion covers the effects of salvation as well as salvation itself. God’s plan embraces the 
whole problem, and it is thoughtless to rob him of a single eleinent in the glorious 
result—R M. EH, 


Vers. 11—22.—The spiritual temple. In the apostle’s prayer for the Ephesians the 
power of God to us-ward who believe was illustrated first in the experience of our risen 
and reigning Head, and secondly in the experience of us as risen and reigning members 
of his mystical bedy. The unity of the members, however, has not been as fully 
brought out in the preceding verses as Paul desired, and so we have in the section now 
before us the subject amplified and completed mainly round the figure of a “ spiritual 
temple.” It is this main figure which we shall now keep before us. And— 

1. CoNsIDER THE RAW MATERIAL OUT OF WHICH TH SPIRITUAL TEMPLE 18 TO BE 
But, (Vers. 11—17.) ‘his is Gentiles and Jews, the Uncircumcision and the Cir- 
cumcision, those far off from God and those that were nigh. The Gentiles were 
“ without God” (ἄθεοι ἐν τῷ κόσμῳ), by which we are not to understand “ atheists” in 
the sense of disbelicving the Divine existence, but simply “ without God in the world,” 
as men who cling to the world in its corporate capacity, wherein it ignores the Divine 
sovereignty and lives an alien citizenship. The Jews, on the other hand, were nominally 
citizens of the sacred commonwealth, and the covenants of promise were in their hands, 
and they had hope in consequence. Yet the raw material in both cases was rough. and 
unsightly until the Lord undertook its preparation for the temple wall. Both were 
under sin, both had to be redeemed from evil, taken out of the quarry of nature and 
fitted by Divine grace for their place in the building. 

Il. THe rounpaTion oF THE TEMPLE. (Ver. 20.) The spiritual temple is here 
said to be built on the “ foundation of the apostles and prophets.” This, of course, sig- 
nifies that it is upon the revelation God made through apostles and prophets that the 
edifice is erected, It is not upon speculations or dreams, but upon “ the sure Word of 
prophecy,” that the structure rests. Without the witnesses in the inspired Word, we 
should have no basis for spiritual unity and no foundation for edification. Hence our 
deep indebtedness to the sacred writers, We cannot do without “the Book ; ” we should 
only be building on the sand. 

III. Tne corner-stones. (Ver. 20.) The next consideration here is the corner- 
stones. Now, Christ is called here the “chief Corner-stone,” that without which the 


on, τι, 1—22.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 87 


two walls could not be bound into one. He lies at the foundation of the structure, the 
massive stone, so to speak, which unites the two great walls, Above him and upon 
him are laid other but minor corner-stones; for every Christian soul who longs to pro- 
mote unity among men is so far a corner-stone in the great building. Hence the minor 
honour of being elements of union is given unto Christ-like sculs. But Jesus is the 
indispensable Corner-stone. And the apostle shows how Jesus is the bond of union 
between Jew and Gentile. Both as under sin needed an atoning Saviour; but only one 
Saviour and one blood were provided. The Saviour of the Jews was the Saviour of 
the Gectiles also. Thus both Jews and Gentiles were brought of necessity to the one 
Saviour; the one sacrifice on Calvary atoned for both; the one blood blotted out the 
transgression of both; the one crucifixion reconciled both to God, and peace produced 
between both and God secured at the same time peace with each other. Jew and Gen- 
tile are united and brought nigh to God by the one blessed Saviour. 

IV. THE UNITY OF THE TeMPLE. (Vers. 18, 19.) The seemingly discordant elements 
are reduced to real harmony, and the unity of the whole is realized in the Spirit which 
pervades all hearts. For when the Gentiles and the Jews realize access unto the Father 
by one Spirit, then the alienation has passed away, and citizenship and the family 
feeling have supervened. It thus appears that “Christian prayer is a witness of Chris- 
tian citizenship.” We squabble about differences until we are united at the throne. 
It is the united prayer which really is felt to unite believers. Alienation cannot survive 
union at the throne of the heavenly grace. 

V. Tus august GuEST WHO INHABITS THE TEMPLE. (Vers. 21, 22.) Every temple 
is erected for some god as guest. It may only enshrine a phantom or an idol, which is 
nothing in the world, and yet the idea in temple-building always is the enshrining 
of a god. Now, this temple, whose stones are the souls of religious men, and whose 
unity is realized in religious exercises, is meant to be the dwelling-place of the 
Holy Ghost. He does not dwell in temples made with hands, but he dwells in those 
temples which are made without hands. ‘The personalities of saintly men become his 
glorious home, and he condescends to dwell within us richly and to fill us with his 
fulness. It is the unifying power of his presence that moulds all into one. The temple 
grows from within, like every growth in nature. The guest determines the character 
of the temple. The Holy Ghost secures a holy temple. To this unity Paul desires the 
Ephesians to come.—R. M. BE, 


Vers. 1—10.—Association with Christ. The concluding thought of the first 
chapter was the resurrection and exaltation of Christ. In order now to bring out how 
they were benefited thereby, he calls up to them their original condition. He shows 
them the pit out of which they have been dug, the rock out of which they have been 
hewn. In the first and second verses he has special reference to Gentile Christians, in 
the third verse he includes Jewish Christians in his description. 

1. Genrite Curistians. 1. They were dead. “And you did he quicken, when ye were 
dead.” It is a comprehensive word for the evil of their condition. There is a natural 
condition for plants, which they lose in their decay. There is a natural condition for 
animals, which they lose in their death. So there isa natural condition for rational 
beings, which they lose in what we call spiritual death. And,as there is nothing 
higher in kind than spiritual life, so there is nothing more dreadful than spiritual death. 
It is not extinction, but it is a condition against nature, un the ground of an immortal 
existence. It is not loving God with our whole soul and strength and mind, but 
living at enmity with him; and how wearing out to contend with our Maker! It is 
not loving our neighbour as ourselves, but seeking our own selfish ends; and how nar- 
rowing is this to our souls! 2, Their deadness was caused by themselves. “ Through 
your trespasses and sins.” If there is any difference between these two words, it is that 
the former refers more to overt transgressions, while the latter is inclusive of evil 
thoughts that have only been entertained in the heart. When Adam and Eve overtly 
transgressed in eating of the fruit, death at once passed upon them in the loss of confi- 
dence in God, of unconsciousness, of ingenuousness, of devotedness to each other, And 
the act was not long in bearing bitter fruit in the hate which led Cain to take a 
brother’s life. Overt transgression makes matters worse, in the evil that is wrought op 
ethers, in the entanglements to which it leads, At the same time, it is true that evil 


88 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, fon. τι, 1—22. 


imaginations that never find expression in words or acts have a deadening effect on the 
soul. They may indicate daring rebellion against God; and, even though they are 
only vain th-ughts that lodze in the mind, they are not there without the spreading 
of a baneful influence over the life, 8, They were only causes of deadness. ‘“ Wherein 
aforetime ye walked.” In trespasses and sins they walked. Their life was one continual 
trespassing and sinning, Their fountain was constantly sending forth bitter water. 
Their tree only brought forth evil fruit. And how could it be oth-rwise, seeing that 
they were corrupted at the very centre of their being? There were some of their acts 
that were better than others, but none that were thoroughly right in principle or motive. 
All their acts had a fatal defect, and many of them, as the first of Romans shows, had 
a positive vileness. 4. They stood related to this world. ‘ According to the course of 
this world.” This world is opposed to the world as it should be, or the kingdom 
of Godamong men. It is the world content with itself, and seeking to be independent of 
God. And as the kingdom of God has an age or ages for its holy development, so this 
world, it is implied here, has an age for its unholy development. For the word trans- 
lated “ course” is properly “age.” In the mysterious providence of God evil has scope 
for its development. “'lhe mystery of iniquity doth work.” And when it is said. 
here that they once walked according to the course of this world, the meaning is that 
their characters had not the normal form of the kingdom, but had one or other of those 
abnormal forms which belong to the world. 5. They stood related to the head of evil. 

“ According to the prince of the power of the air, of the spirit that now worketh in the 
sons of disobedience.” He is here called the prince of the power of the air, Heisa 
prince with other evil spirits under him. vil is divisive; his then must be a mighty, 
prince-like influence that he keeps them united under him for evil ends. He is depen- 

dent on God, a mere instrument in his hand, at. his absolute disposal, as it is with every 

creature ; but he is’ allowed, through his emissaries, to have great power upon earth. 

The singular epithet is applied to him hero in allusion to his surrounding us with 

temptation as the atmosphere surrounds the earth. As the air borders on the earth, 

ΒΟ there is a sphere bordering on our spirits, subtile, invisible like air, through which evil 

suggestions can readily be conveyed tous. Or it may be that the evil spirits have an 

affinity to air which they do not have to grosser matter, so that it is their haunt within 

this region. There is here what we cannot understand; but we can understand this 

—temptation being skilfully presented to our minds, against which we must invuke the 

skill of another, else we are taken in the tempter’s meshes, He is further called the 

prince of the spirit that now worketh in the sons of disobedience. It is not usual to 

connect a spirit, or principle, with its prince. But he is undoubtedly the principal 

representative of the spirit of disobedience. In him disobedience takes its most viru- 

lent form. The object on which he is bent is to spite God, to thwart his holy ends. 

This is the spirit which he as its original source breathes into his subordinates, and 

which they in turn under his direction seek to breathe into men. And those in whom 

it finds a sphere of operation are called the children of disobedience. ‘They stand related 

to the evil principle as its unclean progeny. It was from heathendom that the descrip- 

tion here was taken. It was very much man left to himself. It was the truest 

representation of what “this world” is, It was Satan having his own way. It was 

rampant disobedience. For though the heathen world was under the Divine provi- 

dence, yet it was without special Aclps, without special checks. Depraved human 

nature was allowed to bring out its own ignorance of God, its own profanity, its own 
licentiousness. It was from that heathen world that these Gentile Christians had been 

taken. ‘There they could see what they once had been. But, lest’ the Jewish Christians 
might think that it had been better with them, he proceeds to bring them under the 
same description in respect of their original condition. 

II. Jewish Caristians aso. (Ver. 3.) “ Among whom we also all once lived in 
the lusts of our flesh, doing the desires of the flesh and of the mind, and were by nature 
children of wrath, even as the rest.” _Kspeciaily are they classed with Gentile Christians, 
as having originally been children of disobedience. Among whom we also all once lived, 
Their disobedicnce appeared in their living in the lusts of the flesh. hose lusts that 
had their root in the flesh, or unrenewed nature, they ought to have brought into sub- 
jection to reason or the will of God; but, instead of that, they lived in them. This 
is further described as “doing the desires of the flesh and of the mind.” Evil wishes 


ou, τι. 1—22.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 89 


spring from the flesh; but in order to be gratified they require the consent of the mind, 
and so they become desires, not only of the flesh, butof the mind. And were by nature 
the children of wrath, even as the rest, “ΒΥ nature” is a qualifying clause. ‘I'he Jews 
could not be spoken of in the same terms as the Gentiles without qualification, For 
they were different in having a covenant position, in having Divine helps vouchsafed to 
them, in being placed under special training. And though they did testify to depravity 
in their frequent rebellions, yet was there alongside a work of grace, which showed 
itself conspicuously in some. It could only be said, then, that by nature, that is, apart 
from covenant grace, they were the children of wrath, even as the rest. What a testi- 
mony is there here to universal depravity}! All have the Divine displeasure imprinted 
on their nature. In the condemning voice of conscience there is an echo, often very 
faint, of the condemnation of God. Our evil tendencies, which we so soon exhibit, 
are tokens that God is angry with us. His righteous sentence has gone forth upon us, 
even in our present condition. This is unpalatable truth, but it agrees with the facts, 
It is well that we should keep it in mind, in order that we may be humbled by it, and 
in order that we may realize the forces against which we have to struggle, 

III. Our satvation. 1. Its explanation. “But God, being rich in mercy, for his 
great love wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead through our trespasses,” 
The mercy is mentioned first, as standing in closest connection with the miserable 
state which has been described, Andas their former state was described in strong terms, 
80 now is there set over against it the superlative quality of the mercy. He is not 
content with the expression, “God in his mercy.” That language is too bare in view of 
what they once were. So he applies his common epithet, “rich.” “ God, being rich in 
mercy.” The mercy is a particular outgoing of the Divine love, viz. toward sinners, 
So he traces it up to the more general feeling, which leads him to seek the good, and 
nothing but the good, of all his creatures whatsoever. And to this in turn he applies 
another common epithet, “ great.” “ ‘Ihe great love wherewith helovedus.” And the 
greatness of the Divine love is here presented under a special aspect. In the fifth of 
Romans it is said, ‘God commendeth his love towards us, in that, while we were yet 
sinners, Christ died for us.” The thought is very similar here. “ Even when we were 
dead through our trespasses he quickened us.” Stress is laid upon the moment of the 
Divine movement. When we were dead and could do nothing for ourselves, that was 
the time for the going forth of the great love of God in rich mercy toward us. And it 
is in this connection that we are to bring in the words within brackets, “ By grace have 
ye been saved.” For, though he has it in his mind to magnify the Divine grace further 
on, yet now, having the opportunity to make a point, he cannot let it pass. And the 
incidental way in which he brings it in shows the great importance which he attached 
to that doctrine. 2. Jts nature. “ Quickened us together, with Christ (by grace have 
ye been saved), and raised us up with him, and made us tosit with him in the heavenly 
places, in Christ Jesus.” It is set forth in relation to our previous deadness. And it 
will be observed that the description here is connected with a certain historical point. 
The idea is that we were dead up to the time when Christ was quickened. We were 
dead, even as Christ was dead in the tomb. Nay, more, weiwere dead with Ohrist in 
the tomb. For it was as our Representative that he was lying there. And when he 
was quickened, it was as our Representative too. He was quickened, not for himself, 
but for us whom herepresented. And therefore it can be said that, when the life-giving 
power went forth upon him in tle grave, we were quickened with him. And it did 
not stop there; but when he was raised up we were raised up with him, in the whole 
breadth that language can bear. And not only so, but the consummation applies to 
us too. It is not indeed said that we were made to sit at the right hand of God, as is 
said of Christ in the first chapter and twentieth verse. But it is said that we were 
made to sit with Christ in the heavenly places, Even here on earth we are sitting 
with Christ in the heavenly places. We are sitting there in him as our Head. That 
is no fancy, but the actual language which is applied to us by an inspired apostle. Oh, 
what a glorious privilege is conferred on us! How does it become us to be thankful, 
and to be humbled! Let us, in our life, rise to the height of our position. Let us not 
be as creeping on the earth, but as sitters with Christ in the heavenly places. 3. 4 
purpose served by our salvation, “That in the ages to come he might show the exceeding 
riches of his grace in kindness toward us in Christ Jesus,” The language is applicable 


90 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, (on. Π. 1—22, 


to after ages on earth, There is encouragement to us, even now, in the fact that such 
kindness was shown to Ephesians who had been dead through trespasses and sins. But 
the language is also applicable to the zons of which the Scripture speaks beyond this 
life. For if there is not room there for sinners being encouraged, there certainly is 
room for the demonstration, the more complete realization, of the Divine grace. It will 
be one of the lessons of those ages to learn how much in our history on earth we wero 
individually indebted to grace. Here again, in the fulness of emotion, he gives an 
ample characterization of the grace, the exceeding riches of his grace, in kindness 
toward us in Christ Jesus. The latter expression has reference to benefits conferred, 
viz. our quickening. (1) The exceeding riches of his grace appears in the complete 
exclusion of human merit. ‘ For by grace have ye been saved through faith; and that 
not of yourselves: it is the gift of God: not of works, that no man should glory.” Our 
salvation is given to the subjective disposition of faith. 10 is when we believe, that the 
union between our souls and Christ takes place, and the first, not the completed, 
quickening goes forth upon us. But this believing does not make us the authors, or 
give us the merit, of our salvation, It, that is to say, our salvation, is the gift of God. 
And believing is just taking it asa Divine gift, taking it as that fcr which we have 
given nothing. Christ has paid the full price for it; he has paid the uttermost farthing, 
and so we can receive it as a free gift. But works are out of the question ; for it is just 
as impossible for a dead man to rise and do the works which he was wont to do, as it is 
for the dead through trespasses and sins to work out their salvation. Divine help is 
the plainest necessity, and to such an extent that there is no room for boasting, (2) 
The exceeding riches of his grace appears in good works following on the Divine work- 
manship, “ For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus fer good works, which 
God afore prepared that we should walk in them,” ‘ An honest man’s the noblest work 
of God.” A Christian is certainly the noblest work of God. “ For we are his work- 
manship, created in Christ Jesus.” We are the result of all the means that God has 
used. It may be seen in us, as saved persons, what Christ has done by his blood. And 
we are not his workmanship because of works which we were alterwards to do; but we 
were created “ for good works, which God afore prepared that we should walk in them.” 
It may be said of a tree that it is afore prepared for the fruit which it is to bear. It 
may be said of a vessel that it is afore prepared for the uses which it is to serve. But 
as the fruit is not the cause of the tree, nor the uses served by a vessel the cause of 
the vessel, so neither can it be said that the works we perform are the cause of the 
Divine workmanship that has gone before. Our salvation, then, is wholly of grace. 


Vers. 11—22.—Union of Jews and Gentiles in the Christian Church. ‘ Wherefore 
remember, that aforetime.” The Ephesian Christians are reminded of what they were 
“aforetime,” that is, before they received the gospel. It is a good exercise of memory for 
us all to go back on what we once were. For we did not all receive the gospel when it 
was first presented to us. Many of us who now believe were for years in a state of 
indifference. How well, then, does it become us to “ remember” our former unconverted 
condition! The memory of what we were aforetime should make us humble and 
thoughtful, and quicken us in present duty. 

I, ‘Hose THAT WERE GENTILES BY NAME. “‘ Ye, the Gentiles in the flesh.” The name 
“ Gentiles,” both in the Hebrew and in the Greek, is “nations.” It was applied by the 
Jews toall nations except their own, just as we distinguish Christians and heathen. 
The Jews were one nation over against many; and though Christians are relatively 
more numerous than were the Jews, still they are the few and the heathen the 
multitudinous. But the apostle has reference to what the Gentiles were “in the flesh,” 
and so he applies a second name to them. 

11. Tuosz ΤΗΑῚ were tue Uncircumotsion. “ Who are called Uncircumcision by 
that which is called Circumcision, in the flesh, made by hands.’ ‘The Jews were 
distinguished by a bodily mark. Itis referred to in the language “in the flesh, made 
by hands.” By this surgical mark on them, they were known as God’s, They were 
therefore properly called “ the Circumcision,” as all others who had not the mark were 
properly called “ the Uncircumcision.” And when the apostle uses the noticeable 
language here, “ Who are called Uncircumcision by that which is called Circumcision” 


eH, 11. 1—22.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 91 


he is not to be regarded as reflecting on the distinction, or on the names founded on it. 
He is'simply exercising a little caution. Those who called themselves Circumcision, as 
suparior to those whom they called Uncircumcision, should have answered to the 
nane. But he will not say that circumcision in the flesh was also circumcision in the 
spirit, There is often this distinction to be drawn between what we are called and 
what we are. Weare Christians in name; but are we also Christians in truth? We 
have many honourable names applied to us as Christians ; but do we answer to them? 
Is there a broad line of distinction between us and men of the world in our characters ? 

III. THEIR BEARING THE NAME OF THE UNCIRCUMOISION IMPLIED Muou. 1. Separate 
from Christ. “That ye were at that time separate from Christ.” They were not, 
indeed, without some connection with Christ. For it is only on the ground of his 
suretyship and work that men have a lifetime on earth, brief at it is. There was, there- 
fore, indebtedness to Christ, even on the part of the uncircumcised; but they were 
separate from him in that they did not have bim as their Messiah. There were Greeks 
and Romans that had more culture than Jews; where they came behind was in their 
having no Messianic privilege. There was no intimation to them of a Saviour who was 
to come into the world. There was no presentation in type to them of the atonement 
that was to be made for sin, They were, therefore, excluded from such saving relation 
to Christ as was open to the Jews. The want of Christ is still the greatest want of the 
heathen world. He is not made known to them for their salvation. The radical defect 
in an unconverted man’s position is that he is out of Christ, and so has none to give him 
shelter and help, 2. Separatefrom the Church, “ Alienated from the commonwealth of 
Israel.” Israel was a commonwealth, as constituted, not for the good of a section, but for 
the good of all alike. It was constituted, not for mere political purposes, but for religious 
purposes principally. It was the Church more than thestate. And the great privilege 
which every member of the commonwealth enjoyed was nearness to God. He was allowed 
to draw near to him and worship him in his temple. Now, when the Jews were thus 
constituted into a Divine commonwealth, the Gentiles were kept at an outside. The 
arrangement we know was for the ultimate benefit of the whole race; but none the less 
deplorable was their condition as aliens, or persons out of privilege. There is no 
arrangement now by which any are excluded from the Church of God, and yet it is with 
many as though such an arrangement existed. There are some, in Christian lands, who 
are alienated from the Christian Church, it may be, to a certain extent owing to the 
faults of its members; but can it be wholly put down to that, when there is in the gospel 
such a representation of goodness as ought to attract all who are not prejudiced against 
goodness ὃ “ Strangers from the covenants of the promise.” There were promises to the 
Gentiles, but they did not pertain to them who lived before the coming of the Messiah. 
The Jews had the covenantsof promise, viz. the covenants made to the patriarchs, founded, 
not on what had been effected for them, but on what was to be effected for them in the 
future, and which was promised. These covenants were their charter as a Church, what 
they could fall back upon as the reason for their existence. ‘lo these covenants the 
Gentiles were strangers ; they had no share in them; theirs was an uncovenanted position. 
The covenant is not founded now on promise; it is founded on accomplished fact, it has 
been sealed with Christ’s blood. None now occupy an uncovenanted position, such as the 
old heathen world did; and yet it is with many as though no change had taken place. 
8. Miserable condition in the world. “ Having no hope.” Not having the “covenants” 
to go upon, they had no hope atall. Reason did not suffice to give them a hops 
beyond the grave. The hereafter was not a certainty, but only a vague conjecture. It 
was not lightened up as it was to Old ‘Testament saints, We Christians have a rich 
hope. It is the hope of a glorious resurrection, and of a perfected and endless life with 
Christ as our risen Saviour. When such a hope has been brought to the world, how 
sad that there are so many in heathen lands who are looking forward into a dark and 
cheerless future! And sadder far it is that there are those in Christian lands who place 
no value on the life and immortality that have been brought to light by the gospel. 
“ Without God in the world.” Out of the Church, they were in the world. And the 
great evil of their being in the self-seeking, God-forgetting world was that there they 
were unbefriended by God. They could not live in the sunshine of his love, for they 
did not know him to be the God of love. It was a loss for which nothing could com- 
peusate, What a gain would it be to the heathen of our day to conceive of God ag 


92 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. (ow, τι. 1—22, 


having given his Son for them! And yet, of those who have the opportunity, how few 
enter into the felicity of the enjoyment of God’s love! 

IV. THEIR ALTERED Position. “ But now in Christ Jesus ye that once were far off 
are made nigh in the blood of Christ.” God had his earthly dwelling-place in the 
temple at Jerusalem. The Gentiles were literally far off from this centre, compared 
with the Jews, But the distance in space was only emblematic of the moral distance 
at which they stood from God. They were at a distance, in their being out of harmony 
with his character. They were at a distance, in the displeasure with which he regarded 
their actions. But in Christ, in his becoming the personal historical Jesus, all this was 
altered. They were brought into a position of nearness to God. Christ effected this by 
his blood. ‘The blood which was shed on Jewish altars was only for Jews, The Jewish 
high priest represented the twelve tribes, but no more. The blood of Christ had a wider 
teference. It was for Gentiles as well as for Jews. And that being the case, Gentiles 
were kept no longer at a distance. 

V. JEws AND GENTILES BROUGHT INTO AMICABLE RELATIONS. “ For he is our Peace, 
who made both one, and brake down the middle wall of partition, having abolished in 
his flesh the enmity, even the law of commandments contained in ordinances; that he 
might create in himself of the twain one new man, so making peace.” ‘Chere is a change 
from “ ye” to“ our.” There is a difference of opinion as to the extent of meaning belong- 
ing to the words, “ he is ofir Peace.” It is admitted that, in the two verses here, the idea 
of peace between both receives decided expression. But some think that there is also to 
be brought in, though subordinately, the idea of the peace of both toward God, The 
objection to that is, that it is superfluous. For already it has been said of the Gentiles 
that obstacles have been removed out of their way, and afterward there is the thought 
of both being reconciled to God, and also of peace, t.e. reconcilation to God, being 
preached to both. It seems much simpler, then, here to confine the thought to peace 
between both. Christ is this Peace in his own person. In him there is neither Jew nor 
Gentile. His work is described as making both (parts) one; and the manner of his 
doing it as breaking down the middle wall of partition. It seems warrantable to explain 
this by an intended reference to the arrangement in the temple. There was there a 
separating of Jews from Gentiles. ‘here was a wall or boundary beyond which 
Gentiles were forbidden to advance, As by the rending of the veil was signified the 
opening of the way into the holiest of all, so by what is described as the breaking down 
of the middle wall of partition we are to understand that Jews and Gentiles are broucht 
into the same nearness to God. The middle wall of partition is explained to be the law 
of dments contained tn ordinances. The Mosaic Law was, on one side, a system 
of separation. It was like a wall enclosing the Jews and shutting off the Gentiles. It 
forbade all familiar intercourse with the Gentiles, As Christ was called Peace, so the 
Mosaic system is here made synonymous with enmity or estrangement. ‘The Jews were 
not to hate other nations (for Jehovah was the God of all the earth, and they were told 
of a time when all nations were to be blessed); but, as things were, they were 
necessarily separated in feeling from them. And the Gentiles, on their side, were not 
slow to hate the Jews for their exclusiveness, ‘I'he Mosaic system, then, in its incidence 
especially on the Gertiles, was enmity. And this enmity, we are told here, Christ 
abolished in his flesh. The Jewish Law he fulfilled, and, by fulfilling, abolished, so that 
it was no more a separation, or cause of estrangement. The rending of the veil pointed 
to a rending of his Hesh. 800 the breaking down of the wall suggests a breaking in his 
flesh, It was a breaking, it is further suggested, that, Jew and Gentile perishing, there 
might rise out of both a new creation, viz. Christian. ‘That he might create in himself 
of the twain one new man.” The breaking thus resulted in a peacemaking: “So 
making peace.” 

VI. How THis was sHown. 1. In their being placed in one Church as reconciled to 
God by the same means. “ And might reconcile them both in one body unto God 
through the cross, having slain the enmity thereby.” There is an advance from “ one 
new man” to “one body.” “ Christian ” was created ; but it was in order that a body 
of Christians might be formed. In this body Jews and Gentiles might very well te 
together; for. they had the deepest ground of union in their both being reconciled to 
God, This equality extended even to the instrument of reconcilation, viz. the Cross. 
When they were thus reconciled to God by the same means, “the enmity was slain; ἢ 


oH. mm. 1—22.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 93 


and there was no need for two Churches—the Jewish Church continuing, and a Gentile 
Church forming a separate community. But there was the clearest case for one Church, 
viz. the Christian Church, containing both, 2. Jn their having the same gosnel of peace 
preached to them. “ And he came ani preached peace to you that were far off, and peace 
to them that were nigh.” When it is said that Christ came and preached peace, we are 
to understand that it was under his authority and through his instruments. In com- 
parison with what he himself had to do with it, others might very well be left out of 
account, There were obvious reasons for the clause in the parting command, “ begin- 
ning from Jerusalem.” But that only, as is implied, indicated the point of departure. 
And it was the same gospel that was to be proclaimed to all alike: ‘“ And that repentance 
and remission of sins should be preached in his Name unto all the nations, beginning from 
Jerusalem.” So here, with a certain emphasis in the repetition of the word “peace,” as the 
purport of the message (to be understood in its God-ward sense}—“ peace to you that 
were far off, and peace to them that were nizh.” If, then, the gospel was preached to 
them in the same Name and in the same terms, they might well be “one body.” 8. In 
their having, as reconciled, the same spiritual privileges. (Ver. 18.) (1) Access unto the 
Father. ‘For through him we both have our access in one Spirit unto the Father.” To 
Old Testament saints God was not unknown as Father. “I said, Thou shalt call me, 
My Father.” But it is true that this is the distinction aud favourite designation of God 
in the New Testament. And the Messiah is correspondingly the Son of God. ‘I'he rela- 
tionship stands out as it did not do before, and gives peculiar pathos to the whole story of 
redemption. Sonship too becomes a more blessed reality, as it was a new-gained right. 
The idea here is that both could exercise the right of sonship in going to the Father 
and asking his blessing. Why, then, should they beapart? (2) Same Introducer. In 
Eastern courts there was one who acted the part of introducer into the presence of royalty. 
This part Christ performs for us, He not only acted for us on the cross, but, on the 
ground of his sacrifice, he still intercedes forus. - And every time we go into the presence 
of God we need his services, if we are to be acceptable. his part Christ performed for 
both alike. (3) Assistance of the same Spirit. There is not one Spirit with Jewish 
yroclivities, and another Spirit with Gentile proclivities. But there is the one Spirit, 
making their interests one, and putting common desires into their hearts when 
approaching God. The equality thus extends along the whole line. 

VII, PRacTICAL CONOLUSION, IN WHICH THE EPHESIAN CHRISTIANS ARE ADDRESSED 
IN A THREEFOLD CHARACTER. 1. They are members of the spiritual commonwealth. 
“So then ye are no more strangers and sojourners, but ye are fellow-citizens with the 
saints.” “ Fellow-citizens with the saints.” They are citizens in relation to God as 
Head of the commonwealth. “They are no more strangers and sojourners,” There 
were those who stood in this relation to the Grecian states. They did not live on 
Grecian soil, or they lived on it without possessing the rights of “citizens.” Such 
had been the relation of the Ephesians to the Jewish commonwealth. But now they 
were fully enrolled and recognized as citizens in that commonwealth in which were 
incorporated both Jews and Gentiles. The members of this commonwealth are desiv- 
nated “saints,” as were the Ephesians in the opening of the Epistle. It points to 
their bearing a certain character, and having certain duties to perform. But the lead- 
ing idea is the privileges of citizens. And these may be particularized. (1) There is 
the privilege of good laws. In a civil community, laws are good where as much 
liberty of the subject is secured as is consistent with the public good, and where the 
inserests of all classes are equally regarded. In this land we have been blessed in 
large measure with good laws. And our legislators are always trying to work out 
more perfectly the idea of justice. In the spiritual community, we do not need to 
concern ourselves about the improvement of the laws. They have had the character 
of finality from the beginning. We never need to distinguish here between law and 
equity. We can feel that the whole Divine dealing is characterized by the utmost 
fairness, reasonableness. “I know the thoughts which I think concerning you.” 
(2) There ts the privilege of protection. A British subject, so long as he keeps within 
the laws, has really the whole British power at his back. If a foreign state allows 
him to be trampled upon, he can claim protection from home. Such cases not unfre- 
quently have arisen, and, where redress has not been given, there has been resort 
to punishment. A member of the Divine commonwealth who is possessed with its 


94 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. (cw. π. 122, 


spirit has the theocratic power at his back—has, it may be sald, ten legions of angels at 
his command, as the Master had. ‘“ Whoso toucheth you toucheth the apple of mine 
eye.” There was this protection enjoyed by the Israelites very remarkably in connec- 
tion with their going up to their feasts. And, in the Christian commonwealth, we 
can feel there is a wall of protection round about us, We can boldly say, “If the 
Lord is on our side, who are all they that can be against us?” (3) There ts the privilege 
of petitioning. It is a fundamental principle of the British constitution that every 
british subject has the right of petitioning the sovereign or Houses of Parliamant. 
There is the same right vested in those who belong to the commonwealth of God. 
This right Daniel exercised when he made his petition three timesa day. 2. They 
are members of the household of God. “ And of the household of God.” The relation 
in the family is closer than in the state. ‘I'he theocracy was as a honse in relation to 
which they had been strangers or sojourners; but now they had the full rights of 
members of the family. (1) There is the right of a place in the household. “The 
servant abideth not in the house for ever; but the son abideth ever.” There is no 
breaking up of the household of God, such as is witnessed in earthly families. There 
is no banishment, such as there was from the household of David. (2) There is the 
right of intercourse. Not the right of interview, let it be noticed, but the right of 
living in the Father’s presence, and, in communion with him, entering into his thoughts 
and plans. “The servant” knoweth not what his master doeth. But of this inter- 
course we have not yet the full manifestation. (3) There is the right of being provided 
for, “lf any provide not for his own, and specially for those of his own house, he hath 
denied the faith, and is worse than an infidel.” God holds himself bound by covenant 
to make all suitable provision for us, here and hereafter. And in our Father’s house 
there is enough and to spare. 3. They are part of the temple of God. We are really 
subjects and really sons, but we are only compared to stones. It is a comparison by 
which are brought out some important truths. (1) Apostles and prophets are founda~ 
tion-stones. “ Being built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets,” The 
latter, in accordance with ch. iii. 5 and ch. iv. 11, are regarded as New Testament 
prophets. It is supposed that the meaning of the language, “the foundation of the 
apostles and prophets,” must be ruled by 1 Cor. iii. 10, where Christ is called the only 
Foundation. But, apart from the consideration that a figure does not always need to 
be used in the same way, the sense in which the apostles and prophets are the founda- 
tion is supported by Peter being called the Rock, and also by the twelve foundations 
being identified with the twelve apostles. There is nothing derogatory in such an 
interpretation to Christ, to whom in the connected clause is given the place of pre- 
eminence in the foundation. All that we are to understand is that, in what they had 
of Christ in their life and teaching, they were stones on which others were laid, and 
they were not stones far up in the building, but were at the very foundation of the 
Ephesian Church. Nay, they were foundation-men for the Christian Church as a 
whole, and it can be said that we are builded on them. And they were men that sub- 
served the Divine purpose well. (2) Christ Jesus himself is the chief Corner-stone. 
“Christ Jesus himself being the chief Corner-stone.” Having said so much of the 
subordinates, he could not omit saying this of the Master. They were only ordinary 
stones of the foundation ; but Christ was the chief Stone of the corner, not only sup- 
porting, but combining. He was a Stone disallowed by the Jewish builders. He was 
to be of no use in the Church or theocracy with which they had todo. And yet it 
was, in the wonderful working of God, in the very disallowing of him by these builders 
that he became the chief Stone of the corner. It is entirely owing to him as cause 
that a temple of God is being erected, each stone a saved soul. (3) There are many 
buildings, but only one temple. “In whom each several building, fitly framed together, 
groweth into a holy temple in the Lord.” It will be seen that, in the Revised trans- 
lation, there is a change from “all the building” to “each several building.” It is 
admitted that for the latter there is a necessity of scholarship; but for the formet 
there is supposed to be a necessity of thought. 1t does not appear, however, that the 
naturalness and beauty of thought suffer by the translation which the Revisers have 
adopted. The key to the understanding of it seems to be Matt. xxiv. 1. His disciples 
came to him to show him the build“~gs of the temple. Here the very word is used in - 
the plural, There were parts that might have formed buildings by themselves, And 


on. τι, 1—22.] “THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 06 


if we think of the time when these buildings were going up together, extending in all 
directions, different sets of builders being employed at different points, would there not 
have been appropriateness in saying that the buildings were growing into, or toward, a 
holy temple? These Ephesians knew what a massive imposing structure was, in their 
temple which covered an immense area, And such is the Church of God, as it is now 
going forward in the world. Buildings, each with its set of builders, and they are 
growing, not into separate temples, but into one holy temple. Let us go out with the 
Master and view them, and form some idea of the imposing structure it is to be. 
(4) The temple takes its whole conformation from Christ. “In whom ye also are 
builded together.” (a) Hach severul building in its parts. The idea of regulation is 
brought out in the word which is translated “ fitly framed together.” “Joint” and 
“reason” both go into the word. There is not a mere putting of parts together, but 
there is a jointing as in the human body, and a jointing moreover that displays reason. 
{t is in Christ as Corner-stone that this is done. He, then, is the reason or thought of 
God (Logos he is called), according to which the various parts of the building are put 
together. It is on this thoughtful connecting of the parts that the stability of a build- 
ing, which is a main excellence, depends. “A noble craft is that of mason: a good 
building will last longer than most books, than one book out of a million” (Carlyle). 
(lv) The several buildings as a whole. Regulation here also is pointed to in the word 
“grows.” For there is a type according to which every living thing grows (which is 
from the Logos, by whom all things are made). So also is there a plan or distinct 
thought (in the mind of the Architect) according to which the buildings, separately 
proceeding, are made to “ grow” into a holy temple. This also is im the Lord. The 
whole connecting of the spiritual structure belongs to him, and is shadowed forth by 
his being Corner-stone. (5) The temple is for the habitation of God. “ For a habita- 
tion of God in the Spirit.” In the Revised translation there is an easy transition from 
the twenty-first verse to the twenty-second verse, from “each several building” to the 
Ephesian Church. That Church was one of the buildings. It was desiened with a 
view to a habitation of God. But any one Church is too narrow for the dwelling-place 
of God. And so the Ephesians are reminded in the word which is employed that they 
were only a building along with other buildings—all of which are needed to make up 
the habitation of God. How intimate the union between God and his people that they 
are as a house in which he dwells! We are the habitation of God in the Spirit who 
puts all holy thouzhts within us. “ Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and 
that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you? ”—R. F. 


Vers. 1—10.—Gospel reformation great and gracious. ‘And you hath he 
quickened,” etc. This passage, though its language is somewhat obscure, sets forth most 
manifestly the greatness and graciousness of gospel reformation. ‘lhe gospel is a refor- 
mative system; it is revolutionary in its spirit and its aim. It uproots the noxious in 
life, and plants the wholesome. It pulls down the corrupt and builds up the holy. It 
burns up man’s old morai heavens and creates new ones, “wherein dwelleth righteous- 
ness.” It reforms society by reforming the individual man ; it reforms the individual by 
regenerating his spirit, and making him a new creature in Christ Jesus. It works from 
the centre to the circumference. Observe— 

1. THE GREATNESS OF GOSPEL REFORMATION. The greatness of the change it effects 
in mankind will be seen if we consider two things which are so prominently set forth 
in this passage. 1. The state of man preceding its work, ‘There are several striking 
expressions in this passage indicating the original depraved condition of sinners, their 
condition before the gospel touches them. (1) They are morally dead. “Dead in 
[through] trespasses and sins.” What is moral death ? Not insensibility, for sinners 
feel; not inactivity, for sinners act. What,then? Destitution of the true principle of 
moral life. “What is that? Supreme love to God. He is the true Life of the βου]. 
Humanity has lost it, and it is dead. Corporeal death is a separation of the scul from 
the body, moral death is the separation of the soul from godly love. (2) They are 
practically worldly. “They walked according to the course of this world.” What is 
the “couise of this world”? Carnal, selfish, devilish. ‘Ihe spirit of the world is their 
inspiration, the maxims of the world their law. (3) They are Satunically ruled, 
“he prince of the power of the air” works in them, He rules and fashions them te 


66 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. (cx τι, 1—22, 


his purpose, (4) They are wickedly associated. “Among whom also we all had our 
conversation in times past.” Their social natures are so perverted that they are linked 
with the corrupt; all their social alliances are false and impure. (5) They are carnally 
debased. ‘In tho lusts of the flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh.” The body with 
its gross impulses dominates over the soul; they are “carnally sold under sin.” Their 
souls are animalized. (6) ‘They are perilously situated. “Children of wrath.” Where 
is the wrath? It is of their own creation, “They treasure up wrath.” From the 
eternal law of retribution their sins must bring on their ruin. 2. The state of man 
succeeding its work, The passage teaches that they are brought by the gospel intc 
the most vital connection with him who is the embodiment, the standard, and the 
medium of all human excellence, “the Lord Jesus Christ.” (1) His life is theirs. 
“ Quickened us together with Christ.” That love which is the life of the soul has been 
imparted. This life is his life, “Together with him.” ‘hey are quickened by his 
ideas, with his Spirit, with his aim. (2) His resurrection is theirs. They are “raised "— 
raised from the grave of carnality, worldliness, and moral corruption, and their resurrec- 
tion is with him. “ Raised us up together.” Christ’s resurrection is not merely the 
instrumental cause of their spiritual resurrection, but its inspiration and its type. (3) 
His exaliation is theirs. They are made to “ sit together in heavenly places in Christ 
Jesus.” They are morally exalted—exalted in their power over themselves and over 
circumstances ; exalted in their sympathies, ideas, and aims; exalted in their fellowship. 
They are in “heavenly places” now, their “ citizenship is in heaven.” ΑἹ] this exalta- 
tion is enjoyed together with Christ. (4) His character ἐᾷ theirs. “ They are created 
in Christ Jesus unto good works.” God has recast their character; he has moulded it 
after the ideal embodied in Jesus Christ. The general meaning of all these expressions 
is thorongh Christianization. Man, after the gospel reformation has been effected, is 
like Christ in spirit and character. ‘He is conformed to the image of Christ.” How 
great the change! how thorough! how sublime! How infinitely transcending all the 
reformations of men! This is the reformation that is wanted ; this is the reformation 
that every true philanthropist should strenuously advocate and zealously promote. 

11. THE GRACIOUSNESS OF GOSPEL REFORMATION. What is the great, originating, effi- 
cient cause of this glorious moral reformation? The text answers the question. “God, 
who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead in 
sins, hath quickened us together with Christ.” Instrumental causes, such as the Word 
of God, gospel ministry, Christian example and influence, are many, but eternal grace 
is the cause which originates all and blesses all. The passage indicates four things 
concerning this Divine grace. 1, It is great. Itis ascribed to the richness of mercy 
and the greatness of love. ‘ God, who is rich in mercy, for his great love,” ete. God’s 
love is the spring of all his activities; it is as deep as his own heurt; it is as induite 
as himself, “It passeth knowledge.” 


“O Love! the one sun! O Love! the one seal 
What life has begun that breathes not in thee? 
Thy rays have no limit, thy waves have no shoreg 
Thou giv’st without merit to worlds evermore.” 


2. It ts mighty. It quickens, raises, exalts, recreates human souls. It is as mighty as 
the power that raised Christ from the dead. How mighty is that power that thoroughly 
Christianizes even one soul! No power but the power of God can do that. “Not by 
might, nor by power.” 3. Jt is manifestable. “In the ages to come he might show 
the exceeding riches of his grace in his kindness toward us through Christ Jesus.” 
The conversion of every one is designed to manifest it. The conversion of the sinner, 
though a good in itself, is not an ultimate end; the event has remote issues, ulterior 
points, bearings and relations interminable. ‘ Ages to come; ” intelligences that will rise 
thousands of years in the future will study and adore the infinite grace of God in the 
spiritual reformation of mankind. “ Howbeit for this cause I obtained mercy, that in 
me first Jesus Christ might show forth all long-suffering, for a pattern to them which 
should hereafter believe on him to life everlasting” (1 Tim. i. 16). 4. 1 is unmeri- 
torious. “For by grace are ye saved through faith ; and that not of yourselves: it is the 
gift of God: not of works.” The expression, “ not of works,” does not mean, of course, 
that men are to do nothing. This would be contrary to the general teaching of Scrip. 


OH. 11, 1—22.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 97 


ture, contrary also to the constitution of the soul and the nature of the work. Man is 
so constituted that no moral change can be effected in him irrespective of his own 
efforts. He must work. All that the expression means is that man’s works are not 
the cause. “By grace are ye saved through faith.” But if faith is required, and it is 
an undoubted necessity, where is the freeness of the grace? Elsewhere Paul says that 
‘it is of faith, that it may be of grace.” Two remarks will explain this. (1) Fazth is 
essentially an unmeritorious act. Because it is the simplest act of the mind, and an 
act for which man has a strong propensity ; he has never taken credit for it; he never 
can, There is no virtue in believing. (2) This essentially unmeritorious act ¢s itself 
the gift of God. Not a gift in the sense in which existence is a gift, but in the sense 
in which knowledge is a gift. It isa gift, because God gives the mental capacity for 
it, reveals the true objects for it, and furnishes the opportunities for studying the 
evidence essential to produce it.—D. T. 


Vers, 11—22.—Gospel reconciliation—tts subjects, agency, and results. “ Where- 
fore remember, that ye being in time past Gentiles in the flesh, who are called Uncir- 
cumcision by that which is called the Circumcision in the fiesh made by bands; that 
at that time ye were without Christ, being aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, 
and strangers from the covenants of promise, having no hope, and without God in the 
world: but now in Christ Jesus ye who sometimes were far off are made nigh by the 
blood of Christ. For he is our Peace, who hath made both-one, and hath broken down 
the middle wall of partition between us; having abolished in his flesh the enmity, 
even the law of commandments contained in ordinances ; for to make in himself of 
twain one new man, so making peace; and that he might reconcile both unto God in 
one body by the cross, having slain the enmity thereby: and came and preached peace 
to you which were afar off, and to them that were nigh. For through him we both 
have access by one Spirit unto the Father. Now therefore ye are no more strangers 
and foreigners, but fellow-citizens with the saints, and of the household of God; and 
are built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being 
the chief Corner-stone ; in whom all the building fitly framed together groweth unto 
an holy temple in the Lord: in whom ye also are builded together for an habitation of 
God through the Spirit.” Reconciliation is the grand idea of this passage, and it sets 
before us the condition of its subjects, the nature of its agency, and the blessedness of 
tts achievement. i 

I, THE conDITION oF ITs sUBJECTS. They are here presented in two aspects— 
aspects in which all men in their unregenerated state are found, 1. As socially dishar- 
monized. Between the Jews and the Gentiles there was no accord; on the contrary, 
there was a deep, mutual variance in sympathy and soul. ‘here was a “ middle wall 
of partition between them.” That wall was built by political prejudices and religious 
differences, and was cemented by a mutual “enmity.” So that they were “aliens,” 
and “strangers,” and morally “far off” from each other. There are these social 
differences between unregenerate men now, the world over. Instead of union, there is 
division—harmony, there is discord—love, there is enmity. Hence the eternal feuds, 
domestic, social, ecclesiastical, political. Some ‘ middle wall of partition” divides 
family from family, class from class, nation from nation, man from man, 2, ds 
religiously disharmonized. There was not only a mutual variance between Jew and 
Gentile, but there was a variance between both and God. Religiously the Jew is 
represented here as being “without Christ,” ignorant of him, and uninterested in him ; 
“without hope,” without any well-founded hope of future good; “ without God ”— 
practical atheists. Living every day as if no God existed. Does not this describe the 
religious condition of all unregenerate men in every part of the world? What a picture 
of the moral world! Hideous, yet life-like! 

11. THE NATURE OF ITs agENcy. Who is the great Reconciler? Who is he that 
reconciles men to men, and all to God? There is One, and only One. ““ Now in Christ 
Jesus ye who sometimes were far off are made nigh.” The passage gives three ideas 
about this reconciling. 1. Jt is the work of self-sacrifice, Christ does it by his 
blood,” by his “cross,” What is the blood of Christ? Not, of course, the vital fluid 
which flowed through his corporeal veins—not his mere existence, but the governing 
moral spirit of his life. The real life of a man is his governing disposition. This is 

EPHESIANS. w 


98 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. (on. τι. 1—22, 


the moral blood that circulates through all his activities. What is the governing spirit 
of Christ? Self-sacrificing love. ‘“ Yo know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ,” ete. 
It is by that self-sacrificing spirit of his in teaching, working, praying, and dying, that 
he does the work of the world’s reconciliation. Love alone can kill enmity. Christ's 
moral blood is the atoning power. 2. J¢ ts the work of abolishment. Christ’s mission 
is destructive as well as constructive. He -pulls down as well as builds up. He came 
to destroy the works of the devil. (1) He abolishes dividing forms. He breaks down 
the “ middle wall of partition.” When he died upon the cross, not only was the veil 
in the great temple of life, which divided men from God, rent asunder, but the wall 
that divided man from man was broken down. “The whole law of commandments 
contained in ordinances ” was abolished. ‘ Blotting out the handwriting of ordinances 
that was against us, which was contrary to us, and took it out of the way, nailing it 
to the cross” (Col. ii, 14). He gave man one system of worship. ‘“ God is a Spirit, 
and they that worship him must worship him in spirit and in truth.” (2) He abolishes 
the dividing spirit. “The enmity.” ‘The abolishment of the mere separating forms 
would still leave souls asunder if enmity existed. He slays the enmity. 3. It ἐδ the 
work of preaching. “Preaching peace.” “And came and preached peace to you.” 
Christ preached peace himself both before and after his death. His personal ministry 
was emphatically a ministry of peace in spirit and in doctrine—in example and in aim. 
He preached by his servants, ‘This was the grand subject of the apostolic ministry. 
This is the grand subject-of all ministers. The gospel is a gospel of peace; Christ 
was the Prince of peace. : 

III. THE BLESSEDNESS OF ITS ACHIEVEMENT, What is the grand result of his 
reconciling agency? 1. Union of man to man. “To make in himself of twain one 
new man.” Giving all men, however diverse in temperament, circumstances, and 
education, one moral soul. This is the true union, the union of heart, making men 
one—one in sympathy, one in purpose, one in Christ. 2. Union of man to God. 
“And that he might reconcile both unto God.” In truth, man can only become truly 
united to his brother man, by first becoming united to God. He must love the great 
Father supremely before he will love his race with the affection of a genuine brother- 
hood. True philanthropy grows out of piety. Men thus united to God, the passage 
suggests, are unitcd together: (1) As citizens of the same spiritual state. They are 
“ fellow-citizens with the saints.” The common “citizenship” of all isin heaven. All 
are alike loyal to the same authority, obedient to the same laws, inheritors of the same 
rights. (2) As members of the same spiritual family. They are of the “ nousehold 
of God.” ‘They are united not by mutual interests or covenant arrangements, but by 
the clinging instincts of family affection. ‘hey are of the family of God. (8) As 
parts of the same spiritual temple. ‘“ And are built upon the foundation of the apostles 
and prophets,” etc. In some respects the parts of a building are more united even 
than the members of a family. In a well-constructed edifice one part is so dependent 
on another, that to disturb a portion would be to injure the whole. All whom Christ 
reconciles are parts of a grand temple. (a) Beautifully united, “framed together.” 
(5) Gradually advancing: “groweth,” the growth of a living organism, not the mere 
growth of a building. (6) Religiously consecrated: “a holy temple.” What a 
glorious temple is this! The temple of Diana these Ephesians originally considered as 
the glory of the world, but it would appear to them contemptible by the grand spiritual 
temple that Paul here pictures to their imagination.—D. T. 


Vers. 1—7.— From death to life. 1. The process. This is a history of spiritual life. 
It reverses the order of natural history. Instead of “ funeral marches to the grave,” 
we have a resurrection giadness, as the soul grows upward /rom death to life eternal. 

I, THE PROCESS BEGINS WITH DEATH. The death here referred to is not a future 

enalty, but the past condition of many men and the present state of all others. 1. 
hare is a spiritual death in the midst of natural life. The body is flushed with the 
glow of health; the intellect is keen in worldly affairs; but the spirit is dead. The 
busy life of the lower nature may hide the scene of death, but it caunct destroy it, 
and to right-minded observers this noisy energy is painful and revolting like the 
revelry of a wake. Spiritual death bears all the hideous marks of real death: (1) a 
failing of spiritual strength ; (2) a loss of faculties of spiritual discernment—Divine 


on. 11. 1—22.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 99 


truth fades from the darkened vision, the ear of conscience grows deaf to the voices of 
heaven ; (3) an unconsciousness of its own mournful condition—the spiritually dead 
give no more evidence of realizing their condition than we can sce in the mute, immo- 
bile countenance of a corpse; (4) the commencement of corruption—the dead soul 
rots and spreads a miasma of sin. 2. Spiritual death is caused by sin. There are 
positive “ trespasses,” in which men go beyond the bounds of the lawful and commit 
what is forbidden; and negative “sins,” in which people miss the mark, fail of their 
juty, and omit what they ought todo. Both have fatal consequences—the one killing 
with the poison of bad thoughts, imaginations, and affections; and the other with au 
atropby of spiritual organs that waste away for want of exercise, 3. Jnnumerable 
influences provoke to sin ; (1) from without, in the general customs of the times, “ the 
course of this world,” and indirect temptations, “ the prince of the power of the air;” 
(2) from within, in bodily appetites, “lusts of the flesh,’ and in mental propensities, 
“ desires of the mind.” The resulting condition of death becomes a second nature, 
normal and chronic; yet it is not the less odious in the sight of God, but rather the 
more so, treasuring up wrath against the day of wrath, 

Il. THE PROCESS RESULTS IN LIFE. The life is described in threo stages. 1. A past 
quickening. ‘He quickened us.” This is accomplished in the Christian. It is whag 
Christ calls being “ born from above” (John iii. 3), and St. Paul, a “ new creation ἢ 
(2 Cor. v.17). (1) It is not an external change, such as the removal of penalties, the 
gift of blessings, and the entrance to a place called heaven, but an internal change 
in the soul of the redeemed. (2) It is not the soothing of u troubled conscience 
nor the endowment of mere comfort and happiness, but life—energy, power, activity 
—life that begins with painful cries and the awakening of sad repentance rather 
than with peace and comfort. The other blessings may be added, but this is first 
and most essential. It is useless to load the grave with treasures. The dead soul 
must come out of the tomb before it can be loosed from its cerements and enjoy its 
inheritance. 2. A present exaltation. “Raised us up; ” “ Made us sit with him in 
heavenly places.” Lazarus comes forth from the tomb, The Christian does not linger 
long among the scenes of his miserable past. 116 is not for ever sitting on the stool of 
the penitents. In his new life he walks in God’s sunlight, he breathes the free air of 
heaven, he is called to a high vocation and endued with glorious privileges. 3. 4 
future blessedness. The Divine life is but in the germ on earth, Its fairest flowers 
will bloom on a happier shore and its sweetest fruits ripen in ἃ sunnicr climate, There 
are “exceeding riches ” of grace to be revealed in “the ages to come.” The life for 
which they are preparing is eternal. No disease will blight it, no age bring it decrepi- 
tude, no death lay it low. As it develops eternally, so will the riches of Divine love 
fill it in an ever-increasing abundance.—W, F, 


Vers, 1—7.—From death tolife. 2. The secret. What is the secret of the wonderful 
reversal of the order of nature that is seen in the spiritual transformation from death to 
life? The power is put forth by the grace of God, and the method of its influence is 
through union with Christ. 

I. THE POWER THAT TRANSFORMS FROM DEATH TO LIFE 18 THE GRACE oF Gop, 
1. The power is Divine. (1) Men cannot quicken themselves. The dead can never rise 
from their graves, Silent, stiff, and cold, dead souls will never shake off their lethargy 
and begin a new spiritual life. (2) Men cannot quicken one another. Before life is 
extinct, by chafing the chill limbs, by giving cordials and other remedies, the fast« 
ebbing vitality may be restored tothe dying man. But when the last breath is breatheu, 
and the heart has ceased to beat, and the patient is really dead, science and love are both 
baffled. We can galvanize the corpse intoa shocking mockery of life, but that is worse 

an useless, Now, nothing short of death has come upon those who are under the 
power of sin, They are too far gone for human restoratives such as education, social 
influence, reward and punishment, exhortation and rebuke, (8) God alone can and 
does effect the great transformation, because he is the Source of all life, and because this 
return from death to life is a pure miracle, 2. The power is put forth by the grace of 
God. He might leave the dead to bury their dead, and concern himself only with fresh 
new lives, But he has infinite pity even for the dead. Nothing but grace could inspire 
such pity. For we have no claim upon God after we have become “ by nature children 


100 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. (cu. m. 1—22. 


of wrath.” We must look for the motive in the love of God alone, But that love is se 
great that it is a very treasure-house of mercy. God is “rich in mercy.” Then our 
very helplessness appeals to his compassion. The more dead we are the more will God 
desire to quicken us. 

ll. THE MEANS THROUGH WHICH THE GRACE OF GoD TRANSFORMS FROM DEATH TO 
LIFE 18 UNION witH Curist. 1. All through the history of the wonderful process, St. 
Paul traces, step by step, the progress of the Christian in the very experience through 
which Christ went. (1) We begin in death as Christ stooped to die for us. (2) We are 
* quickened together with Christ,” and have fellowship with the resurrection of Christ. 
(3) We are exalted in the likeness of Christ’s ascension (ver. 5). (4) And we look 
forward to sharing in his future glory. Thus we are not merely to receive the benefits 
of the death and resurrection of our Lord; we have to enter into his very experience 
and pass through it ourselves spiritually. Then his life and his victory become ours. 
2. his experience is realized by our union with Christ in faith. It is vain and 
hopeless to attempt to follow Christ by painfully attempting an exact imitation while 
we are going alone and in ourown strength. The way is too dark, too steep, too rough. 
And this is not what is expected of us. But if we trust Christ our faith unites us to 
him, and by the influence he puts forth over us he carries us along with him; so that 
through him we receive the gift of life from the grace of God.— W. F. A. 


Ver. 8.—Grace and faith. These two, grace and faith, are the sheet anchors of the 
Pauline gospel. The former was preserved in the Augustinian theology, and the latter 
restored to the Church by the Reformation. In his earlier Epistles, St. Paul establishes 
their claims by argument. Now, he considers those claims to be settled, and appeals to 
the doctrines of faith and grace as axioms, quoting the phrase, “‘ By grace have ye been 
saved,” as a sort of proverb. It is plain that the apostle regarded the truths as 
practically self-evident, though it was not long since they were the mysteries of a 
new revelation and the conclusions of an original argument. There is no paradox in 
this changed position, for it is the function of revelation so to open our eyes that we 
may see for ourselves what was before hidden. Then, having once thus beheld the truth, 
we may retain it on its own account. So that revelation is most successful when it 
teaches us how to dispense with itself. But this is only possible on the condition that 
there is an inherent fitness and reasonableness in the truths it declares. If, therefore, we 
are to see the axiomatic truth of the doctrines of grace and faith, they must not be an 
arbitrary association of ideas; they must be truths of inherent reasonableness. In other 
words, the relation of salvation to grace and faith must not be treated as accidental, and 
fixed only by the sovereign will of God, but as natural and necessary. 

I. SALVATION 18 GIVEN BY GRACE. To see the natural reasonableness of.this axiom, 
we must first understand in what salvation consists. In the Bible the word “salvation” is 
not a technical theological term, It means deliverance generally. Any special import 
in a particular passage must depend onthe context. In the present instance the context 
clearly shows what kind of salvation St. Paul is thinking of. This is not rescue from 
earthly poverty and pain—the lower old Jewish salvation, nor escape from future 
torment—the lower Christian salvation. It is deliverance from a present spiritual death 
(vers, 4,5). The soul is saved from itself. Such a salvation must be by grace, 
because we cannot escape from ourselves; because the evil of spiritual death involves 
the loss of power in spiritual things; because God only can create life; and because the 
death results from sin, and therefore implies an ill desert that can only appeal to the 
mercy of God. The facts of the work of Christ and the recovery of dead souls to life 
by the gospel prove that this salvation exists and is accomplished by grace. 

11. Grace works THROUGH FaITH. This principle, if axiomatic, must be also natural 
and reasonable. We must not think of faith asa mere assent to the doctrine of grace. 
Faith is the soul opening out to God. As the flower cannot be quickened into fertility 
while the bud is closed, the soul that is self-contained can by no means receive the 
grace of God. The door is barred, and Christ will not force an entrance. Faith is a 
capitulation of the proud soul. It means flinging wide the gates in submissive 
receptivity, aud yielding to the voice of Divine love in obedient activity. When the 
soul has faith in God, the grace of God streams in with life and healing. As distrust 
gevers souls, faith unites them. Thus faith is like the wire joining earth to heaven, 


OH, 1. 1---22.1 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 10, 


while grace is like the electric current which waits, but only waits, such a connection 
to hasten to us with light and fire and life. 

Ill, Farra comes rrom Grace. Even faith itself is “ the gift of God.” Faith is a 
spiritual act and habit, and therefore it would be impossible in a soul quite deaa 
spiritually. But he who provides the salvation provides the means wherewith to enjoy 
it. If faith be ever so feeble we may cry, “ Lord, I believe ; help thou mine unbelief,” 
with the assurance that there is no prayer more certain of an answer.—W. Ε΄, A. 


Ver. 10.—God’s workmanship, I. ΑΒ CHRISTIANS, CRMATED IN CuRIST, WE ARE 
Gop’s WorKMANSHIP, It cannot be that our salvation comes by our works, because it is 
auch a quickening from death to life as amounts to nothing,short of a new creation, and 
because God is the only Creator. We only become new creatures through union with 
Christ, and by the grace of God that isin him, To know if this is our condition, we 
must see if we bear the traces of the great Worker upon our persons. God’s work must 
have the characteristics of good work. 1. Fitness. God finds us out of joint. He 
shapes us suitably for our vocation. A house without adaptation to its ends may look 
handsome, but it is a failure. A true Christian will not only have a saintly bearing, he 
will have a practical suitability for his mission, 2. Z'horoughness. How thorough is 
God’s work in nature as seen in the microscopic organs of the smallest insects! The 
new creation is as thorough asthe old creation. Down to every thought and fancy God 
shapes the character of his redeemed. 3, Beauty. The best work is graceful and fair to 
look upon, God’s spiritual work is adorned with the beauty of holiness. 

II. We ARE THUS CREATED FOR THE PURPOSE OF DOING 6000 works. Good works are 
more honoured by the doctrine of grace than they are by the scheme of salvation by 
works; for in the latter they appeal only as means to an end, as stepping-stones to be 
left behind when the salvation as reached; but in the former they are themselves the 
ends, and are valued on their own account. Thus we are taught not to perform good 
works as an only or necessary means for securing some ulterior boon, but are invited to 
accept that boon just because it will enable us to do our work better. Instead of 
regarcing the gospel as a pleasant message to show us how we may save ourselves the 
trouble of work, we must hear it as a trumpet-call to service. The Christian is the 
servant of Christ. In spiritual death we can do nothing. Salvation is quickening to a 
new life. The object of this life is not bare existence. All life ministers to some other 
life. Spiritual life is given directly with the object of enabling us to do our work, It 
fails of its object if it is unfertile. The barren tree must wither, the fruithless branch 
must be pruned away. Purity and harmlessness are but neyative graces, and are not 
sufficient justification for existence. The great end of being is the doing of positive good. 
The judzment will turn on the use we have made of our talents, 

III. Tue works FOR WHICH WE ARE CREATED HAVE BEEN PREARRANGED BY Gop. 
The road has been made before we have been ready to walk on it. And there is a 
road for every soul. Each of us has his vocation marked out for him and fixed in the 
ancient counsels of God. No life need be aimless since every life is provided with a 
mission. How may we know the mission? 1, From our talents. Men do not gather 
grapes of thorns, nor poetry of commonplace minds, nor heroism of feeble souls. The 
nature of the tool proclaims its use. The hammer cannot be made to cut, nor the saw 
to drive nails, God’s workmanship bears on its special form the indications of its 
purpose. 10 know our work we must pray for light that we may know ourselves, or 
we shall fall into the common error of mistaking our inclination for our capacity and 
our ambition for our ability. 2. From our circumstances. God opens providential doors. 
Let us not refuse to enter them because they are often low and lead to humble paths. 
If they face us they indicate the work for which we are created, and that should suffice 
obedient servants,—W. F. A. 


Ver. 12.—Dark depths. Step by step descending into darker and darker depths, 
St. Paul describes the awful condition out of which heathens had been rescued when 
they became Christians. Regarded from a Jewish point of view, this condition is seei: 
to consist in the loss of all the high privileges of Isracl, and the salvation of the 
fentiles appears as an adoption into the circle of those privileges, But larger things 
of more general import are covered by the description, so that it applies virtually tc 


102 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. (om. τι. 1—22. 


all who are outside the pale of the gospel. Let us go through the descending and 
darkening scrics and observe the several woeful characteristics. 

1. Curisriess, The Gentile world had no Messiah. Worldly interests—business, 
pleasure, culture—have their advantages; but they bring no Saviour, no Physician of 
sick souls. As Christ is the Foundation-stone of the new temple, to be without 
Christ is to have nothing on which to erect subsequent Christian blessings. If we 
have the doctrine and discipline of the New Testament without the Christ, we have 
nothing of real profit. The dumb, pathetic helplessness of spiritual hunger in the 
finer inquiring and doubting minds of our day is a proof that to be without the light 
and life and love of Christ is as great a loss to us as it was to any in old times. 

11. Cuurcuiyss, “ Alienated from the commonwealth of Israel.” The Church is 
now what Israel was in pre-Ckristian times—the home and family of the people of 
God. Only it is not marked by the visible boundaries of any “ Holy Land.” The 
true Church, the fellowship of kindred followers of Christ, contains many a choice soul 
that has been accounted a schismatic and cut off from the organized communities of 
Christendom. Real excommunication comes not by the fulmination of an anathema, 
but by the breach of spiritual sympathy. Without the union that comes through our 
relation to Christ we voyage in solitude over lonely seas of thought. 

Ill Uxevancerizep. “Strangers from the covenants of the promise.” The Jew 
had a gospel in Messianic prophecy. The Christian has his in New Testament history. 
What covenant is there in science? What promise in art? What gospel in com- 
merce? We may discover laws and facts of the universe, aud create works of skill 
and beauty, and accumulate treasures of wealth. But still stricken souls cry, “Is 
there no bali in Gilead ?” for all this brings no peace to the weary and the broken- 
hearted. 

IV. Pessimist. “ Having no hope.” Pagan Rome and Grecce were verging towards 
pessimism in the days of St. Paul, when philosophers advised suicide and historians 
taught contempt of mankind. Pagan Europe now manifests the same tendency. 
Culture fails to convert the Philistine. Science dwarfs humanity before nature, and 
discovers no soul and no heaven. Business, politics, and society drive man to a 
weariness that sees no rest. 

V. AtHeistic. Speculative atheism is rare, if it ever exists, Practical atheism is 
more common and more disastrous. It is worse to believe in God and to live as if 
there were no God, than to doubt his existence. ‘lo be without God is not to look 
for his help nor to obey his will. This is death, since in God we live and move and 
have our being. Glorious must be the gospel that redeems us from such a depth of 
ruin.—W. Ε΄, A, ᾿ 


Vers. 18---18.--- Christ our Peace. 1. Curist ΜΑΚῈΒ PEACE. He was predicted as 
the Prince of peace. His birth was heralded by the good news, “On earth peace.” 1. 
Peace between man and man. In Christ the enmity between Jew and Gentile ceases. 
Christianity forbids all envy, jealousy, hatred, and strife. It is cosmopolitan, and will not 
sanction national selfishness cloaked by the sacred name of patriotism. It is brotherly, 
and will not favour sectarian animosity sheltering under the mask of loyalty to truth. 
2. Peace between man and God. Both Jew and Gentile are reconciled “ unto God” 
(ver. 16). ‘The discord between man and man is but a symptom and after consequence 
of the deeper quarrel between man and God, just as the unrestrained war of factions is 
a result of the overthrow of the central authority in a state. 

II. Cunist’s PuACE 18 STABLE. A hollow peace which like an unstable equilibrium 
is liable to be upset at any moment, and is little better than an armed truce, is only a 
deception and asnare. But Christ’s peace is solid and secure, involving two great safe- 
guards. 1. Meconciliation. A duel may be interrupted by the police, and yet the 
combatants may still cherish mortal hatred to one another. ‘he forced agreement of 
Jew with Gentile under the Roman empire was no real peace. The order of a state in 
which criminals are curbed but not reformed, and the decorum of a society in which 
only social fear prevents outrageous insults to purity and godliness, are no proof of 
real peace with God and man. But Christ reconciles, takes away all disposition for 
quarrelling, and establishes peaceable affections between man and man and between 
man and God, 2. Union. The old feuds between Norman and Saxon can never be 


cu. τι. 1—22.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, 108 


revived, simply because the two races have been blended together. So Christ would 
blend Jew and Gentile, and establish a common family unicn between Christians and 
also between the whole Christian brotherhood and our one Fa'her in heaven. 

IIL. Curist’s PEACE DEPENDS ON THE DESTRUCTION OF THE CAUSES OF DIscorD. It 
does not merely heal the surface-symptoms, but it goes to the root of the evil and 
cuts this out. The Law, which was the middle wall of partition between Jew and 
Gentile, is abolished. The religion of Law, which provoked constant enmity between 
man and God, is done away. In the place of rigid, painful exactions, never by any 
possibility fully satisfied, we have the service of the Spirit, which is the same for all 
and which is possible to all. ᾿ 

IV. Curist’s PEACE IS BROUGHT ABOUT BY THE SACRIFICE OF HIMSELF. 1. Jn rela~ 
tion to God, Christ makes reconciliation by his great propitiatory offering of himself. 
As we look at the cross our enmity to God dies down, and we learn in humble peni- 
tence to seek for forgiveness. 2. In relation to man. Christ has died for every man. 
Before that awful tragic event all mutual enmity should be hushed. In the love of 
our Peacemaker, which is shown in his dying for us, we have the strongest possible 
motive for a common fervour of love to him that should quench and drown all petty 
animositics and unite all Christians into one body.—W. F. A. 


Vers. 19—22.—The Christian temple. The pride of Ephesus was her world-famed 
temple, in which the relizion; the art, and even the commerce of the city centred and 
flourished. What the temple of Diana was materially in its visible pomp and power, 
the Church of Christ is to be spiritually, but with a higher splendour and a wider : 
influence. More than once has St. Paul described the Church as a temple. The 
truths shadowed forth by this name press upon us with weighty importance. 

I, THe MATERIALS WITH WHICH THE TEMPLE 18 BUILT. 1. Lhe foundation. “The 
foundation of the apostles and prophets” must be the work of the earliest and leading 
Christian teachers who laid the first stones of the Church. They preached the funda- 
mental truths on which the Church stands—primarily Christ crucified, for Christ is 
the reat Foundation—and they gathered in the first converts. The Church receives its 
Divine recognition in being apostolic and in being founded by inspired men—“ pro- 
phets.” 2. The stones. These are the men and women who compose the Church. A 
building cannot bo all foundation. The Church must be the union of individual 
Christians. It is not the teachers and authorities, but the several members who con- 
stitute the Church. These, therefore, are the rich gifts and the honourable mission of 
the Church. All classes are here united, and those who were once furthest from God 
—publicans, Samaritans, Gentiles, heathen, corrupt judicials, the neglected, the igno- 
rant, and the base—are brought in. 3. The Corner-stone. Christ crucified is the foun- 
dation laid by apostles and prophets in their preaching; Christ glorified is the crowning 
completion of the whole structure. We begin with Christ; we end in Christ. The 
temple starts with Christ, and as it rises tier by tier it is growing up to Christ. Christ, 
the Head of the body and the chief Corner-stone of the Church, is both the supreme 
authority and the perfect glory of his people. 

II. THE PLAN ON WHICH THE TEMPLE IS DESIGNED. 1. The adjustment of a variéty of 
separate parts. “ Each several building ” is “fitly framed together.” It is as thouvh 
the vast temple were begun in several distinct centres, and, as the building progressed, 
these approached one another till they met and combined in one vast harmonious 
structure. There is variety all through, for the “ frozen music,” architecture, is a 
blending of many different notes. In the Church there are necessary differences. The 
hot imagination of the South must produce a different type of Christianity from that 
moulded by the cool, practical temperament of the North. All parts of the temple 
are not for the same ends. One is to take a lowly place in the monotonous run of 
stones in a wall; another, to be carved into the delicate grace of a capital, conspicuous 
to all eyes. But every one has its place, and the union is dependent on variety. 
There is no unity in ἃ heap of cannon-balls. The fitting together of the various parts 
of an elaborate structure constitutes the highest unity. 2, Ultimate unity. To this 
the harmonizing of the several parts is tending, Do we not see the work progressing 
now in the cooling of ancient ecclesiastical feuds side by side with an enlarging liberty 
of thought? The true unity will be oneness of sympathy, brotherly love, and mutual 


104 


THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 


(on. πὶ. 1—21, 


helpfulness. 


Every Christian should strive to realize his share of this and beware of 


the selfishness of individualism, Christianity begins with individual faith, but it 
grows into an enlarged brotherhood and the formation of one temple. 


III. THE UsE TO WHICH THE TEMPLE IS DEDICATED. 
The spiritual temple is “a habitation of God.” 
temples made with hands.” He inhabits the humble and contrite spirit. 


god dwells. 


A temple 15. a house in which a 
“God dwelleth not in 
The real 


presence of God is in the Church. He does not only bless his children, he visits them 
and abides with them. He does not confine his presence to a select few—inspired 


prophets, ordained priests, ete. 


incense spreads through every quarter of the temple. 
the Church—not in outward magnificence, but in the spiritual presence. 


He fills the whole Church with his presence as the 


1, Herein is the true glory of 
2. From 


this arises the responsibility of the Church, not to defile the temple of the Holy Ghost, 
but to let the glory of God shine out through every door and window unsullied by any 


cloud of sin—W. F, A. 


EXPOSITION, 


CHAPTER Ii. 


Vers. 1—13.—Dic¢ressionon THE ADMISSION 
OF THE GENTILES To THE KincDom oF Gop. 

Ver. 1.—For this cause. The reference is 
not merely to the last statement or illustra- 
tion, but to the whole view of the purpose of 
God toward tlie Gentiles unfolded in ch. ii. 
The apodosis does not coine in till ver. 14, 
at the beginning of which this conjunctive 
clause is repeated. I Paul, the prisoner of 
Christ Jesus for you Gentiles. He introduces 
himself in order tomake known tlie feelings 
which were roused in his soul towards them 
by the consideration of the privileges just 
enlarged on—especially to acquaint them 
with tht prayers he offered for them (see 
vers. 14—19), and apparently with the in- 
direct object of getting them to offer similar 
prayers for themselves. ‘To justify this 
introduction of himself, he delicately intro- 
duces the fact of his being a prisoner on 
their behalf. What had brought him to 
Rome, what had made him appeal to Cesar, 
was his preaching the gospel to the Gentiles ; 
indeed, the immediate occasion of his arrest 
at Jerusalem was the suspicion that he had 
taken Trophimus, an Ephesian, one of 
themselves, into the temple (Acts xxi. 29). 
By this allusion to the condition into which 
nis regard for them had brought him, he 
conciliates sympathetic consideration of what 
is to follow. 

Ver. 2.—If ye have heard of the dispen- 
sation of the grace of God. Here begins the 
digression. The words, “if ye have heard,” 
etc., do not denote an uncertainty, but are a 
delicate reminder. Doubtless they had 
heard of the matter when he was at Ephesus, 
and, as he remarks in ver. 3, he had already 
written briefly on it. Grace is here uscd in 
a more restricted sense than in ch. i. 2—in 
the sense of Divine favour, honour, privilege 
—the same as in ver. 8, “To me... is this 
favour given.” Which is given me to you- 


ward. The grace or favour meant ig that 
whereby Paul was constituted tle apostle 
of the Gentiles. Deeply though he felt 
his being sent away from preaching to his 
countrymen (Acts xxii. 18), he took kindly 
to the new sphere allotted to him, and mag- 
nitied his office (Rom. xi. 13). 

Ver. 3.—How that, by revelation, was 
made known unto me the mystery. The 
mystery, as is explained afterwards (ver. 6), 
was not the gospel itself, but its destination 
to the Gentiles as much as to the Jews; 
although, as appears afterwards, this ful- 
ness of blessing is really the great glory 
of the gospel. Mystery, that which is known 
only to the initiated, does nut denote here a 
thing obscure in its own natare, but only 
something that had been concealed trom 
view. It was only the initiated that now 
knew that God designed the gospel for 
Gentile and Jew alike. Paul had been 
initiated “by revelation ”’—not by his own 
reflecting power, not by his study of Scrip- 
ture, not by communication from other men, 
but by a special communication from God 
(Gal. i. 12). As I wrote before in few 
words. Where? Inanotler Epistle? No; 
but in the earlier part of this Epistle (see 
ch. i. 9; ii. 18, etc). If it be said the 
allusions in these places to the topic in 
question are rather vague and general, the 
apostle virtually admits it—he wrote of it 
“in few words;” but, as it is a great and 
glorious truth, he returns to it to amplify it 
and place it in a brighter light. 

Ver. 4.—In accordance with which, when 
ye read, ye may understand my knowledge in 
the mystery of Christ. Προς ὃ, with reference 
to which, ¢.e. to what I wrote afore: to make 
that more intelligible I write on the subject 
more fully now, so that you shall see that 
your instructor is thoroughly informed in this 
matter of the mystery in Christ—this once 
concealed but now revealed purpose of his 


grace, 


on. τη. 1—21.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, 


105 


Ver. 5.— Which was not made known to 
the sons of men in other generations. Though 
not 8 new purpose, the knowledge of it is 
new. Abralam, David, and the prophets, 
however much they knew of Christ and the 
fulness of blessing in him for all the families 
of the earth, did not know the full extent 
of God’s grace to the Gentiles—did not 
know that the middle wall was to be wholly 
broken down, and all inequality removed. 
This might seem to throw some doubt on 
the reality of this doctrine; but it was on 

urpose that God kept it secret, and those 

yy whom he has now revealed it are worthy 
of all regard. As it has now been revealed 
unto his holy apostles and prophets in the 
Spirit. It is not revealed to Paul only, 
although he has got the privilege of an- 
nouncing it to the Gentiles, but to the whole 
body of “holy apostles and prophets.” ‘The 
designation, “holy apostles,” is rare; it is 
used here to magnify the office, to show that 
those whom the Head of the Church had 
set apart for himself were fit instruments to 
receive so important ἃ revelation. ‘“ Pro- 
phets ” here are undoubtedly New Testament 
prophets (see ch. ii. 20), the contrast being 
with “sons of men in other generations.” 
Reference may be made to the experience 
and decree of the Council of Jerusalem, 
guided by the Holy Spirit (see Acts xv. 28). 

Ver. 6.—That the Gentiles are fellow-heirs 
—heirs with the Jews of the same inheri- 
tance (see ch. i. 11)—and fellow-members of 
the body (this figure is repeated and applied 
in ch. iv. 4, 16, 25), and fellow-partakers of 
the promise in Christ Jesus through the 
gospel—the promise to Abraham, “ In thee 
and in thy seed shall all the families of the 
earth be blessed.” They do not get this 
blessing indirectly through the Jews, or by 
becoming Jews, but directly, as Gentiles; and 
they become fellow-heirs, fellow-members, 
and fellow-partakers “in Christ Jesus,” en- 
joying all privileges in him,inastateof union 
and fellowship with him. To this state they 
are invited and admitted through the gospel ; 
by receiving the glad tidings they enter on 
these blessings (comp. Rom. x. 15, 18). This 
statement of religious equality between Jews 
and Gentiles -is strong, clear, complete; 
the more remarkable that Paul himself had 
had so strong Jewish prejudices; only one 
of clearest insight and highest courage 
could proclaim the truth so emphatically ; 
it is little wonder if many believing Jews, 
less enlightened and less courageous, shrank 
from his statements as too strong. 

Ver. 7.—Of which I became a minister ; 
did not gradually grow up to the office, bat 
became, at 8 given time and place, a minister, 
8 διάκονος, a servant. According to the gift 
of the grace of God. The office of serving 
Christ was a gift, most undeserved on Paul’s 


part, who had been ἃ persecutor and in- 
jurious, but flowing from the free grace 
of God, his sovereign, unmerited mercy. 
Which was given me according to the work- 
ing of his power. This denotes the manner 
of the gift; the gift itself, apostleship to 
the Geutiles, would have been little had it 
not been accompanied with Divine power. 
Spiritual office without spiritual power is 
miserable; but in Paul’s case there was the 
power as well as the office; not merely the 
power of working miracles, as some have 
held, but besides this, the power of spiritual 
insight into the meaning of Scripture— 
power of exposition, power of demonstra- 
tion, power of persuasion (comp. 1 Thess. 
i. 5; Acts xiv.1; 1 Cor. iv. 7, etc.). Paul 
gratefully acknowledged that all the power 
of his ministry was God’s, not his own 
(1 Cor. iii. 6, 7). 

Ver. 8.—Unto me, who am less than the 
least of all saints; not only of apostles and 
prophets, but even of all believers—a pro- 
found expression of humility, founded not 
only on his persecuting career, but on his 
consciousness of sin, of inborn rebellion 
against God’s Law, of fountains of unlawful 
desire in his flesh (Rom. vii. 18; 1 Tim. i. 
13—15), making him feel himself to be, in 
heart and essence, the chief of sinners. 
The sense of sin is not usually in proportion 
to the acts of outward transgression, but to 
the insight into the springs of evil in one’s 
heart, and the true nature of sin as direct 
antagonism to the holy God. Was this grace 
given. The third time in this chapter that 
he speaks of his office as a fruit of grace, 
showing that, notwithstanding his being a 
prisoner on account of it, and all the perils 
it involved (2 Cor. xi. 24—27), he was over- 
whelmed with God’s unmerited goodness in 
conferring it on him. It was substantially 
the post of a foreign missionary, with hardly 
one human comfort! To preach among the 
Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ; 
εὐαγγελίσασθαι, to evangelize, to proclaim 
good tidings. The force of the ed is not 
given in “preach,” but the idea is amply 
conveyed by the words that follow. The 
balance of authority for τοῖς ἔθνεσι, “to the 
Gentiles,” and ἐν τοῖς ἔθνεσι, “among the 
Gentiles,” is about equal; the meaning 
really the same. “E6vos, heathen, was almost 
an offensive name; yet with that name the 
apostle associates the highest blessings of 
God. The unsearchable riches of Christ; 
two attractive words, riches and unsearch- 
able, conveying the idea of the things that 
are most precious being infinitely abundant. 
Usually precious things are rare; their 
very rarity increases their price; but here 
that which is most precious is also bound- 
less—riches of compassion and love, of 
merit, of sanctifying, comforting, and trane- 


106 


THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 


Tou. nr. 1—21. 


forming power, all without limit, and capable 
of satisfying every want, craving, and 
yearning of the heart, now and evermore. 
Th: thought of his having such riches to 
offer to all made him regard his office as 
most glorious, raised him far above the 
point of view from which the world would 
despise it, and filled him with adoring 
nee to God for having conferred it on 

im. 

Ver. 9.—And to make all men see what is 
the dispensation of the mystery. Another 
branch of his office, and another fruit of 
God’s grace in conferring it. He was not 
only to benefit man, but also to vindicate 
God, For “fellowship of the mystery” 
(A.V.), the R.V. has “dispensation of the 
mystery,” founded on the preference of the 
reading οἰκονομια, for which there is a great 
ents of authority over κοινωνία. 

+ was the apostle’s function to show how 
this mystery had been dispensed—concealed 
for a long time and at last revealed. Which 
from the beginning of the ages hath been hid 
in God. The counsel itself was πρὸ τῶν 
αἰώνων, before the foundation of the world ; 
the concealment of it ἀπὸ τῶν αἰώνων, from 
the beginning of the ages, when there were 
intelligent beings capable of understanding 
it—whether angels or men. Whatever the 
angels may have known of the Divine 
plans, this feature of them was not known 
till revealed to the New Testament Church. 
Who created all things. The reason’ for 
adding this particular designation of God is 
not obvious; probably it is to indicate the 
relation of the matter in hand to the 
mightiest works of God. This is no trifling 
matter; it connects itself with God’s grandest 
operations; it bas supremely glorious bear- 
ings. It might be supposed to have rela- 
tions only to one race and to one period of 
time; but it has relations to “all things;” 
it is an integral element in God’s plan. 
The words, by Jesus Christ (A.V.), are not 
found in a great preponderance of textual 
authorities, 

Ver. 10.—To the intent—indicative of the 
purpose of the remarkable arrungement or 
dispensation according to which the eternal 
Divine purpose, which had been concealed 
from the beginning of the ages, was now 
made known—that there might be made known 
to the principalities and powers in the 
heavenly places; that a lesson might be given 
to the unfallen angels. Their interest in 
the scheme of man’s redemption is often 
referred to (1 Pet. i. 12). Even the highest 
powers of heaven have yet much to learn 
respecting God. The dispensation of God’s 
grace to man is one of their lesson-books. 
Dr. Chalmers shows (‘ Astronomical Dis- 
courses’) how this meets the objection that 


so dread a sacrifice as the life of God’s Son | ἐποίησε. 


could not have been made for one por 
planet; in its indirect bearings we do not 
know what other orders of beings have 
derived most vital lessons from this mani- 
festation of the attributes of God. How- 
ever men may scorn the salvation of Christ 
and all that belongs to it, the highest in- 
telligences regard it with profound interest. 
By the Church the manifold wisdom of God. 
Through the Church, now constituted, accord- 
ing to the revealed mystery, of Jew and 
Gentile, all redeemed by Christ’s blood and 
renewed by his Spirit, there is exhibited to 
the angels the manifold wisdom of God. 
The precise line of thought is this: God, 
from eternity, had a purpose to put Jew and 
Gentile on precisely the same footing, but 
concealed it for many ages, until he revealed 
it in the apostolic age, when he appointed 
Paul his minister to announce it. The pur- 
pose of this whole arrangement was to 
enlighten the principalities and powers of 
heaven in the manifold wisdom of God. 
How in his manifold wisdom? In this way. 
During these preparatory ages, when God’s 
gracious dealings were with the Jews 
only, all kinds of false religions were de- 
veloping among the heathen, and their 
diversified influence and effects were be 
coming apparent in many ways—the diver- 
gent tendencies of men, especially in religious 
matters, were being develop d; but in the 
new turn given to things by the breaking 
down of the middle wall in Christ, the 
manifold wisdom of God was shown in 
transforming many of these most diverse 
elements, unifying them, buildiug them up 
into a great spiritual body, into a holy, 
most beautiful, most symmetrical temple. 
When all things seem to be flying asunder 
into the most diverse and antagonistic ele- 
ments, God gives a new turn, as it were, to 
providence, and lo! a glorious symmetrical 
and harmonious structure begins to rise. 
Ver. 11.—According to the eternal purpose 
which he purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord. 
The apostle is ever anxious that we should 
connect these operations of God with the 
profundity, deliberation, and awfulness of 
an eternal decree, and that we should thus 
contrast them in our minds with many even 
of the most important works of man which 
are often determined, on his part, by a 
passing event or other trivial cause. The 
verb in this clause is ἐποίησε, which he 
made, and it has been debated whether it 
denotes the original formation of the pur- 
pose, or the execution of it under Christ. 
With A.V. and R.V., we prefer the former. 
The object of the apostle is to indicate that 
the purpose existed from eternity; but, 
besides, the meaning of “fulfilled” or 
“executed” can hardly be sustained by 
The closing formula, “in Christ 


oH. ΤΙ. 1—21,] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 


107 


Jesus,” is perfectly applicable to the eternal 
formation of the purpose; it is the con- 
stantly returning indication of the element 
in which the whole schome of grace had its 
beginning, its progress, and its end. 

Ver, 12.—In whom we have our boldness 
and access. Παῤῥησία literally means 
“boldness” or “freedom of speech,” but is 
used bere in a more‘ample sonse for want of 
restraint, ease of fecling, comfortable self- 
possession, in our access to God. Contrast 
with Adam hiding himself among the trees 
of the garden, and the lost calling on the 
mountains to fall on them, and the rocks to 
cover them. The “we” in this verse in- 
cludes both Jews and Gentiles. The 
“access,” or introduction (see ch. ii. 18), is 
like that of the high priest into the holy of 
holies—we have boldness to enter into the 
holiest of all (1100. x. 19). In confidence 
through the faith of him. The confidence 
of being welcomed and accepted when we 
go into God’s presence springs from our 
faith in him. We believe in him as the 
Propitiation, as our Peace, asthe Reconciler, 
and we go before God with confidence. ‘The 
clause, “through faith in him,” influences 
the whole verse. And, as before, we have 
at the beginning of the verse, “in whom” 
—an expression denoting generally our 
vnion with Christ, and at the end, “ through 
the faith of him”—a specification of the 
‘instrument by which that union is formed 
and by which it operates. 

Ver. 13.— Wherefore I beg that ye faint not 
at my tribulations for you. <A very delicate 
and touching request, that they would not 
be too much distressed by what he was 
suffering for them (comp. Epaphroditus, 
Phil. ii. 26). Paul know that the sympathy 
was so strong that what was suffered by him 
was endured sympathetically by them. Two 
expressions denote that the sufferings were 
great: “ My tribulations for you”—a word 
expressing intense and protracted suffering; 
“that ye faint not,” or that ye do not lose 
heart, as if the power of evil had got the 
upper hand. Which is your glory. ‘lhat is, 
the character or capacity of the apostle of 
Jesus Christ to the Gentiles, in which I 
suffer tribulation, is one of such exalted 
dignity as to reflect glory on you. Take 
that view of my suffcrings; I sufter because 
I hold so glorious an office, and the glory 
of that office is reflected on you. 

Vers. 14—21.—PRAYER FOR THEIR Spiri- 
TUAL ENRIOHMENT. 

Ver. 14.—For this cause, The digression 
being ended, the apostle takes up the thread 
broken at ver. 1. We must seek the “cause” 
in ch. ii. Seeing that the Gentiles have 
now equal privileges with the Jews; seeing 
that by faith in Christ Gentile Christians 
have been brought as near to God, and have 


as good a right to the good things of the 
covenant ;—-I take the steps now to be speci- 
fied for enabling them actually to possess 
these good things. On the one hand, the 
apostle saw the believing Ephesians still 
comparatively poor and needy; on the other 
hand, he saw all spiritual stores provided for 
them: the question was how to get the one 
into contact with the other. For this cause, 
he says, I bow my knees unto the Father, 
An emphatic way of denoting prayer; but 
not incidental, occasional prayer, inspired 
by some passing feeling; the attitude “ bow 
my kneos” denotes deliberate prayer (comp. 
Dan. vi. 10), makivg a business of it, 
approaching God with reverence and holy 
fear, with all the solemnities suitable to the 
occasion of making a specific and important 
request. In the A.V. it is “unto the Father 
of our Lord Jesus Christ.” The R.V., some 
of the oldest manuscripts, and most recent 
commentators omit the latter words, which 
are supposed to have been talzen from ch. i. 3. 
On internal grounds, the omission of the 
words seems to yield the best sense, for in 
ch, ii. 18 our having access to “the Father” 
is spoken of, and when the apostle proceeded 
to show how he availed himself of that 
privilege, he is not likely to have used more 
than that expression. Further, there is 
such a close connection between πατέρα and 
πατριὰ in ver. 15, that they aie not likely 
to have been far separated as the apostle 
used them. : 

Ver. 15.—From whom the whole family in 
heaven and on earth is named. So A.V., 
but R.V. has “every family,” holding, 
doubtless, that the want of the article —naca 
mat pid, not πᾶσα ij mar pia—requires this sense. 
But asin Matt. ii.3; Luke iv.13; Acts ii.36; 
vii. 22, and ch. ii. 21; so here, raca without the 
article may denote the totality of the thing; 
πᾶσα πατριὰ corresponding to πᾶσα οἰκοδομὴ. 
And this seems more in accord with the 
scupe of the passage, for here the apostle is 
not distributing into groups, but gathering 
into one. But what is the precise import of 
the statement, and -for what reason is it 
introduced? The apostle recognizes all 
saints, whether in heaven or on earth, as 
forming one family, and as the whole family 
derives its name from God, so God may be 
expected and appealed to to make full and - 
corresponding provision for the wants of its 
various sections. The implied appeal is not 
to the fact that the family is God’s family, 
but to the fact, less important in itsclf but 
really including the other, that it is named 
after him. Among men, one would be held 
emphatically bound to take an interest in 
those: who are not only his relations but 
bear his very name. Now, that part of 
the family which is housed in heaven is 
gloriously provided for; the apostle pro- 


108 


THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 


ἴσα, nx. 1—21, 


eeeds to intercede for the portion still on 
earth. As the whole family is named after 
the same Father, is conspicuous before the 
eyes of all as God’s, 80 it may well be ex- 
pected that the more needy, feeble, exposed, 
and tempted part of the family will be 
treated in every way worthy of its Father. 


“ Let saints on earth unite to sing 
With those to glory gone; 
For all the servants of our King, 
In earth ard heaven, are one. 


“One family we dwell in him, 
One Church above, beneath; 
Though now divided by the stream, 
The narrow stream, of death.” 


Ver. 16.—That he would grant you, accord- 
ing to the riches of his glory. The standard 
or measure of the Divine giving is brought 
into view. . “ Riches of his glory” is a more 
emphatic expression than “ glorious riches,” 
though substantially the same in meaning. 
God’s standard of giving is liberal, bounti- 
ful, overflowing. An image of the riches 
of his glory is seen in the starry heavens, 
which proclaim at once the vast riches and 
surpassing glory of God. Or in the beauti- 
ful appearance of an autumn sunset, where 
the whole sky is flecked with clouds bright- 
ened into a sea of glory. In prayer, it is 
both useful for ourselves and glorifying to 
God to recognize his bountifulness—to re- 
member that he gives us a King (2 Sam, 
xxiv. 23). To be strengthened with might by 
his Spirit in the inner man. The inner man 
is the seat of influence, but with us it is the 
seat of spiritual fecbleness. Most men may 
contrive to order their outward conduct suit- 
ably; but who has control of the inner man? 
Faith, trust, humility, love, patience, and 
the like graces which belong to the inner 
man, are what we are weakest in, and what 
we have least power to make strong. In this 
very region it is sought that the Ephesians 
might be strengthened with might by the 
Spirit. The gift of the Spirit is available 
for this very purpose for all that ask him. 

Ver. 17.—That Christ may dwell in your 
hearts by faith. Reversing the usual order, 
the prayer begins (ver. 16) by asking the 
blessing of the Third Person of the Godhead ; 
now we have 8 cluster of petitions connected 
with the Second Person. The first of these 
is for the indwelling of Christ in their hearts, 
as opposed to mere occasional visits or influ- 
ences from Christ; the instrument by which 
this blessing is attained being their faith. 
Christ exercising a constant power within 
them, both in the active and passive move- 
ments of the heart, giving the sense of 
pardon and acceptance, moulding the will, 
sweetening the emotions, enlightening and 
confirming the conscience, purifying the 
whole springs and principles of action. 


This to be secured by their faith, opening 
the door, receiving Christ in all his fulness, 
resting and living on him, believing his 
promises, and longing for his appearing the 
second time. In order that ye, having been 
rooted and grounded in love. Two images 
are combined to make the idea emphatic— 
that of a tree and that of a building; 
denoting what is both the starting-point 
and the support of the Christian’s life, viz. 
love. In what sense? The love of Christ 
is specified afterwards (ver. 19), but this 
may be as a pre-eminent branch of that mani- 
fold love which bears on the Christian life— 
the love of the Father, Son, and Holy 
Ghost; the love of the brethren to one 
another; and the reciprocal love evoked 
from the believer by the reception of this 
love. Evidently it is implied that the 
Christian life can begin and flourish only in 
such an atmosphere of love; as warm sunshine 
is needed to start and advance the life of a 
plant, so love is needed to start and carry 
on the life of the soul. Experience of 
Divine love is a great quickening and pro- 
pelling power. ‘One glance of God, a touch 
of his love, will free and enlarge the heart, 
so that it can deny all and part with all 
and make an entire renunciation of all to 
follow him” (Archbishop Leighton). 

Ver. 18.—May be made strong to compre- 
hend with all the saints. The subject to be 
comprehended is not only beyond man’s 
natural capacity, but beyond the ordinary 
force of his spiritual capacity. The thing 
to be grasped needs a special strength of 
heart and soul; the heart needs to be 
enlarged, the mental “hands of the arms” 
need to be made strong (Gen. xlix. 24). But 
the attainment is not impossible—it is the 
experience of “all the saints;” all God’s 
children are enabled to grasp something of 
this (comp. 2 Cor. iv. 3—6). What is the 
breadth, and length, and depth, and height. 
No genitive being given, it has been a diffi- 
cult point to settle to what these dimen- 
sions must be held to be applicable. Some 
think that the love of Christ in the following 
clause must be meant; but surely when that 
is made the subject of a separate part of the 
prayer, and is not in the genitive but the 
objective case, governed by a verb of its 
own, this explanation is not to be enter- 
tained. Others, with more reason, think 
that the idea of a temple was in the mind of 
the writer, as it certainly was in ch, ii. 21, 
22, and that it is the dimensions of the 
temple he had here in his eye, the prayer 
being that the Ephesians might compre- 
hend the vastness and glory of that spiritual 
temple which is constituted by all believers, 
and in which God dwells by the Spirit. 
Even this, however, would not divest the 
construction of abruptness, and it would fit 


cH. 1Π. 1—21.) 


THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 


109 


in but poorly with the context, in which the 
tenorof the apostle’s prayeristhata profusion 
of Divine blessing might be enjoyed by the 
Ephesians. Ifa genitive must be supplied, 
may we not conceive the apostle to have 
had in his view the entire provision God has 
made in Christ for the good of his people, 
80 that the dimensions would be those of 
the gospel storehouse, the vast reservoir out 
of which the Church is filled? “Breadth” 
might denote the nanifoldness of that pro- 
vision; “length,” its eternal duration; ite 
“depth” might be represented by the pro- 
fundity of Christ’s humiliation; and its 
“height” by the loftiness of the condition 
to which his people are to be raised. ‘To 
comprehend this, to understand its existence 
and its richness, is to get our faith enlarged, 
our expectations expanded; it is through 
this comprehension that “all the saints” 
have got their wants supplied, and their 
souls filled as with marrow and fatness. 
Ver. 19.—And to know the love of Christ, 
which passeth knowledge. The love here is 
evidently the love of Christ to us, and this 
may well be specified as a special matter of 
prayer. Knowledge of Christ’s love, in the 
sense of an inward personal experience of it 
—its freeness, its tenderness, its depth, its 
patience—is the great dynamic of the gospel. 
This love is transmuted into spiritual force. 
As the breeze fills the sails and bears for- 
ward the ship, so the love of Christ fills the 
soul and moves it in the direction of God’s 
will. But in its fulness it passeth know- 
ledge; it is infinite, not to be grasped by 
mortal man, and therefore always presenting 
new fields to be explored, new depths to be 
fathomed. That ye may be filled with all 
the fulness of God; that is, that ye may be 
filled with spiritual grace and blessing to an 
extent corresponding to all the fulness of 
God. Though the finite cannot compare 
with the infinite, there may be a correspon- 
dence between them according to the capa- 
city of each. There is a fulness of gracious 
attainment in every advanced believer that 
correspouds to all the fulness of God; 
every part of his nature is supplied from the 
Diviue fountain, and, so far as a creature can, 
he presents the image of the Divine fulness. 
In the human nature of Christ this corre- 
spondence was perfect: “In him dwelt all the 
fulness of the Godhead bodily ;” in the soul 
of the believer there may be a progressive 
movement tuwards this fulness. No higher 
view can be conceived of the dignity of 
man’s nature; and the glorious privileges 


conferred on him by the gospel, than that 
he is susceptible of such confurmity to God. 
Who can conceive that man should have 
attained to such a capacity by a mere pro- 
cess of evolution? “So God made man in 
his own image;” and in Christ man is 
“renewed in righteousness and holiness after 
the image of him who created him.” 

Vers. 20,21.—Doxotoay. The study and 
exposition of the amazing riches of the grace 
of God gives birth to an outburst of praise 
toward the Divine Source of all this mercy, 
past, present, and to come. Now unto him 
that is able to do exceeding abundantly 
above all that we can ask or think, In 
thinking of God it is as if we thought of 
space—however far our conceptions may 
travel, there is still infinity beyond. Paul. 
had asked much in this prayer, and thoughts 
can always travel beyond words, yet the 
excess of God’s power beyond both was 
infinite. This excess is denoted by a double 
term of abundance (ποιῆσαι ὑπὲρ πάντα and 
ὑπερεκπερισσοῦ), as if the apostle wished to 
fill our minds with the idea of absolute 
infinity of gracious power in God. Accord- 
ing to the power that worketh in us, which 
is none other than the power “which he 
wrought in Christ, when he raised him from 
the dead” (ch. i. 20). The power that is 
actually at work in us has only to be exerted 
a little more to accomplish wonders of sanc- 
tification, and confer on us immense spiritual 
strength. Unto him be the glory in the 
Church in Christ Jesus, world without end. 
Amen. To God the whole credit of the 
scheme of grace and the work of grace as 
carried out in his people is due (“Not of 
works, lest any man sliould boast”); there- 
fore let the Church acknowledge this, and 
cordially and openly ascribe to God his due. 
Let this feeling be universally encouraged 
and cherished in the Church, and let it find 
in the Church services suitable occasions of 
breaking forth in song and prayer. Again 
the apostle’s favourite formula comcs in— 
“in Christ Jesus,” to denote that this act 
of adoration is to be done in immediate 
connection with the work and person of 
Christ; for it is he who has brought about 
the whole condition of things from which 
the act of adoration springs. And this 
ascription of praise is not transitory; this 
view of the livine character and actings 
will never become obsolete or be superseded 
by other views; it will claim their cordial 
ascriptions for ever—literally, to all the gene- 
rations of the age of the ages. 


HOMILETICS. 


Vers. 1—13.—God’s purpose as to the Gentiles. This passage a parenthesis after 
ver. 1—a reference to Paul’s personal history, It contains the explanation of his 


110 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. (cu. 11. 1—21. 


whole career, the secret of his wonderful zeal. Why was he a prisoner? Generally, 
for the Gentes, Why for them? Because the Divine purpose regarding them had 
been revealed to him, and through him to the world, and the enmity of the Jews to 
that purpose had brought Paul into captivity. Looking at the passage as a whole, it 
may show us how Paul found compensation for his captivity in the privileges connected 
with his office as apostle of the Gentiles. This compensation lay chiefly in threa 
things. 

I. The precious insight he obtained into the glory of the Divine purpose in reference 
to the Gentiles, giving him a high conception of the far-reaching generosity of God. 
1, There 15 a high intellectual pleasure in the discovery of any great truth. 2. A pro- 
found emotional pleasure in discovering a truth of vast benefit to mankind. 3. A still 
higher pleasure in receiving such a truth direct from God. This truth did not involve 
a case of levelling down, but of levelling up. Thouvh the Jews, as a nation, were no 
longer to occupy a higher platform than the Gentiles, yet all were to be invited to equal 
nearness to God, and if avy should reject the invilation, the blame and the loss would 
be all their own. 

II. The remarkably high qualifications given to him for his office (see ver. 7)—great 
love, faith, courage, perseverance, hope; great intellectual insight ; great spiritual power. 
Others got frightened (Mark, Demas, etc.); Paul went on. The human spirit was often 
depressed, but God comforted him, The thorn in the side was annoying, but “my 
grace is sufficient for thee.” 

III. The great honour and privilege of being called to so blessed a work. The work 
had a glory on eaith and a gloryin heaven. 1. On earth. He preached to the Gentiles 
the unsearchable riches of Christ. He proclaimed his riches of grace, and showed them 
to be unsearchable. He not only proclaimed them, but in a sense imparted them— 
brought them into contact with the IE hesians, so that they got the good of them, through 
the blessing of the Holy Spirit. 2. In heaven. The gospel has aspects of blessing beyond 
this world. It carries important lessons to the principalities and powers. It shows the 
manifold wisdom of God, shows how all classes and varieties of mankind are brought to 
God by the cross of Christ, assimilating all characters, overcoming all alienations, 
demolishing all walls of separation, and building up all together in Christ Jesus. 

One great conclusion. In every sense the success of the gospel is very glorifying 
to God; it illustrates his perfections ; it glorifies his Son; it educates the very angels; 
and thus it carries forward the grand purpose of God in the creation of the worlds. 
“To him be glory for ever. Amen.” 


Ver. 8.—The unsearchable riches of Christ. “Riches” an attractive word. Human 
heart leaps towards them. Ceaseless disappointments of most who follow after them. 
Here the riches that moth and rust do not corrupt, nor thieves break through to steal. 
1. There are in Christ unsearchable riches of compassion. Case of the lost, proper object 
of pity. Christ’s pity boundless. Human pity often quenched by great wickedness, 
troublesomeness, loathsomeness, Not so Christ’s! ity for thief on cross, Saul, 
Corinthians, and other gross sinners. 2. Unsearchable riches of merit. His blood 
cleanseth us from all sin. He is ‘‘able to save to the uttermost all that come to 
God by him”—Augustine, Bunyan, Lord Rochester, John Newton, and such like. 
8. Unsearchable riches of sanctifying grace. Great change needed to make men meet 
for kingdom of heaven. This includes grace to enlighten, guide, strengthen, and to 
restore from declension, 4, Unsearchable riches of comforting grace. No sorrow to 
which we are liable for which the gospel has not a comfort; no wound for which 
there is no balm. The Third Person, “the Comforter,” is sent by Christ. 5, Unsearch- 
able riches of glorifying grace. Can make provision for the full satisfaction and infinite 
enjoyment of every soul for ever and ever. “They shall hunger no more, neither 
thirst any more; ... for the Lamb in the midst of the throne shall feed them;” 
“ He that hath the Son hath life;” “He that overcometh shall inherit all things, and 
I will be his God, and he shall be my son.” 


Vers. 14—21.—Prayer for spiritual enrichment. This prayer remarkable for 
qualities already noted as belonging to Paul’s prayer. Three paris in this prayer— 
(1) introduction ; (2) petitions ; (8) doxoloyy. ᾿ 


on, m1. 1—21.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 111 


I. Intropvction. 1. The attitude: “I bow my knees;” humility, earnestness, 
2. The designation of God: “the Father;” the character in which Christ taught us to 
approach God in prayer, and which gives us most evcouragement., 8, The name of the 
family is derived from God, constituting au additional plea. That which bears God’s 
Name must be an object. of special interest to him. 

11. Tus peritions. ‘Three centres of petition, according as the grace (1) of the Spirit, 
(2) of the Son, or (8) of the Father is specially invoked. 1. Ver. 16: connected with 
the Spirit. (1) Zhe petition: to “be strengthened with might by his Spirit in the 
inner man”—the region where we are weakest, and where the might of the Spirit is 
most needed. (2) The measure or standard of the gift: “accurding to the riches of his 
glory ;” as, for example, that riches as exhibited in the starry firmament, or in any 
other scene that exhibits the boundless profusion of God, 2. Vers, 17—19: connected 
with the Son. (1) Indwelling. “That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith ;” 
denoting permanent residence and intcrest, to be secured by a faith ever looking to him 
and resting on him. (2) Stability and force. “'That being rooted and grounded in 
love;” having the stability and force of Christian character which comes from love; 7,6. 
the love of Christ received and enjoyed, and a loving spirit toward him and his peo) le 
exercised. (8) Comprehension, with all saints, of the manifold dimensions of Christ’s 
capacity to bless (see Exposition). (4) Knowledge of “ the love of Christ, which passeth 
knowledge; ” for the inward, experimental knowledge of that love is the strongest of ali 
sviritual dynamics, ὃ, Ver. 19: connected with the Father. “Filled with all the 
fulness of God.” The renewed heart has a capacity to receive the things of God—to be 
plunged, as it were, into his fulness and filled therefrom. This can never be fully 
reached; as our capacities increase there is more to he enjoyed. 

ΠΙ. Tue poxotocy. 1. The Being praised. “Him that is able,” etc. View of 
Divine infinity, for much has been asked and more thouglit about; yet, like space and 
time, God’s ability to bless extends infinitely beyond. ‘The blessing is in the direction 
of what has been already conferred: “ According to the power that worketh in us,” 
2. Tie ascription offered. (1) The offering: “glory ”’—the praise, credit, glory of the 
whole work of grace, with all its blessings and its final consummation. (2) The sphere: 
“in the Church ”—something different {rom the glory of creation and providence; the 
glory connectcd with the history of the Church—the glory of redemption. (8) The 
medium: “in Christ Jesus,” in vital union to whom the Church has got all her 
blessings. (4) The duration: “ world without end;” for the story of redemption will 
never become obsolcte, and the songs of redemption will be for ever fresh and living. 
“Glorious things are spoken of thee, Ὁ city of our God!” ‘ How goodly are thy 
tents, O Jacob, and thy dwelling-places,O Israel! Biessed is he that blesseth thee, 
and cursed is he that curseth thee!” 


HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTIORS, 


Ver. 1.—“The prisoner of Jesus Christ.” The apostle often refers to his prison-life, 
and here presents himself to the Churches as “an ambassador in bonds” (ch. vi, 20). 

1. He was A MOST CELEBRATED PRISONER. Perhaps he was regarded as of no great 
account by his Roman jailors, who could have known nothing of the secret of his great- 
ness; but viewed in the light of Christian history, Paul is the most distinguished of 
men. He did more than any other apostle to shape the theology of Western Christendom, 
which, in its turn, has left the deepest imprint on the civilization of the world. The 
world would not be to-day what it is if Paul of Tarsus had not lived. His influence has 
long survived the empire of Rome, which held him captive. We sympathize with the 
prison-sorrows of the great. Alas! that the best of men, “ of whom the world was not 
worthy,” have spent so many weary days and years in prison! 

II. He was Nort A PRISONER FOR CRIME OR FOR THE BREACH OF THE ROMAN LAWS, 
BUT AS THE EFFECT OF THE UNSLEEPING HATRED OF THE JEWs. It was his ministry to 
the Gentiles which brought down upon him the vindictive anger of his countrymen, and 
led them to accuse him before the Roman magistrates. The suspicion that he had taken 
Trophimus, an Ephesian, into the temple at Jerusalem had, indeed, an immediate con- 
nection with his first arrest. ‘ He was at once Christ's prisoner, the Jews’ prisoner, the 


112 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. (om. τα. 1—21 


Romans’ prisoner, the Gentiles’ prisoner: Christ’s prisoner, as suffering for his gospel ; 

the Jews’ prisoner, as suffering by their accusation ; the Romans’ prisoner, as suffering 

by their sentence; the Gentiles’ prisoner, as suffering for his labours unto their salva- 

τὴν His imprisonment was thus a higher honour than his rapture into the third 
eavens. 

III. His ImpRisoONMENT HAD ITS PROVIDENTIAL ADVANTAGES, Just as John Huss 
had leisure during his imprisonment in the fortress on the Rhine to write words that 
fired the hearts of his countrymen ages after his martyrdom at Constance, and as Martin 
Luther’s one year’s imprisonment in the Wartburg enabled him to give the Scriptures 
to Germany in the tongue of the people, so the Apostle Paul was enabled in the leisure 
of his Roman imprisonment to throw off those beautiful Epistles of the captivity—to 
the Philippians, to the Ephesians, to the Colossians, to Philemon—which have so 
largely contributed to the edification and comfort of the Church. He still held the 
threads of a hundred interests in his hands, and felt in his prison at Rome the throbbing 
of thousands of Christian hearts in all parts of Asia and Europe. 

IV. PRISON-LIFE IS ALMOST NECESSARILY SAD, BECAUSE OF ITS ISOLATION FROM 
HUMAN RELATIONS, ITS SOLITUDE, ITS SUSPENSION OF ACTIVE AND ACCUSTOMED 
LABOUR, AND ITS USUALLY HARD CONDITIONS. It must have been a sore trial to the 
apostle to submit to an enforced inactivity, while the world was everywhere, in so 
sad a sense, “ripe for the harvest.” It would seem as if, at a certain point, the sym- 
pathy of Asiatic Christians failed him (2 Tim. i. 15); and there was an unaccountable 
indifference to his wants marking the relations of the Roman Christians themselves, 
which argued that much was not to be expected from their affection. So his prison- 
experience must have had its dark moments. 

V. Mark THE SPIRIT IN WHICH THE APOSTLE LIVED THROUGH THIS PRISON-EX- 
PERIENCE. ‘I'he solitude of such a life often breeds a morbid spirit, which throws a 
darker colouring into the thoughts of the prisoner. Yet the Epistles of the captivity 
breathe a beautiful spirit of Christian courage and resignation, not to speak of absolute 
rejoicing. Compare the letters of the apostle with those of Cicero, Seneca, and Ovid in 
their exile, and we see at a glance the different effects of Christianity and paganism 
upon the happiness of man. As the prisoner of Jesus Christ, he abounded in the con- 
solations of his Divine Master, while he must have been greatly encourayed by -the 
visits of disciples like Epaphroditus, Epaphras, and others, who carried to him the 
prayers and benefactions of the Churches. 

VI. WE OUGHT TO REMEMBER PRISONERS IN OUR PRAYERS, AS “BOUND WITH THEM.” 
Most prisoners in our day are in jail for crime, but we ought to remember that they 
are men, that they are our brothers, that they must feel their separation from wife and 
children and home as keenly as we should. Perhaps, but for restraining grace, we 
should have been in their position, But we are bound specially to remember in our 
prayers those suffering for the cause of Christ, and especially those occupied with great 
service for the Lord.—T. C. 


Vers. 2—5.—Dispensational privileges of the Gentiles, The apostle recurs to a sub- 
ject already treated in “few words” in the first chapter—words which he requests them 
to read, that they may fully understand his meaning—respecting the new position of 
the Gentiles in the kingdom of God. Their position was determined by a dispensation, 
that is, by an arrangement organized in all its parts in relation to space and time; for 
God works by order in grace as well as in nature. Consider— 

I, THE ORIGIN OF THIS DISPENSATION. “ The grace of God given to me to you-ward.” 
It was an act of Divine favour to select the apostle as the person through whom 
“the mystery” of the dispensation was to be, not only revealed, but applied in its 
cedeeming effects to the Ephesian heathens, It was not the honour or the authority 
involved in it that made it precious in his eyes; it was the privilege of making 
known the unsearchable riches of Christ. Thus, as a good steward of the mysteries 
of God, it was the delight of his life to dispense them in all their gracious mani- 
folduess to the family of Ged. 

11. ΤῊΒ MYSTERY THAT SHROUDED THE DISPENSATION For AGES. 1. 7ὲ ἐδ called 
“the mystery of Christ,” not because he ts tts Author, but because he #8 the Centre or 
Subject of it; tor it included far more than the truth that the Gentiles were fellow- 


cn. ΤΙ. 1—21.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 113 


citizens of the saints. Christ is the Mystery of godliness, as he is God manifest in 
the flesh, but he is emphatically so as “Christ the Hope of glory” for the Gentiles 
(Col. i. 27). 2. Jé was hidden for ages from the sons of men, both Jew and Gentile. 
A mystery is either something which has been concealed, perhaps for ages, and which 
probably would never have been discovered unless the voice of revelation had 
proclaimed it; or something which, even when revealed, transcends the power of the 
human faculties to comprehend it. Now, the Incarnation is a mystery in this double 
sense; but the call of the Gentiles, as part of “the mystery of Christ,” is a mystery 
only in the first-named sense. It was known to the Jews for ages that the Gentiles 
would share in the blessings of the Messiah’s kingdom—and the Apostle Paul 
quotes Old Testament predictions to prove the fact (Rom. ix. 25—33); but it 
was not known that the Gentiles would be included within the circle of religious 
privilege by the complete sacrifice of the Hebrew theocracy and the reconstitution 
of religion on a perfectly new basis, designed equally for all mankind, under 
which the old distinctions of Jew and Gentile would be done away. There was 
to be no further room for Jewish particularism, The dispensation which was to 
carry the world to its last destinies was to be as universal as that embodied in 
the first promise made to our first parents. 3. The revelation of the mystery. 
So far as it involved a mission to the Gentiles, it was revealed first to the 
Apostle Paul at his conversion; for when Christ appeared to him on his journey 
to Damascus, he said, “1 have appeared unto thee for this purpose, to make 
thee a minister and a witness . .. delivering thee from the people, and from the 
Gentiles, unto whom now I send thee, to open their eyes, and to turn them from dark- 
ness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God” (Acts xxvi. 16—18). But the 
fuller exhibition of Gentile privilege is made in this glorious Epistle as well as else- 
where. It was a revelation made by the Lord himself (Gal. i. 12). But it was made 
especially to “apostles and prophets,” both of them belonging to the new dispensa- 
tion—the only class of inspired men connected with it who received special informa- 
tion from the Holy Spirit, who searches the deep things of God, respecting the new 
development of the kingdom. The revelation was, indeed, one of facts as well as of 
truths, The calling of the Gentiles was made manifest in the Spirit’s falling upon Cor- 
nelius, and in the widespread success of the gospel among the Gentiles, so that the 
logic of facts beautifully reinforced the more formal revelations of “ apostles and pro- 
phets.” 4. The substance of the revelation. “That the Gentiles are fellow-heirs, and of 
the same body, and partakers of his promise in Christ by the gospel.” These are the 
three points of Gentile privilege. ‘hey were not to receive the blessings of the 
Messiah’s kingdom by being merged as proselytes into the old theocracy, which was to 
abide in all its narrow ritualism. (1) The Gentiles are fellow-heirs. Vossession by 
inheritance involves the ideas of right, certainty, and inalienallencss. All that is 
involved in the benefits of the covenant of grace is our inheritance. Now, the Gentiles 
are “heirs of God and joint-heirs with Christ” as well as the Jews, just because they 
are “children of God by faith in Christ Jesus.” They cannot be heirs unless they are 
children; they cannot be children unless they have faith, And because they have 
faith, they are Abraham’s seed. ‘And if ye be Christ’s, then are ye Abraham’s seed, 
and heirs according to the promise” (Gal. iii. 29). The Gentile interest in the inheri- 
tance may be recent, but it is entire and beyond cavil. Jews and Gentiles have an 
equal share in all the blessings of the iaheritance. (2) The Gentiles are of the 
same body. This marks a more intimate relationship. They were all Jews and 
Gentiles alike, baptized into one body by one Spirit, and thus coalesced into one 
Church-state, with Christ as the Head of both. But while they were thus, as members 
of oe body, partakers of a common life, the Gentile was not there by the permission 
of the Jew, or the Jew by the permission of the Gentile. They were both equally 
baptized into it by the Spirit. The union in one body obliterates all previous dis- 
tinctions of character or culture, and all varieties in dispensational privilege ; for there 
is no schism inthe body. The Judaistic section of the Church in the apostle’s day 
fought strenuously against the doctrine of the one body. (8) The Gentiles are fellow- 
partakers of the promise. This refers, not so much to the promise of redemption made 
first to Adam, repeated to Abraham, and embodied in many Old Testament predictions, 
az to the promise of the Spirit, who enables us to realize all the blessings involved in 
EPHESIANS, 3 


114 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. ou. τη. 1—21, 


this first promise, This was, indeed, the blessing of Abraham which came upon 
the Gentiles (Gal. iii, 14). It was conspicuously realized when, in the words of the 
Apostle Peter, “the Holy Ghost fell upon them as on us.” There is no promiso of the 
new coveuant that is not equally sure to Gentile and to Jew. All the three points of 
Gentile privilege, setting forth apparently the relation to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, 
and represented in a sort of spiritual climax, are realized by union with Christ, made 
known to us in the gospel. Salvation centres, as its objective ground, in Christ Jesus, 
and the pgp is the medium by which it is subjectively applied to sinners of man- 
kind.—T. ©. 


Vers. 8, 9.—The apostle’s high privilege. Very often does he refer, with a sort of grate- 
ful humility, to the Divine favour in attaching him to the service of the gospel. 

1. Mark THE CONTRAST BETWEEN HIS CALL AND HIS SENSE OF PERSONAL NOTHINGNESS, 
“Less than the least of all saints.” The expression is excecdingly emphatic, being a 
comparative formed upon a superlative. He could never furget his share in the death of 
Stephen, and his fierce persecutions of the Church of God. This was the sin which, 
though forgiven by God, could never be forgiven by himself. But he was likewise con- 
scious of his own weakness and sinfulness,as we know by the very forcible phrase, “ of 
sinners I am chief,” which he uses as a presently believing man. Such language of self- 
abasement is a mark of true saintship. The highest saints are usually the most distin- 
guished by their humility. The term by which he describes himself imyplics that there 
are saints in Christ’s kingdom—little, less, least ; not that ‘there is any difference in 
their title, but a difference at once in their realization of their own unworthiness and in 
the degree of their conformity to him who was at once “ meek and lowly.” Now, while 
the consciousness of his own unworthiness stood out in marked coutrast to the high 
function to which he was called in God’s grace, he does not shrink from asserting his 
authority as an ambassador of Christ in the strongest terms, but always with the con- 
viction of one who ascribes all his success, not to his own merits, but to “ the gift of 
the grace of God.” His call to the apostleship involved his conversion, and his con- 
version was “ by the effectual working of God’s power.” 

11. ConsipER HIS MESSAGE ΤῸ THE GeNTILES. “The unsearchable riches of Christ.” 
We read of riches of grace and riches of glory, but the plenitude of, all Divine bless- 
ings is in him. 1. Zhe apostle does not specify what ts included in the “riches of 
Christ.” He who was rich for our sakes became poor that “ ye through his poverty 
might be made rich” (2 Cor. viii. 9). We sce the source of all the riches—it is in 
himself. But Scripture shows that, while in him there was all the fulness of the God- 
head bodily, with the real design of his filling us eventually with all the fulness of 
God, “ the riches of Christ” are scattered over the whole path of a believer, from its 
starting-point in conversion till it is lost in the glories of the eternal inheritance. He 
is rich in love, rich in compassion, rich. in mercy, rich in grace, rich in peace, rich in 
promise, rich in reward, rich in all the blessings of the new and better covenant, as he 
must be because he is “ made unto us wisdom, rightcousness, sanctification, redemp- 
tion.” 2. The riches of Christ are “unsearchable.” ‘lhe word suggests the idea of 
the difficulty of tracing footsteps. Who can trace the footsteps of God? Whatever 
of power is infinite power; whatever of wisdom is infinite wisdom; whatever of love 
is infinite love, (1) We cannot trace the extent of the “riches of Christ.” We ma 
apply a double standard of measurement, taking account of the infinite altitude of the 
sources whence his salvation has flowed, and of the depths of sin and misery to which 
salvation had to descend in ordcr to reach its objects. Yet we have not searched out 
the riches of Christ. He put forth upon our salvation all the invention of his omni- 
scient wisdom, applied to it the utmost energies of his omnipotent power, and lavished 
upon it the exceeding riches of his infinite goodness—neither mercy conflicting with 
justice, nor love with righteousness, nor compassion for the sinner with hatred of his 
sins. (2) The riches of Christ are unsearchable so far they are undiminished with 
use or time. Who can trace the limits of their application? Millions have drunk 
of the “ water of the wells of salvation,” but these wells are still unexhausted and 
inexhaustible. ‘he rivers of the earth may fail; there may be dry wastes where now 
there are running streams; but the riches of Christ can never fail, though thousands of 
needy souls have drawn from them and twice ten thousand more will yet come to 


ox, ἡ. 1—21.) THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, 115 


draw. The fountain of supply is full as it is free, and free as itis full. 8, Consider 
his larger message to the whole world of man. “ And to make all men see the dispen- 
sation of the mystery, which from the beginning of the world hath been hid in God.” 
The apostle’s object was to enlighten the Jew as well as the Gentile upon the true 
nature of the dispensation which displaced so much that was dear to the Jewish heart 
in order that the true glory of the Lord might shine forth, not as a mere minister of 
the circumcision, but as the uniter of Jew and Gentile, bond and free, male and female, 
in his own body. The mystery was hid for ages, but was now made known by 
apostles and prophets. We see how revelation was an historical movement, subject to 
the usual laws of historical development; for the redemptive purpose, “ hid for ages,” 
was evolved by a gradual process of growth, till in Christianity it became a full-grown 
fact. It was part of the discipline of man to go through all these stages of imperfect 
knowledge till “ the perfect day ” dawned upon the world. But it was through all the 
ages “the mystery of redemption,” going back to the ages that date from: creation— 
“creation building the platform on which the strange mystery of redemption was 
disclosed.”—T. O, 


Vers. 10, 11.—The Church the means of angelic enlightenment. The Divine purpose 
in the dispensation already described was to make known to the angels the manifold 
wisdom of God. 

1. THE ANGELS RECEIVE INSTRUCTION THROUGH THE CuuRcH. This implies: 1, That 
the angels are not omniscient, for they have something still to learn. 2. That the angels 
are in communication with the Church on earth as well as in heaven. They rejoice over 
the conversion of sinners; they minister to those who shall be heirs of salvation (Heb. i. 
14) ; they stand in immediate relation to the individual man (Matt. xviii. 10; Luke xv. 
‘10; xvi. 22). The apostles regard themselves as “ spectacles to angels” as well as men, 
in the insults heaped upon them by an ungrateful world (1 Cor. iv. 9). The Apostle Peter 
was liberated from prison by an angel. Angels are present in the assembly of the saints 
(1 Cor. xi. 10). They are associated with the redeemed in heaven (Heb. xii. 22), so as 
to derive much information concerning the kingdom of God. 8, The angels desire 
increased knowledge of the ways of God with man. This might be inferred from the 
fact that they come specially into the foreground at great turning-points in the history 
of the kingdom of God, such as the founding of the old and new covenants, and the 
humiliation and exaltation of Christ. But they are expressly represented as desiring 
“to look into” the great realities of redemption (1 Pet. i. 12), and here they are 
instructed in the manifold wisdom of God by means of the Church. 

II. Tue INsTRUCTION CONVEYED BY THE CHURCH 18 “THE GREATLY DIVERSIFIED 
wispom oF Gop.” It is a curious fact that the interest of the angels is not in the 
power or the goodness of God, but in his wisdom, as if to imply that the work of 
redemption represents the highest order of intelligence. It is also a high honour to man 
that he should first receive the knowledge which the angels are to receive through 
man. But the angels, by their great age—for they may be thousands of years old— 
have advantages that short-lived man does not possess for comparing the wisdom of 
God as manifest in widely distant ages. But the wisdom here referred to centres in 
the Church—the spiritual body constituted in Christ, and its variety is manifest in 
the original plan of salvation, in the selection of a Redeemer, in the incarnation, in 
the atonement, in the application of salvation to Gentile and Jew, in the spread 
of the Greek language, in the triumph of the Roman law, and in all the dispensa- 
tions by which the Church has been led onward to her final destiny. Thus our earth, 
though a mere speck in space, becomes, in the eyes of angels, the brightest of stars; 
for ai is the platform of that Church which mirrors forth “the manifold wisdom 
of ε 

III. Ir 1s THz CHURCH WHICH 18 THE MEDIUM OF ANGELIC INsTRUCTION. Not specifi- 
cally the preaching of apostles, nor human preaching, but the Church as the exhibition 
in its long and checkered history of the wisdom of God, 

IV, THIS EXHIBITION OF THE MANIFOLD WISDOM WAS INVOLVED IN THE ORIGINAL 
PLAN OF SALVATION. “ According to the eternal purpose which he purposed in Christ 
Jesus our Lord.” The scheme was fixed in the counsel of peace; it was executed in 
all its parts in and through Jesus Christ, in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdona 


116 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, (ox. m1. 1-21. 


and knowledge; and it found historical realization in the progress and kingdom of God, 
apart from all dispensational limitations.—T’, O. 


Ver. 12.—The new spirit of approach to God. As the effect of the work of redemp- 
tion, we stand in a new relation to God, which entitles us to a continuous access to 
hin, free, unrestricted, and confiding, 

I. WE HAVE BOLDNESS AND access ΤῸ Gop. There is an open, intrepid speaking 
which springs from a mind confident in itself and strong in the justice of the cause it 
espouses; but the freedom of speech here referred to is based upon a true appreciation 
of our relation to Christ and the security enjoyed by the believer in the midst of all 
his tremors and dubieties. Our God is indeed a consuming fire, yet the believer can 
approach him without servile fear, simply because Christ is the way of access, and 
the heart has been sprinkled from an evil conscience through his blood. 

11. Ir ΙΒῚΝ Carist WE HAVE THIS OHANGED DISPOSITION IN PRAYER. He died that 
we might have “boldness to enter into the holiest.” We see in his atonement, not 
a means of deliverance out of the hands of God, but the strongest of all reasons for 
casting ourselves into the hands of God as the very best Friend we have in all the 
universe. Our security from the wrath of God is in the bosom of God. It is Jesus 
who gives us audience with God, dispelling at the same time from the mind of the 
worshipper those suggestions which would restrict or narrow the riches of God’s love. 

JIL. Iv 1s By FAITH IN CHRIST WE REACH THIS NEW TEMPER OF BOLDNEss. It is by 
the faith of which Christ is both the Object and the Author, discovering to us the 
dignity of his person, the efficacy of his work, the security of his love, that we are 
enabled joyfully to approach God. It is thus we have confidence in our approaches 
to God. Christ’s sacrifice, as it has given infinite satisfaction to God, is titted to 
inspire the soul of the believer with perfect confidence. He sees that nothing more is 
needed to ensure his everlasting acceptance, and is thus led to tread with boldness the 
entrance into the sanctuary of God’s presence, He has peace with God through our 
Lord Jesus Christ. He has confidence in regard to his interest in God’s love, in régard 
to the power and faithfulness of God to fulfil his promises, and in regard to the con- 
tinuousness of the supply of grace necessary to his final salvation. 

1V, ΤῊ EFFECTS OF THIS BOLDNESS AND ACCESS TO GOD ARE TO MAKE US SUPERIOR 
TO ALL THE AFFLICTIONS OF LIFE. The apostle beseeches the Ephesians, on this 
ground, not to lose heart on account of the afflictions that had come to himself on 
their account. The cynical philosopher represents most men as easily reconciled to 
the misfortunes of their friends, but Christianity not only enjoins but sustains a nobler 
temper. So close was the relationship that existed between the apostle and the saints 
at Ephesus, that his afflictions had fallen upon them like almost the reality of a per- 
sonal experience. They were not to be discouraged by his tribulations, which were, 
after all, the price paid for his uncomprumising assertion of their rights as Gentiles, 


Ver. 15.— The family in heaven and in earth.” The prayer of the apostle, which 
includes a reference to the whole family interest of the universe under the blessed 
Father, is one of the most fervent, comprehensive, and sublime to be found in all 
Scripture. Let us consider the force and beauty of the expression, “the family in 
heaven and in earth.” The primary reference is to the Church of God, but it likewise 
includes the angels, who merge with the saints into one family; for “all they are 
brethren.” The Church is the family of God in many respects. 

1. Iv 18 80 IN THE TIE THAT BINDS ALL THE MEMBERS TOGETHER, A family has its 
constitution in nature, not in similarity of opinion, or interest, or taste. We cannot 
choose who shall be our brothers or sisters. There are relationships in human life 
into which we can enter or not enter at will, such as political associations, literary 
fellowships, social bonds of various kinds. The family is not of this character. Now, 
the Church is a family unlike these merely voluntary associations, for it is founded by 
God himself, in which we have our place by his own adopting grace, and once we are 
there, our relations to everything internal and external are determined, not by our- 
selves, but by the laws of family life. We become “ children of God by faith in Christ 
Jesus” (Cal. iii. 26), There may be members in this family who may not recognize 


oH. rt. 1—21.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 117 


us as fellow-members at all, but we are members notwithstanding, by ties which they 
have done nothing to create and which they cannot undo by their exclusiveness or 
their bigotry. Yet all the members are really bound to each other by the tie of a 
common life, for they live by faith in Christ Jesus, and of a common love; for faith 
worketh by love, and never works without it. Jesus says, “ Love one another, as I 
have loved you.” That is, we are to love with a love practical, humble, bountiful, 
patient, gentle, all-embracing, and lasting as Christ’s own love. 

IL. Tu» Cuurcn 18 A FAMILY BY ITs UNITY. ‘There is but one Father in the Divine 
family, who unites in himself the perfection of fatherly and motherly affection. There 
is but one Church on earth, “ one body,” as there is but one faith, one baptism, one 
hope. Wherever there is union with Christ, there is membership in his body the 
Church, The indwelling of the Holy Spirit is the bond of unity in the Church. It 
follows, therefore, that believers must be one in laith, love, and obedience, 

111. Tue Cuurcu as A FAMILY ADMITS OF GREAT DIVERSITIES. There are great 
diversities of affection, of temperament, of character, in the same family, contributing, 
indeed, to the fulness and happiness of its life. ‘The completeness of the family 
depends, indeed, on the beautiful fusion of its masculine and feminine elements. Now, 
the Church similarly, though one, exists under great diversities of form and condition. 
There are, first, the two great divisions of the Church into the heavenly and the earthly 
membership. It isa mistake to say, as some do, that the Church consists only of 
living saints, as if the dead ceased to be in its unity. God does not set members in 
the body that they may die out of it again; he is the God, not of the dead, but of the 
living; and if such members are not in the body, they are without a Head, that is, 
without Jesus Christ, who is the only Head of the body. Can “the whole body” grow 
to the measure of the stature of a perfect man without including the growth of the 
entire Church of God? Then, again, there are the diversities of dispensations, 
Believers of every age, no matter under what dispensation they lived, are members of 
the Divine family. The way of salvation was always the same (Rom. iv.). The one 
Lamb of God who took away the sin of man was “slain from the foundation of the 
world ” (Rev. viii. 8). The variety of dispensations marks the onward stages of the 
family life. Then, again, there are the diversities of opinion which have existed 
within the Church of God without destroying its unity; and endless diversities of 
character and temperament, all governed more or less by the subduing grace of God; 
and the diveisities of lot, service, and event, illustrated in the career of the members of 
this family. 

TV. Tue CuurcH 18 A FAMILY WITH A FINAL GATHERING AND A HOME FOR ALL ITS 
SEPARATED MEMBERS, ‘here is a house of “ many mansions,” which our Saviour has 
gone before to prepare (John xiv. 2)—“ the holy places made without hands;” the 
grand metropolis of God’s moral rule, “ whither the tribes go up, the tribes of the 
Lord,” from every realm of earth, from every age of time. ‘Ihere angels will mingle 
with saints, and interchange experiences of the love of God. The fatherhood of God 
is thus seen to connect different orders of beings by a new and loving tie. Happy 
family, whose names are written in heaven! Happy family, whose ranks are 
unbroken, whose hearts are one! Gathered home at last, to be for ever with the Lord, 
and for ever with one another!—T. 0. 


Ver. 16.—A prayer for spiritual strength. This beautiful supplication suggests 
several interesting points. 

I. I 18 A PRAYER FOR THE saints. It is not for their conversion, but that they 
might have life still more abundantly. The apostle’s desire was to make men eminent 
Christians, to quicken them in the heavenly race, to promote in them a growth in grace 
and knowledge which would contribute to their spiritual robustness. 

IL THe BLESSING SOUGHT IS REGARDED ΑΒ A FREE GIFT. “‘Ihat he would grant 
you... to be strengthened.” All true prayer proceeds upon the supposition that we 
can expect nothing from God but as a free gift through Jesus Christ. ‘here must be a 
sense of want along with a spirit of entire dependence on the Lord, so that the believer 
may realize the sweetness of the promise, “My God shall supply all your need 
according to his riches in glory by Christ Jesus” (Phil. iv, 19). 

IIL THE BLESSING 18 SPIRITUAL STRENGTH. “Strengthened with might... in the 


118 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. (on. 11. 1—21. 


inner man.” It is nota prayer for physical strength, which is a matter of slight moment 
in God’s sight, though it is often made the subject of foolish boasting among men; nor 
for intellectual strength, which is a much more important factor in human life; but for 
“strength in the inner man.” ‘This is not to be confounded with “the new man.” It is 
rather “the hidden man of the heart” (1 Pet. iii. 4); the man “created after God” 
(ch. iv. 24) in righteousness and holiness; the interior principle of spiritual life; the 
personification of our intellectual and spiritual life, with its impulses, its feelings, its 
struggles. This is the sphere, the direction, the destination, of the strength prayed for. 
It is a prayer that God would make us eminent in grace and goodness, that our souls 
may prosper and be in health like our bodies, that we may be able to grapple with all 
our spiritual enemies, to resist temptation, to endure afflictions, to perform the duties 
of our Christian calling. If we have strength, we shall be able to run in the way οἱ 
God’s commandments (Isa. xl. 81). Our physical strength is renewed from day to day 
by food and rest. So is our spiritual strength daily renewed by the Bread of life; and 
thus the apostle could say of himself, “I can do all things through Christ which 
strengtheneth me.” 

IV. Tue Source OF THIS STRENGTH 18 THE Spirit or Gop. “By the Spirit.” 
Here is the Fountain of spiritual energy. ‘The Spirit strengthens the believer by leading 
him to the fulness of grace that is in Christ, by shedding abroad the love of God in his 
heart, by applying the promises of the gospel, by making the Scriptures sources of that 
“joy of the Lord which is our strength,” and thus causing us to go from strength 
to strength till at last we stand before God in Zion. It is easy to see, indeed, that the 
Fountain of strength is in the Spirit; for all the nine graces of the Spirit—love, joy, 
peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance (Gal. v. 22) — 
are so many factors of this inward power. They promote the freedom and efficiency 
of life. 

V. THE MEASURE OF THIS STRENGTH. “ According to the riches of his glory.” The 
apostle asks it iz no limited measures; he asks it in the measure of the riches of 
that glory which is seen in his blended and harmonious attributes, God will act up 
to the diznity of his infinite perfections. ‘Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it, 

~ saith the Lord;” “ Ask, and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full.” There is au 
inexhaustible source of mercy upon which we may draw at pleasure in the supreme 
exigencies of our life. 

VI. ConsIDER THE IMPORTANCE OF THE BLESSING ASKED FOR, There is happiness 
in strength, there is misery in weakness; there is efficiency in strength, there fs 
futility in weakness. 1. Our usefulness depends on large supplies of spiritual strength. 
If we are weak, what good can we do in the world? “Ye are the salt of the 
earth; but if the salt have lost its savour, wherewith shall it be salted? It is thence- 
forth good for nothing.” 2. We glorify God by this fuller strength. It is not enough 
to have grace enough to carry us to heaven; we must abound in the fruits of righteons- 
ness to the praise and glory of God. Let us, then, pray earnestly that we may became 
“ strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might,” and that our inward man may be 
renewed day by day, even though our outward man show signs of weakness and 
dJecay.—T. Ὁ, 


Ver. 17.—The indwelling of Christ in believers. ‘That Christ may dwell in your 
hearts by faith.” Whether we regard this clause of the prayer as representing the 
result, or the purpose, or the source of the spiritual strength spoken of in the previous 
clause, it is in very close relationship with it. Its own meaning is perfectly clear. 

1. Taz InpwetLteR—Carist. There is a threefold idea suggested by the term. 
1. The believer is regarded as a temple or house to be divinely inhabited. It is origin- 
ally a house in ruins, to be restored as a beautiful temple of the Lord. Judging by the 
analogy of restoring a ruined house, the first operation is a cleansing out of the rubbish ; 
the second, an opening of the windows to admit the pure air of heaven, and a kindling 
of a fire on the hearth; the third is a closing up of all the cracks or openings in the 
walls by which the wind or air finds access; and the fourth is the furnishing of the 
rooms with such articles of convenience as our taste and our means may enable us te 
procure, Similarly, wken the Lord takes up his abode in the sinner’s heart, the process, 
though not successive in point of time, includes, first, the application of the blood of 


ou, 1. 1—21.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, 119 


Christ to “the heart sprinkled from an evil conscience;” second, the opening of the 
windows of the understanding to displace the tainted atmosphere of man’s thoughts, 
and the kindling of the fire of love Divine in the heart; third, the watchful closing up 
of those avenues in the soul through which sin so easily finds access; and fourth, the 
furnishing of the soul with the needed graces of the Spirit. 2. The indwelling ts here 
ascribed to Christ. It is elsewhere ascribed to the Holy Spirit: “Know ye not that 
ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you?” (1 Cor. iii. 16). 
It is likewise ascribed to the Father: “He that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God, and 
God in him” (1 John iv. 16). These varying forms of expression find their solution 
jn the doctrine of the Trinity. He that hath seen the Son hath seen the Father, and 
he that hath the Son hath the Father; then, again, he that hath the Son hath the 
Spirit of Christ: “The Spirit of God dwelleth in you. Now if any man have not the 
Spirit of Christ, he is none of his, And if Christ be in you .. . the Spirit is life because 
of righteousness” (Rom. viii. 9,10). Therefore, when the apostle speaks of Christ dwell- 
ing in our hearts, he refers to the Spirit’s indwelling, for Christ dwells in his people by 
his Spirit. But there is a distinction in the modes of this indwelling: the Father 
dwells in us by love (1 John iv. 16); the Son by faith (ch. iii. 17); the Spirit lies hid 
in the heart, working the faith in the one case and the love in the other. 3. J¢ implies 
an abiding habit of life. Christ does not come as a sojourner or as a wayfaring man, 
that turneth aside to tarry for the night, but as a constant dweller. Herein lies our 
security for the continuance, the power, the comfort, of this life. 

IL. ‘He seaT OF INDWELLING—THE HEART. This is the true shrine, The word 
signifies the seat of religious knowledge as well as feeling, Thus Christ sits at the very 
centre of spiritual life, himself the very Life of that life (Gal. ii. 20), controlling all its 
impulses and movements. ‘The objects we most desire we treasure in the heart. The 
heart wearies of many things, but can never weary of this Divine Visitant, who can 
speak with commanding voice when the soul is disturbed by suggestions of βίῃ. “If 
our heart condemn us, God is greater than our heart” (1 John iii. 20). The Lord is 
the supreme Possessor of the heart “now sprinkled from an evil conscience.” 

III. THE SUBJECTIVE MEANS OF THE INDWELLING—FaITH. This is not to be 
regarded merely as the means of our justification, or as the root of our spiritual life, but 
as its continuously sustaining principle, according to the apostle’s teaching: “1 live; 
yet not I, but Christ liveth in me: and the life which I now live in the flesh I live 
by the faith of the Son of God” (Gal. ii. 20). This is the faith that worketh by 
love, that purifies the heart, that overcometh the world. It is the principle of spiritual 
communion; it is that by which we realize the presence, the excellence, the power, 
of Christ in us; it is that which radiates all grace and peace through the believer's 
heart.—T. O. 


Ver. 18.—Love, the root and foundation of spiritual knowledge. ‘That ye, being 
rooted and grounded in love,” may comprehend and know the love of Christ. The effect 
of Christ’s indwelling in believers is to root them and found them deeply in love—love 
being the root of the tree of life in the one case, and the foundation of the temple or 
house in the other; for the soul, ever contemplating Christ within it, is changed into 
his very likeness, The apostle means that the Ephesian saints would grow in the 
knowledge of that love by growing into the likeness of that love, “Blessed are 
the pure in heart: for they shall see God;” “The meek will he guide in judgment, the 
meek will he teach his way.” The truths of God are by them spiritually discerned. 
There is a deep philosophy in this matter. Men cannot understand each other except 
so far as they have the radical elements of the same experiences in themselves. I 
understand what you mean when you say you are hot or cold, because I have had 
sensations of heat and cold in myself. Thus people of dissimilar tempers, or culture, or 
opportunities are apt to misunderstand each other. A vulgar man cannot understand 
a man of high refinement. A practical man of the world, who is to-day what he was 
yesterday, and will be to-morrow what he is to-day, can never understand the man of 
poetic genius, whose spirits come and go like the tides, to-day in the height of senti- 
mental ecstasy, to-morrow in the depths of despair. ‘There must, therefore, be similarity 
of temper or experience to promote a real understanding. Thus we can see how only 
love can understand love. Even in our worldly intimacies, it is not quickness of per- 


120 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. (cH. nx. 1—21. 


ception but the force of sympathy or affection that enables us to understand our friends. 
“Love’s quick eye can pierce through disguises impenetrable to a colder scrutiny.” 
Thus it is that the knowledge of God is not to be compassed by a mere exercise of the 
intellect ; it is to be attained through love: “ He that loveth not knoweth not God; for 
God is love” (1 John iv. 8). Thus it comes to pass that we can know the love of 
Christ realizingly just in proportion as we have that which resembles it in our own hearts, 
and that love is there in virtue of his own indwelling by the Spirit. “The Christ of 
the Bible manifests himself, and, by the laws of human nature, can manifest himself 
only to his own image formed in the heart.” Thus it is possible to read a new meaning 
Into the beautiful sentence of inspiration, “Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither 
have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that 
love him” (1 Cor. ii. 9). Our Lord has suggestively said, “If any man will do his will, 
he shall know of the doctrine whether it be of God.” There are moral as well as 
intellectual conditions in the pathway of all extended knowledge.—T. C. ; 


Vers. 18, 19.— The comprehension of the love of Christ. The true science for saints 
is “ Christ’s love.” 

I. ConsiDER THIS LOVE AS REPRESENTED IN THE PASSAGE ag to length, breadth, 
height, and depth, 1. These dimensions seem to imply infinity. It has been suggested 
that the apostle speaks as if standing in a centre, himself the object of this love, 
enveloped by an atmosphere of love which stretches away illimitably above, beneath, 
around, He prays that all saints may stand, as it were, in the focus of the same 
enveloping love. What is that which has thus its centre wherever a saint is to be 
found? ‘he centre of infinite space is wherever we stand; for we carry this centre with 
us, no matter where we go. So it is with the infinite love of Christ, which surrounds 
the saints with its vast and limitless expanse. Each saint ought to feel that he is in 
the very centre of that love, as if the sole object of its guiding, purifying, comforting 
care. Human affection has its limits, for it cannot lavish its richest treasures upon 
several beings at the same time. Not so the heart of Jesus, which has room for millions 
upon millions of saints, 2. But the love of Christ may be seen in its pre-eminence from 
the standpoint of time. Not only does he love millions, but there is a wonderful 
duration in his affection for us. We think gratefully of the parental affection that 
shone upon our life before any time that our memory can recall, and long before we 
were conscious of its existence. We value most the friendships that have lasted longest. 
But what is all earthly love to the everlasting love of Christ, which had us in his heart 
ages belore our birth, and had a kingdom prepared for us before the foundation of the 
world? But his love is as lasting as it is ancient. Human affection often fails throuch 
misunderstandings, collisions of interests, variations of pursuit, so that there is oftcn 
a painful sense of uncertainty as to the future; but even that affection can hardly 
follow us, as to any real succour or comfort, throughout the unknown life that awaits 
us beyond the grave. There is One, however, who is the same yesterday, to-day, and 
for ever; on the continuance of whose love we can securely count in time and through- 
out eternity. If he love us now, he will love us to the end. What, then, shall separate 
us from such a love? 3, But this love might be regarded from another standpoint : 
think of its intensity, We measure its intensity by its sacrifices, its sufferings, its 
burdens; yet we must remember that there was more than a mere human sensibility 
beating in the heart of Christ. He plants himself in the very heart of this world’s 
ingratitude and rebellion and unbelief, exposed to all its hatred, revenge, impurity, 
profanity ; and dies for this very world, “the Just for the unjust, that he might bring 
us to Gud.” 

IL. Iv 1s A LOVE DESIGNED TO BE THE OBJECT ALIKE OF COMPREHENSION AND OF KNOW- 
LEDGE. ‘The apostle prays that the Ephesian saints nay comprehend the dimensions 
of it and “know the love of Christ, which passeth knowledge.” There is a difference 
between the two terms. We do not want simply to know about Christ’s love, of which 
the absolute understanding is beyond our reach, but to know it, to realize it as a 

ssession of our own, to have an experimental knowledge of its preciousness. Such 
ove may be darkness to the intellect, but it is sunshine to the heart; too marvellous 
for us to comprehend, but ποὺ too rich for us to enjoy. “In a word, to know the love 
of Christ—it is might in weakness; it ia patience in tribulation; it is atrencth for 


cu, m1. 1—21.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 121 


living ; 10 is hope in dying; it is heaven brought down to earth; it is heaven dwelling 
within the soul.” 

III, Tue GRAND PURPOSE AND RESULT OF THIS REALIZED ΠΟΤΕ. ‘That ye may be 
filled with all the fulness of God.” 1. The fulness of God ts the fulness which God 
possesses, and therefore incapable of being contracted to the dimensions of a human 
heart. Yet that fulness—the plenitude of the Divine perfection, which is said to dwell 
in Christ bodily—is the very measure unto which we are to be filled. We are to be 
perfect as our Father in heaven is perfect ; we are to come “ to the perfect man, to the 
measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ ;” we are actually predestinated to ke 
conformed to the image of that Son of God who is the Brightness of the Father’s glory, 
and the express Image of his person, 2. We are to be filled unto that fulness. The 
apostle does not say that we shall reach it in this life, or that, if we reach it in the life 
beyond, the distance between God and us will net still be less than infinite. Plunge 
an empty vessel into the ocean, it is filled out of and filled with the fulness of the 
waters that surround it on every side. That empty vessel is our soul. It can take 
in the fulness of God in its own measure of sclf-containment. ‘he comparison, to be 
more exact, demands that the vessel in question should be of expansible material, like 
a sponge, which, lying withered upon the rock, becomes larger and larger as it is sunk 
in the deep, till it is merged in the very fulness of the sea. Thus our dry and withered 
souls, filled with the love of Christ, expand gradually into the very fulness of God. 
3. Effects of this filling unto God’s fulness. One is that, with a well so full and over- 
flowing, our vessels need never be empty. You may ask too little; you cannot ask too 
much : for the very fulness of God is ever flowing into you. You cannot exhaust it by 
any frequency of resort to it. Study ever more and more the love of Christ, which, 
like an arch, stands all the firmer from every additional stone with which it is weighted. 
Another effect is that, in proportion as you are being filled with God’s fulness, there is 
less room in the heart for sin, or fear, or doubt, or pain. The fulness, like the perfect 
love, “casteth out fear.” Asin an exhausted receiver, the more the air is drawn off 
the more firmly will the machine clasp the surface upon which it stands, so the more 
that guilt and fear are drawn off from the believer’s heart, the more will it cleave to the 
ales strength on which it rests. Let our hearts rejoice, therefore, in the fulness 
of God.—T. C, 


Vers. 20, 21.—A great doxology. The apostle had exhausted all the surms of supph- 
cation, and now he casts himself upon the very infinitude of God, which was able to 
supply more than the thoughts or desires of men could suggest in the sphere of prayer. 

I, Tae THEME OF THE DoxOLOGY. It is no abstract ascription of glory to God; it 
is one full of hope and cheer to the Church—the ability of God to do great things for 
his people. There isa sort of climax in the language employed: God is able to do 
what we ask or think; he is able to do above all we ask or think; nay, abundantly 
above it; nay, exceeding abundantly above all we ask or think; and our thinking is 
very much wider than our asking. ‘I'wo things make us strong in prayer—a deep sense 
of need and a strong hope of supply. Perhaps we shall hardly veuture to ask scme 
blessings, but we ouvht to consider that we are either to approach God on our own 
merits or on the merits of Christ. If we pray for blessing on our own merits, we can 
hardly be too stinted in our asking; but if on the merits of Christ, we ought not to 
disgrace God by asking little things on such a wide basis of encouragement. We have, 
in fact, got a carte-blanche put into our hands by Christ, saying, “ Ask what you will, and 
it shall be done unto you.” We are to ask up to our power of thinking, and far beyond 
it; for “God giveth liberally and upbraideth not.” “ Prove me now, ... if I will not 
open you the windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing that there shall not be room 
enough to receive it.” But Paul says merely that God is “able” to do so; what about 
his will to do so? ~=We remember, when speaking of God’s ultimate restoration of the 
Jews, Paul says, “ And they also, if they abide not still in unbelief, shall be graffed in; 
for God is able to graff them in again.” That is, they shall be, because God is able to 
doit, Therefore, we shall never have asked too much till we have asked beyond God’s 
ability. 

11. THE MEASURE OF THE POWER REFERRED ΤῸ. “According to the power that 
worketh in us.” It is not abstract or intrinsio omnipotence, such as merely suggests 


122 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. (on. or. 1—21 


a possibility that may never pass into a reality. It is a power in actual exercise for the 
benefit of the Church of God. It is in actual operation even before we have begun to 
ask or think ; it is “ the exceeding greatness of his power to usward who believe;” it 
is the glorious and surpassing power of God, not only irreversibly pledged, but irrevo- 
cably in operation, The principal thing that God does for us is what he does in us. 
“ According to the power that worketh in us.” There is a power that worketh for us, 
in virtue of whose supreme disposal “all things work together for good to them that 
love God ;” but there is ὦ power that worketh in us, to will and to do of his good 
pleasure, that perfecteth that which concerneth us, keeping us from falling, so that we 
may be presented blameless before the presence of his glory. 

II. Tue DEBT oF GLoRY DUE ΤῸ sUcH A Gop. “Unto him... be the glory.” 
What shall we not render unto him? Is it nota glorious work he hasdone? We 
πδδοῦ make him glorious, but we can tell how glorious he is in his gracious and mighty’ 
administration, “ ‘lhine is the glory,” said Christ. All glory belongs to him. Many 
glorious things exist in creation. ‘The sun is glorious, the stars are glorious, even 
one star differing from another star in glory ; but it is God who feeds their wonderful 
fires. They belong unto Jehovah. ‘No flesh must glory in his presence ;” and the 
only way not to glory before him is to glory in him. “He that glorieth, let him glory 
in the Lord.” 

IV. THE sPHERE OR SCENE OF THISGLORY. “ Untohim be the glory in the Church and 
in Christ Jesus.” “The locality or sphere is the Church, the outward theatre on which 
this glory is manifested before men ;” and “ Christ Jesus is” the Minister of this glory 
to God, the Minister of the true tabernacle which the Lord pitched, and not man, by 
whom the glory in question is presented with acceptance. In fact, it is in him God 
manifests the glory of his perfections as the God of grace and salvation it is through 
him he shines into our hearts to give us the light of the knowledge of the glory of God. 
Thus the blessings descend through Christ to the Church, just as all the Church’s 
service goes up to God through the hands of Jesus Christ. ν 

V. 'FHE PERIOD OF THIS GLory. “ΤῸ all the generations of the age of the aves.” A 
camulative expression of great force. This glory is to be given to Gcd during all the 
ages of time, “His Name shall endure for ever; men shall be blessed in him; all 
nations shall call him blessed;” “I will make thy Name to be remembered in all 
generations.” The stream of time rolls on world without end, but the glory is to 
continue through all the ages of eternity. “Blessing, and houour, and glory, and 
power, be to him that sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb fur ever and ever. 
Amen.” 

VI. Lessons To BE DRAWN FROM THIS DoxoLoGy. Let.us not be poor any more in 
our supplications ; let us not be stinted in asking to the dishonour of his abounding 
grace. Let us be encouraged to ask by the recollection of the blessings we have already 
received. Let us show a more signal gratitude for all our mercies. Are not the extent 
of our obligations and the perfection of the holiness to which they bind us, far beyond 
our powers of a)prehending or appreciating them ? and ought they not to leave us with 
the similar question of bewildered gratitude, “ What manner of persons ought we to 
be? "—T. C. 


Vers. 1—13.— The decth of the tribal spirit, The apostle, having stated the unity 
between Jews and Gentiles in the one spiritual temple, proceeds in this parenthesis to 
state the aspect of the gospel which is thus presented. It amounts, in fact, to the death 
of the tribal feeling, and to the encouragement of that broad cosmopolitanism which has 
been fostered by the Christian system. Paul, of course, rejoiced in his Jewish origin 
and in all the privileges which he had thus inherited. But since his conversion unto 
Christ, the narrowness had disappeared, and he took his stand before the world as the 
apostle and apologist of the Gentiles, hoping for the same elevation of character for 
tkem as for himself. ' 

I. Ler vs ΝΟΤΙΟΚ ΒΟΥ PAUL WAS PREPARED FOR THIS CHAMPIONSHIP OF THE 
Gentites, (Ver. 8.) He had come to enteitain a deep humility of spirit. He deemed 
himself “ less than the least of all saints.” In Paul’s experience it has been observed 
there is a progress. First he speaks of himself as “ the least of the apostles, that am 
not meet to be called an apostle, because I persecuted the Church of God” (1 Cor. xv. 9), 


cH. I. 1—21.J THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, 128 


Secondly, as in this passage before us, he regards himself not only as hardly worthy of 
the name of an apostle, but as less than the least of all saints. Having ranked all 
apostles above himself in the first instance, he now ranks all the saints above him. 
Then, thirdly, he puts himself below all other sinners, and declares, “ This is a faithful 
saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save 
sinners; of whom I am chief” (1 Tim. i. 15). _ Now, this expresses a complete revolu- 
tion in Pharisaic thought. Unquestionably Paul had learned to judge himself severely 
when he comes to conclusions such as these. Now, Christianity secures this apparent 
moral paradox of esteeming each the other better than himself (Phil. ii. 3). “ΒΥ 
humility,” as A. Monod has said in his ‘ Explication,’ “the Christian is led to judga 
himself severely, while charity comes to his aid in making him judge favourably of 
another. Each one, besides, reading in his own heart and not that of others, perceives 
only in himself that depth of sin which is the worst aspect of it, although least visible, 
and he can always hope that with others, whatever the appearances may be, this depth, 
hidden from his eyes, is better than with him.” This personal humiliation, then, is the 
preparation Paul receives for his great réle as elevator of the Gentiles. It is when 
personally abased that we are exalted in heart and hope, and become the willing 
servants of mankind. 

11. Pauw’s ESTIMATE OF HIS OFFICE. (Ver. 8.) It was‘a “grace” given to him to 
be allowed by God to preach among the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ. His 
notion was that it was the crown and summit of human privilege to be thus placed in 
charge of such a commission. He magnified his office. He saw nothing to be com- 
pared with it in the privileges of men. He would have endorsed the words of a great 
modern preacher when he declared to students for the ministerial office, “ ‘There is no 
career that can compare with it for a moment in the rich and satisfying relations into 
which it brings a man with his fellow-men, in the deep and interesting insight which it 
gives him into human nature, and in the chance of the best culture for his own 
character. . . . Let us rejoice with one another that in a world where there are a great 
many good and happy things for men to do, God has given us the best and happiest, and 
made us preachers of his truth.” 

II, THe MORAL ELEVATION WHICH THE GOSPEL PROPOSES 10 BESTOW UPON THE 
Gentines. (Ver. 6.) Up to our Lord’s time the tribal idea prevailed. The Jews were 
a tribe, and their pulicy was, as their policy would still be, the supremacy of the tribe. 
But Christ proposed not to carry the Jewish tribe up to proud supremacy, but, on the 
contrary, to bring all other tribes up to their level of privilege, and to weld the world’s 
peoples into one. It was he who first touched the key of cosmopolitan comprehensive- 
ness and bade the narrow tribal spirit to cease. He talked of many coming from east 
and west to sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven 
(Matt. viii. 11). He talked of drawing “ all men” unto himself once he was lifted on the 
cross (John xii. 82). He spoke of Jerusalem ceasing to be the single centre of true 
worship, and of true worshippers worshipping the Father anywhere (John iv. 21—24). 
All nations were to be discipled by his servants (Matt. xxviii. 20). Into these broad 
and noble views for mankind the eleven did not very rapidly or fully enter. Doubtless 
Peter had inaugurated the Gentile Pentecost in the house of Cornelius; but he relapsed 
into narrowness a few years later at Antioch. It was reserved, therefore, for Paul, the 
most powerful mind of the apostolic band, to catch the cosmopolitan spirit of his Master, 
and to champion the Geutile against all the prejudice of the Jewish world. It has been 
suggested that he would not have chosen the appointment had it been left to himself. 
But, as far as we can judge, he showed no narrowness once he had humbled himself at 
Christ’s feet on the way to Damascus. He there ceased to be the patriot of a tribe, 
and became, in the widest and worthiest sense, a citizen of the world and a champion 
of the rights of universal man. There is surely something grand in this idea of lifting 
outeaet communities into the highest and holiest associations, There is no casting of 
contempt on any tribe, but extending pity and compassion unto all, The golden gate 
of privilege is opened wide for every one. The missionary enterprise is the beat and 
noblest policy which men have set themselves in earnest to carry through! 

IV. THE LESSON THUS AFFORDED TO THE HEAVENLY WORLD. (Vers, 10—12.) The 
idea of Paul is that the angels on high look down with rapt interest and profit upon 
what is taking place in the Church. ‘The movements of men outside the Church have 


124 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. [ση. mr. 1—21, 


of course, their interest ; but it is the bringing of the different peoples of the earth into 
the glorious unity of the Church of God which g0 strikes the attention of the heavenly 
world. The Divine society which is gathering round Jesus is the most instructive 
exhibition of God’s purposes which the heavenly world can contemplate. As Jonathan 
Edwards put it in his sermon upon ver. 10, the angels are benefited by the salvation 
of men, (1) by seeing therein a great and wonderful manifestation of the glory of God; 
(2) by Jesus Christ, as God-Man, becoming their Head. We may be sure that the 
history of the world looks very differently to the immortals from what it does in the 
pages of mortal history. We see the tramp of armies and of battles upon the graphic 
page, and an account more or less intelligent of the different and concurrent causes; 
but with what fuller insight and appreciation must the heavenly world look down 
upon the vicissitudes of time! Amid the conflicting policies of different states and 
nations, the missionary enterprise appears as the one consistent and uniting policy. 
The elevation of the world’s peoples into one consecrated whole, into one mighty family, 
into one organic whole, is surely worthy of a God. And this is what the Church 
exhibits; it was for this Paul suffered, it is for this we in our respective spheres must 
atruggle too.—R. M. E, 


Vers, 14—21.—The Christian brotherhood—Paul’s second prayer. From the noble 
idea of the elevation of the heathen to equal privileges with the Jews, the apostle 
proceeds to a second prayer for the Ephesian converts, in which he rises to still greater 
elevation of thought. Prostrating himself before the Father of all, he contemplates 
a family unity embracing both heaven and earth, and he prays that his friends at 
Ephesus may experience such inward illumination and streneth as to be fitting members 
of the mighty family. The leading thought is, then, Christian brotherhood, which 
embraces angels as wellasmen. The following thoughts are suggested by the prayer :— 

L CurisTIAN BROTHERHOOD 18 TO BE REALIZED IN DEVOTION BEFORE A COMMON 
Patuex (Ver. 14.) The words “ of our Lord Jesus Christ” are not in the most ancient 
manuscripts, and are rightly omitted in the Revised Version. This clears the ground for 
the understanding of the family name. The word for “ family” (πατριὰν is etymologically 
connected with πατὴρ, so that it is God the Father who supplies the patronymic to 
“every family in heaven and on earth.” All gather round the feet of a common 
Father, and realize in their devotion the true brotherhood. We do not sufficiently think 
of how much is accomplished when we get men everywhere on their knees with the 
Lord’s Prayer upon their lips. As we say from the heart, “ Our Father, which art in 
heaven,” our hearts have become really one. However much we may squabble before 
we proceed to prayer, if our prayer to the infinite Father be true, we have entered by 
it into real brotherhood. Contention caunot stand “the light of the countenance” of 
the great “‘ Peace-maker.” 

II. CuristIAN BROTHERHOOD 18 SECURED THROUGH THE INDWELLING OF A COMMON 
Saviour. (Vers.16,17.) For the Holy Spirit, entering into the hearts of God’s children, 
enables them to entertain the elder Brother as a Guest. Christ dwells within each of 
us, He comes to sup with us and to enable us to sup with him (John xiv. 21; 
Rev. iii. 20). Christ within us becomes the unifying element. He is the Guest of 
each and of all. As a Divine Being, he can pervade all the hearts and ensure the 
brotherhood. The brotherhood is brought about and sustained by an indwelling Christ. 
Taking possession of our natures, Jesus moulds them to his own gracious purposes and 
secures the essential brotherhood all round. 

III. CuRIsTIAN BROTHERHOOD 18 INTENSIFIED THROUGH THE GRADUAL COMPREHEN- 
BION OF CHRIST’S WONDROUS LovE.’ (Vers. 18,19.) Jesus’ by his indwelling becomes 
the object as well as instigator of our love. We get “rooted and grounded in love.” 
The selfish, loveless life has ceased, and the loving and devoted life has begun. ‘This 
is essential to the comprehension of another’s love. As Robertson says, “ You must 
love im order to understand love.... One act of charity will teach us more of 
the love of God than a thousand sermons.” Only loving hearts, then, can 
appreciate the wondrous love of Christ. It passeth the knowledge of natural and 
unloving men. Love is a revelation only unto love. But now, supposing that the 
love of Christ has begun within us, then his wondrous love becomes a subject of endless 


contemplation, Its breadth and length, its depth and height, present ἃ problem for 


en, mt. 1---21.} THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, 125 


our holy comprehension, which can never be exhausted. “ The believer,” says A. Monod, 
“who has been represented just now as rooted and grounded in the love of the Lord, is 
here represented as enveloped on all sides by this love, which extends itself in all 
directions around him beyond the limits of vision. Suspended in the very bosom of 
the infinite love, like the earth in the bosom of space, he looks before him, behind him, 
above him, below him, to seize the just measure of this love which has saved him, but 
all ends in demonstrating the impossibility of measuring it. The breadth? On his 
cight and on his left, immensity. The length? Before him and behind him, immensity. 
The depth? Under his feet, immensity, ‘he height? Over his head, still immen- 
sity.” Here, then, in the infinite love of Christ there is material for etcrnal study, and 
the brotherhood realizes that it has begun an everlasting progress towards “ the fulness 
of God.” As we comprehend Christ’s love, we find ourselves proportionally “ partakers 
of the Divine nature” and filled with the Divine fulness. This is the infinitely distant 
goal; this is the straight line to which our hyperbolic orbit is continually making 
approach, though destined never actually to reach it. And as we approach the perfec- 
tion and fulness of God, we become the more united in Christian brotherhood. 

IV, CurisTIAN BROTHERHOOD REMAINS UNBROKEN BY THE OHANGE OF WORLDS. 
(Ver. 15.) The family of love, who are gathering regularly round the feet of the 
heavenly Father, cannot be broken up by death or change of worlds. Heaven with its 
saints and angels, earth with its suffering and saintly souls, these constitute but one 
family circle, and are pervaded by the one Christ and the one Christian spirit. It is 
this thought which robs death of its sting and makes it appear but a sublime emigra- 
tion. The majority are in the Father’s house above; it is the minority that are left on 
earth; and our sainted dead have simply passed over to the majority and are awaiting 
us amid more perfect associations. “)eath, in short,” says Martineau, “under the 
Christian aspect, is but God’s method of colonization; the transition from this mother- 
country of our race to the fairer and newer world of our emigration. What though no 
other passage thither is permitted to all the living, and by neither eye nor ear we can 
discover any trace of that unknown receptacle of vivid and more glorious life? So 
might the dwellers in any other sphere make complaint rcepectizg cur poor world. 
Intensely as it burns with life, dizzy as our thought becomes with the din of ite eager 
passions and the cries of its many woes, yet from the nearest station that God’s 
universe affords—nay, at afew miles beyond its own confines, all its strong force, its 
crowded cities, the breathless hurry and ferment of its nations, the whole apparition 
and chorus of humanity, is still and motionless as death; gathered all and lost within 
the circumference of a dark or illumined disc, And silent as those midnight heavens 
appear, well may there be, among their points of light, some one that thrills with the 
glow of our lost and immortal generations; busy with the fleet movements and happy 
energies of existence more vivid than our own; where, as we approach, we might catch 
the awful voices of the mighty dead, and the sweeter tones, lately heard in the last 
pain and sorrow, of our own departed ones.” 

V. THE CHRISTIAN BROTHERHOOD IS SUSTAINED BY THE ASSURANCE OF Gon’s suR- 
PASSING POWER. (Vers. 20, 21.) In the doxology the apostle adds one other thought 
to round and complete his glorious theme. He wishes to ascribe glory unto God; but 
what attribute shall form the substance of the doxology? The atiribute of power. 
Not, however, the physical power which obtains in the universe of sense, but the 
spiritual power which obtains in the “ world of mind.” And so he looks upward and 
pronounces the mighty God as “able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask 
or think, according to the power that worketh in us.” In the world of sense he does 
not work up to his full strength, nor is there any reason why he should. The physical 
universe speaks of his “eternal,” but not necessarily of his “infivite” power (Rom. i. 
20). It is in the domain of the spirit that he performs his chefs-daeuvre. And such 
a thought is surely fitted to sustain the aspirations of the Christian brotherhood !— 
Rk. Μ. BK 


Vers, 1—13.— Paul’s apostieship to the Gentiles: introduction. The apostle has it 
in his mind to pray for the Ephesian Christians, There is a twofold ground upon 
which he proceeds. 1. What has been said about them. “For this cause.” He has 
desoribed them in three waya as incorporated in the Church. His last statement 


126 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. (ox. πὶ. 1—21. 


pointed to their being built in. They were, therefore, objects for intercession, such as 
their heathen ancestors had not been. 2. 1718 relation to them. He did not stand at 
an outside, but in the closest relation to them, such as brought with it the obligation 
on his part to pray for them. (1) He had a relation to them through the common 
Master, being the prisoner of Christ Jesus. “1, Paul, the prisoner of Christ Jesus.” 
He was not the only one of whom that could be said, but “Paul the prisoner” was 
well known to them. Indeed, it was an Ephesian named Trophimus who innocently 
brought him into trouble. He was the prisoner of Cesar; but who was Cesar but the 
hand of Christ in the matter? He recognized the fact that it was by Christ’s will 
primarily that he was a prisoner. Christ being above Cesar in power, and therefore 
able to order it otherwise, it was to human appearance strange that a worker like Paul 
should at this time have been so restricted in his energies. But he who has eyes like 
unto a flame of fire saw deeper into it than any other could, One good result which 
flowed from his imprisonment was that he was able to give himself more to composi- 
tiun. See here how there rose before the mind of the prisoner of Christ a glorious 
conception of his Church, by which there will be greatest benefit to the end of time. 
(2) He was the prisoner of Christ Jesus on behalf of them, the Gentiles. “In behalf of 
you Gentiles.” His unbelieving countrymen (who in their spiritual pride were for the 
exclusion of the Gentiles) had been his bitterest foes, and were, indecd, chargeable 
(more than the Roman authorities) with his imprisonment. He was suffering for his 
liberality in seeking to include them, as was the will of Christ, within the pale of the 
Church. He might well, then, claim to write to them, as well as be expected to offer 
prayers on their behalf. But, having mentioned this ground of his praying for them, 
he goes aside fram his prayer, and does not proceed with the sentence which he has 
commenced until the fourteenth verse, giving us a parenthesis which, for length and 
weight together, is not surpassed. Transition to the subject of his wpostleship. “If 
s0 be that ye have heard.” Gentiles, for whom he was suffering, could scarcely have 
been ignorant, whether they had enjoyed his ministrations or not, of the fact of his 
being apostle of the Gentiles. And if the Ephesian Christians had heard more par- 
ticularly of the matter of the revelation, as probably they had done, for Paul laboured 
twc years among them, yet it would not be inconsistent with usage to say, “If so be 
that: ye have heard,” as referring to a well-known fact, and as referring to it in the way 
of calling them to self-scrutiny as to the time when they heard it and the person from 
whom they heard it. 

1. His APOSTLESHIP WA8 OF DIVINE ARRANGEMENT. “Of the dispensation.” It was 
not of his own ordering, but was the dispensation of God, It was arranged that he 
should be a minister to preach unto the Gentiles (vers. 7, 8). This is in accordance 
with his manner of viewing things in the first chapter. He who has the administra- 
tion of the eons has also the appointment of all who serve in his house, whether 
ordinary or extraordinary. 

11. For HIS APOSTLESHIP HE WAS FAVOURED WITH THE KNOWLEDGE OF A MYSTERY. 
“Of that grace of God which was given me to you-ward.” He had no reason to look 
for such a thing, but with a view to his acting as their apostle he was so favoured. 
1. It was a mystery which was ¢ icated to him by revelation. ‘ How that by 
revelation was made known unto me the mystery.” He did not receive it at second- 
hand, nor was it a discovery of his own; but it was immediately and supernaturally 
communicated to him, That was guarantee for the knowledge being certain and 
thorough. The fact revealed to him at his conversion, that he was to bear Christ’s 
Name before the Gentiles, may only have given rise to perplexities as to the mode. We 
can think of the revelation referred to here as coming to him, not without preparation 
of reflection on his part, during his retirement in Arabia. And it must have been a 
great help to him in his perplexities to know confidently and timeously the principles 
on which God was to proceed with the Gentiles, 2. I¢ was a mystery of his knowledge 
of which he had already given them evidence. “ As 1 wrote afore in few words.” The 
reference is evidently to this same Epistle, especially to the first chapter, in which it is 
part of the “mystery” of summing up all things in Christ, that Gentiles are put on 
an equality with Jews in being made “heirs” on trusting in Christ. It was the 
mystery of Christ, viz. as the great Reconciler- He had written in brief; but their 
imterest would make up for his brevity, and he claims that, in what he had said, he had 


on. m1. 1—21.] TEE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 127 


given them the opportunity, when they should “read,” of perceiving his understanding 
of the mystery. And thus, through his communication to them of what he had got 
immediately from God, they would have the satisfaction of seeing for themselves what 
the truth was, 8, [é¢ was a time when others were favoured with revelation of the 
mystery as well as he. “Which in other generations was not made known unto the 
sons of men, as it hath now been revealed unto his holy apostles and prophets in 
the Spirit.” “Sons of men” has a certain association of incapacity. Being only sons 
of men, they could not be expected to know the mystery of themselves. And the 
former generations of them had stood at a disadvantage. They had not been absolutely 
excluded from the benefit of revelation. But still, in all that they bad been favoured with, 
in promises connected with the admission of the Gentiles, it had remained very much 
of a mystery, until the then Christian period. And the Apostle Paul, with an evident 
enthusiasm, thinks of himself as in the company of apostles and prophets, upon whom 
in that age the inflatus of the Spirit had come, and who were privileged to make com- 
munications of blessed import to the Gentiles. 4. What the contents of the mystery 
were. “To wit, that the Gentiles are fellow-heirs, and fellow-members of the body, and 
fellow-partakers of the promise in Christ Jesus through the gospel.” There is a catch- 
ing up of a previous thread here, for which we were prepared by his reference to what 
he had written before, “They were made a heritage.” They had the “earnest” of an 
“inheritance.” They were “God’s own possession.” There was something new (or 
matter for revelation) in their thus being fellow-heirs. For this was something beyond 
the extension of grace to them. It indicated their relation to ancient Israel. ‘The 
Jews (or believers among them) were not the only successors of Israel. But the Gentile 
believers were served heirs as well. They were in the true theocratic line. The pres- 
tige of that people, the great things the Lord had done for them, were theirs, And 
theirs, too, were even the lessons of their apostasies. Theirs were their Scriptures. 
“ Fellow-members of the body ” is also a catching up of a previous thread. For he has 
before written of the “one body” (ch. ii. 16). ‘This had not been clear to the former 
generations, They had not contemplated such a close commingling of Gertile and 
Jewish elements, Was there to be uo partition wall whatever? Was their identity as 
Jews completely to be lost? Yes, that was the form that mercy to the Gentiles was 
to take. And there were they in the Ephesian Church, some of them Jews and some 
of them Gentiles, but all members of the body of Christ. “And fellow-partakers of 
the promise in Christ Jesus through the gospel.” “ Fellow-partakers of the promise” 
is properly the parallel phrase. But there is a reason for connecting the remaining 
words specially, if not exclusively, with this. For the promise (that is, to former 
generations) refers to the same blessings offered (since the coming of Christ) in the 
gospel. There is thus a catching up of a previous thread from the second chapter, 
where it is said that Christ came and preached the gospel (uf peace) to Gentiles as well 
as to Jews, And there was much for apostles and prophets to reveal of the mystery 
here. For it was by so completely “ filling up” the types, and presenting the real all- 
sufficient sacrifice for sin, that all former restrictions could be done away. Men no 
longer needed to be circumcised or to go up to Jerusalem, but could freely participate 
in the blessings of salvation simply as believing on Christ, 

III. His BEING A MINISTER OF THE GOSPEL TO THE GENTILES FILLED HIM WITH A 
SENSE OF HIS OWN UNWORTHINESS. ‘ Whereof I was made a minister according to the 
gift of that grace of God which was given me according to the working of his power. 
Unto me, who am less than the least of all saints, was this grace given, to preach unto 
the Gentiles.” Paul takes the lowly title of “ minister” (literally, “one who runs at the 
call of another,” but used generally of a servant). He was a servant in 9 particulur 
order. Grace was given him to preach unto the Gentiles. ‘That was where he found 
his work, where he was appointed to follow the Master. And the gift of this grace 
(thus defined) was given him in a particular way—“ according to the working of his 
power.” “The mention of the power of God is founded on the circumstance that Paul 
sees in his change of heart, from a foe to a friend of Christ, an act of omnipotence.” 
It is an exercise of power that calls for our adoration. Grander than the flash of the 
lightning, the roll of the thunder, was the power which turned Saul into Panl, the 
persecutor into the preacher. It is power which has been exercised after the same 
example, notably in the case of Bunyan. 10 is power to which the Church can con- 


128 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. (cs. mr. 1--21. 


stantly look for the raising up of men to do its work. It is power to which the 
greatest sinners may be pointed for their conversion to God. In magnifying the Divine 
power, Paul humbles himself. But not thus does his feeling of humility (which none 
need to cultivate more than ministers) find adequate expression, But in view of the 
greatness of hig calling he humbles himself still further. ‘ Unto me, who am less than 
the least of all saints.” There is employed, to express his meaning, what is both a 
comparative and a superlative. There was no exaggeration in this to the apostle who, 
though he could warmly vindicate his apostolic position when there was occasion, yet 
had a feeling of his own nothingness (2 Cor. xii. 11). It belongs to a shallower Christian 
experience than his was, to make such comparisons, To one who has felt his own utter 
vileness before God, to think of instituting a comparison in personal worth, in spiritual 
standing between himself and his fellow-Christians, is utterly abhorrent to him. He 
tepudiates the thought; he ds less than the least of all saints. There can be no doubt 
that those who have (without feigning) the deepest feeling of humility are really the 
best saints and the best champions of the faith. It is not the case that a career of 
wandering such as the apostle had (in his case it was wandering in self-righteousness 
for thirty years) is necessary to the deepest feeling of humility. For we have all 
enough of evil in our hearts to lead to humiliation. But it may be said that those 
who have had such wanderings and subsequent struggles are the most likely (in respect 
of their opportunity) to excel in a knowledge of the corruption of their hearts. ‘The 
apostle supplies us with ἃ rich expression here, “all saints.” Who are they that form 
this order? Certainly none of mankind who have not the blood of Christ sprinkled 
upon them, Certainly more than those who have been specially “sainted” of men. 
‘They include many “ hidden ones” on earth, 


“ But sure from many a hidden dell, 
From many a rural nook unthought of, there 
Rises for that proud world the saints’ prevailing prayer.” 


They include the “elder saints” in heaven, both angels and men. They have all theit 
circle of influence in the universe of God. We are to look unto “Jesus, the Author 
and Perfecter of our faith ;” but we are also to get strengthening, incitement, catholicity, 
from “the communion of saints.” 

IV. THE suUBJECT OF HIS PREACHING TO THE GENTILES WAS THE UNSEARCHABLE 
RICUES OF Curist. The blessings of the gospel are compared by our Lord to gold: “I 
counsel thee to buy of me gold.” And, in agreement with that, is this description of 
these blessings as “the unsearchable riches of Christ.” There are none higher (as 
there is nothing hizher in metals than gold), and, if we count them as men count gold, 
they are inestimably precious. What are the blessings of the gospel? There is first 
of all peace, not the peace of unfallen beings, but the peace of those who have been 
sinners and are now reconciled—the sweet seuse of sin forgiven, the blessed feeling that 
the guilt which was resting on us is removed, and that there is now nothing between 
us anda holy God. And who can tell the preciousness of this blessing? The man 
who has this peace can feel richer than Croesus, It is a peace which makes us 
independent of the world, which the world cannot give and which the world cannot 
take away. It is a peace which passeth all understanding, which has a mysterious, 
unspeakable sweetness about it, so that he who has once felt what it is would never 
like to lose it. Another blessing is spiritual understanding. The man who knows is 
on a different footing from the man who does not know. Think of one who has all the 
light of modern science, compared with the Chinaman who is only where his ancestors 
were two or three thousand years ago, Think of one who has all the light which 
Christianity has shed on the highest matters, compared with the fetichist whose dim 
object of reverence is some unconscious stone. How dark the world would have been 
at this day but for the dayspring from on high which hath visited us! But, along 
with that outward light which shines widely, there is to all who seek and embrace it 
an inward light of the Holy Ghost. Blind Bartimzuses, we believe in Christ, and we 
receive our sight. And what riches it is to have spiritual insight, to have the veil 
taken off God and truth, to be under no delusion, to be delivered from every error, and 
to see things clearly in the light of God! A third blessing, but a very comprelensive 
one, is holy feeling, What a cage of unclean birds doas sin make of our hearts! But 


cH. 11. 1—21,] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 129 


the gospel introduces a radical change of feeling. ‘ For the law of the Spirit of life in 
Christ Jesus hath made me free from the law of sin and death.” And is it not golden 
to have fine feeling—feeling in which there is no sinful element, but only the fine grain 
of holiness; to have devoutest reverence and tenderest love towards God; to have due 
respect and tender love toward our fellow-men? The man who feels aright all round 
has his wealth in his soul, there a perpetual feast. These blessings we may regard as 
summed up in Christ. For as Christ is said not only to have the bread of lif- but to 
he himself the Bread of life, so we may say he has not only unsearchable riches to 
bestow, but he is himself the unsearchable Riches. He is the true Gold, he is precious in 
every quality of his being as gold, and, in having him as the Portion of our souls, we 
must needs have unsearchable riches. ; 

V. AN OBJECT AIMED AT BY THE APOSTLE IN HIS PREACHING TO THE GENTILES. “ And 
to make all men see what is the dispensation of the mystery.” He himself understood 
the mystery, having got it by revelation. -And he had given them the means of 
perceiving his understanding of it, and therefore of understanding it for themselves. 
But so precious a truth was not to be confined within so narrow an area. He had a 
certain unbounded ambition in preaching the gospel. It was to make all men see the 
gracious arrangement which had been newly introduced, and see it so as to be induced 
to take advantage of it. On another occasion his language was, “That all the Gentiles 
might hear.” In both cases it is the language of enthusiasm. It was the lurning 
desire of his heart, to make all men see, that made him go (not without hardships) 
from land to land. He was not free to settle down in any one place. When he had 
established a centre of gospel light in Ephesus, he must go elsewhere. The world was 
a dark place, and he must establish as many centres of light at suitable points in it 
as God would enable him to’establish during his appointed course. 

VI. A TWOFOLD ULTERIOR OBJECT SERVED BY THE PREACHING OF THE GOSPEL TO 
THE GENTILES. 1. More immediately men having demonstrated to them the Divine 
sovereignty. “Which from all ages hath been hid in God who created all things.” It 
is because he has created all things that he has the disposal of all things. There is 
nothing whatever which he cannot bend to his will. [Ὁ was in the exercise of his 
sovereignty that, at the beginning of the ages, he did not reveal the whole breadth of 
his purpose. It lay hid in himself. And for ages his ways were dark, in the great 
majority of men being left to their own natural ignorance and inability. During these 
ages he rested in his own thoughts regarding men, in his own reasons of procedure, in 
his own ways of working. But there was mystery. ‘The largeness of his purpose was 
sovereignly hid under a cloud until, with the coming of Christ and the preaching of the 
gospel to all men, it clearly burst forth. 2. Angels seeing by the Church the manifold 
wisdom of God. “'To the intent that now unto the principalities and the powers in the 
heavenly places might be made known through the Church the manifold wisdom of 
God, according to the eternal purpose which he purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord.” 
The Church is the community of which, as is said in the first chapter, Christ is the 
Head. ‘The interest in this community is here represented as extending to the angels. 
They are here designated on the side of their power and rank as the principalities and 
the powers. In the hundred and third psalm it is said, “Ye his angels, that excel in 
strength.” In what relation rank or dominion is ascribed to them, we have not the 
means of knowing, as we have not the survey of the heavenly world which they, it is 
here implied, have of the earthly world. But we are to understand the apostle, in the 
loftiness of his thought, seizing upon this as being to the honour of the Church, that it 
attracts the attention of the inhabitants of “the heavenly places”—those who have 
never known any other habitation, who, from the first moment of their being, have 
lived in the presence of God. They have been contemporaries of man during all his 
history. For when the earth was framed “the morning stars sang together, and the 
sons of God shouted for joy.” We are to think of them as witnessing man’s innucence 
and fall, and as being made acquainted with the introduction of grace in the promise, 
And the Law (which had a separating side) was by the “disposition of angels.” And 
angels very signally heralded the Saviour’s birth, But it was not for our sakes alone 
that they were thus connected with our history. It would seem that, though in the 
heavenly places, they had but a limited knowledge of redemption. They had not fore- 
knowledge; they had to wait like us tur the evolution of events. What was mystery 

EPHESIANS. κ 


180 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. (om. m1. 1—21. 


to us (as to the including of the Gentiles) was mystery to them also, being hidden to 
both in God. They were at a loss to understand what the development of things under 
the gospel was to be. But they were taught by the events. Now through the Church 
was made known the manifold wisdom of God. The Church was not to be instructress, 
but rather material for instruction by God in the subject of his manifold wisdom, 
There was material to be found elsewhere, in which the angels delighted to study the 
manifold wisdom of God. It was when the worlds were brought forth into space that 
they shouted for joy. What a field was that opened up for their contemplation! “0O 
Lord, how manifold are thy works! in wisdom hast thou made them all.” The simple 
idea of a house is that which has walls, and door, and windows, and roof; but into what 
manifoldness, what richness of: structure, may that be drawn out by the creative mind 
of the architect! An architect’s work is manifold in proportion to the multiplicity of 
the parts, and to the variety he can introduce into these; and his skill is seen in his 
combining these parts, in all their multiplicity and variety, into a unity. What 
multiplicity of parts has God to deal with in the material structure of things! and what 
variety he introduces, so that no leaf is exactly like another! and how there are mot only 
adaptations which can be made a study of by themselves (as a column,or bit of tracery 
on it, may be made a study of), but these are comprehended in wider adaptati-ns, and 
so all-comprehensive is the Divine thought that there is in the result no confusion but 
the highest simplicity! That is one sphere for the display of manifold wisdom. We 
may expect greater manifoldness as we rise higher. What a manifoldness in the life of 
rational beings! “And God,” says Leibnitz, “has the qualities of a good Governor as 
well as of a great Architect.” It may be supposed that the angels will first con- 
template the manifold wisdom of God in themselves, in their high and varied endow- 
ments, in the way in which their eternal well-being has been secured to them without 
their having to pass through the experience of sin, and in the part assigned to each and 
to all in the great plan. Is he not called the Lord of hosts, as marshalling the innumer- 
able army of angels? They have a manifoldness far beyond our conception, and yet he 
can dispose of them as easily as an officer can do with a small section of an army. He 
calls them, as he calls the stars, by their names; not one is overlooked, not one out of 
place. The manifold wisdom of God is also to be seen in the way in which the twelve 
hundred millions of men on the earth are dealt with at one moment. The problem 
here has been complicated by the entrance ot sin. Manifold are the phases of sin, and 
manifold are the methods by which he seeks to dislodge men out of their sin. But 
this manifold problem of the world of mankind is mastered by him more easily than 
the problem of a single household is mastered by us. But itis in the Church that 
there is to be seen conspicuously the manifold wisdom of God. And, in the first place, 
it is to be seen in that general point regarding the Church which the apostle has been 
considering, viz. the including of the Gentiles after they had been so long excluded. 
It may seem that the exclusion of any from the privileges of the Church was a reflection 
on the Divine wisdom. Was it not sacrificing their interests that an effort was not 
made for their salvation along with that of others? But the problem was far more 
manifold than that. If there had been a comprehension of all nations all along, the 
result would probably have been the extinction of religion. We are not to think that 
Christ could have come, and his gospel be promulgated, at any time. If the gospel 
dispensation had been introduced at the time of the election of Abraham, we may 
suppose it would have been thrown away. He with whom a thousand years are as 
one day had to look to, not the greatest good of men then, but to the greatest good of 
men to all time. And so he ordained a long period of preparation, both negative in 
bringing out what men could not do, and positive in the way of teaching by type and 
providential dealing. And he did not bring Christ into the world until he saw how 
his truth could get a firm hold, and be proclaimed wide to the nations, And though 
the gospel has yet much to do, it is in such a position that it cannot now be lost. But 
this was only part of a wider purpose. ‘“ According to the eternal purpose which he 
purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord.” ‘We have to bring in the whole purpose of God 
regarding the Church. This purpose he purposed in eternity. It was a purpose running 
through the ages. In Christ he saw the Church in the completeness of its idea, in the 
whole of its development. And, with this clear before his mind, he could patiently 
wait through the ages for the fuller unfolding of his purpose. As Christ is called the 


on, ΠΙ. 1—21.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 131 


Wisdom. of God, so we may expect to see in his Church a wisdom manifold as himself. 
What an element in the scheme of redemption, that the Redeemer was a Divine Being 
in human nature! How justice and mercy are reconciled in his cross! How sin is 
forgiven while God at the same time manifests his detestation of it! How manifold 
are the ways by which men are brought into the Church! What the final adjustment 
cf things is to be is very much a mystery to us, as it is doubtless to the angels. But 
we stand in this position that, in what has been exhibited to us already of the manifold 
wisdom of God, we can look hopefully forward to the final reconciliation. 

VII. RETURN TO PRIVILEGE OF CHRISTIAN Position. “In whom we have boldness 
and access in confidence through our faith in him.” Christ was the Object of their 
faith, Realizing by faith what he was, the provision made by him, the great love he 
bore to them, they had the spirit of sons. In Gal. iii, 26 it is said, “Ye are the 
children of God by faith in Christ Jesus.” That is, we have the position of children, 
Here the thought is, we have the disposition of children. 1. The spirit of boldness. 
They had a free, joyous mood, as having an interest in Christ. They were delivered 
from the fear of wrath. They were not of the number of those who, through fear of 
death, were all their lifetime subject to bondage. 2. In nearness to God (in the God- 
Man) they had the spirit of confidence. They had that confidence restored to them 
which Adam lost. ‘hey had the confidence to which Paul elsewhere gives lofty 
expression: “For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor princi- 
palities, nor things present, nor things to come, nor powers, nor height, nor depth, nor 
any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ 
Jesus our Lord.” 

VIII. Exuorrarion LOOKING BACK ΤῸ FIRST VERSE. ‘ Wherefore I ask that ye faint 
not at my tribulations for you, which are your glory.” He supposes that they would 
be concerned for his tribulations, as endured for them. How was the cause of Christ to 
be carried forward, when so principal an instrument was lying a prisoner in Rome? 
But he would have them not to faint, bringing forward the consideration that these ΄ 
tribulations of his were their glory. If he had proved unfaitl ful to their interests, and 
withdrawn from persecutions, that would have been a discrediting of him as a discredit- 
ing of the Founder of the Church, and they might in that case have been tempted to 
despair of Christianity. But, as he had stood true to them in the face of persecu- 
tions, that brought them honour, and was fitted to have a confirming, elevating effect 
on them as a Church.—R. F. 


Vers. 14—19.—A prayer on behalf of the Ephesian Christians, I. TH sUPPLIANT. 
“For this cause I bow my knees.” He has explained who he, Paul, was, in the 
remarkable parenthesis which concludes with the thirteenth verse. In resuming his 
sentence, so long interrupted, he naturally falls back on the first words, “For this 
cause.” Thus taken up, it has only the meaning which it had before, the thought in 
the parenthesis being carried forward into the word, “I.” He describes himself as a 
suppliant from the natural posture in prayer. The only reason there can be for a 
standing posture in prayer has a narrow reference, There is justification in standing in 
prayer at a bedside or before a congregation, if kneeling interferes with edification 
(which is the higher censideration), Solomon was able to combine the kneeling 
posture with edification in his prayer of the dedication ; for, placed on a brazen pulpit, 
“he kneeled down upon his knees before all the congregation of Israel, and spread forth: 
his hands toward heaven.” Kneeling is the posture of humility, and we have reason 
to humble ourselves before God as creatures before our Creator, as sinners before our 
Judge. It is the posture of earnest entreaty. “And his fellow-servant fell down at 
his feet and besought him.” So should we, as though pleading for our life, bend the 
knee before God. 

II. How Gop 18 appREssED. “ Unto the Father, from whom every family in heaven 
and on eaith is named.” In the Greek there is a transition as from Father to father- 
hood, only the transition in thought is not to the abstract idea of fatherhood, but to the 
sonerete representation of it in a family, God has instituted the relationship of father 
and son among men, And though the angels neither marry nor are given in marriaye, 
it would seem from the language here that there is a certain grouping of them in 
families too. How far this may descend we have not the mcans of knewing. [ut inte 


132 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. (cu. πὶ 1—21. 


a family there enters the idea of a head with a certain subordination to the head. 
There also enters the idea of a special affection existing between the members of the 
same family. Now, the whole of this conception has its origination in Godhead, It 
is {rom God that every family in heaven and on earth is named, We find Father and 
Son existing from eternity. “41 was set up from everlasting, from the beginning, or 
ever the earth was... . When he appointed the foundations of the earth, then I was by 
him, asone brought up with him: and I was daily his delight, rejuicing always before 
him.” And angels and men have been constituted after this pattern, in order that they 
may be familiarized with the truth of God’s fatherhood, and in order that they may know 
in what close relationship he would have them stand to him. And where the family is 
thus “named” after God, how becoming to worship him as the God of families, and 
specially as the God of our family! 

ΠῚ. Ta MEASURE ACCORDING TO WHICH BLESSING Is ASKED. ‘That he would grant 
you, according to the riches of his glory.” ‘here is a certain expectation of favout. 
and donations from people according to their rank and wealth. ‘Ihere is a style ot 
giving which is known as princely, The apostle supposes that the glory of God, which 
infinitely transcends all human glory, which is infinitely rich in the meeting of all 
perfections,—that all this glory means infinite power to bless, to which his creatures 
may look. His conception of God is sublime, that he grants according to the riches 
of his glory. He grauts, not like a being of limited powers, but like himself. He is 
glorified in bestowing large blessings upon his people. He who came forth from God 
aud knew the glory of God, said, “ Hitherto have ye asked nothing.” 


“Thou art coming to a King; 
Large petitions with thee bring ; 
For his grace and power are such, 
None can ever ask too much.” 


IV, Tue PRAYER LN FIVE PETITIONS. ‘These petitions follow each cther in natural 
order, and we are carried forward from the point where our need begins to the point 
where it is all filled up. It is a suitable prayer for Christians, to be used often, even 
as the Lord’s Prayer. First petition—“ That ye may be strengthened with power through 
his Spirit in the inward man.” The destination of the strength is the inward man. As 
it were, it goes past the outward man, and reaches to the inward man. The outward 
man “decays;” the inward man needs to be “renewed day by day.” The apostle 
teuches where our need begins, viz, in an inertness in the inward man. We are not 
disposed to exert ourselves spiritually. ‘he outward has too much influence in our 
life, and works to our inward weakening. We need strength to counteract our inert- 
ness, and to deliver us from too outward a life. Now, there is all strength in God. 
This is part of the riches of his glory. And his Spirit is the mediating agent between 
his strength and our weakness. And what we have to ask God to do for us is, that, 
through his Spirit, he. would infuse strength into our weak inner nature. Second 
petition—“ That Christ muy dwell in your hearts through faith.” The supplies of 
strength which we get from God through the Spirit find their way into our faith to 
its greater activity. This faith is an exercise of the mind specially directed toward 
Christ for us—Christ in what he was and still is as our Surety. The result is the 
indwelling of Christ in our hearts. We dwell within (as is suggested by “inward man”); 
τ but within us (far in as we are) dwells Christ. He dwells in our hearts (the inward 
man viewed from the side of the affections), where he receives our love and adoration, 
As dwelling within, we are present in every outward motion; and so Christ, as dwelling 
within us, is at the very centre of our being, and becomes so interlaced with it as to be 
present in all our life, to think in our thoughts, to speak in our words, to act in our 
actions, “I live, yet not I, but Christ liveth in me.” And we ask from God new sup- 
plies of strength that, with new faith, we may have new experience of Christ’s indwell- 
ing in our hearts, and presence in our life. Third petition—* That ye, being rooted 
and grounded in love.” If love is “ creation’s final law,” it is also its first principle. If 
it is the end for which all things exist, it is also the principle from which all things 
have sprung. Love may be defined as the desire to bestow. It was in the desire to 
bestow that we were created, with all our capacity for enjoyment. If, then, our bein 
is thus to be traced hack to love, it is clearly necessary that we should be rooted a: 


on. mm. 1—21.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, 183 


grounded én love, And this, we are taught here, is only possible by our believing in 
Christ. For love is in Christ, as Christ in us. As believing, then, is rooting and 
grounding ourselves in Christ, so it must mean rooting and grounding in love—getting 
down into the eternal substratum of all being. And we ask for supplies of the Divine 
strength that, through a vigorous faith, this rooting and grounding in love may go 
forward in our life. Fourth petition—‘ May be strong to apprehend with all the saints 
what is the breadth, and length, and height, and depth, and to know the love of Christ 
which passeth knowledge.” ‘The rooting and grounding in love is evr qualification for 
apprehending its greatest manifestation. Cold hearts can do nothing here. The 
apostle’s own heart is in such a glow that the love of Christ rises before him as though 
it were a body in space having dimensions of breadth, and lenyth, and height, and depth. 
We are'not to suppose that he was so mathematical as to associate different ideas with 
these dimensions. The use that they serve is to fix and detain the mind over the 
magnitude of the love of Christ. The magnitude of the love of Christ appears in two 
things. 1. I¢ is. bestowed on the undeserving. How was it possible for Christ to love 
us? It was not that there was any goodness in us with which he could have sympathy. 
For we were the opposite of what he was. As described in this Epistle, we walked 
according to the course of this world ; we lived in the lusts of our flesh, doing the 
desires of the flesh and of the mind, It was not that he underrated what we were ; 
for he saw our depravity in all its breadth, and length, and height, and depth. It can 
only be statcd as ἃ great inexplicable fact that, in the full view of what we were, he 
was irresistibly drawn toward us in saving love. 2. It ds bestowed in the sacrifice of 
himself. In order to gratify his love in our salvation, he had not only to lay aside his 
Divine glory, but’ to come down into our nature, and, in that nature, to suffer shame 
and death. It is no ordinary love that is needcd to impel one to sacrifice his life for 
another. “Skin for skin,” said the arch-deceiver, “yca, all that a man hath will he 
give for his life.” “Love,” said the Spouse to her Beloved, “love is strong as death, 
many waters cannot quench love, neither can the floods drown it; though a man would 
give all the substance of bis house for love, if would utterly be contemned.” And 
Christ falsified the base insinuation of his adversary, and verified the loving declaration’ 
of his Spouse. His love was proved stronger than death, though that death was ten 
thousand deaths in one, in having in it the curse of the broken Law. This is the love 
of our Peloved; and say not then any more, “ What is thy Beloved more than any ther 
beloved ?” 
“or fainter than the pale star’s ray 

Before the noontide blaze of day 

Is all of love that man can know,— 

All that in angel breast can glow,— 

Compar’d, O blessed Lord, with thine, 

Eternal, infinite, Divine.” 


We are to scek to apprehend with all the saints the magnitude of this love. Yor this 
is saintship, according to the apostle, to have the mind opened to some sense of its 
magnitude, and we must not make it narrower than that. We are to seek to “ appre- 
hend,” along with others, the dimensions of this love; but we are also to seek to know 
it by ourselves, that is to say, to have it in our own experience. We can have a 
certain “apprehension” of its infinitude; but our experimental knowledge of it is 
necessarily finite. The reality, being infinite, always passeth our knowledge. But we 
are to ask of God, that, being rooted and grounded in love, we may know more of this 
wonderful love of Christ. ΖΦ ἢ, petition—“ That ye may be filled unto all the fulness of 
God.” The apostle here indicates the goal toward which we are to be blessed, We 
have now some of the fulness of God. Through the agency of the Spirit, we have 
poured into us out of the Divine fulness, strength, light, purity, love, peace, joy; and 
these in ug are the same in kind that they are in God. We look forward to the time 
when we shall be filled out of this fountain even up to our capacity. Meantime we 
would have more of the knowledge of Christ’s love, which unseals the fountain of the 
Divine fulness.—R. FB. 


Vers. 20, 21.—Dowology. J. How Gop 18 etoniriep, “ Now unto him that is able 
to do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think, according to the power 


184 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. (on. 11. 1-21. 


that worketh in us.” We adore God as able to do for us in answer to our prayers. It 
is expected of us that we ask, that is, actually desire the blessing, and express the 
desire. But, beyond all that we ask, there is what we think, that is, what comes in‘o 
our mind as to what we should desire and express. Now, God is able to do above all 
that we ask or think. And not only so, but the apostle is so struck with the dis- 
proportion between our asking and thinking, and the Divine ability, that he has to add 
the expression, “ exceediny abundantly.” And then he would have us look to our 
being answered, not accurding to our own poor asking and thinking, but according to 
the power that worketh in us, all our experience of which is fitted to raise our 
expectation. 

JI. IN WHAT SPHERE HE 18 GLORIFIED. “ Unto him be the glory in the Church and 
in Christ Jesus.” We are to praise God for what:has been done for the Church and for 
what is gifted to the Church. “ And the glory which thou hast given me I have given 
unto them; that they may be one, even as we are one; I in them, and thou in me, 
that they may be perfected into one; that the world may know that thou didst send 
me, and lovedst them, even as thou lovedst me. Father, that which thou hast given 
me, J will that, where I am, they also may be with me; that they may behold my 
glory, which thou hast given me: for thou lovedst me before the foundation of the 
world.” It is only in Christ that there is the Church, and that it is what it is (being 
the receptacle of Christ’s glory), and therefore it is only in him that we can praise God 
for the Church. 

IIL. Tue TIME DURING WHICH HE 18 TO BE GLoRIFIED. “ Unto all generations for ever 
and ever.” Literally it is, “ unto all the generations of the age of the ages.” There are 
generations which make up an age; then there are ages which make up the grand age. 
There is suggested the length of time (beyond our narrow conception) which God has 
for completing his purpose regarding the Church; and also the lenzth of time there- 
after, during which the full-volumed doxology will be chanted to Gud. It becomes us 
each to add our “ Amen.” . 


Through all eternity to thee 
A joyful song I'll raise; 

For oh, eternity’s too short 
To utter all thy pruise.” 


RF. 


Vers. 1—13.— Aspects of the true gospel ministry. “For this cause I Paul, the 
prisoner of Jesus Christ for you Gentiles, if ye have heard of the dispensation of the 
grace of God which is given me to you-ward: how that by revelation he made known 
unto me the mystery; (as I wrote afore in few words, whereby, when ye read, ye may 
understand my knowledge in the mystery of Christ) which in other ages was not 
made known unto the sons of men, as it is now revealed unto his holy apostles and 
prophets by the Spirit; that the Gentiles should be fellow-heirs, and of the same body, 
and partakers of his promise in Christ by the gospel: whereof I was made a minister, 
according to the gift of the grace of Ged given unto me by the effectual working of 
his power. Unto me, who am less than the least of all saints, is this grace given, 
that I should preach among the Gvutiles the unsearchable riches of Christ; and to 
make all men see what is the fellowship of the mystery, which from the beginning of 
the world hath been hid in God, who created all things by Jesus Christ: to the intent 
that now unto the principalities and powers in heavenly places might be known by 
the Church the manifold wisdom of God, according to the eternal purpose which he 
purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord: in whom we have boldness and access with confi- 
dence by the faith of him. Wherefore I desire that ye faint not at my tribulations 
for you, which is your glory.” Homiletically, this whole passage, in which there are 
many digressions and involved utterances, may be regarded as exhibiting a true gospel 
minister in three aspects—as the subject of vicarious suffering, the recipient of Divine 
ideas, and as the messenger of redemptive mercy. 

I. THE SUBJECT OF VICARIOUS SUFFERING. Paul speaks of himself as a “ prisoner of 
Jesus Christ for you Gentiles,” and iu the thirteenth verse he says, “ my tribulations for 
you.” As an apostle, Paul’s sufferings were great ; elsewhere he gives a bricf catalogue of 
them (Corinthians, etc.) ; but all his great sufferings as an apostle were vicurioue—they 


on. tit, 1—21,] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 185 


were for the men he endeavoured to help. “ All for you Gentiles.” We offer three 
remarks concerning his vicarious sufferings, as a true gospel minister. 1. Vhey were 
intense. What agony of mind is involved in the expression, “ For I could wish that 
myself were accursed from Christ for my brethren, my kinsmen according to the flesh”! 
According to Dean Alford, Dr. Wordsworth, Professor Plumptre, Jowett, and our best 
critics, this means such an agonizing desire for the salvation of men as would prompt 
the most terrible sacrifices to accomplish it. In another place he represents his state 
of mind as a parturétion distress. “I travail in birth again.” Again, “1 suffer trouble, 
as au evil-doer, even unto bonds.” And again he says, “I endure all things for the 
elect’s sake, that they may obtain the salvation that is in Christ Jesus” (2 Tim. ii. 9). 
Evory true gospel minister knows something of this intense spiritual suffering for 
others. What solicitudes, disappointments, wrestlings of soul has he! So intense was 
the desire even of Moses for the good of others, that he said, “If thou wilt forgive 
their sins—; andif not, blot me, I pray thee, out of thy book which thou hast written ” 
(Exod. xxxii. 32), 2. They were voluntary. Human society is so organized that a 
certain amount of vicarious suffering comes on all men, irrespective of their choice, and 
even contrary to their choice. The innocent suffer for the guilty, children suffer on 
account of the sins of their parents. The present generalion groans under the burdens 
of the past. But the vicarious sufferings of Paul, as a minister, were voluntary, he 
entered into them freely. ‘Ihe love of Christ “constrained ” him to put himself in 
the place of suffering men, and to feel with them and for them. Hence he says, “ Who 
is weak, and Iam not weak ? who is offended, and I burn not? ” (2 Cor. xi. 29). 3. 
They were Christ-like. Whilst there are points which mark the vicarious sufferings of 
Christ, both in their nature and amount, from the vicarious sufferings of those of his 
ministers, yet there are points of agreement which are worthy of our notice. That 
such correspondence exists is suggested by the similarity of Scripture-language by which 
both are set forth. Both are represented as endured for sinners and in order to effect 
their salvation. Indeed, Paul speaks of his whole life as a sacrifice (Phil. ii. 17). ‘I'wo 
points of analogy are especially worthy of remark. (1) Both partook of intense grief 
on account of human sins. Christ’s grief on account of sin was intense, agonizing, and 
fathomless in amount. “Ὁ Jerusalem, Jerusalem,” etc. Paul participated to some 
extent in this feeling. “Of whom I tell you even weeping, they are enemies of 
the cross of Christ.” In truth, the vicarious sufferings of all genuine ministers partake 
of this. Even those of the Old Testament felt it. Jeremiah says, “Oh that my eyes 
were fountains of waters,” etc.! and the psalmist, “I beheld the way of transgressors, 
and was grieved.” (2) Both partook of an intense anxiety for man’s salvation. To 
restore man to the knowledge, image, and fellowship of God was the one great object 
of Christ. For this he laboured ; for this he agonized, bled, and died. This was Paui’s 
great aim. “ For though I be free from all men, yet have I made myself a servant unto 
all, that I might gain the more. And unto the Jews I became as a Jew, that I might 
gain the Jews; to them that are under the Law, as under the Law, that I might gain 
them that are under the Law; to them that are without Law, as without Law (being not 
without Law to God, but under the Law to Christ), that I might gain them that are 
without Law. ΤῸ the weak became I as weak, that 1 might gain the weak: Iam made 
all things to all men, that I might by all means save some” (1 Cor. ix. 19—22), And 
in another place he says, “I please all men in all things, not seeking mine own profit, 
but the profit of many, that they may be saved” (1 Cor. x. 33). Now, my position is 
that this intense, voluntary, Christ-like, vicarious suffering, not only ever characterizes 
the history of every genuine minister of Christ, but is an essential qualification for the 
office. Paul felt that his great efficiency in the work depended upon his proximation 
to Christ in the amount of his vicarious sufferings. What else did he mean when he 
said, “1 Paul rejoice in my sufferings for you, and fill up that which is behind of the 
afflictions of Christ in my flesh fur his body’s sake, which is the Church ” (Col. i. 24) ὃ 
ΤΠ. Tur recrerent or Divine meas. “ By revelation he hath made known to 
me the myst-ry,” etc. The gospel truths which Paul had to proclaim to the Gentiles 
were not derived from any human source. They were not the deductions of his own 
reason or the intuitions of his own soul, but they were revealed to him by God. “I 
never received it of man,” said he, “ neither was I taught it, but by the revelation of 
Jesus Christ ” (see Acts xvi.), We have an account of this revelation given by Paul 


136 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. low, 1τπ. 1—21: 


himself. It is the glory of man that he can receive ideas from the great God himselt. 
He has what no other creature under heaven has—the capacity to take in the thoughts 
of the Infinite. It is essential to a true minister that he does this. He cannot offer 
any spiritual help to humanity uvless he does so. His own ideas have no power to 
help his race. The ideas to enlighten, elevate, and bless souls must come from God. 
Hence what Paul gave to the Gentiles, he tells us, came by revelation. Two remarks 
are suggested by the passagein relation to the idea. 1. It had been long hidden. He 
calls it the mystery: “‘ The mystery which in other ages was not made known.” It 
was a mystery not in the sense of incomprehensibility, but in the sense of undiscovered- 
ness. It had been unrevealed, and therefore unknown to past generations. The whole 
gospel was once a mystery; it was in the mind of God as an idca unrevealed to the 
universe. 2. It was very grand. The particular idea to which the apostle here refers 
is this, that the Gentiles were to partake of the salvation of the gospel, and to be united 
in one body with the Jews. “‘That the Gentiles should be fellow-heirs, and of the same 
body, and partakers of his promise in Christ by the gospel.” Grand idea this! That 
the poor Gentiles should become “ heirs” of the same inheritance as the Jews—members 
of the same great spiritual “body” as the Jews—partakers of the same great “ promise” 
as the Jews. The idea that Paul had from God was the uniting of all the races in the 
world in one great spiritual conlederation, 38. Jt was exceedingly ancient. “ From the 
beginning of the world it hath been hidden in God.” Such was the idea that Paul tells 
us had been revealed to him and to the holy apostles and prophets by the Spirit. Every 
true gospel minister is the recipient of Divine ideas. 

{II. THE MESSENGER OF REDEMPTIVE MERCY. Paul speaks of himself here as the 
“minister ” of the things that have been revealed to him. ‘“ Whereof I was made a 
minister,” etc. What he received he had to communicate. The passage indicates 
several things concerning a true messenger of redemptive mercy. 1. The Divine desig- 
nation to the office. ‘1 was made a minister, according to the gift of the grace of God 
given unto me by the effectual working of his power.” The office of a true minister 
is a gift of grace—a sift of grace which comes to the soul by the effectual working οἱ 
God’s power. Paul felt that he became a messenger of these truths, not by his own 
seeking or merit, but by the grace of God. Nor by his own native inclination, but by 
the effectual working of God’s power, referring, undoubtedly, to the Divine energy in 
his conversion. Every man must experience this Divine energy before he can become 
a true messenger of redemptive mercy. God must work in him before he can work by 
him. 2. The humble spirit of the office. “ Unto me, who am less than the least of all saints, 
is this grace given.” The expression means, who am incomparably the least of all the 
saints, who am not worthy to be reckoned amongst them. The memory of his past 
conduct and the solemn grandeur of the work to which he was called deeply impressed 
him with the sense of his own unworthiness. Humility is essential to this great work; 
it is when a man feels his weakness that he is truly strong in the ministry of truth. 
A deep sense of our own insufficiency is essential to make us sufficient for this of all 
offices the most grand and momentous. He who fecls himself the “least of all saints ” 
will become the greatest of all preachers. 3. The grand subject of the office. What is 
the great theme of the gospel preacher? Scientific facts, philosophic speculaticns, 
theological theories? No; “ the unsearchable riches of Christ.” The word “ unsearch- 
able” occurs in only one other place in the New Testament (Rom. xi. 33), where it is 
rendered “ past finding out.” Past finding out, not so much in the sense of mystery, 
as in the sense of inexhaustibleness. It is an ocean whose depths are unfathomable, 
and whose breadth and length stretch into the infinite. These “ unsearchable riches” 
of Christ, unlike material riches, are soul-satisfying, man-ennobling, ever-enduring, 
4. The enlightening character of the office. “To make all men see what is the fellow- 
ship of the mystery.” The idea is to enlighten all in respect to God’s redemptive 
mercy, the Gentiles as well as the Jews. The work of a true gospel minister is to 
make men sce Divine things, to bring them before their eyes, and to induce them to 
look earnestly and steadily upon them. 65, The angelic bearing of the office. “To the 
intent that now unto the principalities and powers in heavenly places might be known 
by the Church the manifold wisdom of God.” Sevetsl thoughts are implied in this 
passage. (1) That there are in the universe a gradation of angelic intelligences, 


 Deinainalitiaa and nawara in haavanlv nlanaa® (9) That it ia af avant imnantanan 


on. τη]. 1—21.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 137 


that they should study the manifold wisdom of God. (3) That the Christian Church 
affords them a grand opportunity for studying this glorious subject. The Church is 
the effect, the manifestation, and the organ of God’s manifold or diversified wisdom. 
(4) That the use of the Church for this object was according to the eternal plan of 
God, ‘ According to the eternal purpose which he purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord.” 
6. The high privileges of the office. ‘In whom we have boldness and access with con- 
fidence by the faith of him.” “ The accumulation of substantives in this sentence,” 
says Hodge, “ buldness, access, confidence, shows that there was no word which could 
express what Paul felt in view of the complete reconciliation of men to God through 
the mediation of Jesus Christ.” The privileges of a true gospel minister, as indicated 
in vers. 12, 13, are: (1) Free and fearless access to the great God. (2) Divine support 
utider the various trials of life. “ Wherefore I desire that ye faint not at my tribula- 
tions for you, which is your glory” Paul was now a prisoner at Rome, and yct he 
felt that inward support which enabled him to exhort the saints at Ephesus not to 
faint or be disheartened on his account. ᾿ 

Such in brief is the view which this passage presents of a true gospel minister. Hae 
is a man of vicarious suffering, a recipient of Divine ideas, a messenger of redemptive 
mercy. Where are the preachers that answer to this sketch? Let such men 51] our 
pulpits, and the conversion of our England will not be far distant; and when all 
England becomes a true Church, the whole world will speedily be won to Christ.—D. T. 


Vers, 14—19.—JIntercessory prayer. “For this cause I bow my knees unto the 
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom the whole family in heaven and earth is 
pamed, that he would grant you, according to the riches of his glory, to be 
strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inner man; that Christ may dwell 
in your hearts by faith; that ye, being rooted and grounded in love, may be able 
to comprehend with all saints what is the breadth, and length, and de) th, and 
height; and to know the love of Christ, which passeth knowledge, that ye might 
be filled with all the fulness of God.” In the whole passage we have Christian philan- 
thropy and prayer. The apostle, who was a philanthropist of the highest type, here 
prays, not for himself, but for others; and prays, not for mere secondary and non- 
essential blessings, but for blessings paramount and vital. Let us attend to this 
tntercessory prayer of his, A true minister is a true philanthropist, and will, like Christ, 
not only vicariously suffer for others, as we have seen, but will ever make ¢ntercessions 
for others. Intercessory prayer is the rarest and highest type of prayer. In answer to 
objections that are raised against it, four facts are ever to be kept in view. 1. 16 8 αὐ 
instinct of social love. Self-love urges a man to pray for himself, social love prompts 
the soul to address Heaven on behalf of others. What more natural than for a loving 
mother to pray for a suffering child, a loving pastor for his people, a loving citizen for 
his country? What is natural is Divine. 2. 7 is α soul discipline. Nothing exerts 
a higher influence upon the soul than the realization of the Divine presence in prayer ; 
this quickens and hallows it. In intercessory prayer, however, there is this, and some- 
thing more ; there is the taking of the soul out of the circle of itself, and expanding 
it with earnest, loving sympathies for others. Intercession lifts the spirit into fellow- 
ship with that God who careth for all. 8, Jt is a manifest Christian duty. Weare 
not only commanded in Scripture to pray for others, but we have the highest examples 
—Moses, Abraham, Paul, Christ. 4. It has been crowned with wonderful success, The 
Bible abounds with examples. “Peter... was kept in prison: but prayer was made 
without ceasing of the Church unto God for him... . And when Peter was come to 
himself, he said, Now I know of a surety that the Lord hath sent his angel, and hath 
delivered me out of the hand of Herod. . . . And he came to the house of Mary, oo 
where many were gathered together praying.” ‘This is only a specimen, 


“For what are men better than shcep or goats, 
That nourish a blind life within the brain, 
If, knowing God, they lift not hands of prayer, 
Both for themselves and those who call them friend ? ” 


Observe In this intercession— 
L Tux Gop irvoxep. Whois he? 1. Hets α Father. “I bow my knees unto 


138 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. (on. mz. 1-21 


the Father.” In the New Testament the fatherhood of God is revealed. Christ speaks 
of him as the I*ather, and in his ideal prayer he is addressed as “ Our Father.” In 
this character Paul here addresses him. We see good reason for this, (1) It makes 
the Object of prayer intelligible to the mind. Infinite Creator, universal Sovereign, 
absolute Proprietor, and Disposer; what finite mind can understand these characters ? 
But a Father all know; paternity engaged the first attention, excited the first feelings, 
started the first thoughts. A child understands what a father is. (2) It makes the 
Object of prayer attractive to the mind. Creator, Sovercign, Judge ; are these attractive ? 
By no means. They overawe, confound, repel. But fatherhood is attractive. The 
child joyously leaps into the arms of its father. Instead-of cringing fear, there is filial 
love and boundless confidence. (3) It makes the object of prayer transformative to the 
mind. Who has such a transformative power as the parent? Fatherhood moulds ali 
characters, fashions history. Children naturally imitate the father they love. Are not 
these good reasons why we should look to God as a Father, and address him 88 such ? 
2. Ile is the Father of all holy intelligences, ““ ΟΥ̓ whom the whole family.” Or every 
family, every race in heaven or on earth. The expression must be limited to the 
intelligent creation, for he could not with propriety be called the Father of the irra- 
tional ; we must go further, and say that the expression must be limited to the holy 
raccs of his intelligent creation, for he would not be the Father of the rebellious and the 
profane. A family relationship exists between all the holy intelligences, and God is 
the Father of all—Father of all uufallen angels and redeemed men. And although 
“Father of our Lord Jesus Christ” may be out of its place in this passage, still it 
expresses a fact everywhere else revealed, that God is the Father of man’s Redeemer, as 
well as of all other holy ones in the universe. What a family is God’s!—loving, 
immense, ever-multiplying, harmonious, and ever-blest. 3. He ts the Father possessing 
boundless bountihood. Paul speaks of the “ riches of his glory.” What is the glory of 
God? Not his power, not his wisdom, not his wealth, not his dominion, but his good- 
siess, When Moses prayed, “I beseech thee show me thy glory,” what was the answer ὃ 
“1 will cause all my goodness to pass before thee,” as if he had said, “ My goodness is 
my glory.” And this goodness of his is inexhaustible. ‘The riches.” It is higher 
than all heavens; it is deeper than all hells. Its majestic billows roll under all 
Gehennas. 

II. THE 6000 mInvoKED. What blessings did he seek? 1. Divine strength of soul. 
“To be strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inner man.” (1) Every man has 
an “inner man”—the moral ego of his being. Itis this inner man that interests 
humanity in God, duty, immortality. (2) This inner man wants moral strength. It 
is enfeebled, it is crushed by sin. It is the slave of the appetite; it is “carnally sold 
unto sin.” It wants strength to rise to its true lordship over the body, and to its right- 
ful relation to God and his universe. How morally weak is the “inner man ”—the 
very stamina of humanity! (3) This moral strength must come from God. He who 
quickencth all things must quicken this inner man, now dead in trespasses and sin. 
It can find help in no other way ; its cry is, “O wretched man that I am! who can 
deliver from this bondage and death?” 2. The indwelling of Christ. “That Christ 
may dwell in your hearts by faith.” There is no mystery about the indwelling of 
Christ, The heart that loves him supremely holds him as ils constant Guest, As the 
author lives in the loving student, as the parent lives in the loving child, so in the 
same way, but in a higher degree, Christ lives in his loving disciples. His thoughts 
are their thoughts, his Spirit is their inspiration, his character is the very sun that 

-quickens, lightens, and beautifies their being. 8, Stability of love. ‘That ye, being 
rooted and grounded in love.” There isa love for Christ which is not rooted nor 
grounded; it isa passing sentiment, which, like a bubble, is thrown up on the stream 
of circumstances. The love of genuine Christianity is a rooted love. Rooted, not in 
something that can change and decay, bnt in the immutable excellence of God. Oh, to 
have all the fibres of the inner man struck into the Divine character, and rooted in 
God! Then, and not till then, will the soul be as the tree “planted by the rivers of 
water,” etc. A religion whose love is not rooted is without (1) life, (2) growth, 
(3) fruit, (4) permanence. 4, The comprehending of love. “That ye may be able to 
comprehend with all saints what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height; aud 
to know the love οἱ Christ, which passeth knowledge.” Christ’s love is intellec(ua ly 


On, m1. 1—21.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, 159 


immeasurable; “ Who by searching can find it out?” And yet, though it passeth the 
knowledge of the intellect, there is a sense in which it can and must be known— 
known as a matter of consciousness, known as an all-controlling power. “The love 
of Christ constraineth us because we thus judge,” etc. 5. Lhe reaching of Divine per- 
fection. “That ye might be filled with all the fulness of God”—that ye might be 
filled up with the fulness of God. The idea is that you may “ be perfect even as God is 

erfect.” This is the standard set before us; we are to be holy, even as God is hcly. 

nfinitely high as this is, nothing lower will meet the cravings of our moral nature or 
the full unfoldment of our endlessly advancing being. Heaven has predestinated us to 
be conformed to the image of God (Rom. viii. 29). 

Such was Paul’s intercessory prayer. Let us seek that Divine philanthropy which 
made him such a mediator between God and man. The priesthood of this philanthropy 
is what we want. Avaunt to all others! They are impious impostors, profane 
intruders. The priesthood of Christian philanthropy is the only Divine priesthood in 
the universe-—D, T 


Vers. 20, 21.—Eaxultant pratse. “Now unto him that is able to do exceeding 
abundantly above all that we ask or think, according to the power that worketh in us, 
unto him be glory in ‘the Church by Christ Jesus throughout all ayes, world without 
end. Amen.” ‘The passage leads us to consider the subject of exultant praise. 
Worship is praise; it is a higher service than prayer. It isin truth the highest end 
and the completest answer to prayer. In the preceding verses Paul prays; here he 
praises. He passes from asking to adoring. The passage leads us to consider religious 
praise in relation to the Object, the Church, the Redeemer, and the ages. 

I. In relation to the Opsect. He is here represented in his absolute and relative 
capacity for helping man. 1. In his absolute capacity. “He is able to do exceeding 
abundantly above all that we ask or think.” (1) Men can ask for much. They can 
ask for ages of blessedness, paradises of beauty and of bliss. (2) They can think of more. 
Imagination transcends desires. We only ask for what we desire; but we can conceive 
cf a universe of things which it has never entered into the heart to crave for. But the 
Divine capacity to give is “exceeding abundantly” beyond the power of asking or of 
thinking. Nay, itis “beyond «il things:” all things that ever have been. It is greater 
than the universe, All things that ever will be ; the possible with God will always be 
greater than the actual. How great is God’s capacity for helping! What a God does 
the gospel give us to love, worship, and‘adore! And yet, strange to say, finite though 
we be, no God of meaner type could match the measure of our souls, 2. In his 
relative capacity. ‘ According to the power that worketh in us.” Infinite as is his 
capability to. help, his power to help us is determined by the nature and measure of 
those spiritual aspirations and cravings which the power of his grace within us has pro- 
duced. Unless we desire knowledge, he cannot enlighten us; purity, he cannot purily 
us; pardon, he cannot pardon us; spiritual strength, he cannot strengthen us. Our 
moral contractedness limits his power to help us. His communications will be according 
to our receptivity. As the indolence of the farmer limits those fructifying influences of 
nature that would yield to him a golden harvest; as the stolid ignorance and base ser - 
suality of the people limit the influence of the genuine reformer to raise the millions in 
the social and political scale ; as the dulness or idleness of the pupil limits the power of 
a great teacher to enrich him with the treasures of knowledge; so the moral contracted- 
ness of the heart limits the power of the Holy One. He canriot do many mighty works 
for us, because of our unbeliet. It is “according to the power that worketh in us” 
that God’s power to help us is determined. 

I. In relation to the Cnurca, “In the Church,” etc. The Church is a company of 
redeemed men, part of which is in heaven and part in various portions of the earth. 
Why does Paul single out the Church to praise and adore the great God? Because the 
Church is under special obligations to do so. All things in heaven and on earth, from the 
lowest to the highest creature, should praise their Maker. “ Let everything that hath 
breath praise the Lord.” But the duty of redeemed souls to do so transcends in urgency 
that of all others. He has not only created them and preserved them, but he has redeemed 
them, and redeemed them not with “ corruptible things ’—such as silver and gold—but 
with the “precious blood of Jesus Christ.” For them his only begotten Son became 


140 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. ἴση. mt. 1--21. 


incarnate, snffered, bled, and died. For them the Holy Spirit is in constant operation. 
‘ All things work together for their good.” None have engaged so much of the Divine 
attention as they ; none have been recipients of such Divine mercies as they; none are 
so deep in debt as they. ‘Their hallelujahs ought to be more fervid, more enthusiastic, 
more incessant than any that echo through the hierarchies of heaven. 

III. In relation to the RenzemeR. “By Christ Jesus.” Why should Paul identify 
the work of the Church with Christ? Why does he ascribe glory to the Eternal bv 
him or in him? Two reasons may be suggested. 1. Through Christ man ts made to 
see the glory of God, He is the Revealer of the moral glory of God tothe soul. “ We 
beheld his glory,” says the apostle, “the glory as of the only begotten of the Father, full 
of grace and truth.” He himself is “ the Brightness of the Father’s glory.” Where but 
in Christ can man see the moral glory of God; the glory not of mere intellect, power, 
or outward goodness which you have in nature, but the glory of tenderness, mercy, for- 
bearance, purity, rectitude, faithfulness, boundless compassion? Where Clirist is not, 
God’s glory is not seen. 2. Through Christ man is brought into sympathy with the 
glory of God. “ God, who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, hath shined 
in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of 
Jesus Ohrist.” He it is that inspires, enamours, and transports the soul with the glory 
of God. Human worship must ever be in connection with Christ. ‘ He loved us, and 
gave himself for us.” 

IV. In relation to the aczs. “Throughout all ages, world without end. Amen.” 
This implies: 1. That God will be for ever, Were he not to be for ever, worship 
would not be for ever. He is eternal. “From everlasting to everlasting thou art’ 
God.” “He inhabiteth eternity.” ‘One day with him is as a thousand years, and a 
thousand years as one day.” 2. That the Church will be for ever. ‘The redeemed will 
never cease to exist. They are to live from generation to generation, through endless 
ages. 3. That the reasons for praise will be for ever. God’s infinite excellence, his 
redemptive and fatherly relation to the Church, and the communications of his love 
are the grand reasons for praise, and these will be for ever. 

Conciusion. What a sublime destiny is that of the redeemed! Genuine religious 
praise is the heaven of the soul. It is that in which all the “ powers find sweet 
employ.” It is that which brings the whole spiritual man within the glow and the 
sunshine of the fatherhood of God. Praise is not the “service of song,” as it is called; 
it is the spirit of life. It is not until all the activities of our being chime in one 
triumphant and succeeding psalm that our destiny is realized.—D. T. 


Ver. 1.—“ The prisoner of Christ Jesus.” St. Paul writes from his Roman dungeon, 
with the galling constraints of his confinement constantly about him. There is a 
pathos in the situation that must move the sympathy of the reader; and yet there is 
a dignity aod even a glory in it that make us feel the apostle’s occasional reference to 
hiz bov-is chiefly a motive for giving the greater weight aud solemnity to his persuasive 
exhortations. ; 

1. THE FAITHFUL SERVANT OF CHRIST MAY BECOME A PRISONER IN HIS OAUSE. St. 
Paul was called into the apostleship from a worldly position of great influence and 
brilliant prospects. He was the most gifted and the most devoted man in the Christian 
Church. No one laboured more assiducusly, and no one met with more marked 
success. Yet it has all come to this, that the great, honoured apostle lies chained in 
a Roman prison, his life at the mercy of the “ mad boy” Nero. The end might have 
been expected in this form. ‘‘ A disciple is not above bis master, nor a servant above 
hislord.” If the Lord was crucified, shall we be surprised that the servant is imprisoned ? 
Still some are perplexed and disappointed, not at suffering these great hardships, but at 
having to bear any cross for Christ. Christianity is the religion of the cross for the 
Christian as truly as for Christ. 

Il. Liperat ΟΗΒΙΒΤΙΑΝΙΤῪ MAY ENDANGER THE LIBERTY OF ITS ADVOCATE. St. Paul 
was a prisoner “in behalf of you Gentiles.” We know, from the history in the Acts, 
that it was through the enmity of Jews that the apostle was accused before the 
Roman government, and that this enmity was roused by the jealousy they felt at his 
preaching the gospel to the Gentiles, and aavocating the Gentile right to an equality 
with the Jew. St. Paul was the preacher of the more liberal Christianity of his day 


On. 111. 1—21.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, 141 


and therefore he was most grievously misunderstood and most bitterly opposed. They 
who feel called to preach more liberal views than are sanctioned by the prevailing 
opinions of the age may expect opposition, but may learn the duty of courage and 
fidelity to truth, and may be cheered by thinkiog of the lonely sufferers. in the same 
cause in bygone days, when the larger views and the freer doctrines were more 
vigorously oppesed than they can be now. The noble champions of liberal Christianity, 
from St. Paul to Maurice, have won substaatial victories from which we profit. 

ΠΙ. Ir 18 BETTER TO BE A PRISONER FOR CHRIST AND LIBERAL TRUTH THAN TO BE AT 
LIBERTY WITHOUT CHRIST AND IN UNCHARITABLE NARROWNESS. After all, the prisoner 
at Rome is more to be envied than pitied, He was the prisoner of Christ, and Christ 
was with him in his bondage. His was the real blessedness of those who are perse- 
cuted for righteousness’ sake. St. Paul was the champion of freedom as opposed to the 
restraints of Judaism, and this real, spiritual freedom could not be destroyed by bolts 
and bara, 

“Stone walls do not a prison make, 
Nor iron bars a cage.” 


The immortal dreamer had large liberty in Bedford jail when he travelled to the 
Beulah heights and almost as far as the gates of the celestial city. 

IV. ἸῊΒ PRISONER WHO SUFFERS FOR A GOOD CAUSE LAYS GREAT OBLIGATIONS UPON 
ALL WHO BENEFIT FRoMIT. St. Paul quietly appeals to his imprisonment as a ground 
for prayer (ver. 14) and exhortation (ch. iv. 1). The sufferings of the great martyrs 
of liberty in the past urge us, who have entered into the heritage won by their toil and 
death, to be faithful to so great a trust, to walk worthy of it by using our liberty as an 
opportunity for the highest service of love, and to preserve it from all encroachments 
and hand it down to our children unfettered by new restraints of theological dogma 
or of official domination.—W. F. A. 


Ver. 8.— Less than the least of all saints.” 1. HE wHo 18 MOST HIGHLY GIFTED WITH 
DIVINE GRACE WILL THINK MOST LOWLY OF HIMSELF. St. Paul, the most gifted apostle, 
is most deeply conscious of his own unworthiness. We must distinguish between the 
endowment of grace and the acquisition of merit. To have much grace is only to be 
much favoured. As ἃ man grows in grace he grows in power of spiritual insigat; 
aud the result is twofold—he has more knowledge of his own true state and a better 
understanding of the claims of righteousness. Thus the standard is ever rising above 
his head in greater heights of holiness, while he is constantly seeing more clearly, freed 
from all hypocrisy and self-deception, the miserable weakness and sinfulness of his own 
character. 

II. He WHO THINKS MOST LOWLY OF HIMSELF WILL BE MOST FITTED FOR THE SERVICE 
or Crrist. It is not that unworthiness is itself a fitness for service. Both to be unworthy 
and to think one’s self worthy are to be doubly unfit. But as Socrates thought he might 
be accounted wise only because he knew he was ignorant while all other Athenians 
were unconscious of their icnorance, the true servant of Christ is aware of the sinful- 
ness which is common to him and to all others, but others are not so deeply cemscious 
of it. ‘his humble consciousness of unworthiness is helpful for service, (1) because 
it makes us look for the indispensable grace of God; (2) because it saves us from 
preaching ourselves when we should be preaching Christ; and (8) because it compels 
us to give God all the glory of success.—W. F. A. 


Ver. 8.—* The unsearchable riches of Christ.” Some riches are unsearchable because 
they are inaccessible, like jewels guarded by jealous sentinels, and pearls in sea-caves, 
and the gold-mines of remote stars. Some riches are unsearchable because they are 
secret, like treasure hid in a field, and ancient records in undeciphered hieroglyphics ; 
in this sense an illiterate man finds the wealth of a library, and an unscientific man 
the stores of a museum, unsearchable. No doubt there are wonderful graces in Christ 
that are as yet above and beyond our grasp, and deep mysteries that we cannot fathom, 
and a spiritual worth in all his blessings that cannot be discovered by the unspiritual. 
But it is not in these senses that the riches of Christ are called unsearchable. The 
doors of his treasure-chamber are flung wide that the poorest may enter. There is no 


142 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. (ox. mt. 1—21, 


veil of mystery to prevent a little child from seeing the beauty within. The riches of 
Christ are unsearchable simply because they are so abundant and so varions that no 
man can ever measure the extent, or count the number, or distinguish all the forms of 
them. For-near upon nineteen centuries this great treasury has been ransacked by 
friends and foes, by hnngering inquirers and by keen-eyed critics, with the result that, 
like the infinite wealth of nature—which is felt to be more immeasurable in our own 
day, after the fruitful, labours of the most indefatigable naturalists, than ever it was 
when not one-tenth of what we now know was discovered—these riches of Christ 
amaze and fascinate and overwhelm us with an ever-growing sense of their magnificent 
unsearchableness, 

I, THE RICHES OF THE CHARACTER OF CHRIST ARE UNSEARCHABLE. 1, They have 
been searched into by uncompromising foes, at first by bitter Pharisees and scoffing 
Sadducees, later by clever philosophical opponents, such as Celsus and Porphyry, down 
to the times of Voltaire’s sparkling sarcasm and Strauss’s dry criticism. And the 
verdict of mankind is distinctly against the fault-finders, confessing with Pilate, “I find 
no fault in him.” 2. These riches have also been searched into by adoring disciples, 
some with the profundity of St. Augustine, others with the simplicity of St. Frances; 
and all types of Christians in every succeeding age unhesitatingly declare that they 
never weary of worshipping fresh wonders in that life of unearthly loveliness. The 
more our eyes are opened to discern spiritual worth, and the more the character of 
Christ is studied, the more are we astonished and delighted by the vision of infinite 
perfection. 

. I]. THE RICHES OF THE TRUTH OF CHRIST ARE UNSEARCHABLE. Christ is the Truth 
and the Light of the world. The ideas of Plato may be measurcd—tie truth of Christ 
never. Yet two classes of people deny the unsearchable nature of the riches of this 
truth. 1. Those who say the world has outgrown Christianity. Perhaps they mistake 
the dogmas of the creeds for the truth as it is in Jesus. The former are necessarily 
limited, and some of them may have to break up and give place to larger ideas. But 
the latter is living, infinite, and eternal. 2. Those who are satisfied that they know 
everything. They are usually the people who know least. A smooth and rounded 
scheme of doctrine comprehends their universe. Because taey have shaped it into 
logical consistency, they assume that no truth can lie outside it. They have yet to 
learn that the Word made flesh, like the Word in nature, is infinite. 

111, Tue RicHES OF THE LOVE OF CHRIST ARE UNSEARCHABLE. Human lovecommonly 
diminishes in intensity in proportion to the extent of the area over which it is spread ; 
family affection being warmer than our interest in the wider circle ol friends, and this 
than general philanthropy, just as the river is deep where it is narrow, but becomes 
shallow as its banks open out in width. But the erace of Christ, in depth and breadth 
like the sea, has a vast comprehensiveness for all, together with a strong intensity for 
each. So that in the last great assembly, when some come from distant isles and 
some from hidden valleys, some from populous cities and some from lonesome deserts, 
to confess that the grace of Christ has reached them in the fulness of its power, none 
will be found so remote as to have been beyond reach, so undeserving as to have been 
past mercy, or so needy as not to have been able to find the supply of every real want 
in his great riches of love. 

IV. Tue RICHES OF THE BLESSINGS GIVEN ΒΥ CHRIST ARE UNSEARCHABLE. There 
is still an unhappy habit among some of listening only to the evil report of the spies 
who tell of the giants, and turning a deaf ear to the spies who bring the grapes and 
pomegranates, No wonder that this habit leads to the painting of the blessings of 
Christianity with very dull shades. Rightly understood, the gospel offers a pearl of 
great price, reveals hidden treasures, strips off the rags and brings forth the best robe 
and the ring. From the first grace of forgiveness to the last grace of peace in death, 
Christ is breathing benedictions on the Christian’s life, so that when he reflects, he is 
astonished at what he has already received, aud yet learns to accept all this as only 
the earnest of the blessings of light, and strength, and purity, and peace, that are 
reserved for his future inheritance.—W. F. A. 


Ver. 10.—“ The manifold wisdom of God.” 1. THE MANIFOLD WISDOM OF Gop 1Β PUT 
FORTH IN THE REDEMPTION OF THE WORLD. God is the great Thinker, All our 


CH ΠΙ. 1-211 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 148 


philosophy is the attempt of man to spell out some of the ideas of God. What wisdom 
was requisite for the creation of the world and the ordering of all things, from the 
movements of a star down to the life of a cell! What wisdom is involved in the govern- 
ment of the world, maintaining life and gladness, @eveloping the latent resources of the 
universe, making all things work together for good, ruling great kingdoms and indi- 
vidual lives in justice and mercy! But a higher wisdom is required for redemption. 
It is more difficult to regenerate than to create, to regain Paradise than to form it at the 
first. 1. Not only are the power and goodness of God needed for this work, but also 
his wisdom. Preaching may be foolish, but the gospel preached is the wisdom of 
God. The highest intellectuality has been exercised in working out the world’s 
redemption. 2. St. Paul sees this especially in the breadth of the results—in the 
inclusion of Gentile with Jew. High wisdom is broad, and liberal charity requires 
much intelligence. Comprehensiveness should not be a mattcr of vague sentiment. 
To be effective it must be fortified by ripe wisdom. 3. This wisdom is manifold. 
God has many interests to consider, many conflicting forces to deal with, and many 
issues to provide for. Therefore (1) different men may have different views, and yet 
all be in the right. (2) Many purposes may be aimed at in redemption beyond what 
we can see, and thus many processes which to us look meaningless find their end. 
The water is not taken over the mill-wheel simply that it may find its nearest course 
to the river; nor is the Christian led over a broken path because that is the nearest 
way to heaven. 

Tl, THE MANIFOLD WISDOM OF GOD 18 MADE KNOWN THROUGH THE CHURCH TO THE 
-HIGHEST INTELLIGENCES. The Church is the manifestation of a wisdom that was 
hidden before Christianity appeared. Truth is explained by illustration, and the Church 
is a concrete illustration of Divine wisdom. Itis not in the thinking and teaching of 
Divine wisdom by Christians, but in their very existence as such, that the wisdom of 
God is revealed. To be a redeemed soul is to be a proof of that wisdom, just as for 
one who had been incurably sick to be a healthy man was to be a living proof of the 
healing power of Christ. ‘Ihis revelation was made to other worlds and higher intelli- 
gences, 1. God cares for other worlds than our own ; elsewhere processes of education 
are being carried on with creatures in whom God takes interest. 2. We are called to 
minister instruction to other worlds, The service is mutual;angels are ministering 
spirits to men, men are instructive witnesses of redemptive wisdom to angels. Thus 
the lowest can help the highest. An angel can learn lessons from a man, as ἃ man 
can find instruction in an insect. Our lives, then, are linked to other worlds, What 
happens to us has bearings elsewhere. This thought may help us to face some mystery 
of life. As in the case of Job, what is humanly unintelligible may be explained when 
it is seen that the beings of another sphere are being instructed through our experience. 
3. If the highest intelligences “ desire to look into” these things, and see the manifold 
wisdom of God in thei, surely we men should treat the works of redemption with 
profound reverence, and regard the study of them as worthy of our highest thought.— 
W. FA. ᾿ 


Ver. 12.—Christian boldness. I. BoLDNESS I8 A CHRISTIAN GRACE. The gospel 
destroys the gloomy old religions of terror. It dispels even the natural fear of guilty 
souls in the presence of the holy God. It brings liberty and courage. It is essentially 
the manly faith of the world’s adult age. 

11. THIs BOLDNESS 185 MANIFEST IN OUR CONFIDENT AccEss ΤῸ Gop. The Christian 
is not to approach God under the circumstances which made the courageous entrance 
of Queen Esther into the presence of King Ahasuerus so nobly patriotic. We see God 
as our Father waiting to be gracious. It is unworthy to fear. Our prayer should not 
be the ery of the captive fur mercy, but the glad request of the child. Note: 1. Christian 
boldness is wasted unless we use it in coming nearer to God. 2, ‘This buldness is no 
excuse for irreverence. 

III. CuRisTIAN BOLDNESS I8 EXPLAINED BY OUR RELATION To Curist. 1, Christ 
dispels our ignorant terrors by revealing the fatherhood of God, We have but to 
acquaint ourselves with him to be at peace (Job xxii. 21). 2. Christ gives to us the 
perfect love that casts out fear. 8, Christ reconciles us with God, and sv removes all 
ground of reasonable alarm. For while we are unreconciled and unforgiven, courage is 


144 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, (ox. mL 1---21. 


madness, and the wildest terror the reasonable condition of those whose conscience is 
roused and who realize their frightful peril. But through Christ we are forgiven and 
reconciled to God. It is ungrateful, after being thus blessed, to cherish the old fears. 

1V. CHRISTIAN BOLDNESS 18 ENJOYED THROUGH FAITH IN Carist, 1, Faith is 
necessary in order to bring us into those relations with Christ which make our boldness 
right and justifiable. Without faith we are not redeemed, and while unredeemed we 
have no ground for being bold in Christ. 2. Faith is necessary in order to enable us 
to realize our free and safe condition through Christ, Until we trust Christ we shall 
not dare to approach God with a confidence that is grounded on our relations with 
Christ. Thus spiritual cowardice is a mark of unbelief. He who trusts most strongly 
will enjoy most freedom of access to God.—W. F. A. 


Ver, 14.—The universal fatherhood of God. I. THE NATURE OF THE FATHERHOOL 
or Gop. 1. God is the Source of our being. He has not only created us as he has 
created the rocks. Weare not manufactured, but begotten by God. He has breathed 
his life into us. 2. God has formed us in his own image. There is a similarity of 
nature in child and parent. All spirits belong to the same family and have a common 
likeness to God. 8, God is closely related to us. ‘Throughout life the father is most 
nearly connected with his children by nature and conscquent claims and duties, God 18 
our Father now; he has not merely called us into being in the past. He always and 
necessarily bears the fatherly relation to us. 

11. Tur EXTENT OF THE FATHERHOOD OF Gop. From God “every family in heaven 
and earth is named;” then God is the Father of every family. -His fatherhood is 
vuiversal. 1. It reaches to all spiritual beings, Of what orders, how many, and how 
vas‘ons they are, are wholly beyond our speculation. But none are so remote, so pecu-' 
liar, so lofty, or so low as not to come within God’s fatherly relationship. 2. It is 
individually concerned with each separate order of beings. “very family.” The 
families are distinguished and so are their homes. God regards his children with 
personal interest. 3. It is not destroyed by evil conduct. There are fallen beings, 
orders, and families that are degraded in sin. But these make no exception to the universal 
fatherhood, In spite of the shameful corruption of some of the families, God is still 
Father of all. David did not cease to be the father of the rebel Absalom. ‘The prodigal 
son could arise and go unto his father. The worst sinner, when he ccmes to himself, 
may say, “My Father.” This necessarily results from the very nature of fatherbood. 
The three facts of origination of life, community of nature, and close relationship can 
never be annihilated. For a father to ignore them is for him to become an unnatural 

rent, 
aie THE CONSEQUENCES OF THE FATHERHOOD OF Gop. 1. In God. (1) He will 
manifest a fatherly interest in every family. In choosing the Jew he cannot forget the 
Gentile. In blessing the Christian he cannot overlook the heathen. Christians, like 
the Jews, have foolishly thought to appropriate God to themselves, But less enlightened 
races have not been neglected by God. He has not left himself without witness in 
pagan lands. All religions, in so far as they contain any truth, are inspired and rest on 
Divine revelations, God visits all his children. The seeking after God in the dark 
of remote inquirers is a vague response to the voice of God heard by them in their 
consciences. (2) God has rights over all men, and no one has a right to disown his 
Father. God will judge all and justly chastise the disobedient children who refused.to 
admit his claims. (8) God desires to bless all his children and will always welcome 
back the penitents. 2. Jn us. (1) We should remember that, as spiritual beings, we 
are related. If men are akin to the inhabitants of other worlds, much more are they 
very closely related to one another. Hence our duties of brotherhood to foreign 
nations and to savage races, (2) We should have boldness and confidence in our 
approach to God. St. Paul names the universal fatherhood of God in the preface 
of a prayer.—W. Β΄. A. 


Vers. 14—19.— The great mystery of the love of Christ. The special object of St. Paul’s 
prayer for the Ephesians is that their knowledge may be enlarged, and the one direction 
in which he desires for them the increase of knowledge is in regard to the love of Christ. 
That is the most wonderful and the most vital theme of Christian meditation; it ean 


oH, 111. 1—21.]} THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, 146 


only be rightly contemplated under spiritual aid; but the true understanding of it will 
be fruitful in rich blessings. 

I. Tue GREAT MYSTERY OF THE LOVE OF CuRist. Everything in Christ is wonderful, 
but nothing more so than his love. The multitude were astonished at his miraculous 
powers. Keen antagonists were confounded before his superlative wisdom ; but his 
friends and disciples were above all and growingly touched by the gentleness, the 
goodness, the sympathy, the self-sacrifice, and the love which filled his life. This 
“ passeth knowledge ” in many respects. 1. Character. (1) Disinterestedness amounting 
to the extreme of self-denial. Christ never sought his own pleasure. He lived wholly 
for others. Measure his self-sacrifice by the depth of the descent from the glory of the 
only begotten Son to the agony and shame of the cross. (2) Intensity. The toil, 
suffering, and fruitful eneryy of Christ’s love reveal this. (3) Eudurance. It is 
sustained by an infinite patience, like God’s long-suffering goodness, like “the mercy 
of the Lord” which “eudureth for ever.” Christ stands long at the door and knocks. 
2. Comprehensiveness, (1) Extending to the whole world. The objects of our affection 
are necessarily limited in number. Who can understand a love that embraces Jew 
and Gentile, Greek and barbarian, and every man, woman, and child in the world? (2) 
Including the most uninviting subjects. We love those whom we admire or those to 
whom we are drawn by some attraction, sympathy, or relationship. Christ loves the 
base, despicable, and corrupt men, remote and obscure fulk—“ the dim multitude” and 
those who seem even less lovable—the great mass of dreary, uninteresting people. 
3. Objects. These are the highest and purest. A low love indulges, pampers, and spoils 
in weakly trying to please its objects. Christ’s love often gives pain, demands sacrifice, 
perplexes and troubles us. It seeks the redemption, the purification, and the highest 
glory of men. 

Il, Taz way To KNOW THE LOVE oF Curist. It “passeth knowledge.” Never- 
theless, though we cannot comprehend, we may apprehend it, as one who cannot see the 
mountain’s cloud-capped towers may explore its base, as one who can never define an 
illimitable ocean may grow familiar with its home waters and neighbouring bays. Now, 
such knowledge as we may have of the supreme mystery of the love of Christ is not to 
be got by merely reading the New Testament histury, nor by any amount of theological 
discussion. It is spiritual, sympathetic, inward, and altained through Divine grace, 
St. Paul prays for the means of acquiring it. They are three, in successive gradations 
—one leading on to the other. 1. Spiritual strenyth. This is to have life, vigour, and 
energy in the inner nature. For so long as the spiritual faculties are dead, or slumbering, 
or only move languidly, they cannot rise to grasp great, Divine things. An inspiration 
of God’s Spirit, to be measured only “by the riches of his glory,” will supply this 
strength. 2. The indwelling Christ. The first act of the awakened, energized spiritual 
nature is to receive Christ through faith. While he is only outside us we can neither 
know him nor love him. 3. Our love to Christ. When we by faith receive Christ into 
our hearts we learn to love him. Then only can we understand his love. It is true 
that “we love him because he first loved us;” still, the vague, wondering sense of 
Christ’s love that wins our hearts to him is a poor perception compared with what we 
shall experience when we look at him with the enlightened eyes of love. Only love 
can understand love. 

III. THE SPIRITUAL BLESSEDNESS THAT FLOWS FROM KNOWING THE LOVE OF ΟἬΠΙΒΤ, 
This is to “be filled unto all the fulness of God.” Men have sought union with God 
by ascetic devotion, by mystic contemplation, by sacramental grace; for all spiritually 
awakened souls have felt a void which only God can fill. The secret which priest and 
pietist have searched after in vain is here revealed. By understanding the love of 
Christ we are brought into sympathetic connection with him in whom dwelleth the 
fulness of the Godhead bodily, and through his mediation we receive the graces and 
glories of the Divine nature (John xvii. 21).—W. F. A. 


Ver. 17.—The real presence. No great delusion could attain wide influence unless 
it were the counterfeit or perversion of a valuable truth, and unless it promised to satisfy 
some deep, natural desire. The doctrine of the real presence is a pathetic witness to 
the yearning of the soul for personal fellowship with Christ, and to the truth that he 
does come into the lives of his people 

EPHESIANS. - 


1'6 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. [ox. 1v, 1—32. 


1. Curisr’s P2rsence Is REAL. It is not enough that he should be with us only as 
“the choir invisible” of the departed great are near; 7.e. in our memory and in his 
influence. We are not satisfied with having his spirit among us in the sense in which 
the spirit of Plato and the spirit of Shakespeare are still with those who read ‘ Phedo’ 
and ‘Hanilet.’ Christ promised to be personally present with his disciples (Matt. 
xxviii. 20). He ascended up into heaven, not that he might be removed from us, but 
that, passing from the material to the spiritual world, he might come into the closer 
contact with our souls, 

IL. Curist’s PRESENCE IS IN OUR HEARTS. He touches us through our thoughts and 
affections. There lies our true self, and it is to our true self that hecomes. He makes his 
presence felt by the truths he inspires, the love he rouses, and the strength he infuses, 
just as the sun’s presence is felt in the seed when it begins to germinate in its dark tomb 
beneath the earth. In this way Christ is even more near to us than he was to 
Zaccheus when he sat at the publican’s table, or to John when the beloved disciple 
leaned on his Master’s bosom. 

IlI. Curisr’s PRESENCE 18 ABIDING. He comes “ ποῦ to sojourn;” he abides with 
us. He is with us when, busy in doing his will, we are not thinking of the Lord 
himself, as the master is among the workmen who for the moment are too diligent to 
look at him. He is- with us in hours of spiritual night when we are not enjoying 
communion with him, as a friend may be by our side in the dark, near though undis- 
covered. He is with us in our weariness when we have not strength and heart to pray, 
as the mother watches her sick child while he lies moaning and quite unconscious 
of her gentle nursing. 

1V. Curist’s PRESENCE 18 ENJOYED THROUGH FAITH. He is not in every heart; 
for there are Christless souls. Nor is he fully present with each one vf his own people; 
for it is on behalf of true Christians that St. Paul prays for the strength to receive 
Christ. He is near to us just in proportion as our faith is vigorous to lay hold of hiin. 
We cannot put our fingers in the nail-prints. We must trust the unscen presence. Wo 
must not look for any second sense, any mystical intuition; for that is as much 
walking by sight as if we saw our Lord with our bodily eyes. Faith is pure trust 
in that of which we have no direct apprehension. By this faith we receive 
Christ.—W. F. A. 


EXPOSITION, 


CHAPTER IV. 
PraotioaL Portion OF THE EPrIstLe. 


Vers. 1—16.—Cuurcu PrincIPLE oF 
GrowTH AND ProGRess; THE OHURCH ἃ 
Bopy. 


Ver. 1.- 1 therefore. Inference not only 
from last chapter, but the whole Epistle. 
Paul’s interest in the Ephesians led lim to 
a double application of the great subject 
which he had expounded: (1) to ask God 
on their behalf that he would bestow on 
them the full measure of the blessing to 
which of his grace they were entitled (ch. 
iii. 14—21); and (2) to entreat them on God’s 
behalf to live in a way befitting their high 
calling(cli.iv.vi.). To this second applica- 
tion he proceeds now. The prisoner in the 
Lord. Not merely “of the Lord,” but ἐν 
Κυρίῳ, the usual formula for vital com- 
munion with Christ, indicuting that his cap- 
tivity was the captivity of a part or member 
of the Lord. An exhortation from such a 
prisoner ought to fall with double weight. 
Beseech you to walk worthy of the calling 


wherewith ye were called. Their call was 
to be God’s people (comp. Rom. ix. 25); 
this not a mere speculative distinction, but 
one that must have practical form and that 
must lead to suitable fruit. True grace 
in the heart must show itself by true 
goodness in the life. They were not to 
conceal their religion, not to be ashamed of 
it, but to avow it and glory in it, and thcir 
lives were not to be disgraced by unworthy 
conduct, but to be brightened and elevated 
by their relation to Christ. 

Ver. 2.—Some Points or A WortHY WaLx. 
With all lowliness and meekness, with long- 
suffering, forbearing one another in love. 
He begins liis enumeration with pass‘ve 
graces—eminently those of Christ. Lowli- 
ness or humility may well be gendered by 
our remembering what we were when Goil’s 
grace took hold of us (ch. ii. 1—3), Meeks 
ness is the natural expression of a lowly 
state of mind, opposed to boisterous 86] - 
assertion and rude striving with others; it 
genders a@ subdued manncr and a peace- 
loving spirit that studies to give the soft 


on. Iv. 1—82,] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, 


147 


answer that turneth away wrath. Long- 
suffering and loving forbearance are phases 
of the same state of mind—denoting the 
abgence of that irascibility and proneness to 
take offence which flares up at every pro- 
vocation or fancied neglect, and strives to 
maintain self-control on every occasion, It 
is from such qualities in God that our 
redemption has come; it is miserable to 
accept the redemption and not try to attain 
and exhibit its true spirit. Neglect of this 
verse has produced untold evil in the Chris- 
tian Church. 

Ver. 3.—Striving to keep the unity of the 
Spirit. Σπουδάζοντες 18 stronger than the 
A.V. “endeavouring,” and denotes an object 
to be carefully and earnestly watched for and 
promoted. ‘The unity of the Spirit” is 
equivalent to the unity of which the Spirit 
is the Author. In all in whom he works 
savingly, the Spirit produces a certain one- 
ness in faith, in repentance, in knowledge, in 
their views of sin, grace, Christ, the world, 
etc, This oneness exists, and cannot but exist, 
even when Christians are not careful of it, but 
the manifestation of it is lost; it seems to 
the world as if there were no such oneness. 
‘““Many men, many minds,” says the world, 
when believers differ much and contend 
much, and are at no pains to preserve and 
manifest the unity wrought by the Spirit. 
It is due to the Spirit, as well as to the 
interests of the kingdom of God, that the 
unity of the Spirit be maintained in the bond 
of peace. The genitive, εἰρήνης, is com- 
monly held to be that of apposition, the bond 
which consists of peace—a peace-loving 
spirit, a epirit laying more stress on the 
pointa in which Christians agree than those 
in which they differ. Those who are com- 
bative, censorious, careless of peace, do not 
walk worthy of their vocation. ἥ 

Vers. 4—6.— WHEREIN UNITY ΟΟΝΒΙΒΤΒ--- 
Seven Parrioutars. There is‘one body (see 
ch. ii. 16). The Church is an organic whiole, of 
which believers are the members, and Christ 
the Head, supplying the vitalizing power. 
The real body, being constituted by vital 
union with Christ, is not synonymous with 
any single outward society. One Spirit; viz. 
the Holy Spirit, who alone applies the re- 
demption of Christ, and works in the mem- 
bers of the Church the graces of the new 
creation. As ye also were called in one 
hope of your calling, This is one of the re- 
sults of the Spirit’s work; when the Spirit 
called you he inspired you all with one 
hope, and this one hope was involved in the 
very essence of yourcalling (comp. Titus ii.13, 
“Looking for the blessed hope, even the 
glorious appeariag of the great God and our 
Saviour Jesus Christ”). ‘To all believers the 
Spirit imparted this one blessed hope. One 
Lord; Jesus Clirist, unique and beyond com- 


parison: as Teacher, all hang on his words; 
as Master, all own his supreme authority; to 
his example all refer as the standard; his 
likeness all covet as the highest excellence 
(where Mary is worshipped, though nomin- 
ally you have but one Lord, virtually you 
have two). One faith; not objective in the 
sense of creed, but as denoting the one 
instrument of receiving salvation (ch. ii. 8), 
the one belief in the one Saviour by which 
we are justificd, adopted, and in other ways 
blessed, One baptism. One initiatory rite 
admitting into the visible Ohurch—baptism 
in name of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, 
symbolic of the washing of regeneration, the 
one way of entering the Church invisible. 
One God and Father of all. We rise now tv 
the fountain of Godhead, the one suprume 
Being with whom all have to do, tle only 
Being who is or can be the Father of us 
all; who can be to us what is implied in 
the name “Father,” whose love and grace 
can satisfy our hearts. Who is over all; 
the supreme and only Potentate, exercising 
undivided jurisdiction, “doing according to 
his will in the armies of heaven,” etc. And 
through all; pervading the whole universe, 
sustaining and ruling it, not dwellin» apart 
from his works, but pervading them; not, 
however, in any pantheistical sense, but as 
@ personal God, whose essence is separate 
from his works. And in all, A closer and 
more abiding influence; he dwells in them, 
and walks in them, moulding their inner 
being, and filling them with. his own light 
and love. Some commentators of mark have 
tried to fiud a reference to each of the per- 
sons of the Godhead in the three prepositions 
over, through, and by, but this seems a 
strained view. The three persons, however, 
appear clearly in the seven elements of 
unity, but, as before (ch. iii. 16—19), in 
the reverse of the common order—first, the 
Spirit; second, the Son; and third, the 
Father. These seven elements constitute 
the true unity of the Church. It is out of 
the question to identify the Church which 
is thus one, with any external organization 
like the Roman Catholic Church. How 
many millions have been connected with it 
who have notoriously been destitute of the 
one hope, the one Spirit, the one Father! 
It is of the invisible Church the apostle 
speaks, and hia exhortation is, seeing that 
this blessed sevenfold unity is the unity 
wrought by the Holy Spirit, maintain that 
unity; maintain the manifestation of it; 
give no occasion to any one to say that there 
is no such unity—that the Holy Ghost is 
a Spirit of confusion and not a Spirit of 
order and unity. 

Vers. 7—16.—Vanizry or Girrs IN oon- 
NECTION WITH UNITY; USE TO BE MADE OF 
THEM. 


148 


THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 


(cu. rv, 1—32. 


Ver. 7.—But to each one of us was grace 
given according to the measure of the gift of 
Christ. In the Church all do not get alike; 
grace is not given in equal measures as the 
manna in the wilderness; Christ, as the 
great Bestower, measures out his gifts, and 
each receives according to his measure. 
Compare parable of talents. ‘ Grace” does 
not refer merely to supernatural gifts, but 
also to the ordinary spiritual gifts of men. 
These ara varied, because what each gcts he 
gets for the good of the rest; the Church is a 
fellowship or brotherhood, where each has an 
intcrest in all and all in each, and is bound 
to act accordingly. 

Ver. 8.—Wherefore he saith, When he as- 
cended on high he led captivity captive, and 
received gifts formen. The speaker is God, 
the author of Scripture, ani! the place is the 
s xty-eighth psalm. That psalm is ἃ psalm 
of triumph, where the placing of the ark on 
Zion is celebrated as if it had been a great 
victory. As this quotation shows, the psalm 
in its deepest sense is Messianic, celebrating 
the victory of Christ. The substance rather 
than the words of the passage are given, for 
the second person (“thou hast ascended,” 
ete.) is changed into the third; and whereas 
in the psalm it is said, “gave gifts to men,” 
as niodified by the apostle it is said, “ received 
gilts for men.” As ina literal triumph, the 
chiefs of the enemy’s army are led captive, 
so the powers of darkness were led captive 
by Christ (captivity, αἰχμαλωσία, denotes 
prisoners); and as on occasion of a triumph 
the spoils of the enemy are made over to 
the conqueror, who again gives them away 
auong the soldiers and people, so gifts were 
given to Christ after his triumph to be 
given by him to his Church. We must not 
foree the analogy too far: the point is simply 
this—as 8 conqueror at a triumph gets 
gifts to distribute, so Christ, on his resur- 
rection and ascension, got the Holy Spirit 
to bestow on his Church (comp. ch. i. 22). 

Ver. 9.—Now (the fact) that he ascended, 
what does it imply but that he descended first? 
The ascent implied a previous descent; that 
is, the ascent of the Son of Gol—of one who 
was himself in heaven, who was in the bosom 
of the Father (comp. Jolin iii. 13), implied 
that he had come duwn from beaven, a 
striking proof of his interest in and love 
for the children of men. And the descent 
was not merely to the ordinary condition 
of humanity, but toa more than ordinarily 
degraded condition, not merely to the sur- 
face of the carth, but to the lower parts of 
the earth, This has sometimes been inter- 
preted of Hades, but surely without reason. 
Uf the expression denotes more than Christ’s 
humble condition, it probably means the 
ieee This was the climax of Christ’s 

wniliation; to be removed out of men’s 


sight, as too offensive for them to look 
on,—to be hidden away in the depths of the 
earth, in the grave, was indeed supremely 
humbling. The object is to show that, in 
bestowing gifts on men, Christ did not merely 
bring into play his inherent bountifulness 
as the Son of God, but acted as Mediator, by 
right of special purchase, through his work 
οἵ humiliation on earth; and thus to lead 
us to think the more highly both of the 
Giver and of his gifts, 

Ver. 10.—He that descendea is the same 
also that ascended far above all the heavens, 
There was ἃ proportion between the descent 
and the ascent. His descent was deep— 
into the lower parts of earth; but his ascent 
was more glorious than his descent had 
been humbling. The Hebrew idea of various 
heavens is brought in; the ascent was not 
merely to the third heaven, but far above 
all heavens. That he might fill all things. 
A very sublime view of the purpose for 
which Christ reigns on high. The specific 
idea with which the apostle started—to 
give gifts to men—is swallowed up for the 
moment by a view far grander and more 
comprehensive, “to fill all things.” Jesus 
has gone on high to pour his glory and ex- 
cellence over every creature in the universe 
who is the subject of grace, to be the Light 
of the world, the one Source of all good. As 
in the solar system it is from one sun that 
all the supplies of light and heat ecme, all 
the colours that beautify earth, sea, and sky, 
all the influences that ripen the grain and 
mature the fruit, all the chemical power 
that transforms and new-creates; so the 
ascended Jesus is the Sun of the universe; 
all healing, all life, all blessing are from him. 
It is quite in the manner of the apostle, 
when he introduces the mention of Christ, 
to be carried, in the contemplation of his 
person, far above the immediate occasion, 
and extol the infinite perfection ond glory 
that distinguish him. 

Ver. 11.—And he gave some (to be) 
apostles. Coming back to the diversity of 
gifts (ver. 7), he enumerates some of these, 
as Christ (αὐτὸς, he, emphatic) bestowed 
them. The organization of the Church is 
not 8 mere human arrangement; its officers 
are of Divine appointment. The first gift is, 
his apostles. It is not meant that he gave 
to some the gifts needed to constitute them 
apostles, though that is true; but that, 
having qualified some to be apostles, he gave 
them to the Church. An apostle had his 
commission direct from Christ (Matt. x. 5); 
he possessed supernatural gifts (Matt. x. 8); 
it was necessary for him to have seen the Lord 
(Acts i, 22); his diocese was the whole world 
(Matt. xxviii. 19; Mark xvi. 15). The 
apostles were the constituent body of the 
Church—they had all necessary gifte foy 


cH. Iv. 1—32 1 


THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 


1490 


setting it up, and as all Christian history 
has tcstified, they were a marvellous gift of 
Christ to his Church. And‘some, prophets. 
Next to the apostles in point of vaiue, as 
gifts to the Church, having supernatural 
knowledge of God’s will present and future 
(Acts xxi. 11). Prophets were indispensable 
pefore the New Testament was given as the 
Chureh’s infallible guide to the will of God, 
but not apparently necessary after the will 
of God was fully recorded. And some, 
evangelists. The nature of this office is 
known only from the meaning of the term 
and the work of those who bore the desig- 
nation (Acts xxi. 8; 2 Tim. iv. 5)—per- 
sons not attached to a particular congrega- 
tion, but who went about preaching the 
glad tidings, and otherwise building up the 
Church, but without the full powers of 
apostles. And some, pastors and teachers. 
The more ordinary settled ministers of con- 
gregations, called pastors, because they 
watched over the flock, trying to lead all 
in right ways; and teachers, because they 
communicated Divine knowledge. Some 
have thought that each expression denotes 
a separate office, but, coupled as they are 
together, it-is better to regard them as 
indicating two functions of one office (see 
1 Tim. v. 17; Acts xiii. 1). 

Ver. 12.—In order to the perfecting of the 
saints. The ultimate end for which the 
gifts bestowed (comp. Heb. xii. 1). A work 
of completion is in hand, which must be 
fulfilled (see ver. 13): the_gaints, now com- 
passed about with intirhtity, have to be 
freed from all stain (ch. v. 26, 27), and as in- 
struments towards this end, the ministers of 
the Church are given by Christ; they are 
not mere promoters of civilization, men of 
culture planted among the rude, but instru- 
ments for advancing men to complete holi- 
ness. For the work of the minisfry. The 
preposition is changed from πρὸς to εἰς, πρὸς 
denoting the ultimate end, cis the immediate 
object (comp. Rom. xv. 2); the office of the 
Church officers is not lords, but διακονοί, 
eervants,as Christ himself was(Matt.xx.28). 
For the building up of the body of Christ. 
Bringing bone to its bone and sinew to its 
sinew, increasing the number of believers, 
and promoting the spiritual life of each; 
earrying on all their work as Christ’s ser- 
vanis and with a definite eye to the pro- 
motion of the great work which he undertook 
when he came to seek and to save the lost. 

Ver. 13.—Until we all come. This marks 
the duration of the office of the ministry. 
Some maintain that it implies that all these 
offices are to continue in the Church until 
the result specified is obtained (Catholic 
Apostolic or Irvingite Clurch): this is con- 
tradicted by Scripture an: by experience, 80 
fay aa apostles and prophets are concerned, 


for the gifts for these offices were not con- 
tinued, and without the gifts the offices are 
impossible. The meaning is that, till the 
event specified, there is to Le a provision in 
the Church of the offices that are needed, 
and the apostle, in using “ until,” probably 
had in view the last office in his list— 
pastors and teachers. To the unity of the 
faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of 
God. Both genitives are governed by unity; 
alrsady there is one faith (ver. 5), but we 
all, ὁ.6. all who compose or are yet to cum- 
pose the body of Christ, the totality of thia 
body, have to be brought to this faith. As 
in ver. 5“ faith ” is not equivalent to “creed,” 
or truth believed, but the act of believing; 
so here the consummation which the minis- 
ters of the Church are given to bring about 
is a state in which faith in the Son of God 
shill characterize all, and that, not a blind 
faith, but a faith associated with knowledge. 
Usually faith and knowledge are opposed 
to each other; but here faith has more the 
meaning of trust than of mere belief—trust 
based on knowledge, trust in the Son of God 
based on knowledge of his Person, his work, 
and his relation to them that receive him. 
To bring all the elect to this faith is the 
object of the ministry; when they are all 
brought to it, the body of Christ will be 
complete, and the functions of the Christian 
ministry will cease. Unto a perfect man, 
unto the measure of the stature of the ful- 
ness of Christ. The idea of organic com- 
pleteness is more fully expressed by these 
two clauses; the consummation is the com- 
pleteness of the whole body of Christ as 
such; but that involves the maturity of each 
individual who is a constituent part of that 
body; and the measure or sign of maturity, 
both for the individual und for the whole, is 
the stature of the fulness of Christ (comp. 
Rom. viii. 29, “Whom he did foreknow, 
them he also foredained to be conformed to 
the tmage of his Son”). The question has 
been put— Will this consummation be in this 
life or the next? The one seems to melt 
into the other; the idea of a complete 
Church and that of a new economy seem 
inseparable; as the coming of Christ will 
terminate the observance of the Lord’s 
Supper, so it will terminate the ministries 
ordained by Christ for the completion of his 
Church. 

Ver. 14.—That we be no more children, 
tossed to and fro and carried about with 
every wind of teaching. ‘The apostle goes 
back to illustrate in another way the pur- 
pose of the ministry; it is designed to 
remedy childish fickleness and the causes 
that lead to it. The ignorant and inex- 
perienced lie at the mercy of abler persons, 
and, when there is no regular miuistry pro- 
vided by Christ, aro liable to be ewept along 


150 


THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 


(cu. rv. 1—32 


by any plausible person that professes to be 
a Christian teacher, and such persons are 
often very dangerous, working by the sleight 
of men, #e. the cunning legerdemain by 
which the teachings of men—teachings de- 
vised by the hearts of men--are made to 
appear to the uninitiated the same as 
Christ’s teaching. In craftiness, tending to 
the scheme of error. Such teachers employ 
crafty methods, apparently harmless, but 


tending to further the method or scheme of | 


error. Tlic strong language here used cor- 
responds with tliat in which, at Miletus, the 
apostle warned the elders of Ephesus of the 
“grievous wolves” that were to come in 
among them, and of the men “speaking 
perverse things” that were to arise among 
themselves, not sparing the flock (Acts xx. 
29, 30). 

Ver. 15.—But speaking the truth in love. 
᾿Αληθεύοντες is hardly translatable in Eng- 
lish —it implies beiug true as well as speak- 
ing the truth and following the truth. 
Truth is the element in which we are to 
live, move, and have our being; fidelity to 
truth is the backbone of the Christian 
ministry. But truth must be inseparally 
marricd to love; good tidings spoken harshly 
are no good tidings; the charm of the mes- 
sage is destroyed ly the discordant spirit of 
the messenger. The more painful the first 
impression which a truth is fitted to pro- 
duce (e.g. ch. ii. 1—3), the more need is 
there for dealing with it in love—a much- 
needed and much-neglected exhortation. 
May grow up into him in all things who is 
the Head, namely, Christ. Growing up into 
Christ is like baptizing into the Name of 
the Father, ete.; it implies that the growth 
tends to a closer union to Christ, as, on 
the other hand, union to Christ causes 
the growth: the two act and react on each 
other. This growth is to be “in all things” 
—in the whole man—in knowledge, right- 
eousness, and holiness, in-all the communi- 
cable properties of Christ. How great the 
work of growth is that should be sought in 
the case of every living believer, is evident 
from the enormous gulf there is between his 
spiritual and moral state and that of Christ. 
Yet such growth is reasonable, considering 
the relation of the body to him, its Head. 
The fact of this relation should encourage 
us to seek and expect the growth, and 
encourage ministers to labour hopefully 
towards promoting it. 

Ver. 16.—From whom all the body fitly 
framed and knit together through that 
which every joint supplieth. The relation 
of ἐκ in this verse to eis in ver. 15 is to be 
noted—growing up vitally into him, the body 
derives vital substance from him. Not, how- 
ever, in a mere individual sense, but as an 
organization, the parts being adapted and 


articulated to one another (this process 
being continuous; see present participles, 
συναρμολογούμενον and συνβιβαζόμενον). In 
the Church there are babes in Christ, also 
young men and old men; some are clear in 
intellect, some strong in faith, some warm in 
love, some excel in passive virtues, some 
in active; but in a well-ordered Church these 
should be getting jointed togethcr, aud 
learning to work with and for one another, 
no one despising gifts which he has not 
but another has; in this sense, there ought 
to be a spiritual communism, for all are one 
spiritual body. But spiritual communism 
does not involve social communism or even 
social equality, nor will social distinctions 
be obliterated in a pure Church, except so 
far as they hinder spiritual communion. 
According to the energy in the measure 
(or, proportion) of each individual part. 
This clause seems to be most naturally 
connected with what follows. In the fit 
framing of the body, channels as it were 
are laid for the propagation and working of 
the vital force throughout the body; this 
force is not alike, but of various amount in 
the different parts; somemembers have much 
of it, some litt]e, but the measure of this 
vital force regulates the growth. Carries on 
the growth of the body. The middle voice, 
ποιεῖται, indicates that it is a growth from 
within, while depending on the energy fur- 
nished by Christ. For building up of itself 
in love. This is the end, 80 far as the body 
ttself is concerned, though, of course, the 
completed spiritual body, like the com- 
pleted natural body, has work to do outside 
itself. In a healthy Church there is a con- 
tinual work of building up: construction, 
not destruction, is its proper business—pro- 
moting peace, purity, prayerfulness, trust, 
activity inthe work of the Lord, but all in 
love, the absence of which makes winter 
instead of summer, declension instead of pro- 
gress, death instead of life. In illustration 
of the various measure of grace, and yet 
its real efficiency in all the members of the 
Church, Eadie says, “ ΝῸ member or ordin- 
ance is superfluous. 16 widow’s mite was 
commended by him -who sat over against 
the treasury. Solomon built a temple. 
Joseph provided a tomb. Mary the mother 
gave birth to the child, and the other Marys 
wrapped the corpse in spices. Lydia enter- 
tained the apostle, and Phosbe carried an 
Epistle of old, the princes and heroes went 
to the field, and wise-hearted women did 
spin. While Joshua fought, Moses prayed. 
The snuffers and trays were as necessary as 
the magnificent lampstand. .. . The result 
is that the Church is built up, for love 18 
the element of spiritual progress. That love 
fills the renewed nature.” The Church has 
been defined as an institution that has truth 


on. Iv. 1—32.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 


15] 


for its nourishment, love for its atmosphere, 
end Christ for its Head. 

Vers. 17—24.—ConsTRAsTeD PRINCIPLES 
oF GENTILE AND CHRISTIAN CHARACTER. 

Ver. 17.—This I say therefore, and testify 
in the Lord. There is no sign of the apostle, 
when he comes to the practical part of his 
Epistle, deeming it of less importance than 
the doctrinal. The formula is very expres- 
sive; the apostle sinks his personality, and 
brings forward Christ as the Exhorter. 
That ye no longer walk as the rest of the 
Gentiles walk. First, he indicates what 
they are not to be. “Be not conformed to 
this world.” In four particulars they are 
to be different from Gentiles. The first of 
these is in the vanity of their mind. The 
allusion is to their frivolous, empty aims in 
life, and their unfixed, unsettled impulses. 
The Gentiles were chasing shadows, blowing 
bubbles, doing anything to make time pass 
agreeably; not considering or knowing 
either what they were, or whence they 
came, or whither they were going. 

Ver. 18.—Being darkened in their under- 
standing (second point of difference), and 
thus blind to all that is most vital—ignorant 
of God, of the way of salvation, of the 
love of Christ. Even at best the natural 
understanding cannot discover these things, 
and when it is not only imperfect but dark- 
ened—made more obscure than ever by sin 
(see after)—its guidance is altogether defec- 
tive. It has been said truly that the youngest 
scholar in a Sunday school that has becn 
taught the elements of the gospel has more 
light than the wisest of the heathen. Alien- 
ated from the life of God because of the 
ignorance that is in them, becauso of the 
hardness of their heart (third point of 
difference). Two causes are given for their 
alienation, viz. ignorance, and hardness of 
heart, this last being the ultimate cause. 
Through worldly living, their hearts have 
become hard, callous, insensible to spiritual 
influences, perceiving no beauty in Divine 
things, no preciousness in Divine promises, 
no excellence in the Divine image; this 
makes them ignorant, careless, foolish; and 
such being their state of heart, they are 
alienated from the life of God, can’t bear 
vital religion, hate the very idea of spiritual 
and holy service. 

Ver. 19.—Who being past feeling. With- 
out sense of shame, without conscience, 
without fear of God or regard for man, 
without any perception of the dignity of 
human nature, the glory of the Divine 
image, or the degradation of sin. Have given 
themselves over to lasciviousness to work 
all unoleanness (fourth point of difference). 
This is the climax—heathenism in its 
worst and fullest development, yet by no 
means rare, The sensuality of the heathen 


was and is something dreadful. Many of 
them gave themselves to it as a business, 
worked at it as at a trade or employment 
(see Uhlmann’s ‘Conflict of Christianity 
with Heathenism,’ ete.). Details, such aa 
even the walls of Pompeii furnish, are unfit 
for the publiceye. With greediness, Πλεο- 
νεξία means the desire of having more, and 
has reference to the insutiable character of 
sensual sins. Sometimes it is translated 
(A.V.) “ covetousness,” as ch. v. 3. 

Ver. 20.—But ye did not thus learn Christ. 
“But” emphatic—a great contrast, that 
must come home to the conscience of every 
Christian, and to his whole heart and soul. 
The expression, “learn Christ,” is a preg- 
nant one, corresponding to “ preaching 
Christ” (Acts viii. 5)—all about Christ, 
Christ in all his offices, and in all his in- 
fluence. He that learns Christ appropriates 
him in the efficacy of his atonement, in the 
power of his Spirit, in the force of his 
lessons, and in the spirit of his influence, 
and finds the whole to be diametrically 
opposite to the godless world. 

Ver. 21.—Ifso be thatye heardhim. A word 
of caution. We are not to assume too readily 
that we are in a right relation to Christ. 
We must look within and make sure of that. 
To hear him, here, is to hear him as his 
sheep hear his voice and follow him, 
recognizing the voice of the Shepherd, a 
voice to be implicitly obeyed. And were 
taught in him, as truth is in Jesus. The 
peculiar force of this clause is the double 
ἐν, not givenin thefirstclause in A.V., thereby 
obscuring the sense, which is, that all teach- 
ing and all truth acquires a different hue 
and a different character when there is a 
personal relation to Jesus. Truth apart 
from the person of Christ has little power ; 
abstract doctrines have little influence; 
the very atonement may be a barren dogma. 
Bat the atonement tanght “in Jesus,” in 
connection with the living, loving, dying, 
risen Saviour tells; the blood of redemption 
in connection with the Son of God incarnate 
thus loving us, and meekly, patiently suifer- 
ing the agonies of the cross in our room, is 
not only a power, but the greatest moral 
power that can move the heart. 

Ver. 22.—That ye put off, as concerning 
the former conversation, the old man. The 
sum of Christ’s practical lessons is given in 
two particulars—putting off and putting on. 
‘The change is very decided and very com- 
plete. It is emphatically personal; not a 
mere change of opinions or of religious 
observances, but of life, habit, character; 
not altering a few things, but first putting 
off the man as we put off a garment. “It 
is a change which brings the mind under 
the government of truth, and gives to the 
life a new aspect of integrity and devout 


152 


THE EPISTLE To THE EPHESIANS. 


fou. tv. 188 


negs.” Which is rotting according to the lusts 
of deceit. The present participle, φθειρό- 
μενον, indicates continuance or progress in 
corruption. Sin is a disintegrating dis- 
solving thing, causing putridity, and in all 
cases, when unchecked, tending towards it. 
Deceit is personified ; it is an agent of evil, 
sending out lusts which seem harmless but 
are really ruinous—their real character is 
concealed; they come as ministersof pleasure, 
they end as destructive tyrants. Lust of 
power, lust of money, lust of pleasure, have 
all this character; they are the offspring of 
deceit, and always to be shunned. 

Ver. 23.—And that ye be renewed in the 
spirit of your mind. Between the first and 
secouil practical change, durived from being 
taught by Christ, the apostle inserts this 
couns::! applicable to both. This renewal is 
the work of the Holy Spirit ; how, then, can 
it be the subject of an exhortation to us? 
In this sense, that we are to prize, long for, 
encourage, watch, this work of the Holy 
Spirit, feeling it to be most vital and 
essential, not to be neglected without awful 
sin and danger. Usually the Holy Spirit 
works in us by stirring up our spirit to de- 
sire and endeavour after holiness; to resist 
these striviugs of the Spirit, or even to be 
indifferent to them, is a deadly and most 
dangerous sin. 

Ver. 24.—And put onthe newman. Ae the 
fruit of inward renewal, let there be out- 
ward renovation. A new object is clean, 
fresh, tidy ; let your life have something of 
the same aspect—let your principles, aims, 
habits, be new, in the sense of being con- 
formed to Christ, who is your life. Which 
after God has been created in righteousness 
and holiness of truth. ‘ After God,” equiva- 
lent to “ after the image of him that created 
him * (Col. iii. 10). Some think “ the new 
man” equivalent to “ Christ” (Rom. xiii. 14), 
constituted the Head of renewed humanity, 
as Adam of depraved. But this would not 
correspond with tlie exhortation to put off 
the old man, nor should we be exhorted to 
put on Christ after being exhorted to be re- 
newed in the spirit of our minds. In what 
sense, then, has the “new man” been 
created? The idea presented itself to the 
apostle in the abstract—there has been a 
ereation of wu new man; but concretely, 
we have tu conform to the Divine creation, 
in respect of righteousness and holiness ; 
righteousness denoting personal uprightucss 
and fidelity to all social duties; holiness, 
the state of thespirit toward God. The last 
words, “of truth,” denote the relation of 
righteousness and holiness to the truth. The 
words are opposed to “ of deceit ” in ver. 2°. 
Lust is bred of deceit, but righteousness 
and holiness of truth. They never deceive, 
nevet disappoint, arc solid to the end, 


Ver. 25—ch. v. 2.—Raas or THE OLB 
Man anv Rones or THE Naw. 

Ver. 25.—Wherefore, putting away false- 
hood, speak every man truth with his neigh- 
bour. Lying or falsehood is pre-eminently 
a heathen vice, as missionaries in India and 
other countries abundantly testify. It is an 
attribute offallenhumanity: “They goastray 
from the womb, speaking lies;” and one Οἱ 
the earliest vices that appear in children is 
deceit. Not only is it God’s will and com- 
mand that we speak the truth, but it is 
peculiarly incuinbent on Christians as 
children of the light, as followers of him 
who is the Truth, as having renounced the 
devil, who is the father of lies. Another 
reason is added. For ye are members one of 
another. Falsehood is always designed to 
mislead; but to deceive our own members is 
emphatically wicked. Says Chrysost:in 
(quoted by Eadie), “ Let not the eye lie to 
tine foot, nor the foot to the eye. If there ba 
a deep pit, and its mouth, covered with ree.!s, 
shall present to the eye the appearance of 
solid ground, will not the eye use the foot 
to ascertain whether it is hollow underneath 
or whether it is firm and resists? Will the 
foot tell a lie, and not the truth as it is? 
And what, again, if the eye were to spy a 
serpent ora wild beast, will it lie to tle 
foot?” 

Ver. 26.—Be ye angry, and sin not. Quo- 
tation from the Septuagint version of Ps. 
iv.5. Anger, the feeling and expression of 
displeasure, is not wholly forbidden, but is 
guarded by two checks. Our Lord did not 
make anger a breach of the sixth command- 
ment, but being angry with a brother without 
cause. The first check is to beware of 
sinuing; to keep your anger clear of bitter- 
ness, spite, malevolence, and all such evil 
feelings. The second is, Let not the sun go 
down on your irritation; examine yourse]f in 
the evening, and see that you are tranquil. 
Eadie quotes Thomas Fuller: “St. Puul 
saith, ‘Let not the sun go down upon your 
wrath,’ to carry news to the antipodes in 
another world of thy revengeful nature. 
Yet let us take the apostle’s meaning rather 
than his words—with all possible speed to 
depose our passion; not understanding him 
so literally that we may take leave to be 
angry till sunset; then might our wrath 
lengthen with the days, and men in Grcen- 
land, where day lasts above a quarter of a 
year, have plentiful scope of revenge. And 
as the English, by commaze of William 
the Conqueror, alway raked up their fire, 
and put out their candles when the curfew 
bell was rung, let us then also quen:® all 
sparks of anger and heat of passion.” Lt is 
expecially becoming in men, when about to 
sleep the sleep of death, to see that .hey are 
iu peace and charity with all men; it were 


cH tv, 1—32.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, 


153 


seemly always to fall asleep in the same 
temper. . 

er. 27.—Neither give place to the devil. 
Place or room, opportunity and scope for 
acting in and through you. There scemg 
no special reference to the last exhortation, 
but as that demands a special act of 
vigilance and self-control, so the activity of 
the devil demands vigilance and self-control 
on all occasions, and especially on those on 
which the devil is most apt to try: to get a 
foothold. The reference to the devil is not 
@ figure, but an obvious recognition of his 
personality, and of the liability of all Chris- 
tians to fall under his influence. 

Ver. 28.—Let the stealer steal no more. 
Ὃ κλέπτων may be translated eitheras a noun 
or as the present participle. In either case it 
implies that even Christians might continue 
to stval, and that they had to be warned 
against the habit. This may seem strange 
to us, but not to those who consider how 
little theft was thought of among the pagans, 
and how liable such habits are to remain 
among converts from heatienism. Where 
there is a low moral tone and an uneducated 
coxscience, very great irregularities may be 
found. Dishonesty in trade, deceit in 
business, are just the same. Among the 
Ephesians, thieving was probably the result 
of idle habits and of dislike to hard work. 
Hence the apostle says, But rather let 
him labour, working with his hands the 
things that are good, that he may have 
to impart to him that hath need. Idle- 
ness is mean, labour is honourable ;. Christ 
calls us to work, not for this reason only, but 
in order that we may have something to 
give away. Paganism would rob others of 
what is rightfully their own ; Christianity 
leads me to give to others what is rightfully 
my own. This different genius of the two 
systems appears here very clearly. Observe 
the true use of superfluities—look out for 
the needy, and give for their relief. 

Ver. 29.—Let no corrupt word proceed 
out of your mouth. Not pagans only, but 
some of whom better things might be 
expected, need this charge. How revolting 
is the tendency in some circles to foul and 
blasphemous conversation; to profane 
and obscene jests, songs, and allusions; to 
feed as it were on moral garbiage! From 
Christian mouths no such word should ever 
issue—it is simply abominable. But that 
which is good for improvement of the 
occasion, that it may give grace to them that 
hear. Speaking should ever bear on im- 
provement or edification, especially on 
turning passing things to good account. 
This should be the aim; it does not require 
speaking to be uniformly grave, but to have 
an object. It may be quite right to have an 
enlivening object, but among Christians it 


should always be such as befits their pro- 
fession, and tends to help on the exalted 
objects at which they aim. 

Ver, 30.—And grieve not the Holy Spirit 
of God. Very solemn and emphatic counsel. 
The name is given with unusual fulness, in 
order to show the magnitude of the sin—rd 
Πνεῦμα τὸ ἅγιον τοῦ Θεοῦ, ‘The Spirit, the 
Holy Spirit of God.” By an anthro- 
popathy the Spirit is represented as grieved 
by such treatment as would grieve us—e.g. 
when his work is obstructed, when sin is 
trifled with, when Deity is treated carelessly, 
when place is given to the devil, when the 
spirit of the world is cherished. Those who 
act thus resemble the Sanballats and 
Tobiahs of the time of the restoration, who 
hindred the rebuilding of the temple and 
the restoration of order and prosperity. 
When the Holy Spirit would urge con- 
secration, separation from the world, holy 
exercises, active service, our indolent and 
worldly hearts are liable to rebel and vex 
him. To grieve a parent heedlessly is a great 
sin; how much more to grieve the Spirit of 
God? In whom ye were sealed unto the day 
of redemption. The Spirit being rather the 
Seal than the Sealer, who is the Father 
(see ch. i. 13), it is better to translate in 
whom than by whom ; besides, this preserves 
the force of the ἐν, which, whether used of 
Christ or of the other persons of the God- 
head, is so characteristic of the Epistle. To 
grieve the Spirit is to help to obliterate the 
seal, and thus weaken tie evidence of our 
redemption. 

Ver. 31.—Let all bitterness; not only in 
specch, but in mind, disposition, habit. And 
wrath and anger; nearly synonymous, but 
perhaps “ wrath” is equivalent to the tumul- 
tuous excited state of mind, out of which 
comes anger, the settled feeling of dislike and 
enmity. And clamour and evil-speaking be 
put away from you; “ clamour,” equivalent to 
the loud noise of strife, the excited shouting 
down of opponents; “evil-speaking,” the more 
deliberate habit of running down their 
character, exciting an evil feeling against 
them in the minds of others. With all malice; 
equivalent to wishing evil, whether ina more 
pronounced or in a latent and half-conscious 
form, whether expressing itself in the way of 
coarse malediction or lurking in a corner of 
the heart, as an evil spirit of which we should 
be ashamed; all are rags of the old man, as 
disgraceful to Christians as literal rags to a 
man of position; utterly unworthy of the 
regenerated child of God. Chrysostom, 
rather fancifully, treats them asa genealogy: 
“ Bitterness bred wrath, wrath anger, anger 
clamour, clamour evil-speaking, which ia 
railing.” 

Ver. 32.—But be ye kind one to another, 
tender-hearted, forgiving one another (op- 


154 THE EPISTLE TO 


THE EPHESIANS. (on. 1v, 1—82, 


posed to bitterness, wrath, anger; Bengel). 
Kind (χρηστοί), sweet, amiable in disposi- 
tion, subduing all that is harsh and hasty, 
encouraging all that is gentle and good; 
tender-hearted (εὔσπλαγχνοι), denoting a 
specially compassionate feeling, such as may 
arise from the thought of the iufirmities, 
griefs, and miseries to which more or less 
all are subject; these emotional conditions 
to bear the practical fruit of forgiveness, and 
the forgiveness to be mutual (χαριζόμενοι 
ἑαυτοῖς), a8 if under the fecling that what 
you give to-day you require to ask to-morrow, 
not being too hard on the faults of others, 
remembering that you have your own. 
Even as God in Christ also forgave you. The 
A.V. rendering, “for Christ’s sake,” is eb- 
jectionable every way: it is not literal; it 
omits the charactcristic feature of the Epistle, 
“in Christ,” losing the force of the consider- 
ation that the forgiveness was dispensed by 
the Father, acting with or wholly one with 


to the great error that the Father personally 
was ποὺ disposed to forgive till he wag 
prevailed on to do so by the interposition 
of the Son. The anrist, “forgave,” is more 
literal and better than the perfect, “hath 
forgiven ;” it points toa definite time when 
forgiveness was bestowed, viz. the moment 
of real belief in Christ, and hearty accept- 
ance of his grace. The vague atmosphere 
in which many envelop the question of 
their forgiveness is very hurtful; it checks 
their thanksgivings, dulls their joy, 
en hope, and dilutes the great 

ynamic power of the gospel—the powerthat 
impels us to forgive our brother, as well as 
to abound in the work of the Lord with a 
tender conscience, the sense of forgiveness 
urges to the most full and hearty doing of 
God’s will; but when hypocrites, with seared 
consciences claim to be forgiven, they steal 
what is not their own, and become more 
abandoned to wickedness. 


the Son; andit gives a shade of countenance 


HOMILETICS. 


Ver. 1.—The Christian walk. “ Walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are 
calied.” We now come tothe practical part of the Epistle, and the first exhortation 
isa striking ove. Paul attached great importance to the element of walk or character. 
He skilfully pnts two things in connection with each other—vocution on the one hand, 
and walk on the other. The preceding chapters had shown the wonderful giory of the 
Christian vocation, The succecding chapters are directed to secure a correspondingly 
elevated Christian walk. Two main topics present themselves. 1. Generally, the value 
of the Christian walk or character, 2, The kind of walk required— worthy of the 
vocation,” etc. 

I, VALUE or CHRISTIAN WALK OR CHARACTER. This may be shown in three aspects. 
As a plea for Christianity, or evidence of the reality of Christian faith ; as a persuasive 
towards it, and as a pattern for imitation. 1. A plea. Sceptical tendencies of the present 
age; logic not sufficicnt to meet them. Strongest popular evidence of Christianity is its 
inherent truthfulness, its self-commending power. But next in power is the consistent 
lives of earnest Christians. Men and women consistently following Christ, breathing his 
spirit, and moving heavenwards, show that his religion is not a sham or a deception, 
but a great reality. 2. «4 persuasive. Such lives appeal to the heart as well as the 
head. They show religion to be, not only a reality, but a great obligation and a great 
blessing ; appeal to the conscience and force it to say, “That is what we ought to be.” 
Men feel they ought to live like such, and certainly they would fain die like them. 3. 
A pattern. Do we need it? Have we not other and more perfect patterns? Sermon 
on mount; life of Christ? Yes, but human nature desiderates something on its own 
level—something visible and tangible, a stepping-stone between heaven and earth. 
Hence Paul gave thanks that the Thessalonians became followers of him and of the 
Lord, and he told the Philippians that he and others were given them “for an ensample.” 
Every Christian congregation should have a number of model Christians fitted to be 
examples to the rest—the elders and elderly people especially. Men may sncer at 
model Christians, but they do not sneer at model soldiers or model servants, and 
certainly every Christian worthy of the name should aim at being ae near Christ as 

ossible, 
ὲ II. THe KIND oF wALK. “ Worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are called.” We 
have all an idea of consistency ; inconsistency should be the object «f our abhorrence. 
The world has « keen eye for inconsistencies of Christians, and exposes them merci- 
lessly. It takes comfort from them to continue in sin, Sins detestable in the godly are 


a. rv, 1---82.1 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 188 


thought nothing of in the worldly. If what David did ἐπὶ re Uriah had been done by 
Nebuchadnezzar, no one would have said anything, A consistent walk is, by God’s 
help, within the reach of all. 1Ὁ is an impressive sermon to the world, a continual 
sermon, an unanswerable sermon. Let all preach this sermon, though it be their only 
one, ‘The “walk worthy” is a walk of holiness, humility, forbearance, forgivevess, 
patience, charity. It is also a walk of brightness and beneficence. It seeks to make 
the world brighter and better. Let us be urged to it by the sius of the world, by the 
miseries of the world, by the dangers of the world, as regards the soul. In order to 
promote it, let us be much with Christ, and as far as we can, with those who are like 
Christ. Let us study the biographies of Christ-like men and aim at conformity to their 
example. Let us often pray the prayer of the third chapter of this book, and other 
prayers of the like tenor. Let us use earnestly our means of grace, praying that each 
sabbath, each sermon, each sacrament, may serve to make us more worthy of the 
vocation wherewith we are culled. 


Vers. 2—6.—Details of a walk worthy of the vocation. This walk demands— 

I. THE PRESERVATION OF SOCIAL CONCORD, THROUGH THE QUINT OR PASSIVE VIRTUES, 
which, having been very characteristic of Christ, are eminently incumbent on all who 
bear his Name. 1. Lowliness, arising from a chastened sense of our sin and unworthi- 
ness. 2, Meckness, which is in speech what lowliness is in spirit. 3. Long-suffering 
and forbearance in love ; in opposition to hastiness, irascibility, impatience, ill temper, 
which, though often little thought of, are eminently unworthy of the Christian calling. 
Christian victories are often gained by meckness and endurance—what Milton called 
“the invincible might of meekness.” These graces have reference mainly to the 
ordinary intercourse of social life; what follows has to do more with the public life 
of the Church. 

Il, THE PRESERVATION OF ECCLESIASTICAL CONCORD THROUGH THE BOND OF PEACE. 
‘The coucord to be preserved is the “ unity of the Spirit ”—the unity of which the Holy 
Spirit is the Author ; not mere external uniformity, but inward agreement. It is a fact 
‘hat there is much inward agreement wherever the Spirit of God works. It is our 
éaty to preserve this—to keep it from being broken or even appearing as if broken. 
This unity is to be maintained by the bond which consists of “peace;” by a peace- 
loving and peace-secking spirit, that spirit of which Christ said, “ Blessed are the 
peaceinakers: for they shall be called the children of God.” The danger of breaking 
the unity of the Spirit is great ; readiness to take offence, pride, regardlessness of the 
welfare of others, forgetfulness of the vast Christian work and warfare committed to 
us, are temptations to this. On the other hand, the habitual striving after the graces 
enumerated above, and trying to exercise them habitually, tend to preserve the unity 
of the Spirit, and to a large extent, too, to preserve external agreement in the govern- 
ment and worship and work of the Church. 

111. In connection with this subject, the apostle shows WHEREIN THE UNITY OF THE 
SPIRIT CONSISTS, AND WHEREIN IT IS TO BE PRESERVED. There is a sevenfold unity (see 
lixposition). That true believers are one in Christ is one of those truths which happily 
even controversy and sectarianism do not quite obliterate. But a more full, rich, and 
constant manifestation of this unity would make a great impression on the world; it 
would remove one of the most common excuses of scepticism ; it would tend powerfully 
both to edify and to extend the cause of Christ; and it would make the fellowship of 
the Church much more delightful, spreading more of the atmosphere of heaven upon 
earth, 


Vers. 7—11.—Christ’s gifts to his Church. The grand object of the apostle in 
this section of his Epistle is to show the ampie pro\i-ion made by Christ for the welfare 
of his Church. The Church may sing as well as the individual, “‘The Lord is my 
Shepherd; I shall not want.” The particular object is to indicate that the gifts 
conlerred by him on the members individually (vers. 7—10), and especially the 
appointment of the several classes of office-bearers (ver. 10), show the Lord’s earnest 
desire to raise his Church to the highest possible condition of grace and honour; to make 
her complete and glorious, as the one body of which he is the Head, the one vessel into 
which he is to pour all his fulness, the bride ou wom he is to exhaust every ornament, 


156 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. (ou. rv. 1-32. 


The marks of Christ’s care for his Church are innumerable; they recede back through 
all eternity and forward for evermore (ch. iii. 18, 19). His death maiked the climax of 
his self-sacrifice ; but even that did not end Christ’s service for his Church. For her he 
not only descended from heaven tv earth, but for her too he reascended from earth 
to heaven; like the high priest, he went into the holiest of all with his Name on his 
breastplate, and he only changed the sphere in which his mediatorial office was 
exercised. But more; the good Shepherd is ever renewing the miracle of the five 
loaves and two fishes ; ever saying with reference to his people, “ Give ye them to eat ;” 
and ever appointing and qualifying suitable officers to take care of his Church and 
break among them the bread of life. He is ever qualifying his ministers for ruling and 
feeding his flock, for filling the empty soul, speaking a word in season to the weary, 
guiding the perplexed, reclaiming the erring, strengthening the weak, supporting the 
feeble-minded, and sending on the ransomed of the Lord to Zion, with songs and ever- 
lasting joy upon their heads. The subject divides into two—the gift-giving (vers. 
7—11), and the end or purpose for which the gifts are given (vers. 12—16). In the 
first part we find: 1. The source of the gifts and the principle of distribution (ver. 7). 
2. Confirmation of this from the sixty-eighth psalm (ver. 8). 3. Commentary anl 
inferences therefrom (vers. 9,10). 4. ‘The special gift of suitable officers. 

I. 1. Christ is the great Source of grace, including ordinary and extraordinary gifts 
(“the gift of Christ”). 2. Christ leaves no one out; to every one of us is given 
grace. 3. The grace was not given in equal measures to all. 4. But according to the 
measure of the gift of Christ. 

Il. From the sixty-eighth psalm it appears that this proceeding was symbolized when 
the ark was placed on Mount Zion, when David’s victories were celebrated, and a dis- 
tribution of gifts took place. 

III, The word “ ascended,” applied to the Son of Gud, implied a previous descent; 
for when he ascended, he went to his own home and seat; previous to this he came 
down, and the apostle dwells especially on his having come down to the lower parts 
of the earth, such as Gethsemane, Calvary, and the grave, His was no holiday visit to 
earth, tu green fields, or goldcn palaces; “ He was taken from prison and from j-dgment.” 
Yet even there he triumphed over all his enenies, and now he is exalted “ far above all 
heavens.” ‘This last expression is very remarkable, especially in the view of what 
modern astronomy teaches on the extent of the heavens. It is a marvellous testimony 
to the glory of the risen Lord. Still higher is the testimony to his glory in the purpose 
for which he has gone on high—* that he might fill all things.” The sun, in the centre 
of the solar system, fills that system, spreading light and heat and manifold influeuces 
to its extremest limits. AJl the colours that beautify earth, sea, and sky; all the heat 
that fosters life and gladdens living creatures of every kind; all the chemical influences 
that are so manifold in their effects on the economy of nature, radiate from the sun. 
So Christ is Sun and Centre of the infinite universe, and the universe is filled by bim 
with heavenly influences. There are many suns, but only one Saviour ; there are many 
systems of worlds, according to our modern astronomy, and even firmaments of worl:|s, 
beyond the ken of our strongest instruments; but all are joined by one glorious bon) ; 
for not only have they been all formed by one Creator, but all have been “filled” by 
the one all-glorious Mcdiator-Lord. What resources does that expression, “that he 
might fill all things,” ascribe to Christ! If he can fill all things, he can fill us; our 
hearts are not easily filled ; but what can be wanting to us out of such fulness? 

IV. But from the stars we come back to the Church, and consider Christ as exalted 
to fill his Church. With this view he has qualified and commissioned certain officers to 
minister to his Church. Of these it is generally allowed that apostles aud prophets were | 
special and temporary ; while evangelists, pastors, and teachers are ordinary and per- 
manent (sce Exposition). Observe that such men are to be received (and when needed 
to be asked too) as gifts of Christ to his Church. It is the Lord of the harvest who 
equips and furnishes labourers for his harvest. We should not seek min‘sters of the 
gospel, as some do, for our own pleasure or credit, rejecting them if they do not quite 
answer our idea; but as gifts of Christ, in which their great object will be to build up 
his Church and promote the beauty of his bride. 


Vers. 12—16.—Christ’s gifts to his Church: their end or purpose. I, Generally, 


cH. iv. 1—34.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 157 


Christ has a work of perfection on hand. This denoted by—* for the perfecting of the 
saints” (ver. 12), and “ unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the ful- 
ness of Christ” (ver. 13). What a high aim with reference to creatures so poor and 
needy as the members of his Church! 

IL In order to this, the work of the ministry exists; and that work seeks (1) “ the 
edifying the body of Christ ;” (2) the promotion of unity of faith and of the knowledge 
of the Son of God (ver. 13); (8) protection of the Church from childish fickleness and 
the arts of men who seek to unsettle her (ver. 14). In order to accomplish these ends, 
the ministry is called to speak the truth in love (ver. 15), and especially truth “ as it 
is in Jesus” (ver. 21). ‘Truth, thus spoken, is the great means of spiritual edification 
and of progress towards perfection. lixternal rites or ceremonies can profit nothing 
except in so far as they are Divine chanuels for conveying this truth. 

IIL. While ministers are instruments, Jesus is himself the great Source of growth. 
1. ‘The growth to be promoted is growth ‘unto him who is the Head” (ver. 15). All 

‘vital, spiritual influence is in Christ. As the woman reasoned, “If I may but touch the 
hem of his garment, I shall be made whole; ” so if we, by faith, shall come into contact 
with our living Head, his gracious influence will spread through our souls, 2. The 
whole Church is articulated with Christ; its parts are articulated with each other, but 
all are designed to communicate with the Head, and to assist:in conveying vital influence 
from the Head to the members. So it is in the human body; it is all jointed and 
connected together; but the object of this is to facilitate the transmission of the vital 
force throughout the whole. All the members of the Church should realize their 
position as parts of a body connected with the head, and should regard the measure of 
energy received by them as designed for the general good (ver. 16). 3. While Christ 
is the sole Source of vital influence, and ministers are the main instruments of its 
transmission, the whole body is to be self-edifying, intelligently and consciously 
moving on towards the grand consummation (ver. 16). Ministers do not differ in kind 
from the members. They have got special gifts for the edifying of the body, but every 
part of the body has got some gift for the same end, All ought to conspi'e har- 
moniously together, keeping in view the grand consummation. Churches and members 
of Churches must not be content with any inferior aim, but habitually and earnestly 
move on toward perfection. And for this the Spirit of love is indispensable (ver. 16). 
The Church cannot edify itself except in love. Strife and division are sure to arise, 
and these are not edifying, but disintegrating. One great lesson here is that, as Christ 
is the Truth, so he also is the Life. The gospel as a system of truth has Christ in the 
centre; so the Church as a living agency has Christ in the centre. Take Christ from 
either, and “ Ichabod” may be inscribed on the wall. 


Vers. 17-—24.—Contrasted principles of Gentile and Christian character. We now 
come more explici(ly to the details of Christian duty. The apostle had presented 
a very high standard of Christian privilege in the preceding chapters, and now he 
presents an equally high standard of Christian duty. What God gives in the one form 
is to be given back in the other, and in corresponding proportion. The importance of 
the subject is indicated by the formula, “This I say, and testify in the Lord.” The 
apostle contrasts the Christian with the Gentile walk, and indicates wherein the latter 
is tc differ from the former, (1) in what the Christian is not to be, and (2) in what he 
is to be. 

I. 1. In the vanity of their mind. 2. In the darkness of their understanding. 3. In 
their alienation from the life of God. 4. In their abandonment to lasciviousness. Thus 
even Christian converts need to remember the duty to keep themselves unspotted by 
the world. There is a world of guilt and godlessness from which it is necessary for 
thein to keep themselves unstained. 

Il. Posrrive RULES or CHRISTIAN Lire, 1. Their Source. “Ye have not so learned 
Christ, if so be ye heard him,” etc. (ver. 20). The whole tenor of Christ’s teaching 
and influence is against these things. Only make sure that you have come under it. 
2. What they are. (1) “Put off the old man,” etc. Comprehensiveness of the word 
“man;” his tendency is to rottenness or corruption; the lusts of deceit which are 
connected with him are pernicious and ruinous. (2) “ Be renewed in the spirit of your 
mind.” Renewal begins within by the Holy Spirit rousing in you a desire for it, and 


158 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, [ση. rv: 1—32. 


urging you to use the means towards it. Accept and improve these movements of the 
Spirit within you. (8) In this way, “put on the new man,” aud especially encourage 
and seek to have developed these two features of the new creation—righteousness and 
holiness. Righteousness, including integrity, honest, true, fair, open dealing ; doing 
justly out and out, in every place and in every relation—in the house, the market, 
the counting-house, the shop, among neighbours, among strangers, everywhere and at 
all times. Holiness of truth, including high reverence for God and all that is Divine, 
sympathy and congeniality of heart with God, cleanness of nature, purity of soul, 
conformity to the image of Christ, who is the Image of the invisible God. No professing 
Christian can be exempted from this rule of life. Nor should any assume too readily 
that he is thoroughly conforming to it. “ Let him that thinketh he standeth take heed 
lest he fall.” Christianity in its practical relations is very searching and thorough, It 
demands a high standard of life and practice. But no wonder, if Christ be the Head, the 
Source of all vital power, and if there be a complete provision by which the needed 
power may be communicated to all the members, Never let it be said to Christians, 
“What do ye more than others?” 


Ver. 265—ch. v. 2.—Rags of the old man and robes of the new. The Christian 
Ephesians somewhat resembled Joshua the high priest, when standing before the angel 
of the Lord, and when Satan was standing at his right hand to resist him. Joshua was 
clothed with tilthy garments, and the angel spake to those that stood before him, “ Take 
away the filthy garments from him. And unto him he said, “ Behold, I have caused 
thine iniquity to pass from thee, and I will clothe thee with change of raiment.” Rags 
of the old man still hang about these Ephesians, disfiguring their persons and giving 
them a very different appearance from that which befits the regenerated sons of God. 
The apostle is giving directions to take away each filthy rag and substitute for it 
the fair raiment of the new man. And he is doing this under a solemn sense of danger 
and responsibility, and with the feeling that two great spirits are also interested in the 
work and actively concerned in it—the one, the spirit of evil, who is trying cunning'y 
but earnestly to spoil the process, and induce the Ephesians to cling to their own 
garments; the other, the blessed Spirit of God, who in his infinite love is secking 
to clothe the Corinthians in the garments of purity, to seal them unto the day of 
redemption, so that by the brightness of their appearance they shall be known to be 
God’s in the day when he makes up his jewels. And what makes the whole matter 50 
solemn and momentous is that, unless they are ever on their guard, the subjects of this 
process are ever liable to give place to the one spirit and to grieve the other; the awful 
danger lying in this, that the spirit to whom they are prone to yield is the spirit of evil, 
and the Spirit they are apt to grieve is the Holy Spirit of God. 1. The rags of the old 
man to be put off are lying, anger, stealing, coarse language, bitterness, wrath, anger, 
clamour, evil-speaking, and malice (see Exposition). Three reasons are given, more 
or less explicitiy, why such things should be put away. (1) We are members one of 
another (ver. 25), and ought to assist instead of injuring one another (ver. 28). (2) We 
ought not to give place to the devil (ver. 27). (3) We ought not to grieve the Holy 
Spirit of God. 2. The robes of the new man to be put on are truthfulness, Fonest 
industry, edifying speech, kindness, tenderness of heart, forgiveness, imitation of God, 
and the loving walk which becomes his followers. Three reasons are given likewise 
why these robes should be put on, (1) God in Christ forgave us (ver. 32). (2) Christ 
loved us, (3) Christ gave himself for us, an offering and a sacrifice to God of a sweet- 
smelling savour. This is one of the most comprehensive and beautiful summaries 
of the Christian life. It is the quintessence of practical Christianity. It furnishes an 
admirable rule for self-examination, and an admirable incentive to progress in the life 
of God. It is a passage, not only to be got by heart, but written on the heart. We 
may well say, as we read these verses, “This és Christianity; this is the walk worthy 
of our vocation.” If the writer of the hundred and nineteenth psalm had such boundless 
delight in the Law of God, though it had not to him the delightful evangelical aroma 
it has to us, what ought our feelings to be? Under all dispensations of the covenant, 
the Law is still the rule of our life, though salvation is of grace; and the prayer that 
continually becomes us is, “Incline my heart unto thy testimonies; quicken thou me, 
that I may keep thy Law.” Rags or robes; why should any hesitate between them? 


cH. Iv. 1—32.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, 159 


To most men rags are most repulsive. To wear literal rags—to appear shabby, dirty, 
untidy, is very unpleasant. How much more, in the eyes of God and the saints: and 
angels, to wear moral rags! Many a one clothed in purple and fine linen wears the 
filthiest rags of the old man; and some, on the other hand, in the plainest and coarsest 
attire, have put on the beautiful robes of righteousness, and shall be crowns of glory in 
the hands of the Lord and royal diadems in the hands of their God. 


HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 


Ver. 1.—Ethics after theology. The doctrinal part of the Epistle is now finished and 
the practical part begins, This is the true and natural order. 

I. Iv Is IN THE SPHERE OF THE DOCTRINAL THAT WE FIND THE POWER THAT CARRIES 
US THROUGH ALL PRACTICAL puTIES. In all the Epistles the duties enforced are 
grounded in the doctrines declared or explained. The doctrines are the reservoir which 
sends its stream of power down over the human life. The engineer scoops out a 
hollow space to be filled with water, constructs his machinery, and then lifts the sluice 
that sets all the machinery in motion. When the doctrines of grace have been fully 
expounded, the apostle lifts the sluice and lets on the stream that sends life spinning 
round and round in a course of holy activity. ‘I beseech you therefore, by the mercies 
of God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice” (Rom. xii. 1). 

11. Ir 18 NECESSARY TO INCULCATE CHRISTIAN DUTIES EVEN IN THE GASH OF 
Curistians. If the apostles did it, we must do it. It is only Antinomianism— 
resting on the doctrines of grace without watchfulness of the walk before God—that 
contests this principle. An Antinomian Bible would have no place for duties, Chris- 
tianity includes duties as well as doctrines. It does not merely hold outa refuge to the 
guilty, but takes all who accept Christ under its supreme and exclusive direction. It 
evangelizes human life by impregnating its minutest transactions with the spirit of the 
gospel. But we must be always careful, in preaching the necessity of good works and 
in enforcing Christian duties, to ground them, as the Scriptures ground them, in the 
doctrines of grace.—T. C. 


Ver. 1.—The obligations of the Christian calling. “Walk worthy of the calling 
wherewith ye are called.” 

1. THE NATURE OF THIS CALLING. It is the Christian vocation. We are called out 
of darkness into God’s marvellous light (1 Pet. ii. 9), into the grace of Christ (Gal. i. 6), 
into the fellowship of Christ (1 Cor. i. 9); unto holiness (1 Thess. ii. 7); unto glory 
and virtue (2 Pet. i. 3); unto peace (1 Cor. vii. 15), not only with God, but with 
our consciences and with one another (Acts xxiv. 16; ch. iv. 2). This calling is a 
hich calling, a holy calling, a heavenly calling. We may well, therefore, walk 
worthy of it. 

II. THE WALK IN HARMONY WITH OUR CALLING. It is emphatically “tv walk worthy 
of the Lord unto all pleasing ” (Col. i. 10); “to walk worthy of God who hath called 
you unto his kingdom and glory ” (1 Thess, ii. 12); to have a conversation becominz 
the gospel of Christ (Phil. i.27). In human society, men are often kept from unworthy 
courses by a feeling οὗ honour, as gentlemen; how much more ought Christians to 
cherish a sense of honour as disciples of the Saviour and juint-heirs with him of the 
kingdom of heaven! The fveling of family honour is often a powerful guard against 
mean or ungenerous actions. Jt is a profound disgrace to find the descendant of an 
ancient and noble family forswear all its best traditions. As members of the household 
of God, as brethren of Jesus Christ himself, shall we disgrace this sublime relationship ὃ 
We cannot afford to bring shame upon our profession (Heb. vi. 6), to lose the comfort 
of our calling (Ps. xix. 11), or to lose its end (Heb. xii. 14), Let us not, therefore, 
affront our calling by inconsistencies, but walk in a way that will fully harmonize with 
its nature, glury, and end. It is all the more necessary to do so as the true walk 
of a saint tends so powerfully to promote the unity of the Church.—T. O. 


Ver. 2.—Graces that promote the harmony of the Church. “ All lowliness and 
meekness, with long-suffering, forbearing one another in love.” These graces 816 


150 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. (on. rv. 1-32 


specially needful in the Church; for their opposites, pride, irascibility, and impatience 
dv much to create heart-burning and division, 

I. Lowniness or minp. 1. 118 nature. It is that deep humility, as opposed tc 
pride, arrogance, and conceit, which is produced by a right sense of our weakness, 
ignorance, and dependence, and by a due appreciation of the undeserved glory (o which 
we are called in Christ Jesus. Men are made humble and self-di-trustful less by the 
knowledge that they are weak, ignorant, and mortal, than by the fact that, while striving 
for a higher end, they are always coming short of it by their mistakes aud their fellies, 
and are in constant need of a strength greater than their own. It is thus possible to 
unite a high aim with a profound humility. 2. Its importanre. It i3 necessary 
because God requires it (Micah vi. 8); because Christ exemplified it (Mait. xi. 29); 
because God dwells with the humble (Isa. lviii. 15); because it is the way to learn 
wisdom (Prov. xi. 2), to attain grace and holiness (Prov. iii. 5,6; Jas. iv. 6), and tc 
preserve unity in the Church (Jas. iv. 1). It bas many promises made to it. God 
will respect the humble (Isa. Ixvi. 2), he will give them grace (1 let. v. 6), he will 
exalt them (1 Pet. v. 6), and reward them with all good things. Its importance is 
specially manifest in Church relations, Believers are not to think of theniselves more 
highly than they ought to think (Rom. xii. 3), nor exalt themselves above their degree 
(2 Cor. x, 183—15), but to esteem others better than themselves (Phil. ii. 3). Let 
believers, therefore, have a humble apprehension of their knowledye, for “knowledge 
puffeth up” (1 Cor. viii. 1); and humble thouchts of their goodness, for we cannot 
understand all our errors, and need tu be cleansed from our secret faults (Ps. xix. 12). 
Let them “put on humbleness of mind,” as the brightest ornainent of Christian 
character (Col. iii. 12). 

Il. Meuxyess. ‘I'here is a natural connection between meckness and humility, and 
therefore they are often joined together. 1. Ifs nature, It is that disposition which 
does not arraign God and does not avenze itself on man. As revards God, it implies a 
ready submission to the authority of his Word (Jas. i. 21), and a cheerful resignation 
to his providence, as opposed to murmuring and fretfuluess (Ps. xxxix. 9). As 
regards man, the meek will have a calm temper under provocations; he will be “ slow 
to wrath ” (Jas. i. 19); be will give “the soft answer that turneth away wrath” (Prov. 
xv. 1); he will show that ornament of a meek and qniet spirit which adorns more than 
rubies (1 Pet. iii. 4). When joined with strength it makes one Οἱ the most effective 
characters. It is especially to be esteemed in a religious life. Therefore the apostle 
says, “ Let him show out of a good conversation his works with meekness of wisdom” 
(Jas. iii.13). It is with meekness and fear that we are to give a reason of our hope 
(1 Pet. iii. 15), and it is in a spirit of mcekness we are to recover the erring (Gal. vi. 1). 
It is one of the nine graces of the Spirit (Gal. v. 22). 2. /ts importance. See how 
largely it contributes to the usefulness of Christian life. The neek man has great 
power with men. See how it coutiibutes to the comfort of life; for it keeps him from 
the friction of temper that so often detracts from true repose; it brings us nearer aud 
nearer to him who was pre-eminently ‘meek and lowly of spirit” (Matt. xi. 29); and it 
has the promise of the earth for an inheritance (Matt. v. 5). Let us, therefore, seek 
meekness (Zeph. ii. 3). 

Il]. Lone-surrerine. 1. Its nature. It is the disposition that leads us to 
suppress our anger (2 Cor. vi. 6; Gal. v. 22); and ‘s opposed to that irritability often 
expressively called shortness of temper, which is quick to show resentment. This 
spirit is of great moment in the Church, where there may be frequent collisions of 
opinion, or interest, or feeling, and it waits with patience till the passionate or obstinate 
sce their way to more reasonable courses. 2. dis imporlance. God conmanis it 
(Rom. xii. 17). He exemplifies it (Matt. v.44; Nom. v. 6—8), and his Son has lelt 
us a most impressive exhibition of it (1 Pet. ii, 21—23). We all fail in our duty aud 
need to have due considration made to our failings. We are above all to bear ang 
forbear in matters of religious fellowship (Rom. xv. 1). ᾿ 

IV. THE SPIRIT IN WHICH THIS LONG-SUFFERING IS TO BE EXERCISED. “ Forbeating 
one another in love.” Christians are not to resent injuries or retaliate for wrongs done 
to them, but are to bear with each other’s infirmities, to cover each other’s weaknesses, 
to pity each other’s frailties, and to forgive the provocations they inflict upon cach 
othar. Thig is to be done, yot from a principle of merely worldly courtesy or from 


oH. Iv. 1—32.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 


contemptuous indifference, but from that love which “ suffereth long, and is kind.” I¢ 
is “charity which covercth a multitude of sins,” just as surely as “ haired stirreth up 
strife” (Prov. x. 12). It would be impossible to secure the equanimity of lile if the 
principle of forbearance, prompted and guided by love, were not yvenerally exercised. 
The counsel of the apostle in this whole passage pointedly condemns the proud, arrogant, 
censorious disposition, which tramples, not only on the rules of courtesy, but of 
Christian affection, We owe to others what they require at our hands, There is much 
in us they have to allow for, and therefore it becomes us to allow for much in them. 
Therefore our very manners ought to show true Christian consideration, for the poet 
has rightly said— 
“And manners are not idle, but the fruit 
Of Joyal nature and of noble mind.” 


T.C. 


Ver. 3.—The unity of the Spirit and the mode of its keeping, “Endeavouring to 
keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.” 

I. ConsIDER THE NATURE OF THIS UNITY. 1. It is not the unity of the body, the 
Church. That is an immutable unity which man cannot keep. God alone keeps it. 
Neither are we commanded to make the unity of the Spirit, but simply to keep it—for 
it exists, in a sense, independently of man’s fidelity; but in the degree in which it is 
kept in the bond of peace, it will eventually lead to visible oneness. 2. Much less 
is it a unity of external organization. That unity existed already at Ephesus. It 
is rather a unity in view of internal differences, which must have existed at Ephesus, as 
in other Churches which had a mixed membership of Jews and Gentiles, Christ did 
undoubtedly make both one on the cross, but the apostles allowed a considerable 
diversity of order and usage to exist in the Churches, according to the dominance of 
the Jewish or the Gentile element in them. There were Churches that followed the 
rule of Moses—-the apostles themselves holding by the ceremonial law till the end of 
their lives (Acts xxi, 20—26). And there were Churches that did not observe days 
nor follow Jewish usage, but took a course authorized by apostolic command itself. 
If the differences that existed in the days of the apostles did not destroy the unity of 
the body, it is difficult to see how similar differences in order and_ worship can destroy 
it now. 3. The unity of the Spirit is that unity of which the Spirit is the Author. 
Its indwelling is the principle of unity in the body of Christ. Man, therefore, cannot 
make it, nor can he destroy it, though he can thwart or disturb its manifestations. 
The use of the word “endeavouring” implies that it may be kept with a greater or 
lesser degree of fidelity. 

II. ConsIDER HOW THIS UNITY 18 TO BE PRESERVED. “In the bond of peace.” That 
is, the bond which is peace, springing out of humility, meekness, and forbearance. 
Just as pride, arrogance, and cuntention are separating elements, the opposite disposi- 
‘tions are conducive to unity. The peace which is the element of Christian society is 
that to which we are called in one body; for we are called by the God of peace, 
redeemed by Christ who is our Peace, sanctified by the Spirit whose fruit is peace, and 
edified by the gospel of peace, that we may walk as sons of peace. ‘Thus the unity is 
preserved and manifested by peace, as it is marred or lost sight of amidst conflicts and 
jars. The apostolic injunction is very inconsistent with the Darbyite principle that the 
unity of the Spirit is to be preserved by separation from evil, theological, ecclesiastical, 
or moral. It is strange that the apostle never hints at such a thing as separation, but 
speaks only of such graces as “lowliness, meekness, with long-suffering,” which are 
but little exemplified in many of the separations brought about by such a principle. 
The Darbyite principle is not a bond of peace. It multiplies separations and divides 
the saints of God. ‘There is uniting power in a common belief or in a common affec- 
tion, but there is none in mere separation from evil, The common rejection of Arianism 
can never become a centre of union for Protestants and Roman Catholics, because they 
are still so fundamentally apart in the whole spirit of their theology. The unity of 
the Spirit which we are enjoined to keep is, therefore, a unity compatible with minor 
differences, and ought to be the grand means of throwing the unity of the body into a 
more glorious distinctness before the world—T. Q, 


BPHESIANS, " 


162 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS (cu. rv. 1—32 


Vers. 4—6.—The sevenfold unity. The apostle proceeds to state the nature and 
grounds of the unity which is to be so carefully guarded. It has its basis in the fact 
that the Church is one, and does not consist of two rival societies, 

1. “THERE 18 OnE Bopy.” The body with its many members and its many func- 
tions is yet one. Similarly, “we being many, are one body in Christ, and every one 
members one of another” (Rom. xii. 5); so that believers, no matter how separated by 
race, colour, language, station, opinion, interest, circumstance, experience, are members 
of this one body. The body cannot, therefore, be an external visible society, but a 
-spiritual body of which Christ is the Head. It may not be so easy to realize this unity 
in the midst of the multiplication of sects and denominations, each with its well- 
defined lines of doctrine and order, and each more or less sharply distinguished from 
its neighbour. Yet there is still but “one body ”—there is amidst accidental diver- 
sities a substantial unity, a unity that covers all truly essential elements. The 
diversity arising from temperament, culture, habit, has had its due effect in the 
development of truth; for some parts of the Church have thus given prominence to 
some truth which other parts have allowed to fall into the backyround. The beauty 
of the Church is manifest in this very diversity, just as it requires all the hues of the 
rainbow to make the clear, white ray of colourless sunshine. The duty, therefore, of 
velievers is to regard the differences that keep them apart, not as hindrances to loving 
intercourse, but as helps to the fuller development of Divine truth and the fuller 
manifestation of the mind of God to the Church. 

11. “Onze Spirit.” As in the human body there is but one spirit, with a single 
vivifying power, so in the Church there is but one Spirit, animating all its members, 
as the common principle of life. “ΒΥ one Spirit were we all baptized into one body,” 
and “were nade to drink into one Spirit” (1 Cor. xii. 13). ‘ We have access by one 
Spirit unto the Father.” There is, therefore, no room for a conflictivg administration. 
“There are diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit” (1 Cor. xii. 4); and therefore all 
sins against unity are sins against the indwelling Spirit. Sectarian or divisive courses 
have a tendency to grieve the Spirit. Indeed, it is a mark of a separating apostasy 
that it has not the Spirit (Jude 19). Let us remember that the one Spirit who 
animates the body of Christ produces as his own choicest fruits— love, joy, peace, 
long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meckness, temperance” (Gal. v. 22), These 
are graces with a distinctly unifying tendency. 

11]. “OnE HOPE OF YOUR CALLING.” 1. Jis nature. Here it is not the thing “ hoped 
for,” as it is in Col. i. 5 and Titus ii. 18, but the emotion of hope, the expectation of 
future good. All believers have the same aspirations, the same anticipations of coming 
glory, as the effect of. the Spirit’s indwelling. The hope is subjective. 2. Its origin. 
The hope is “of your calling.” It springs out of the effectual call of the Spirit, who 
begets us to “a lively hope” (1 Pet. i. 3), being himself the Earnest and Seal of the 
Juture inheritance. We naturally hope for what we are invited to receive. 3. Its 
effect. Just as two strangers meeting for the first time on the deck of an emigrant 
ship, both bound for the same new land, and purposing to pursue the same occupation, 
are united by a common interest of expectation, so believers are drawn together into 
unity by a consideration of their common hopes. 

IV. “One Lorp.” As the Head of the Church, the supreme Object of faith, and into 
whose Name all saints are baptized. There are two ideas involved in this blessed 
Jordship—ownership and authority. 1. Ownership. Jesus Christ is not only Lord of 
all, but especially Lord of his own people. We are not our own, for we have been 
redeemed and bought with a price (1 Cor. vi. 20), even saith his precious blood. For 
this end he both did and rose and revived, that he might» be Lord both of the dead 
and of the living (Rom. xix. 4). 2. Authority. Therefure we are subject to him, our 
reason to his guidance, our conscience to his precepts, our hearts to his constraining 
love. There is no part of our being, there is no event of our lives, that is not subject 
to this authority which brooks no rival. It is this subjection of all believers to one 
Lord that marks the inner unity of the Church; for loyalty to a conmon Lord makes 
them stand together in a common hope, ἃ commion life, a common love. 

V. “One rats.” Not one creed. though all believers do really hold all that is 
essential to salvation, but one faith in its subjective aspect, through which the one Lord 
is ppprehended, It is one in all believers, for they are all justified in exactly the sans 


cH. Iv. 1—32.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 163 


manner, and it is in all a faith that “purificth the heart,” “worketh by love,” and 
“oyercomcth the world.” It is not, therefore, an external unity that this faith builds 
up, but a union of a spiritual character,-wrought by the grace of God. This principle 
or grace ol fuitl has a thoroughly uniting tendency, because it brings us near to the 
Saviour, and the nearer we stand to him we stand the nearer to one another. 

VI. “One Baptism.” There is but one baptism, once administered, as the expression 
of our faith in Christ; one initiation into the one body by one Spirit (1 Cor. xii. 13); one 
dedication to tle one Lord, All believers are baptized unto the Name of Father, Son, and 
Holy Ghost. ‘ As inany as have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ, There 
is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female: 
for ye ave all one in Christ Jesus” (Gal. iii. 27, 28). Christendom owns but one 
baptism. It has been remarked as strange that the Lord’s Supper— the one bread” 
(L‘ ‘or, x. 17)—should not have a place among the unities, as it is essentially the symbol 
of union among believers. But it differs from baptism in two important respects: 
(1) baptism is individual, the Lord’s Supper is social; (2) it is by baptism, spiritually 
regarded, we are carried into the unity of the one body (1 Cor, xii. 18); it is by the 
Lord’s Supper we recognize continuously a unity already accomplished. ‘Thus baptism 
is included among the seven unities, because it embodies the initial elements that enter 
into the unity. 

VIL. ‘Ong Gop anpb Fatuer o¥ ALL, who is above all, and through all, and in all.” 
The unity of the Church finds its consummation at last in him, who originated the 
scheme of grace and from whom all the other unities are derived. If God be our 
Father, then are we members of one family, brothers aud sisters in Christ Jesus, and 
are therefore bound to live together in unity. The counsel may well come to us, “See 
that ye fall not out by the way” (Gen. xlv, 24). All the unities are secured by the 
relation of God the Father to the Church. He is “over all” its members, and there- 
fure there can be no rival sovereignty. The Church “is the habitation of God through 
the Spirit.” He is “through all,” in respect of pervading and supporting energy; he 
is “in all,” as the Source and Spring of coustant light and grace and goodness. ‘There 
is here no pantheismm. ‘Thus there are seven unities, like so many distinct vbligations, 
tu incline believers to the unity of the Spirit, which can only be preserved in the bond 
of peace. Believers ought, indeed, to be of one heart and one soul.—T. C. 


Ver. 7.—Diversity of gift in unity of body. There are three points suggested by 
this verse. 

I. ‘uu UNITY OF THE CHURCH IS CONSISTENT WITH GREAT DIVERSITY OF GIFTS. 
As in the human body there are many members with different functions, so the 
Church is “nut one member, but many.” Diversity of gift, so far from being incon- 
sistent with unity, is really essential to it. ‘If all were one member, where were the 
body?” All the great purposes of life wouid be frustrated if every part of the organism 
did not find its due place. 

11. Each Member OF THE CHURCH HAS HIS SEPARATE GIFT. This does not say that 
any one member has all gifts. Each has received his measure. There are those who 
would make the Chuich all “tongue,” as if all were called-to the gospel winistry, 
he gifts differ buth in nature and in measure. One has the gift of speech, anotlier the 
gift of sagacity, another the gift of enterprise, another the gift of sympathy, another the 
gift of wealth and influence. All ought to be contributory to the unity of the Church, 

111. THE ORIGIN AS WELL AS MEASURE OF THE GIFTS ΙΒ TO BE TRACED TO CHRIST. 
The position of each member in the body is not determined by itself, but by God. The 
eye does not make itself the eye, nor the hand the hand. So the position of believers 
in the Church is determined, not by themselves, but by Christ, The grace “is given 
according to the measure of the gift of Christ.” Christ is the Source of all spiritual 
gifts, and he determines their adjustment as well as their amount. He does not give 
according to our merit, or our capacity, or our desires, but according to his sovereign 
pleasure. here is, therefore, (1) no room for self-inflation if we have received the 
largest gifts; (2) there is no room for envy or jealousy because others have received 
more gifts than ourselves; (3) but rather an argument in the fact that one has a grace 
which another wants, for our helping each other in the Lord. Thus the true unity of 
the Church is promoted.—'l. Q. ; 


164 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, (on. rv. 1—32, 


Vers. 8—10.—The Svurce of all the gifts. It is Christ himself in virtue of hia ᾿ 
exaltation, 

1. Tae AscENSION THE GROUND ALIKE OF THE FOUNDING, THE PRESERVATION, AND 
THE PERFECTION of THE CuurcH. This historic circumstance is the sequel of our 
Lord’s resurrection from the dead, and can only be rightly appreciated by marking its 
connection with the humiliation by which it was preceded. It was the Son of God 
who descended, and therefore it was the Son of God who ascended up far above all 
heavens, and who, like a conqueror, is here represented as dividing the spoils οἱ 
conquest. He is exalted to give the Holy Ghost with all his gifts and graces. It isa 
very touching as well as inspiring thought that the humanity of our ascended Turd 
has not been so transmuted as to change his relation to us, We cannot doubt the 
identity of his person. ‘The same Lord who went about every day dving good upon 
earth, is now doing good every day in the fulness of spiritual blessings which he is 
dispensing from the throne of his asceusion- glory. 

i THE GIr7s oF THE ASCENSION. These stand in abiding connection with the 

eace, the sauctification, the hope, of believers. But the special reference is to the 
Blea of the Christian ministry. Ministers may be nothing in themselves, but as 
the gifts of Christ they ought to he highly esteemed. If we love Christ, we ouglit 
to set store by his servants, who shepherd the flock in the absence of the great 
Shepherd. 

11. Tue UNWORTHY RECIPIENTS OF THESE GIFTS. “ Yea, for the rebellious also” 
(Ps. xviii. 18), They were for men, as the apostle » serts; for rebels, as the psaln:ist 
asserts. It is not usual for conquerors to divide their spoils among rebels, yct our 
conquering Lord gives gifts even to those who put him to death. The ministry ia 
still the Lord’s gift to a wicked world, for he is still the Source of the inward life of 
the Church and of its authority. —T. C, 


Ver. 11.—The variety of the gifts. The Lord himself gave apostles, prophets, 
evangelists, pastors, and teachers. Provision is thus made for three grest objects, 

I, Tue rounpaTION oF THE CxuRcH. It needed a spccial order of inspired men to 
lay the foundations, Hence believers are said “to be built upon the fuundation of 
apostles and pronhets” (ch. ii. 20). The foundation, however, had only to be laid 
once for all, and tiicse apostles and prophets passed away in the first age of Christianity. 
There is no place, therefore, now in the Church for either class; for the ‘ apostles’ 
of the Irvingite sect possess no single qualification of the orizinal apostles of Christ. 
As the apostles wrote nearly the whole of the New Testament Scriptures, v ‘ch supply 
the literary foundation of Christianity, they may thus be regarded as still identified 
with the progress of the gospel in all lauds and all ages. 

Il. THE EXTENSION oF THE CHURCH. Evangelists were specially designed to preach 
the gospel in districts where it had not been previously known. ‘They are on this 
ground distinguished from pastors and teachers, They itinerated from place to place, 
carrying with them the wonderful story of the cross, and were-quite exempt, as such, 
from the labours of organization or discipline. Our missionaries in modern times do 
the work of evangclists. 

IIL Tue continuance or THE Cuurca. Pastors and teachers were stationary 
ministers appointed for the continuous edification of the flock. They represent, not 
two classes of oftice-bearers, but two aspects of one and the same office. They are dis- 
tinguished alike from prophets and from evangelists, and had to do with the permanent 
instruction and guidance of the flock. The existence of sueh an order of teachers 
proves that the Christian Church was not to be propagated or maintained by mere 
gifted persons. Why, in that case, should the Lord have appointed such ordinary 
officers at all? The pastors of Ephesus and Corinth were distinct from the pro- 
phetically gifted persons in both Churches (1 Cor. xiv.; ch. iv. 11). Private persons, 
no matter how gifted, were not allowed to take the place of apostles and prophets 
at Corinth, and therefore not of pastors and teachers, If they could not take the 
place of the one, they could not take the place of the other. If all believers were to 
exercise the gift of ministry in the Christian dispensation, why should not the apostles 
have started with this arrangement from the first? Why should the Lord give 
pastors and teachers to one generation—and that a generation provided with a 


cH, Iv. 1—32.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 165 


least two inspired orders of teachers—and make no similar provision for all future 
generations ?—T. C. 


Ver. 12.—The design of the ministry. It is to perfect the saints for Christian 
service and for sharing in the edification of the Church. The ministry is intended tu 
“equip or prepare for future enterprise by means of perfecting the power and adapta- 
tion of the man for his task.” It prepares the saints for two services. 

I. THE work oF ministry. It is maintained by some that this passage warrants 
all saints to preach the gospel, because the four classes of officers spoken of are said 
to prepare saints for the work of ministry. If so, then these officers, or some of them, 
are still needed fur the purpose; yet this is expressly denied. ‘’he passage, however, 
implies that the preparation in question is to be continuous, for it is to last till the 
end of time. The word “mivistry,” however, must be taken in a large sense to 
signify general spiritual service, that may assume a thousand different forms (Heb. vi. 
10; Acts vi. 4; xi. 29; 1 Cor. xvi. 15; 2 Cor. ix. 12, 13; xi. 8; 2 Tim. iv. 11). 
Every believer is not only to be “fruitful in every good work,” but to “hold forth the 
Word of life,” though he should be neither trained nor called to the Christian pastorate. 

11. Tue gpirication or Tue Cuurcu. This is the second end included in the 
Christian pastorate. The action of the ministry upon the saints is blessed to the 
enlargement of the Church, both in numbers and in spirituality. A revival of religion 
is always accompanied or followed by “a builiing up of the body of Christ.”—T. C. 


Ver. 13.—The ministry not a temporary institution, It is to continue till the Church 
shall have arrived at its completed unity. This does not imply that there are still 
apostles and prophets in the Church. It is the ministry, not these particular offices, 
that is to continue in the Church. The ministry is to continue till the Church 
reaches its destined goal, which is here described in three forms. 

1. Unrry oF FAITH AND KNOWLEDGE OF THE Son or Gop. ‘This implies: 1. That 
faith and knowledge are distinct from each other in nature, though they are inseparable 
in the experience of Christian men. Faith is fed by knowledge, and knowledge, 
especially in the sphere of Divine realities, is based on faith. 2. That religion is not 
a mere matter of feeling, but intellectual as well, resting upon correct apprehensions 
of Divine truth. 8. That the central Object of religion is the Son of God, not only 
apprehended, but appropriated by faith. It is eternal life to know him. 4. That 
saints have yet to attain to a truer faith and a larger knowledge of the Son of God. 
All believers, it is true, have “one faith ;” yet they are to attain to the unity of faith. 
Unity is a matter of degrees. The apostle does not, however, say that we are to begin 
with it, but to end with it, It is to be realized, not in the course of the dispen- 
sation, but as one of its blessed results. The unity of the faith includes more than 
the unity of the Spirit—that unity of mutual kindness and forbearance that will 
promote the other unity—for it points to the result of the Spirit’s continuous working 
in the Church. There is an absolute truth independent of all our opinions, and the 
same to every man, whether he believes it or not. We shall not here attain to it; but 
we shall reach it when we are at length set free from our imperfections and our 
infirmities. We shall then be of one mind, because we shall be confurmed to one 
image. 

IL A ΡΕΒΡΕΟῚ MAN. This points to the full development of our manhood. We 
are fragmentary, one-sided, without a true adjustment of powers. The believer is 
imperfect both in faith and in knowledge, but he is growing into that unity of life 
which invulves perfect knowledge and perfect holiness. 

III. Tue MEASURE OF THE STATURE OF THE FULNESS OF CuRIstT. The true standard 
is conformity to Christ. The stature of the Cliurch is ever expanding, as it receives of 
Christ’s fulness, into that very fulness. The end of this growth cannot be seen in 
this life. The Bible nowhere represents the perfection of the Church as occurring on 
earth. It is to be without spot or wrinkle when the day of its glorious presentation 
comes. Thus the design of the Christian miustry is to labour for the perfection of 
the Church.—T. C. ᾿ 


Ver. 14.— Warnings against instability and deception. The ministry has been 


166 THI EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. fou. rv. 1—32. 


appointed to bring the Church forward to maturity, and therefore it is concerned te 
carry it safely through the intermediate stages. We are consequently warned not to 
continue children, but to advance steadfastly towards manhood. There are two faults 
hinted at by the apostle. 

1. CHILDREN ARE APT TO BE UNSTABLE. “Tossed to and fro and carried about by 
every wind of doctrine.” They have not become so firmly rooted in the truth as to be 
proof against unsettling influences either within or without them, Consequently, they 
are like “a wave of the sea driven cf the wind and tossed.” 1. The warning implies 
that truth is a matter of supreme moment. Holiness of character is impossible 
without it, Believers ought to be well founded in the truth; not mere babes, but 
such as “are of full age, even those who by reason of use have their senses exercised 
to discern both god and evil” (Heb. v. 14). 2. They are warned against the tendency 
to be blown about by the winds of doctrine that blow from every quarter. The 
counsel is much needed in this age of startling suggestion, radical deuial, and deep 
unscttlement. ‘There are men who go the rounds of all the sects; swinging from side 
te side with a movement which indicates that they are true to nothing but the love of 
chanve. It is hard for unstable natures to hold the poise of their judgment in the 
midst of such terrible cross-fires of theological and philosophical speculation. 

II. CHILDREN ARE APT TO BE DECEIVED. Their want of knowledge leaves them 
open to imposition and deception. The apparatus of theological seduction is always at 
hand. The language of the apostle implies: 1. That there were errorists either at 
Ephesus or elsewhere, identified with the Christian communion, marked by “the 
sleight of men and cunning craftiness whereby they lie in wait to deceive.” It isa 
mere dream to suppose that the primitive Church was perfectly pure either in doctrine 
or practice. The apostle’s farewell address to the Ephesianu elders at Miletus antici- 
pated the rise of serious error (Acts xx. 29), 2. That such “false teachers” were 
marked by selfishness, deceit, and malignity, This is the character which the apostle 
usually ascribes to such men (Rom. xvi. 17, 18; Col. ii. 18; Gal. ii. 4; 2 Cor. ii. 17). 
Error is, therefore, not harmless, though it may appear to be the mere sword-play of ‘a 
speculative temperament. False teachers are not innocent. Yet our judgment in all 
cases of this sort must be exercised with charity and meekness, because men may be 
better than their creed, and may be influenced by the sounder parts of it. 3. ‘That 
Satar often succeeds in seducing the unwary by the dexterous tricks of such teachers, 
who cunningly mingle the truth with such error as robs it of its healing virtues.—1T. C. 


Vers. 15, 16.—The true method and conditions of Christian growth. The apostle sees 
the conditions of Christian stability in a faith that worketh by love—the love being at 
once the sphere and the means of our spiritual growth. The expressive figure used 
by the apvstle sets forth several important truths concerning the Church and its 
development. 

I. Toe Source or 1s GRowrH—Curist THE Heap. As the Church is a spiritual 
body, so the characteristics of the natural body are found init. It is a body divinely 
framed as truly as the natural body, and designed to bring greater glory to God than 
the body which types it. Its Head is the Lord himself. It has its being and form in 
him, as well as ali its nurture, such as its life and light, grace and joy, strength and 
fruitfulness ; it depends upon the Head for subsistence and for safety; it is united to 
the Head by a bond that is both close and indissoluble. 

IL. Tux acent or irs GRowrH—rueE ΠΟῪ Sprit. For “ by one Spirit were we all 
baptized into one body ” (1 Cor. xii.12). As the one spirit of man wields at will all the 
functions of the body, and concentrates the various members upon its purposes as they 
arise, 80 the Holy Spirit gives each member of the wnystic body its peculiar action and 
power in the divinely appointed diversity which contributes to its eventual unity. 

III. THE RELATION CF THE MEMBERS ΤῸ EACH OTHER. “The whole body is fitly 
joined together and compacted by that which every joint supplieth.” Each member 
is in relation with all other members as well as with the Head. Lach is dependent 
upon the other. No member can dismiss another as useless; none is so great as not to 
be indebted to the least. “God has tempered the body together.” Now, just as the 
parts of the human frame are necessarily of different functions, and set, some iu 
superior, some in inferior, places, yet all act together in the fullest sympathy ; so all the 


On. tv. 1—32. J THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 167 


members of Clirist’s body must keep rank end order, acting within their own sphere 
with due wisdom, harmony, and love, the eye not doing the work of the hand, nor the 
hand the work of the foot, but abiding each in his own calling, 

IV. THERE 185 AN INDIVIDUAL ACTION OF EACH MEMBER. “ According to the effectual 
working in the measure of every part.” Each must do its own proper work, according 
to its position. Just as a man is strong in the faculty which he most exercises, so the 
member who is strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus becomes individually efficient 
according to the operation of that grace. One member is thus apt to teach, another to 
convince, another to counsel, another to stimulate. 

V. THE CHANNELS OF SUPPLY—“ THE JOINTS AND BANDS”—aRE THE WorD AND 
ORDINANCES, They convey grace from the Head to the members, The Word of God is 
the grand means, in connection with baptism and the Lord’s Supper. These two 
ordinances are, indeed, the two appointed symbols of the Church’s unity—baptism 
representing the first action of the Holy Spirit in fittiffg the members for the body; the 
Lord’s Supper, the drinking into one Spirit, who makes the table a visible centre of 
anion to those brought out of the world. 

VI. THE ELEMENT OR SPHERE IN WHICH THE GROWTH OF THE BODY IS EFFECTED. 
“Love.” It is not asserted that we are to grow in love, but that in love, as the 
sphere of growth, we are to grow in all the elements of perfection. That love which 
follows the things which make for peace and edification, and bears the infirmities of 
others, has peculiar faculties for edifying the body of Christ. 

VII. Tue rEsuLT or growts. “It maketh increase of the body unto the edifying 
of itself.” The increase is twofold—in the addition of members to the Church, and in 
the growth of the members in all the elements of spiritual perfection —T. C. 


Vers. 17—19.—The moral characteristics of heathenism. The apostle warns the 
saints of Ephesus not to walk in the ways of paganism. These ways are vividly 
described. 

J. THE HEATHEN WALK IN THE VANITY OF THEIR MIND. This vanity has its 
intellectual and its moral side. 1. Intellectually, it represents the waste of speculative 
power upon questions of the profoundest importance, ending usually in pantheism, 
atheism, or polytheism. The pagan intellect groped in vain amidst the darkness for 
light upon duty, upon providence, upon the future life of man. The heathen became 
vain in their invaginations. 2. Morally, the heathen walked ina vain show, looked for 
happiness in riches, honours, and power, and pursued foolish or wicked courses in 
the effort to attain these objects of desire. The end of such a walk must always be 
disappointing. 

Il, EXPLANATION OF THIS VAINLIFE. It istwofold. 1. It arises out of intellectual 
obscuration, “ Having the understanding darkened.” Not that the natural genius of 
the heathen was obscured, for the world must always admire the classics of Greece and 
Rome; but there was all but utter extinction of spiritual light in the heathen mind. 
‘There was no saving knowledge. The god of this world had blinded their minds, and 
their growing apostasy entailed a judicial blindness which issued in utter darkness. 
2. It arises out of moral estrangement from God, “ being alienated from the life of God.” 
There could be no light in the mind, because there was no life in the heart. The life 
of God is not his own life, but the life he lives in his ;eople, which is manifest in their 
faith and holiness; but the heathen were estranged from that life, 80 as to have no 
liking for it and no inclination to it, but rather a love for the life of sin, (1) This 
moral estrangement is caused by “ the ignorance that is in them;” for where men are 
{onorant of God, they have no desire after him, no faith in him, no communion with 
him, no living accurding to his will, (2) And this ignorance, in turn, springs out of “ the 
hardness of their hearts.” The callons heart was proof agaiust all impressicn from 
without, and thus kept the mind uninformed or apathetic, till heart and mind were 
both buried in the gloom of hopeless paganism. 

JIL Unrimare resvuLts OF THIS VAIN LIFE. “ Who being past feeling, have given 
themselves over unto lasciviousness to work all uncleanness with greediness.” When the 
hardness of the heart has followed close upon the steps of the darkened mind, conscience 
loses its power; it becomes seared as with a hot iron; the sense of sin is lost ; the fear 
of guilt dies out; and now the way is open to measureless moral disorder. The sinner 


168 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, ἴσα. rm 182, 


plunges into all forms of impurity, with the spirit of covetousness, as if he con pever 
be satisfied with sinning, but sought ever new enormities of lawless desire. This i+, in 
brief, the tremendous picture of heathenism given by an inspired apostle.—T. C. 


Vers, 20—24.—In Christ the transition effected from the old man to the new man. The 
apostle represents “" believers” as having “learned Christ,” not as having learned about 
him, but as having reached the true knowledge of him, having heard his voice and 
having been taught by him, as to “the truth as it is in Jesus”—a truth that carried 
them far apart from the frightful licence of the heathen. We now understand the 
exact import of this truth. It is to put off the old man and put on the new man. 
It is, in a word, sanctification. 

L THE NECESSITY OF THIS TRANSFORMATION. The question might naturally arise— 
Had not the saints at Ephesus already put off the old man and put on the new man? 
Were they not already true befievers? Why should they be asked to do it again? 
We must keep in view the distinction that the apostle clearly maintains in this familiar 
figure between “ the old man” and “the new man.” Sometimes he refers to our legal 
condition, sometimes to our moral condition. “Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ” 
(Rom. xiii. 14). In this Epistle the apostle exhorts the Christians to put off the old 
man; but in the Epistle to the Colossians he says the old man has been already put off 
(Col. iii. 9). In this Epistle the exhortation is given, “ Put on the new man ” (ver. 
24); but elsewhere that which is new has been already accomplished (2 Cor. v. 17} 
Weare exhorted again to be “ transformed ” (Rom. xii. 2) and “ renewed ” (ver. 23); bu* 
we are elsewhere said. to be already “ transformed” and ‘renewed ” (2 Cor. v.17). It 
is necessary to mark this distinction, that we may not be led aside or into that mys- 
ticism which seems to confound justification with sanctification. It is the moral, not 
the legal, condition that is here in question. It is worse than a mistake to say that 
we ought not to trouble ourselves about sin, because the new man cannot sin, and al! 
sin comes from the old man, who has been already crucified and put off. This theory 
makes the work of the Holy Spirit altogether unnecessary. 

II. THE NATURE OF THIS TRANSFORMATION. This is evident from the contrast 
between the old man and the new man. 1, The old man represents corrupt nature, 
and is called “old” because it is original as opposed to what is new. It precedes what is 
new. Its character is vividly pictured by the apostle: “waxing corrupt according to 
the lusts of deceit.” There is a progressive mora] disintegration, which is inconsistent 
with the life of God or the happiness of man. The moral nature goes to pieces under 
the action of this corruption. Then it finds its natural development in “ lusts of deceit.” 
These lusts are deceitful, for they promise pleasure and bring pain; they promise 
liberty and bring bondage; they promise secrecy and bring shame; they promise 
impunity and bring retribution. Christians are well taught to put off this old man. 
2. The new man represents the new nature, with its renewed intellect, its renewed 
affections, its renewed will. It has been “created after God in the righteousness and 
holiness of truth;” that is, in the righteousness aud holiness which belong to the 
truth, or which are its essential products. Observe: (1) That the new man is a creation, 
as man was a crcation at the beginning. “We are God’s workmanship ” (ch. ii. 10). 
(2) The new man is in God's image, as the first man was in God’s image. The apostle 
says, “ According to the image of him who created him” (Col. iii. 10). (8) The linea- 
ments of the image of the new man are “righteousness ”—that principle which guides 
im in all his relationships to God, man, and himself; and “ holiness ”—that principle 
of the spiritual life which has primary relation to God himself. Righteousness and 
piety, governed and guided by the truth, are the two great principles of spiritual 
perfection. The image of God is thus manifest in its intellectual and its moral side. 
All things, indeed, have become new to the believer—a new name, new relations, new 
honours, new possessions, new thoughts, new affections, new words, new actions— 
because he now acts from a new principle (Gal. ii. 20), and is governed by a new end 
in life (1 Cor. x. 31).—T. ©, 


Ver. 25.— Warning against falsehood. As the saints had put off lying at their 
conversion, it was their duty henceforth to speak truth with their neighbours, Consider 


ou. rv. 1—32.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. — 169 


I, Tue soctan puty. ‘Speak every man truth with his neighbour.” What 
is truth? There is truth as opposed to falsehood, which is an express inteution to 
deceive. There is truth of character, which is opposed to insincerity. Both kinds of 
truth are manifest in three circumstances—in common conversation, in bearing testi- 
mony, in making and in keeping promises. (1) Christians ought to be truthful in 
ordinary conversation, on the most trivial as well as on the most soleran occasions, 
because if a strict veracity is not maintained in the unguarded moments of life, it seldom 
remains long unshaken under a stress of temptation, The slightest deviation from it, 
either in the way of exaggeration or distortion, is inconsistent with the candour and 
simplicity which ought to adorn a Christian. The prohibition of talsehood is absolute 
in Scripture. “Ye shall not lie to one another” (Lev. xix. 11); “Lie not one to 
another” (Col. iii. 9); “Speak every man truth with his neighbour ” (Zech. viii. 16). 

2) Truth must be maintained in bearing testimony. “ A false witness speaketh lies” 
Prov. vi. 19), and thus “‘soweth discord among brethren.” It is the characteristic mark 
of a citizen of Zion that he will not take up a report against his neighbour (Ps. xv. 38). 
No affection, no prejudice, no fear of man, ought to lead toa false, or partial, or mis- 
leading representation of facts, Perjury undermines society more than murder. (3) 
Truth must be kept in the matter of promises, There must be areal intention to fulfil 
them when they are made. The citizen of Zion “ speaketh the truth in his heart” (Ps. 
xv.2). Promises to men stand on the same footing with vowsto God. “ Better it is that 
thou shouldest not vow, than that thou shouldest vow and not pay ” (Eccles. v. 5). We 
must be as conscientious in performance as we are in promise. There may be cases, 
no doubt, in which the obligation is superseded by higher considerations. Herod was 
not bound by his oath to the daughter of Herodias. There may be cases likewise in 
which there is a providential disability to carry out a promise. But if we possess a 
full capacity of action, our duty is to fulfil our engagement. The citizen in Zion 
“ sweareth to his own hurt, and changeth not” (Ps, xv. 4). 

II. THz MOTIVE TO THIS SOCIAL DUTY. “Because we are members one of 
another.” This is a religious consideration that is not designed to exclude other 
grounds of oblization to truthfulness. 1. But the principle here laid down upplies 
equally to mankind in general. (1) A lie is a breach of the social contract. It tends 
to make seciety impossible, for society only exists through the trust that man exercises 
in man, It turns that instrument of speech, which God has given us for our mutual 
comfort, into a means of estrangement. Therefore “the righteous man hateth lying” 
(Prov. xiii. 5). (2) It is a breach of the golden rule that we should do to others as 
we would have them do to us. Liars expect others to speak the truth to them, and 
complain when it is not done. Therefore truth is what every man has a right to 
expect and desire from another. We have no more right to deceive our neivhbour 
than we have a right to defraudhim. (3) It destroys the comfort and peace of society. 
What a picture of its effects is in Jer. ix. 4, 5!—‘“‘Take ye heed every one of his 
neighbour, and trust ye not in any brother: for every brother will utterly supplant, 
and every neighbour will walk with slanders. And they will deceive every one his 
neighbour, and will not speak the truth: they have taught their tongue to speak lies, 
and weary themselves to commit iniquity.” (4) It prepares the way for further 
demoralization of character. 2. The principle here laid down specially applies to 
Christians. They are not only members of Christ, but of one another. Chrysostom 
supposes the impossibility of the eye lying to the foot or the foot to the eye, in the 
presence of danger. Thus it would be equally unnatural, by the very law of their 
union, as members one of another, that believers should deceive one another by false- 
hood. The consideration of this membership suggests a relation (1) to that God the 
Father who is “a God of truth” (Deut. xxxii. 4), who “is not a man that he should 
lie” (Numb. xxiii. 19), who gave oath and promise as “the two immutable thinys, in 
which it is impossible that God should lie” (Heb. vi. 18); (2) to that Saviour who is 
the Truth as well as the Life—“the faithful ani true Witness”—having “no guile 
found in his mouth;” (8) and to that Holy Spi-it who is the Spirit of truth (John 
xiv. 17), and bas given us the Scriptures of truth. 

Inrerences. 1. Let believers be careful as to truth. “If any man seemeth to be 
religious, and bridleth not his tongue”—particularly from lying— that man’s religion 
ig vain.” Let them pray with the psalmist, “Remove far from me the way of lying.” 


170 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, (ot. 1¥. 1—82, 


Let them not tolerate liars in their society (Ps. ci. 7). 2. Mark how religion tends to 
promote the well-being and comfort of society. Truth is the cement of society. 8. 
Remember that the devil is the father of liars (Juln viii. 44), and that “ whosoever 
loveth and maketh a lie” shall not enter the heavenly Jerusalem (Rev. xxii. 15).—T, C. 


Vers, 26, 27.—Restraints upon anger. The apostle teaches that we are not to allow 
the irritations or exasperations of life to become the occasion of sin, that we are not to 
cherish anger, and that we are not to give scope to Satan by temper which may open 
the heart to those passions of hatred and revenge that are identific.: with his operations. 
The passage teaches— 

J. THAT THERE I8 AN ANGER THAT I8 NoT SINFUL. This affection is, indeed, 
implanted in our nature for righteous ends. It arms the passions quickly against evil, 
and operates with the force and effectiveness of an instinct, If it is mingled with 
malice, it becomes sinful; but if it is associated with a holy disposition, it is safe an¢ 
good. Jesus regarded the conduct of the Jews “with anger” (Mark iii. 5). Anger is 
often attributed to God himself (Ps. vii. 11), but it can have no sinful elements in the 
Divine mind. It is, in fact, with anger as it is with hatred. It is a shallow prejudice 
to shrink from the name and the thine which it signifies, as if it were all and only 
evil. Jesus hated as well as loved. ‘I'he two emotions hang for their life upon each 
other, Love cannot be unless a hearty hate of evil lie beneath. They are but the two 
sides of one sublime emotion which turns life, so often insipid and dull, into a vivid, 
balanced, and joyful activity. So itis with anger, Under the inspiration of a holy nature, 
it may flash forth with a marvellous power against wickedness, untruth, and dishonour. 

Il. Tuat THERE 1Β AN EAS® PASSAGE FROM WHAT IS RIGHT TO WHAT IS WRONG IN THE 
INDULGENCE OF ANGER. “Be ye angry and sin not.” This command implies that it 
is an easy matter to sin in our anger, and a hard thing to be angry and not to sin. 
The path of duty affords firm footing to those who keep it; but it is very narrow, and 
there are dangerous pitfalls on either side. Anger is, therefore, not an operation to be 
rashly or lightly performed, even when it 18 ἃ very evil thing against which our dis- 
pleasure is directed. If it comes often and comes easily, you may suspect the danger 
that lurks in it. ‘lake care, above all things, that the zeal for rigliteousness may not 
plunge you into hatred of your neighbours. “If a glass bo(tle be full of clean water, 
though it be stirred there ariseth no mud; but if mud arise when it is stirred, the 
water was foul in the bottom: so is the spirit of a man foul within that, being stirred, 
showeth distemper.” ‘Be angry and sin not.” You cannot be angry and suffer not. 
Just as a canvon when discharged recoils heated and begrimed within by the fiery 
blast that issued from its mouth, the spirit of man is similarly affected even by those 
discharges of anger that are directed against the most wicked deeds, 

III. Tuat rr 1s HARD TO AVOID SIN IN OUR ANGER IF WE INDULGE IT FOR AN UNDUE 
LENGTH OF TIME. “Let not the sun go down upon your wrath.” Anger may flash 
suddenly out from the lips of a good man, but “‘ it resteth in the bosom of fools ” (Eccles. 
vii. 9). There is a limit even to righteous anger; not that we are not to have a con- 
tinual anger against sin; but we are not to carry our anger against a brother into the 
next day. We are not to harbour resentment or keep it raukling in our bosom, lest it 
should change into downright hatred or revenge. 

IV. Tuat SaTan TAKES ADVANTAGE OF OUR ANGER TO DO US GREAT HURT. There 
is an old Latin proverb, “He who goes angry to bed has the devil for a bedfellow.” 
Anger, if cherished, supplies a motive to yield to his evil suggestions, The devil is in 
full sympathy with a resentful spirit. Yet, though he wiclds the resources of this 
world as its god; thaugh he is incarnate in the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and 
the pride of life; he has no power to enter any heart except with the will of its owner. 
Let not Christians, then, allow that heart, which is the temple of the Holy Sthost, to 
be opened, in a moment of holy anger, tc the intrusive suggestions of the evil one. 
The counsel of the apostle is well calculated to promote the comfort and the usefulness 
of life. Let Christians take care that their anger is not without cause, or without 
measure, or without justice, and that it should not be so inconsistent with love that we 
cannot pray for those against whom it is directed —T. 0. 


Ver. 28.— Warning against theft: a plea for honest work, It may seem strange 


’ 


on. rv, 182.) THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 171 


that such an admonition should be addressed to believers. It is no more strange than 
admonitions against fornication. “ Flee fornication” (1 Cor. vi. 18), 11 is a warning 
against dishonesty, which often assumes insidious disguises that couceal the true 
character of the injury done to our neighbours, 

1. TuErT 18 ONE OF THOSE SINS WHICH OUGHT NOT EVEN TO BE NAMED AMONG 
Curistians. It springs out of the deep selfishness of the heart. It is a breach of the 
great commandment of love—that love “which worketh no ill to his neighbour ”— 
and proves that the world has a great hold upon the heart that can plan the deed of 
dishonesty. 

II. ΤῊ REMEDY PRESCRIBED TO PREVENT THEFT IS HONEST work. “ Let him labour, 
working with his hands.” 1, God is our Employer. He has appointed our work and 
he requires it at our hands (Acts xx. 84; 1 Thess, iv. 11). It ought to be part of our 
worship. The gospel does not forbid our making an honest gain, nor does it counte- 
nance any indifference to our mere earthly advantage. It gives no encouragement to 
asceticism. 2. Idleness is inconsistent with Christian life and leads to many dangers. 
“ Tdleness occasions poverty, brings men to want, increases their necessities; and then 
they betake themselves to indirect and unlawful means to supply them.” There were 
persons at ‘Thessalonica who were “ working not at all, but were busybodies ” (2 Thess, 
iii, 11), Christianity gives no encouragement to monkish idleness. It was designed 
for a busy world, 8. It must be honest work. “Working with his hands the thing 
which is good.” We may not stcal, either to enrich others or ourselves. We may not 
seek our own advantage by oppression or injury to others, or by the gain of callings 
dishonouring to our Christian profession, “‘I'he matter of our alms must be goods 
righteously gotten; otherwise it is robbery, not righteousness.” 4. It is work for the © 
benefit of others as well as ourselves. “That he may have to give to him that needeth,” 
Weare not to amass wealth for our own enjoyment, but that we may supply the 
necessities of others. There are some who cannot work. Their wants we are bound to 
supply, for no man liveth to himself. “The righteous man giveth and spareth not” 
(Prov. xxi. 26). “Who would not rather be a labourer than a loiterer, seeing the 
sluggard is so miserable a wretch, but the just man so happy and able to do good 
works ?”—T. Ο, 


Ver. 29.—Two kinds of speech. The apostle gives us a lesson on the use of the tongue. 

I. NEGATIVELY : WE ARE TO UTTER NO CORRUPT SPEECH. 1. 76 argues a corrupt heart ; 
for “out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, false witness, blas- 
phemies” (Matt. xv. 19). 10 is thus the tongue “defileth the whole body, and setteth 
on fire the course of nature” (Jas, iii, 6). It is “out of the abundance of the heart 
that the mouth speaketh” (Matt. xii. 34). 2. Corrupt speech is a fearful perversion of 
the noble fuculty of speech with which God has endowed us. It is a melancholy fact 
that “out of the same mouth proccedeth blessing and cursing” (Jas. iii. 10), 3. 
Corrupt speech has the power of destruction. It takes root outside of us, perhaps in 
some young heart, which it “sets on fire of hell.” How true it is that “death and life 
are in the power of the tongue” (Prov. xviii. 21)! 4. Corrupt speech ts irrevocable. 
No words of ours may be able to undo the mischief caused by it. 5. Corrupt speech is 
reserved for the fire of judgment. (Matt. xii.) 

ΤΙ. PosirivELy: WE ARE TO USE EDIFYING SPEECH. “That which is good to the use of 
edifying, that it may minister grace unto the hearers.” 1. Hdifying speech. It must be 
speech that will tend to build up the hearers in faith, holiness, and wisdom. It must be 
salutary speech, calculated to improve both heart and mind, tending to make men wiser 
and better. 2. It must, as the original words signify, be speech guided according to the 
needs of men. We must consider the different dispositions, views, and wants of those 
we converse with, so as to speak with effect. We should not “cast our pearls before 
swine” (Matt. vii. 6), nor “speak in the ears of a fool who will despise the wisdom of 
our words ” (Prov. xxiii. 9), but rather use a happy dexterity in accommodating religious 
discourse to different persons and occasions. A word in season may be blessed to the 
conversion of a soul. Milton says, “ A word has changed a character, and a character 
has changed a kingdom.” 8. The design and effect of such discourse is “that it may 
minister grace unto the hearers.” It discovers the grace that is in our own hearts, and 
is the means of working it in the hearts of others, Therefore “our speech ought to ba 


172 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, (ox. rv. 1—32. 


always with grace, seasoned with salt, that we may know how to answer every man * 


(Col. iv. 6).—T. Ο. 


Ver. 30.—Sin and ingratitude of grieving the Spirit of God. The apostle, as if to 
show the serious consequence of corrupt speech in a Christian, says, “Grieve not the 
Holy Spirit of God.” ‘lhat would be a most deplorable result. 

1. ConsIDER WHAT IS IMPLIED IN THIS ACT, 1. J¢ implies the holy personality of the 
Third Person of the Trinity. He is a Person as mueh as the Father and the Son. 2. 
It implies that the Holy Sptrit ts already @ Dweller in the hearts of those who are 
capable of this act. We grieve those we love or those who love us. A very different 
term than “grief” would be applied in the case of unbelievers who are said to resist him. 
ὃ. The Holy Spirit represents himself as susceptible of grief or affront. Not that there is 
any break in the calm of the Godhead, but to signify that “he carrieth himself toward 
us after the manner of a person grieved,” as if he were a human being capable of grief. 
When we consider that it is he who applies to us the redemption procured by Christ; 
that it is he who, as the Spirit of holiness, works in us every pure thought, every 
chaste desire, every noble sentiment; that he dwells in our very bodies as his holy 
ternple ;—our unworthy conduct is manifest in its true light as a grieving of the Spirit. 
His love is wounded as well as his holiness offended. 4. The effect of our “grieving” 
him is to lead to the suspension of his influences, to the withdrawal of his comforts, to 
the temporary loss of our assurance. In a word, he will withhold the manifestations of 
his presence. 

I]. ConsIDER THE ARGUMENT BY WHIOH THE APOSTLE ENFORCES THE EXHORTATION. 
“Tn whom ye have been sealed till the day of redemption.” It is ingratitude on our 
part to grieve him upon whom our salvation depends. The apostle does not make an 
appeal to our fears as if the Spirit would leave us, but te our gratitude, as any corrupt 
speech or action on our part would wound the heart of our best friend. The passage 
implies our perfect security till the day of judgment. 1. There is no hint of apostasy 
in the passage, or of the Spirit’s departure, 2, The term “sealing” implies security. 
“A security that may be broken at any time, or the value of which depends on man’s 
owr responsive fidelity, is no security at all.” 8, The sealing is spoken of asa past 
act: “Ye have been sealed.” Thus their perseverance in grace was secured. 4. The 
security lasted beyond death: “ till the day of redemption.” The apostle never regards 
the day of death as marking the day of final security, but rather fixes it for that day 
which completes the redemption in the rejoining of body and soul in their changeless 
imcorruptibility—T. ©. 


Ver. 31.—Malictous and revengeful feeling. The apostle commands us to put away 
five forms of it aluug with the temper out of which they spring. 

I. Brrrerness. This points, not to mordant speech merely, but to a sour, irritable, 
splenetic temperament, which places a man in an attitude of constant antagonism with 
his fellow-men. It argues want of love and consideration for others. Its effects are 
(1) to spoil our own comfort; (2) to excite the hatred of others; (3) to destroy our 
influence for good. 

Il, Wratu. This suggests the fierce mental excitement that springs out of bitter- 
ness, Itis “a fever in the heart, and a calenture in the head, and a fire in the facc, and 
a sword in the hand, anda fury all over.” Wrath is sinful because it springs from want 
of love, from misunderstanding, and from pride (Prov. xxi. 24). 

Il. Aneer. This is a more settled habit of the spirit. There is an anger that is 
lawful (ver. 26), so far as it proceeds from a lawful cause, is directed to a lawful 
object, and is guided to a lawful issue. But the auger bere is altogether sinful. Itis an 
anger (1) that is accompanied with hatred; (2) that breaks out into curses (Ps. evi. 33) ; 
(3) that is excited by the wrong done to ourselves rather than by the dishonour done to 
God ; (4) that is long cherished; (5) that unfits us for holy duties. We ought to put it 
away from us, because (1) God forbids it (Col. iii. 8); (2) because it disturbs both 
mind and body; (3) because it is folly as well as sin (Prov xiv. 17, 29) ; (4) because it 
may lead to eternal ruin. 

IV. Cuamour. This is the cry of strife; the noisy, impetuous brawlitg, which 
gives outlet to the dark hostility within, 


on. rv. 1—82.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 173 


V. Evit-spzaxine. This points to the licence of speech which wounds the reputa- 
tion of others. It is an outrage alike upon truth and charity. 

VI. Manice. This marks the rooted enmity out of which all the five forms of evil 
naturally spring. It has been remarked that their genealovical relationship is manifest 
in the very order of their meution: “ Acerbity of temper exciting passion, that passion 
matured into strong indignation, that indignation throwing itself off in indecent brawl- 
ing,and that brawling darkening into libel and abuse, a malicious element lying all the 
while at the basis of these flagrant enormities.” We are commanded to put them all 
away. 1. They find their true place among the works of the flesh (Gal. v. 19—21). 
2. They are not only inconsistent with but opposite to the nine graces of the Spirit— 
love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, tempcrance; and 
their indulgence in any degree by Christians has the effect of grieving the Spirit. 
8. They are inconsistent with that worthy walk which belongs to the vocation with 
which we are called (ver. 1).—T. C. 


Ver. 32.—The benevolent and forgiving temper. Instead of bitterness, there ought to 
be kindness; instead of wrath, anger, clamour, and evil-speaking, there ought to be 
tender-heartedness ; instead of malice, a loving and hearty forgiveness. 

I. Kinpyess. It is a suggestive idea that our English word “ kind” is derived from 
kin-ned, as marking the affection of kindred. 1. Consider how it is to be manifested. 
(1) By desiring one another’s good (1 ‘lim. ii. 1); (2) by rejoicing in one another's pros- 
perity (Rom. xii. 15); (8) by pitying one another’s miseries (Rom. xii. 15); (4) by 
helping one another’s necessities (1 John iii. 17, 18), 2. The. motives to kindness. 

1) The example of God himself, who is said to be “kind to the unthankful and evil " 
(Luke vi. 35); (2) it is a commanded duty; (3) we are brethren both in the flesh and 
in the spirit, A kindly spirit without a touch of censoriousness or harshness greatly 
recommends true religion. 

Il. TexpeR-HEARTEDNESS. This expression is in the original closely allied to 
“bowels of mercy ” (Col. iii. 12). It implies a compassionate sense of the miseries and 
infirmities of others. It is to interpret in the best sense the injunction of the apostle: 
* Look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the things of others” 
(Phil. ii. 4). The ties of nature are not cancelled by Christianity, but strengthened by 
it. We ought to be ready at all times to soothe the sorrows, to remove the miseries, to 
solve the donbts, of our neighbours, It is a temper highly recommended in Scripture 
(Luke vi. 36; 1 Pet. iii. 8). An unmerciful spirit is declared to be inconsistent with the 
love of God in the soul: ὅ Whoso. ..shutteth his bowels of compassion . .. how 
dwellcth the love of God in him?” (1 John iii. 17). We ought to follow the example of 
our heavenly Father, who is rich in mercy ,and whose tender mercies are over all his works ; 
and of his dear Son Jesus Christ, who was often moved with compassion (Matt. ix. 36), 
and, as the High Priest of our profession, cannot but be touched with the feeling of our 
infirmities (Heb. vi. 15). 

111. THe roretvine spreir. “ Forgiving one another, even as God also in Christ for- 
gave you.” These words imply: 1. That Christians will often do to one another much 
that needs forgiveness. They are “of like passions with other men,” beset by infirmities 
of temper, or apt to come into collision with others either in a way of opinion or of interest. 
Faults will be committed, offence will be given. 2. That it is a Christian duty to for- 
give others. Our Lord gave repeated injunctions respecting it (Matt. vi. 14; Luke xvii. 
4). 8, Our forgiving our brethren must be certain lactor in our own prayer for Divine 
forgiveness. 4, The motive or measure of our forgiveness is to be the very forgiveness 
of God himself. Note: (1) It is God who forgives; itis an act of his grace (ch, i. 7). 
(2) He does it in Christ, not merely for his sake, but in him as our Mediator. (3) Is 
is a past act. Believers are forgiven in Christ in the very moment of their conversion 
(4) How miserable we should be without it !—God angry with us; hell under our feet ; 
the very blessings of life a curse to us. (5) How happy we are with this forgiveness! 
God will never condemn you vor remember your sins; all things will he hlessed to you 
the love of God the guarantee of your final glorification.—T. Ο, 


Vers. 1—16.— The unity of the Church. The doxology has just died away with its 
ascription of glory to God in the Church throughout all ages,and now the apostle turns 


174 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, fon. rv, 1—82. 


from his {intercession to admonish the Ephesian Christians about the necessity of culti- 
vating lowliness of mind and mutual consideration, that in the Church there may be 
preserved “ the unity of the Spirit in the hond of peace.” It is plain from the verses 
that follow that Paul’s conviction was that the Divine glory could only be manifested 
in a Church thoroughly united. To the all-important subject of the unity of the Church 
we are consequently led. 

1. ConsipER THE UNIFYING Facts. (Vers. 4—6.) Paul here lays before the Ephesians 
ccrtain great facts which are meant to contribute to this unity of the Church. These 
facts we had better enumerate in tarest outline. 1. Theie is one body. This refers te 
the solidarity of believers, who, so far from being independent wnits, are dependent parte 
of one great organism of which Christ is the Head, The unity of the Church is thus 
shown to be organic, and lying deep down in the nature of things. 2. There is one 
Spirit, For to the existence of a body there must be a spirit. The body, the Church, is 
pervaded by the Spirit, the Holy Ghost. It would be a corpse but for this indwelling. 
3. There is one hope in all the called ones, The unity of hope is surely a remarkable 
fact. All the called ones have their faces set towards the future as the gulden age, 
when their ideals shall be realized. Christianity is the religion of hope, the one religion 
which denies that the former times were better than these, or that the golden age is 
behind us. 4. One Lord, Jesus reigns as the Church’s living Head. He as Mediator is 
the Source of all authority in the Church. His lordship or headship is a fact which calls 
forunity. 5. One faith, This asserts that the truth is one. Error is manifold, but the 
truth as it is in Jesus is one. It seems to our latitudinarian age almost heresy to affirm 
the unity of the Christian faith. But seeing that its substance consists in facts, it would 
be madness to relegate these to the region of uncertainty. 6.-One buptism. This is 
baptism into the one Name of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost (Matt. xxviii. 19), so that 
the Divine Name unifies the baptized believers. ‘ The doctrine of baptism ” is reduccd 
to a significant unity thercby. 7. “ One God and Father of all, who is over all, and 
through all, and in all” (Revised Version). ‘Thisis the seventh and last of the unifying 
facts. The fatherhood of God, all-embracing, all-pervading, speaks of family unity 
and rebukes all discord. In presence of such facts the wonder is that division could be 
entertained. 

21, CONSIDER THE UNIFYING Girts. (Vers. 7—12.) More has been done towards the 
unity of the Church than confront believers with unifying facts, even in their sevenfold 
perliction, The ascended Saviour has bestowed unifying gifts upon his believing 
people. We need not tarry over the humiliation by which Christ secured them—a 
humiliation down to the lower parts of the earth, and involving the tenanting of the 
tomb and the region of the dead. We hasten to the glorious gilts themselves, which 
come vut of the hands of the ascended and glorified Christ. And here we have: 
1. Apostles. We may well restrict the term to the selected witnesses of our Lord’s 
resurrection, the noble band who wrought most earnestly for the unity of the Church. 
2. Prophets. The inspired ones, whose inspiration was always on the lines of Christian 
unity ; for the will of God which they conveyed to men is that believers should be onc. 
ὃ. Evangelists, Men like Timothy or Apollos, who go forth with the’ one message, 
thereby promoting unity in the Church of God. The gospel is not a manifold, as we 
have seen, but a unity, and he who proclaims it with simplicity and earnestness con- 
tributes thereby to the unity of the Church. 4, Pastors und teachers. These gifts 
are less ἜΝ τ and consequently more important. True pastors, true teachers for 
God, will aim at “the peifecting of the saints, unto the work of ministering, unto the 
building up of the body of Christ.” The note of a Divine gift is the desire to promote 
the all-important unity. Is it nota glorious thought that orders of men have becn 
established by Christ for this special purpose of promoting the unity of the Church? 

III, ConsIpeR THE UNIFYING DEVELOPMENT, (Vers. 18—16.) The unifying process 
{s to be educational and so progressive. The unity will not spring full-grown and 
μὴ κα like Minerva from the head of Jove, but it will grow, as knowledge grows aud 

indly feeling, “ from: more to more.” And in this patient development Jesus is to be 
our Ideal, and his fulness and perfection the goal for which we strive. Taking him as 
our Standard of excellence, we are to grow up into him in all things; and if we do, 


unity must result. And here we should observe: 1. Our development will carry us 
Ravina ahd dtch “νον ΑἹ] ει  (Wae TAN Wan thanan ta πέλοι καὶ Abt ee da .--ὦὖ 


iH, Iv. 1—82.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 1τὸ 


inability to make up our minds about the essential doctrines of the faith. If we aro 
tossed about like vessels unmoored, if we are a prey to designing and cunning men, we 
cannot contribute anything to the unity of the Church. 2, Our development will 
enable us to be communicative and so far edifying. (Vers. 15,16.) For as we grow 
iu knowledge of Christ we learn to speak the truth in love. A speechless inember of the 
community cannot contribute much to unity and edification. We are bound to be 
witnesses. And loving language about the Lord promotes the glorious unity. It grows 
as the organism grows in mutual adaptation, strength, and power. ‘le Church, thus 
growing in the knowledge of the living Head and pervaded by the one Spirit of life 
and of love, advances towards the perfection which Christ has shown us. Harless 
and Monod, in writing on these verses, refer to the indeterminate character of the 
yassage as to the realization of the perfect state being in this world or beyond it. But 
the emphasis is laid by Paul upon the fact of development, and how each individual 
may. contribute to the consummation in the unity of the Church. If cach of us con- 
siders his duty in the matter of edifying that body of which, as a believer, he forms 
a part, the glorious development will make its steady progress towards the perfection 
to be realized at last. It is surely worth an effort to contribute something to such a 
purpose.—R. M. E. 


Vers. 17—32.—Kaw material for Christian unity. It comes upon us with some- 
thing like a surprise, the exhortations of the present passage alter the glories which 
have gone before. But they are instructive in that they biing out the raw material out 
of which Paul hoped to manufacture Christian unity. It is cv.dent that he despaired 
of none, even supposing they had been guilty of the gravest crimes and characterized by 
the deepest pollution. Does not his grand hope rebuke our faint-heartedness ? 

I. ConsipER THE MORAL BEACONS HERE BROUGHT BEFORE THE Epuesians. (Vers. 
17—20.) Paul presents in the begir ning of the Kpistle to the Romans a frightful picture 
of the immorality of the heathen. He had studied the question carefully, as a missionary 
to the heathen must. He here gives a briefer analysis, but one exceedingly vivid and 
instructive. ‘The terrible fact was that many of the Gentiles had “ given themselves up 
to lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with greediness,” and Paul gives us here tne: 
reason of it. They had got utterly “ hardened” and “ past feeling.” ‘I'his was through 
their ignorance of the holy God, from whose life, with all its purifying power, they were 
consequently alienated. ‘They had nothing for it in these circumstances but to follow 
the glimmer of their own darkened understandings, and to walk in the vanity of their 
minds. It was a case ot alienation and isolation from the only Source of purity and 
of life. Paul covsequently holds up the licentious Gentiles as beacons to warn the 
Ephesians away from the paths of sin, that they may walk worthily as the children of 
God. 

IL. ConstpER THE SPIRITUAL RENEWAL TO WHICH HE SUMMONS THEM. (Vers, 21—24.) 
The unconverted and lascivious beathen only showed to what excess of sin the old 
nature within each of us will proceed, if it be not put away. The beacons show the 
possibility of every sinful soulif it be not converted unto God. Hence Paul counsels the 
Ephesians to “ put away, as concerning your former manner of life, the old man, which 
waxeth corrupt. after the lusts of deceit; and that ye be renewed in the spirit of your 
mind, and put en the new man, which after God hath been created in righteousness and 
holiness of truth” (Revised Version). The “old man” is the sinful nature which we 
all possess as children of Adam; the “new man” is the better nature which God 
creates within us. But this new nature does not assert itself as new faculties and new 
powers, but utilizes the understanding and affections and wil!, which it finds already 
within us, so that according to proper mental laws we experience our renewal. The 
meaus by which this renewal is brought about are Christ and his offices and benefits; 
in other words, it is effected by “the truth as it isin Jesus,” The moral manifestation 
is in “righteousness and holiness of truth.” 

ILL. ConsipER THE SERIOUS SINS AGAINST WHICH HY WARNS THE Epurstans. (Vers, 
25—29.) It is evident, from the way in whicli he mentions them, that they prevailed in 
heathenism, and that the Ephesians had been previously guilty of them. They bring 
out vividly the raw material with which he had to work, and they should sustain the 
hope of missionaries still, 1, Falsehood, It is evident that the veracity of the 


176 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, [cu. 1v. 1—32. 


heathen co ild not be calculated on; and what was true in Paul’s time is true still. The 
testimony of missionaries is to this effect, that you cannot rely on the word of the 
heathen. An interesting fact may here be quoted in illustraticn, “ A Christian Santa] 
was once going through several villages to make au extensite purchase of rice, lu 
the first of the villages he got part of what he required, in the sccond also he gut some 
baskets, and so forth, all for cash payments. But when he had brought out his money 
at the last village, he saw that he had not enough. He was twelve shillings shoit 
of the sum necessary to pay what he had bought. It is a thing unheard of among the 
Santals to give any goods on credit, so that the man saw that he had no alternative but 
to ask the seller to take back twelve shillings’ worth of the rice. Meantime the seller 
had perceived that he had to do with a Christian, and as this impression was confirmed 
on his directly putting the question, he declare, without more ado, that he would be 
content in the mean time with the partial payment, and would trust to the buyer that 
he would soon bring him the balance. Unfortunately, the tax-collector came next 
day to the village to collect the dues, The man who had given his rice on credit was 
not able to pay his dues fully at once, and told, by way of excuse, what had befallen 
him. But the official deemed it incredible that a Santal should part with his guods 
without getting the mouey for them. His suspicion was confirmed by the fact that the 
mean could give neither the name nor the residence of his debtor, and only took his 
stand upon this, that he was a Christian, and would certainly pay the twelve shillings 
ere long. Tveno the other villagers did not believe the story, aud the collectur scutenced 
the supposed liar to a suitable measure of stripes. A few days aftcr, that Christian 
returned and paid his debt. [is creditor.had scarcely recovered from his undeserved 
ill treatment; but he forgot his pains throuzh the joy of being able to vindicate himself 
and his honourable debtor befure his neighbours and-acquaintances. He called them all 
together and said triumphantly, ‘You lauzhed at me lately because U trusted the word . 
of a Christian. There he is. Look well at him. I have not dunned him for his 
debt. I knew neither his name nor where he lives, and yet he has come to pay me the 
twelve shillings,” This intcresting circumstance brings out at once the falsehood 
that exists in heathenism and the veracity fostered by the guspel. Before lcaviny this 
first sin, however, it is well to notice on what Paul grounds his appeal for vera ity. It 
is on our being “ members one of another.” “ Truth-speaking,” says Mozley, “is not a 
universal isolated obligation which we are under—a law to say truth under all 
circumstances, and in whatever relations we stand to the other party; but it supposes 
certain relations, viz. the ordinary relations of man with man, the natural terms of 
fellowship with man—that we are bound to perform all the offices of humanity to him, 
and to behave to him as a brother. When we speak of the certain and obvious 
obligation to sincerity, these are the relations which we suppose; and St. Paul places 
the duty of veracity upon its proper basis, and gives the law of truth its proper position 
in the frame and system of morals, when he assigns the duty of truth-spiaking this 
large and deep source, this intelligible connection, and this inclusive rationale.” We 
do not proceed further in the quotation, but he infers that the relations of man to man 
may so vary, as when ἃ man turns out assassin, that we are under no obligutivn to tell 
truth to him, if it would further his diabolical designs, 2, Sinful anger. This is 
another sin which is prevalent among unregenerate men. Paul’s appeal implics that 
there is such a thing as sinless anger. God is angry with the wicked, for example, 
every day. David, again, at the very time when he was calling on God to search him 
and to try him, could say calmly in the Divine prescnce, “ Do not I hate them, Ὁ 
Lord, that hate thee? and am not 1 grieved with those that rise uj against thee ὃ 
I hate them with perfect hatred: I count them mine enemies” (Ps. cxxxix. 21, 
22). But a great deal of the anger indulged in, both in heathen and in Christian 
lands, is sclfish passion, and so sinful anger. It is against this sellish phase Paul 
warns them, and as we are peculiarly open to assaults from Satan when thus angry, 
the Ephesians are warned in this connection not to give place to the devil. 3. Laziness, 
The heathen will not work if they can help it. ‘They would rather steal than work. 
Hence the gospel has always had an important mission in the “exaltation of labour.” 
The monks in the Middle Ages did immeuse service in this direction, and really 
prepared Kurope for the vast development of modern industry. This is one great 
feature also of modern missions, ‘hey give an impulse to industry whereve: they 


ou. Iv. 1—32.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 177 


are established. But it is to be observed that “the apostle does not honour all 
industry: far from it. He always reprobates the covetous, moncy-getting spirit. He 
aven says, ‘The love of money is the root of all evil,’ and he calls covetousness 
idolatry. . ... He admires industry, but it must be industry which is consecrated 
by the nature which he requires; for it is that of duty—when a man fulfils in the 
fear of God the task which is allotted to him.” In the present instance he exhorts 
thex to give up the laziness which would prompt a man to steal, and to work earnestly 
that they may be able to help others. Labour is exalted when disinterestedness enters 
in and consecrates it. 4, Filthy conversation. We need not tarry upon this, It is 
known to be one of the great trials of missionary life in heathen lands. What they 
hear is something awful, Some time since an enterprising and able young man disguised 
himself and spent some nights in the model lodging-houses of Glasgow, to report on 
the way in which they are conducted. His testimony was that it was not so much what 
he saw or emelt which gave him such pain, as what he heard, This exactly illustrates 
the point before us, Paul’s ear, we may be sure, had been the avenue of exquisite 
torture as he heard “the filthy conversation of the wicked.” He calls upon his con- 
verts, consequently, to cultivate a gracious and edifying discourse. It is by speaking 
that human usefulness is chiefly realized. Men are to be talked into better things 
(Rom. x. 17). 

IV. ConsIDER 41S WARNING AGAINST GRIEVING THE Hony Spirit or Gop. (Ver. 30.) 
Now, if Paul’s ears were grieved with the immoralities of heathenism, how much more 
must we believe will the Holy Spirit be offended! How needful that those in whose 
hearts he dwells should abstain from all appearance of evil, and su give uo offence to 
the holy Guest! More especially should this be the case when he condescends to 
seal souls “unto the day of redemption.” If he has come to abide with us for ever, 
surely we ought not to trifle in his presence or to offend his pure and blessed Being } 

V. LastLy, CONSIDER HIS APPEAL FOR MUTUAL FORBEARANCE AND KINDLINESS. 
(Vers. 31, 32.) He brings in the forgiveness of God to us as a reason why we should be 
forbearing and forgiving to one another. In this way he expects to bring the Ephesians, 
who had been so unholy, into the glorious unity of Christian love. The material on which 
he worked was raw and rough indeed, but not worse than human nature still, But 
out of the roughest stone hewed from the quarry of nature Divine grace can make 
polished stones fitted for God’s palace—R. M. E, 


Vers. 1—16.—Evhortation. 1. TRANSITION FROM THE DOCTRINAL TO THE PRACTICAL, 
“T therefore, the prisoner in the Lord, beseech you.” There is a similar transition 
at Rom. xii. 1, “I beseech you therefore.” In both cases the “therefore ” is the link 
of connection between doctrine and duty. In both cases the apostle follows up his 
exposition of doctrine by an affectionate enfurcement of duty. In the other case 
his affectionate tone is caught from a consideration of the mercies of God. In the 
present case it is caught from a cousidcration of his own sufferings. He has already 
prayed for them as the prisoner of Christ Jesus. Now, he beseeches them as the 
prisoner tn the Lord. If in the former expression the idea is more that the imprison- 
ment was “caused” by Christ, in the latter it is more that it came to him, not as a 
wrong-doer, but as moving in the Christian sphere. Either way, he refers it to Christ. 
He might have commanded them as their apostle, who had received the mystery 
relating to them by revelation, but he rather besought them as the Lord’s prisoner. It 
is well when the “ official” can be lost sight in the “personal.” Paul thought that he 
might urge those from whom he had had an affectionate parting to the performance of 
duty by the consideration of his chains (in their relation to Christ). 

11. Genera ExHorration. “Walk worthily of the calling wherewith ye were 
called.” They were called, according to the foregoing part of the Epistle, to be sons, 
or members of the Christian family. Another aspect of it was that they were called to 
be citizens, or members of the Christian commonwealth. They were thus called when 
they accepted of Christ. But whether they were called to be sons or citizens, it was a 
‘hich ” calling wherewith they were called. They had a great “ Head” placed over 
thern. It was in the working out of a great scheme that they were called. And the 
apostle’s thought is that they were to bring their “ walk ” into some worthy correspond- 
ence with their “calling.” “It is,” said a Roman writer, “useful -for cities that 

EPHESIANS, uw 


178 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, (on. τν. 132 


valiant men should (although it be false) believe themselves born of the gods, that their 
minds, thence bearing a confidence of their divine extraction, may more boldly under- 
take great enterprises, pursue them more earnestly, and hence accomplish them more 
happily, from the security the conceit produceth.” It is by no conceit, but in sober 
truth, that as Christian believers we belong to a family, to a commonwealth of which 
God is the Head. And should not such a connection draw us away from what is mean 
and base, inspire us with noble thoughts, and incite us to noble actions? 

II. SpectaL EXHORTATION TO CHRISTIAN UNITY. 1, Disposition leading up to Chris- 
tian unity. It is viewcd as what should “aétend” us in our Christian walk. That is 
to say, if we walk worthily of our calling, this is the disposition which we shall manifest. 
“ With all lowliness.” This is of prime importance with the apostle, for in the twelfth 
of the Romans, having set foith our duty toward God under the aspects of consecration 
tu his service and suparation from the world, he immediately says, “ For I say, through 
the grace that was given me, to every man that is among you, not to think of himse’f 
more highly than he ought to think; but so think as to think soberly, according as 
God hath dealt to each man a measure of faith.” We have reason to be lowly before God. 
Even Christ, we know, cherished the spirit of lowliness, and commended it to us by his 
own example. He was lowly in respect of his creaturely nature. He was also content, 
as the Representative of mankind, to take whatever place the Father assigned him. He 
did not need to humble himself for sin, unless representatively (it it is proper to think 
of him as humbling himself for the sin with which he identilied himself). We have 
reason to be lowly, because of having been personally involved in sin, and because of 
much remaining evil in our nature. And it is only in the way of faith, or in fellowship 
with Christ, that we have any Christian worth. And if we have thus reason to be lowly 
before God, shall we be arrogunt toward others? Shall we not rather keep self in the 
background, in accordance with the precept, also in the twelfth of the Romans, “ In 
honour preferring one another”? Let us, then, have add lowliness, such as becomes us 
as sinners before God, and such as becomes us in the various positions in life in which 
we are placed. “ And meekness.” With lowliness the apostle couples meekness ; and we 
need not wonder at his dving it when the Master had doue it before, with this dilference, 
that meekness came first to his thought—* Learn of me; fur I am meek and lowly in 
heart.” Meckness points to sufferings which have to be endured; we need not wonder, 
therefore, at {t having a prominence in the Saviour’s thought. There are sufferings sent 
upon us with which others have not had todo. We are to bear ourselves meekly under 
them before God. We are not to be as though we challenged God’s sovereiguty, or 
wisdom, or goodness in sending them. And even when others have had to do with our 
sufferings, we can look past them to God, as David did when he said, “Let him curse, for 
the Lord hath bidden him.” “ With long-suffering.” This has reference to provocation 
veectved. There is provocation in the ordinary course of life. We suffer from the 
infirmities and faults of others, We may have to do, as Paul had, with “ unreasonable 
and evil men.” But we are to think specially here of there being provocation within 
the Church circle. There is provocation if we are-ardent in a good cause and are 
associated with the apathetic, or if we 866 clearly the proper course to be pursued and 
are overborne by the ignorance of others, or if we are bearing our fair shave of the com- 
mon burdens while others are shirking them. There is provocation in a more positive 
form if we have to do with those who advance views or engaze in movements which 
we must strongly condemn, or who are given to misrepreseutation and abuse, or who in 
malice do not scruple to stir up strife. ‘“ Forbearing one another in love.” The inward 
feeling with which we are to meet provocation is long-suffering ; its outward manifesta- 
tion is described as forbearing one another. ‘Ihe latter form of expression indicates that 
we have all our faults, and all need to be borne with. Forbearance is good fur ourselves. 
“ He that is slow to anger is better than the mi ;hty ; and he that ruleth bis spirit than 
he that taketh a city.” Forbearance is good for those who give provocation. It gives 
them time for reflection, It is also a likely means by which they may be won to 
reason. It is heaping coals of fire on their heads. It is overcoming evil with good. 
Forbearance is good for the ends of a Christian socicty, in preventing unnecessary 
division, in promoting unity. 2. The nature of Christian unity. “Giving diligence 
to Keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.” In accordance with what has 
been amid, this unity of the Spirit is, on the one side, a disinclination to obtrude self, 


cH. Iv. 1—32.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 178 


and, on the other side, the power of bearing with others. In accordance with what is 
said of it here, as produced by the Spirit, this unity is the disposition to be guided by 
the Spirit, aud to advance the end which the Spirit has in view in relation to the 
cause of Christ. This unity of the Spirit is to find expression in the bond of peace. The 
Roman Catholic Church claims to present this bond of peace in its entirety. For, first, 
it claims to be the unbroken organization of Christians all over the world, and shuts out 
from the Church of Christ all who do not enter its communion. We Protestants are 
not Christians; and therefore there is no break so far as we are concerned. And, 
secondly, it claims to have also the bond of peace, in freedom from internal division. 
We as Protestants refuse to acknowledge this claim. For, first, we differ from the 
Roman Catholic Church, in spite of its historic position, as to the essentials of salva- 
tion, And, secondly, its uniformity is not freely wrought of the Spirit, but results 
from unreasoning conformity to the law of the priest. It is suggested here that it may 
only be possible to attain to an imperfect realization of the bond of peace. We are to 
give diligence in this matter; but it does not entirely depend on ourselves. When we 
have done our best, the bond may be broken independently of us, Who are the breakers 
of the bond of peace? (1) Those who are churgeable with defection. The bond of 
union in the Church is not what is supposed to be truth, but what can actually be 
‘made out to be truth from the Word of God. ‘Those who are aside from this, whether 
they are in the majority or not, whether they conform to the language of the confession 
or not, are really the dividers, They necessitate those who have the leading of the 
Spirit giving their testimony to the truth and, it may be, dissenting from their 
brethren. (2) Those who manifest an unchristian spirit toward brethren who differ from 
them. It is right that we should try to convince those whom we believe to be in 
error, But there is ἃ way in which we are to do it, if we have the interests of truth 
and of unity at heart. “In meekness correcting them that oppose themselves, if 
peradventure God may give them repentance unto the knowledge of the truth.” If 
we exhibit a temper that is not consistent with the truth, that may be as dividing 
as holding an erroneous position. (3) Those who unnecessarily separate from a Chris- 
tian society. The mere fact of separation from a particular ecclesiastical organization 
is not decisive of the sin of schism. Nor is the fact of error in a society necessarily a 
warrant for separating from it. We should be content to remain in the same society 
with brethren, even though we differ from them in many points, if we think that the 
great interests of the kingdom are being properly advanced. By those who value the 
continuance of the bond of peace it must be acknowledged that separation is an extreme 
step; and is only to be justified, in the case of those who separate, where it can be 
made out that the interests of religion are better served by the existence of a separate 
society. (4) Those who cluim to be the Church of God to the exclusion of other Christian 
societies, If there are Christian bodies that are really doing the work of Christ, though 
they do not join with us, or work according to our methods, we are bound to regard 
them as belonging to the Church of Christ, and to live in brotherhood with them. 
And to be arrogant and uncharitable towards them is breaking the bond of peace as 
really as though we were separating on insufficient grounds, 3. Grounds of Christiun 
unity. (1) Unities to which we are to be properly related. It is manifest that the 
apostle has studied to put these in a striking and memorable form, There is a three- 
fold division, and there are tliree unities in each of the divisions, (a) The Church itself 
ts constituted a unity. “There is one body.” Believers are not detached units, but, 
whateyer they are by human denomination, by Divine constitution they are made a 
unity, They are not two or more organizations, between which there might be rivalry ; 
they are only one organization. And how fitting that there should be sympathy 
between the various members of the body—that the eye should not say to the hand, “I 
have ne need of thee,” or, again, the head to the feet, “1 have no need of you”? 
“ And one Spirit.” Weare not merely constituted one body, but are animated by one 
Spirit. It is not as though we had a double or treble consciousness, but being dwelt 
in by the one Spirit, we should be kept from divergence and led in the same direction. 
There is here ground, if we could get to it, for that unity described in John xvii, 20, 
“ That they all may be one.” “ Even as also ye were called in one hope of your ealling.” 
The consummation is the same in essence to all. Itisglory, or full and blesscd fellow- 
ship with Ubrist. And how fitting that those who are to live with Christ throughous 


180 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. ἴση. rv. 1—32, 


eternity should meantime as brethren “dwell together in unity”! (b) How this unity is 
brought out. “One Lord.” “In whatsoever notion we take the word ‘Lord, either asa 
prince over subjects, or as a master over servants, or as an owner of goods, or as ἃ pre- 
ceptor and president over disciples, or as a leader and captain to followers, or as a 
person singularly eminent above inferiors, he is according to all such notions truly 
our Lord.” A body implies a head, and as our dependence on Christ is that of responsi- 
bility, he is truly our Lord. As united to the same Head, it becomes us to be in goud 
brotherhood. This is his law (common it is), “ Hereby shall all men know that ye 
are my disciples, if ye have love one to another.” “One faith.” We have ail the same 
uniting bond to Christ, the same subjective disposition toward him. We all rely upon 
the atoning merits of his sacrifice, We all confide in him for what is needed to com- 
plete our salvation. We can ail use the same language of trust ; we can sing the same 
hymns; we can offer the same prayers. Being thus alike in the essential element of 
character, it 1s fitting that we should exhibit catholicity, that we should be free from 
all sectarian feeling. ‘One baptism.” It is this which symbolizes our union by faith 
to Christ. Our unity has received visible manifestation. We have all been baptized 
into Christ, It is fitting, then, that we should live in good fellowship one with another, 
(c) Low this unity is sustained, “One God and Father of all.” As the apostle has 
been speaking of Christians, we must not extend the range of this language beyond 
them. We can all say, “Our God,” and “Our Father.” “ Who is over all.” In his 
sovereignty he has an absolute right to dispose of all, This a father has to a limited 
extent over his children, ‘ And through all.” In his fatherly love he goes out to 
all, and pervades all with his gracious influences. So a father wishes to pervade 
his children with those sentiments of which he approves. “ And in all.” With the 
revelation of his fatherhood he blesses all. Soa father would have his children to live 
in the sunshine of his love, In love of the brethren, then, we should be tenderly affec- 
tioned (or have naturai affection) one to another. We must think of God as rejoicing 
in the peace of his Church, as a father rejoices to see good feeling maintained between 
those whom he has begotten. (2) What diversity there is Christ has appointed. “ But 
unto cach one of us was the grace given according to the measure of the gift of Christ.” 
It is a motive for unity. (a) ‘That we have all grace for which to be thankful. No 
one has been overlooked in the distribution, The humblest Christian has his grace as 
well as the greatest apostle. (Ὁ) That the diversities of grace have not been arbitrarily 
appointed. ‘They have been measured out (to a nicety, it is suggested by the language) 
by the great Distributer, (6) That all the diversities are necessary to the grand unity 
which Christ has in his mind. It was on his ascension that he became Donor, or Dis- 
tributer to men. “ Wherefore he saith, When he ascended on high, he led captivity 
captive, and gave gifts unto men.” The conception is that he ascended as a conqueror. 
Satan, sin, and death were in his triumphant train, On his victory over these, he gave 
“gifts” tomen. These were the spoils of the battle-field, as it were, which he distri- 
buted among his followers. We are to think of them, in their special association with 
the Ascension, as the gift of the Holy Spirit, the gift of a finished redemption, the gift 
of a completed Bible, tae gift of the Christian style of character, and, as we shall see 
presently, the gift of the gospel ministry. It was because he descended that he could 
do so much when he ascended. ‘‘ Now this, he ascended, what is it but that he 
also descended into the lower parts of the earth? He that descended is the same also 
that ascended far above all the heavens, that he might fill all things.” His descending 
into the lower parts of the earth points emphatically to the reality of his death. His 
body was not merely on the earth, but was received within the earth. His soul was 
not merely a dweller in an earthly body, but was received into Hades. He thus had the 
extremes in his experience, and therefore can fill all things, from the lowest depth to the 
highest height. He can especially, out of his own experience, be with his people in 
the grave and in Hades, and thence carry them with him to the heights. (3) The 
various ministering orders were especially his gifts. (a) What these were. “ And he 
gave some to be apostles ; and some, prophets ; and some, evangelists; and some, pastors 
and teachers.” Apostles, These were the highest functionaries in the Church. Functions 
were combined in them which were separated in others. They also possessed extra- 
ordinary qualifications. («) They had extraordinary administrative pcwer. They had 
the care of the Churches generally (or widely), and were a gift te the ea'ly Church ina 


OH. Iv, 1—32.] : THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 181 


being a supreme authority in all matters of administration. Many questions would come 
up at the first about the right working of the Church, and they were there on the spot as 
though Christ had been there to settle them decisively. (8) They had extraordinary 
teaching power. ‘There were developments of doctrine without which the Church could 
not be established, and fora time the Church had in the apostles the gift of inful- 
lible exposition. It was thus exceptionally helped through the most critical period. It 
was especially in connection with the founding of Churches that the apostolate was 
exercised. And.in connection with this, on dis teaching side, the apostolate was 
sevarated into two offices. (i.) Prophets. These were inspired like the apostles, and 
seem to have come in after them, in the way especially of expounding apostolical 
teachings. While the apostles planted, the prophets watered. They would be useful 
to Churches, in the way of continuing the benefit when the apostles had to pass on to 
found others, (ii.) Evangelists, These had the same itinerant charactcr that the 
apostles and prophets had; but their distinctive feature was that they brought the 
gospel, especially as a message of pardon, to bear upon the ignorant, or careless, or 
inquiring. Philip did the work of an evangelist in directing the Ethiopian eunuch to 
Christ. They would be able to render valuable assistance to apostles in the founding 
_of Churches. Christ still gives these to the Church, in the more or less distinctly 
recognized order of evangelists, ¢.e. men who have a special power in awakening the 
careless, as distinct from feeding believers with knowledge. He also gives them, in the 
order of missionaries, in so far as they have to do converting work. There are added, 
in conjunction, pastors and teachers. (i.) These are in connection with Churches as 
settled, and as distinguished from the other orders are stationary. (ii.) They are the 
ordinary office-bearers, after the extraordinary have ceased from the Church. (iii.) They 
represent the two sides of the apostolate, without its infallibility and supremacy. The 
pastors represent the administrative side, the care which is to be exercised over mem- 
bers of a Church, similar to the care which the shepherd exercises over his flock. The 
teachers, again, represent the teaching side, the exposition which needs to be given of 
truth founded on the teachings of the Bible, and specially of Christ and his apostles, 
And, as itvis not said as before, some, pastors, and some, teachers, but some, pastors 
and teachers, it is rightly held that there is contemplated a combination of the two 
functions in one order. (Ὁ) For what end given. “For the perfecting of the saints, 
unto the work of ministering, unto the building up of the body of Christ.” (a) The 
ultimate end of the gifts is the perfecting of the saints. ‘This is placed first, though we 
might have expected it last. For it is well to remember that all that is done in the 
Church or gilted for the Church is to be judged by this—how far it serves the per- 
fecting of the saints, There is a perfect form after which nature strives; so there is a 
perfect form to which the saints are designed to come, and it is most emphatically the 
province of the Church to help saints toward their perfection. What that perfection is 
we shall see more particularly in the following verses. (8) The gifts specified agree in 
being connected with a work of ministering. The apostolate, we know, was not a 
sinecure; it meant work, and to Paul it meant hard work and suffering. What Christ 
still continues to the Church implies the work of ministering to the souls of others, a 
work than which none should be more arduous. (y) The way in which the work of 
ministering is to reach the perfecting of the saints is by the building up of the body of 
Christ. To do the work of an evangelist is not enough. Men, after they have been 
couverted, must be looked after. They must be brought into connection with the 
Church, And the Church must be thoroughly organized, must have all suitable insti- 
tutions, must be strong and vigorous in its working, in order that the.perfecting of the 
saints may go on. It folluws (i.), as against the Plymouthists and others, that there 
is a special pastoral and teaching order in the Church; and (ii.) tucre is this in the 
interests of unity, which is not broken by the diversity there is, seeing all are gifted to 
the Church by Christ. (c) Goal up to which the gospel ministry has been given. 
(a) Goal characterized as the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, 
“Till we all attain unto the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of 
God.” There is a difficulty with which we are confronted here. It has already been 
said in this paragraph (ver. 4) that Christians haye ‘one faith.” We must have some 
“beginning” of faith in us, else we cannot be numbered among the “all” here. How, 
then, can it be said that we are to have “the uvity of the faith” as our goal? [ is not 


182 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, Lox. rv. 1—32, 


that we are to attain unto the same “degree” of faith. For in our ultimate state there 
will be differences in the degree of faith, which is only to say that there will be differ- 
ences in character (no factor therein being more important than faith). But, at the 
same time, it is true that all will come to a full-orbed faith, that all will have clearly 
brought out the grand characteristics of faith which are only dimly seen now. Again, 
it is true that all Christians have, to begin with, “one knowledge,” the one practical 
knowledge of the Son of God. In our ultimate state, too, we shall vary in our capacity 
of Knowing the love of Christ and appreciating the bearings of his work. But there is 
a full, rounded, satisfying knowledge to which we shall all come. In our present 
advancement our faith is not sufficient to exclude unbelief. We can only say, “ Lord, 
I believe; help thou mine unbelief.” But our ultimate will be the expulsion of all 
uubelief. Our knowledge, too, is not so much one as to exclude all differences of 
opinion. But the unity with which we shall end will be one in which we shall sce eye 
to eye, from which all difference of opinion will be excluded. (8) Coal characterized as 
the full-grown man. “ Till we all attain... untoa full-grown man.” In apposition 
with the toregoing, it is said (changing from the abstract to the concrete), “till we all 
attain... usto a full-grown man.” We have. just seen that there is a unity with 
which we bezin and another unity with which we end. Here it is implied that there 
is a state of infancy with which we begin and a state of manhood with which we end. 
And the goal here, too, is purposely viewed as a unity; for it is not said, “ full-grown 
men,” but “a full-grown man.” We must, however, in order to this unity being attained, 
become individually full-grown men. And that suggests how much there is before 
Christians rise from the babe state up to the state of manhood. What a disparity in 
bulk, stature, strength, and generally in development, between the babe and a man in his 
piime! We can mark the increase that takes place from year to year. And so there 
is a goal of spiritual manhood, far away from the point where a man first believes in 
Christ. ‘here are possibilities of attainment before us which we are slow to realize. 
God shows us in the lily how rapidly we may grow, and in the cedars of Lebanon how 
deep-rooted we may grow; in the plane tree he shows us how widespreading we may 
become, and in the olive.tree how productive; in the lily and olive, too, how beautiful 
we may become, and in the pine forests what a healthfulness and pleasantness there 
may be about us. Here he teaches us the lesson of growth from the human body. 
When we see how a child is growing up, let us think how there should be a parallel to 
that in our spiritual life. (γ) Goal set before us in Christ. “Till we all attain... unto 
the measure of the stature of the fulucss of Christ.” If it was the abstract first, and 
then the concrete, it is now particularly tle hdstorical. It is a matter of infinite con- 
sequence that the goal for humanity has been reached by the representative Man. He 
has carried us, representatively, forward from our infantile state to our state of man- 
nood. We can see before the throne, or on it, a representation of what by the inwork- 
ing of Divine grace we are to become. Let us think of the character which he wrought 
out for‘us on earth, an* as love is so much introduced by the apostle, let us think of 
that character as formeu .Ato its beauty under the formative principle of love. There 
is in Christ the representation of contemplative love. He contemplated whatever the 
Father showed him in nature, in human life, in the Holy Scriptures, In the stillness 
of his soul he communed with.God through these, and these melted into him, they 
swallowed up his being. And as a consequence, what the world showed him was 
exposed to his mind, and could not pollute him, And if we are to attain to full stature 
in Christ, we must keep sabbath {n our souls, we must keep out the distraction of the 
world, we must look upon and appreciate those glorious truths which, through the ages, 
God by his servants and his own Son has been setting before us. There is in Christ the 
representation of active love, He was more than the perfect man of the mystics; he 
presented also the side of activity. He felt that he had a blessing to impart to men; 
and all his energies must be strained that the blessing should not be withheld. “1 
must work the works of him that sent me, while it is day: the night cometh, when no 
man can work.” And if we are to be of full stature in Christ, our inertness must be 
rebuked, our holy energies must be called forth. We must know what it is to “ work,” 
and, while working, let us take care that our works are “wrouyht in God.” There is 
in Christ the representation of suffering love. IfChrist could be said to excel in one class 
of virtues more than in another, it was in the passive virtucs, He suffered what was 


cH, Iv, 1—82.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 183 


appointed him. He drank the cup which his heavenly Father put into his hand. He 
suffered sublimely for those whom he came to save, And if we are to attain unto the 
measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ, we must be ready to suffer, to bear the 
contradiction of sinners, to shed tears over sinners. For if there is anything which 
betokens the Christian style of character, it is sympathizing with men as lying under 
sin, so that we can suffer for them and from them, if so be that we may compass their 
good, (d) Gospel ministry needed up to goal. The teaching here is that the gospel 
ministry is the means by which the final unity is to be brought about, by which 
spiitual manhood is to be reached. It is true of the teacher that he makes his work 
superfluous. The child grows up to be able to do without his help. And so with the 
“gilt” of the teacher in the Church; his work is to make himself unnecessary. The 
time is coming when no man shall need to teach his brother, saying, “Know the 
Lord ;” for all shall know him, from the least to the greatest. But, until the goal is 
reached, the gospel ministry will be needed. And nothing could set forth its position 
more strongly than that. It is not to be stpposed that it does everything. It rather 
comes in as a supplement to what Christians can do by themselves, Even when the 
person sitting in the pew has a better understanding than the person occupying the 
pulpit, he may reap benefit, if only truth (however imperfectly) is presented to his 
mind. Let no one say that he has got beyond the lip of the Cbristian ministry. If 
it is earnest, it may be expected to have Divine power with it. We know that Christ, 
who did not come to his manhood till the last (albeit that even while he was coming 
to manhood he left every other immeasurably behind), did not dispense with the 
teaching of the sanctuary. For he went, as his custom was, into the synagogue on 
the sabbath day. And shall we say of even the greatest literary man of the day who 
has a soul to care for, that he is better at home than sitting in church? (6) Gospel 
ministry needed to deliver from the dangers incident to childhood. “That we may 
be no longer children, tossed to and fro and carried about with every wind of doctrine, 
by the sleight of men, in craftiness, after the wiles of error.” There are some who are 
necessarily in spiritual childhovd from their recent spiritual birth. There are others 
upon whom it is a reflection that they are in their childhood, seeing that they 
might have got beyond it with the opportunities that they have had. It is the latter 
rather that are described here. They are at the mercy of false teachers, or the opinion- 
ative. They are like waves tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind. In 
their simplicity and inexperience they are made a handle of by those who are practised 
in the wiles of error. A certain sleight of hand is practised on them. The word 
“ sleight” is literally “ dice-playing.” ‘The dice-player can by trickery (loading the dice is 
part of the trickery) throw them so that the numbers turn up which suit his purpose. 
So there are religious tricksters who can turn texts of Scripture to suit their purpose. 
For instance, it is said by those who advocate the indiscriminate ministry of all that a 
stated ministry was only a temporary arrangement. And they get the simple—thbose 
whom the apostle here calls children—to believe that. This indiscriminate ministry is 
very much a playing upon men so that they are tossed to and fro and carried about, 
now believing this and now believing that, as the crafty influence them. A stated 
ministry is meant to deliver from the evils of such a condition, to carry the inexperienced 
past instability into a certain established state. (f) Process of development toward the 
goal described. (a) What we have to doin the determination of the development. “But 
speaking truth in love.” It isnot certain that “speaking truth” is the right translation. 
If it had been the intention of the apostle to convey this idea, we should have expecte:l 
the same form of expression which is used in the twenty-fifth verse, where two words are 
used, and not the one word here, which primarily is tru¢hing it. What is certain is that 
the apostle means toconvey the idea that, instead of baving todo with the wiles of error, 
we are to have to do with truth. We must be guided by truth if we would come to the 
goal set before us. We are to have todo with the truth im love. It is implied that 
there is an intimate connection between truth and love. If truth directs, love impels. 
Love is the highest law of being, and therefore we must have our being bathed in it if 
we would understand the truth of things, and speak and act the truth. (8) Christ has 
a principal part in the development, ‘‘ May grow up in all things into him which is 
the Head, even Christ.” It is from the head that the regulation of the body, in all its 
movoments, proceeds, So it is from Christ as the Head that the whole regulation 


=e 


184 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. (on. rv. 1—32, 


of the Church proceeds. What we do is not to regulate ourselves, but rather to put 
ourselves into accord with Christ in his regulating of us, ‘lhe head communicates with 
all the parts of the body ; it can send commands tothem. And thusit is in the Church, 
In all things we are commanded from Christ as from the brain or centre of the whole 
system. And so we grow up into him in all things. The whole development takes a 
distinctively Christian form. (y) Particularly, the development proceeds round Christ. 
“From whom all the body fitly framed and knit together.” In the body round one 
centre the different parts are harmoniously related to each other, and so related as 
mutually to support each other. So the idea is that in the Church Christ, as from the 
centre, is putting each into his proper position—a position in which he will harmonize 
with other parts and add strength to them. (8) The development proceeds by a supply 
Srom Christ according to the need of every part: “Through that which every joint 
supplieth, according to the working in due measure of each several part, maketh the 
increase of the body.” A tree grows by the vital juices which are supplied to every 
part. Ina tree there is a connecting, as by joints, where the supplies pass off to the 
various points. The joints in the body are where the sup)lies of nourishment pass off 
to the various members. So the Church is so jointed that it can all be supplied from 
Christ. ‘here is a due apportionment to every part. ‘here is no part forgotten, so 
that there is nothing like atrophy. And no part is supplied contrary to its nature, so 
that there is no abnormal development, as though the hand were enlarged to the size of 
the foot, or the foot dwarfed to the size of the hand. (e) The result which is being 
produced is described (the figure being dropped) as the building up of ttself in love. 
“Unto the building up of itself in love.” While the Church may be endlessly growing, 
it will come toa state of fixedness, of establishment, It will be built up like a strong 
compacted building which cannot be broken down. It isin love that this result is 
produced ; and in love it will remain an eternal reality. This then, finally, is the way 
which the apostle takes to show the foundation that there has been laid for Christian 
unity. Thus at length has he supported his particular exhortation that we are to 
keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.—R. F. 


Vers. 17—24.—Eahortation resumed. “This I say therefore, and testify in the 
Lord.” It is characteristic of the apostle to sink his own personality, and to put forward 
Christ. He wishes it to be understood that it is not in his own thought, but in the 
thought of him whom he calls Lord, that he makes his statement and gives his solemn 
asseveration regarding their duty. 

I, EXHORTATION DIRECTED AGAINST GENTILISM. “That ye no longer walk as the 
Gentiles also walk.” They had formerly been Gentiles in walk or character, as Gentiles 
in name. Now they were religiously the people of God. It became them, therefore 
tv have done with Gentile ways. 1. General character of Gentilism. “In the vanity 
of their mind.” That was the moral atmosphere with which they were surrounded. In 
Rom. i. 21 it issaid that they “ became vain in their reasonings.” The word translated 
“mind” clearly refers to the governing part of the nature. And the meaning is that 
they wasted their “ rational powers on worthless objects.” They were made to have 
to do with great realities; but they were taken up instead with vanities. They were 
made to worship God, “ who is, and is the Rewarder of them that diligently seek him ;” 
but they were idolaters, making gods of things that were not. They were made for 
émmorlality ; but amid the trifles of time they had little or no thought of a hereafter 
Of the most privileged populace in ancient heathenism it is said that “ they spent their 
time in nothing else but either to tell or to hear some new thing.” (1) Gentélism on ist 
intellectual side. “ Being darkened in their understanding.” We are not to understand 
that they were unable to use their intellectual powers, For though heathenism has 
been largely associated with degradation of intellect, yet there have been some marked 
intellectual developments in the heathen world. A pagan, such as Euclid, was able 
most successfully to prosecute mathematical science. But it is true that, as they came 
near the centre of human interest, they were dimmed in their vision, they were 
enveloped in darkness. For want of the Divine light they had no right conception of 
God, or of the meaning of human life. They called evil good, and good evil; they 
put darkuess for light, and light for darkness, (2) Gentilism on tts practical side, 
“ Alienated from the life of God.” There was much inertness with which heathenism 


on, IV. 1—32.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 185 


was chargeabie. But at the same time, it is true that there were busy mercantile 
cities in the old heathen world. Anda very great amount of energy was spent by 
heathen peoples on war. It can only be said that their higher energies were not called 
forth, and that none of their energies (not even those directed to ordinarily useful pur- 
suits) were penetrated with the life of God. They were alienated from that life, self- 
pleasing having taken the place of the glory of God; and therefore in all their energies 
there was the coldness of death, the rottenness of the grave. These two clauses on 
which we have been commenting are closely related. For what is light but the life of 
God within the intellectual sphere? And what again is it that utilizes our energies 
but light ? There are subjoined now other two clauses of a causal nature. “ Because of 
the ignorance that is in them, because of the hardening of their heart.” It does not 
seem natural to connect these two clauses with only the second of the preceding 
clauses. But rather retaining both in our mind, are we to connect the ignorance that 
is in them with the darkening of their understanding, and the hardening of their heart 
with their alienation from the life of God. It is true that ignorance is a form of spiritual 
darkness, but not otherwise than hardening is a form of spiritual death. Ignorance is 
both aresult and a cause. And, in so far as it has resulted from a refusal to have light, 
it is a cause from which there is not dissociated blame. As an abiding state (the result 
of a previous course), it is a source whence there is a perpetual irruption of darkness 
within the circle of the thoughts. Hardening of the heart also is both a result and a 
cause. It has been defined as such a suppression of moral and religious feeling as to 
imply a total disregard of Divine calls and warnings, and an insensibility to their 
importance? In so far as obduracy is formed, it has resulted from disrevard of calls 
and warnings, and therefore it may be assigned as a cause (with which blame is 
associated) for alienation from the life of God. By cultivating sensitiveness to good 
we prevent hardening in evil, and therefore hardening is blameworthy. 2. Gentilism 
tn its most offensive form. “ Who being past feeling.” This was one form of the hard- 
ening. ‘The result of a course of dissoluteness was that they were past all feeling, ce. of 
shame. ‘That feeling of shame is given as guardian of the purity of the body. But 
habitually disregarded, it is lost. ‘Gave themselves up to lasciviousness.” Such was 
their fearful self-abandonment. Instead of abandoning themselves to God (which 
would have been deliveran’e from all possible thraldom), they abandoned themselves 
to what (with specialty) is called lust. That is, they made a god of lust. They 
degraded se//, their glorious personality, by making it a means to lust. Thus aban- 
doned to lust, it became their conscious aim or business “to work all uncleanness.” 
And that does not complete the description of their guilt and degradation. For it is 
added, as indicating the frame of mind in which they wrought uncleanness, that they did 
it “with greediness.” And there is no reason to think that this description, or the 
descri.tion in Rom. i., is exag-erated. Not that there were not some virtuous heathen ; 
but impurity was so rife as to be characteristic of heathenism. And when it is con- 
sidered how it was not an object of public reprobation, and how it was associated with 
religion and also with art, it can be understood what foul shapes (amid a certain 
refinement and luxury) it would take. : 
11. ΕΡΗΕΒΙΑΝΒ REMINDED How GENTILISM Is CONTRADICTED By CHRISTIANITY. “ But 
ye did not so learn Christ.” It will be observed that Christ is not put forward here as 
our Teacher, but as our Lesson. It is stronger language than is employed by Christ 
when he says, “ Learn of me,” where he puts himself forward as our Example. It corre- 
sponds to what the apostle says in 1 Gor. i, 23, “We preach [not.‘ concerning,’ but] Christ 
crucified.” A lesson is what we have to get into our minds; so we have, as it were, to 
acquire or get into ourselves, by learning, the person of Christ himself. There is the 
commencement of the lesson. “1ἴ so be that ye heard him.” In this clause Christ is put 
forward as the Teacher of the lesson. They heard him when they were converted. At 
such a critical time it becomes us to know what we are really doing, under whose 
instructions we are putting ourselves. A parent secs to his son being put toa school or 
university where he thinks he will get for him satisfactory instruction. So we should 
be sure, as taught here, that at the great turning-point it was not the voice of a hireling 
or the mere echo of our own voice that we heard, but the voice of him who has autho- 
rity to speak tous. There ἐδ the lesson in its continuance. “ And wore taught in him, 
even ag truth is in Jesus.” This refers to the further instruction which they had 


186 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, [ox. rv. 1—32, 


received as those who had heard Christ. Here again Christ is the Lesson—“ taught in 
him,” as we might say taught in languages or in philosophy. And not merely so, but 
the historical Jesus is pointed to ss the embodied Lesson—‘ even as truth is in Jesus.” 
He contains all the truth of God, and especially as he is brought before us in the 
Gospels, all that we need to know for salvation. He is a Lesson we cannot learn ina 
day or ina lifetime, Even eternity will not suffice to exhaust itscontents, But let us 
learn Christ as we can now, in the excellence of his character, in the greatness of his 
work, and in the purport of his doctrine. 1. Christianity in its negative aspect. 
“That ye put away, as concerning your former manner of life, the old man, which 
waxeth corrupt after the lusts of deceit.” He has in view, it will be seen, their former, 
ae. their Gentile or pre-Christian manner of life. In this he sees what he calls the 
old man, viz. the sinful type of humanity. Originating in opposition to (iod, there is a 
type (such as there is in the development of a tree) according to which the corrnpt 
development goes forward. There is a necessity of nature or of Divine government 
by which, as sinners, we grow worse and worse, and in the way in which we grow worse 
and worse. There is a law (appvinted order) of sin and death under which ‘se are 
placed. With the same essential type in all sinners, the corru;t development takes a 
special form from the lust (or desire in a sinful state) that is dominant, whether it is what 
is called lust, or the lust of money, or the lust of power. These lusts all agree in beinz 
intimately connected with or in the service of deceit. That is to say, under different 
disguises, we are promising ourselves independence and satisfaction, or making ourselves 
believe that we are pleasing God or benefiting men while really all our relations are 
wrong. The old man, then, as truth as it is in Jesus requires, is to be put away. That 
is better than the old translation. We are not merely to put it off, as we put off our 
clothes at night; but we are to put it away, as an old garment never to be put on 
again, 2. Christianity in its positive aspect. “ And that ye be renewed in the spirit of 
your mind, and put on the new man, which after God hath been created in righteousness 
and holiness of truth.” The new man is the type of redeemed huinanity, or, as it is put, 
“the holy form of human life which results from redemption.” A condition of this is 
renewing in the spirit of the mind. We are not to iuterprct this as though it were 
renewed by the Spirit in the mind. The spirit is the centre where we appropriate the 
blessing of redem) tion, where we choose Christ instead of self, where we put ourselves 
ina right relation to the holy type of humanity. We are taught that renewal must 
be fron within outwards. If there is only life lingering at the outside, it will never 
peuctrate from thence to the centre. But if there is still life at the centre, though the 
old forms may have to be cast away, it will clothe itself in new forms. The new man 
is described as that which huth been created. In one view of it, this is what Christ did 
in his work. He created a holy type, which may be assumed by us sinners. And that 
was surely creation by pre-eminence. It was creation after God, even as mau was created 
at first in the image of God. And we are here helped to the understanding of what 
that image was. It did not consist in anything accidental, but it consisted in what is 
most essential (what presupposes free-will), viz. rightness of moral disposition. It is 
here referred to as righteousness and holiness of truth. “ Righteousness betokens a jest 
relation among the powers of the soul within and towards men and duties without. 
But holiness betokens the integrity of the spiritual life, and the piety towards God of 
which that is the condition.” There is ἃ truth in such relations upon which righteous- 
ness and holiness are founded. Weare made with a subordination of our lower powers 
toour higher. We are made tobe mutually helpful. And we are made to be dependent 
on God and to trust in him, In all these respects man was rightly dispositioned at 
first. And what we lost in Adam we have more than regained in Christ in the creation 
of the new man. This new man, then, let us put on as that which we are never to put 
off. Let us pray for a constant renewing in the spirit of our mind, that, after God, we 
may have righteousness and holiness οὗ truth—that every relation which God has made 
for us may be honoured by us.—R. F. 


Vers. 25—32.—Vices. The apostle here enumerates five vices pertaining to the old 
man, or Gentile state, and shows how they are contradicted by Christianity. 

I. Lyina. 1. Lhe negative of Christianity. ‘Wherefore, putting away falsehood.” 
Lying sufficieutly indicates what is meant, if we take it as including falsehood in act 


on. τν, 1—32.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, 187 


as well as falsehood in speech. It is the intention to deceive that makes the lie, what- 
ever its manifestations. The goodness of the motive does not alter its character. We 
may be saying what we do not think, to convey a compliment. Or we may be advanc- 
ing an argument in which we do not believe, to serve our party. Or we may make a 
strong denial, to cover the fault of a friend. We may, by some half-truth, be getting 
rid of a slight inconvenience to ourselves. But all the same, there is an offence com- 
mitted against truth, And we must understand from the teaching here that Christ 
emphatically says no to it in every form. We are to put away lying, and the context 
plainly suggests that we are to put it away as belonging to the old man. We nced not 
wonder at it characterizing the old man, when we remember that Scripture dates the 
original of evil in us from the result of a lie told by the father of lies. Many of the 
heathen were like the Cretans, of whom Paul testified, in a quotation from one of their 
own poets, that they were always liars. It is a vice which is known to be very preva- 
lent among non-Christianized peoples. There is not so much of shameless lying among 
Christian nations; but in Jess open forms, where there is not saving grace, there is the 
same disposition to be false, to state false reasons for our conduct, to keep up false 
appearances, tu cover our faults by a denial of fact. “Do not,” says Ruskin, “let us 
lie at all. Do not think of one falsity as harmless, and another as slight, and another 
as unintended. Cast them all aside; they are an ugly soot from the smoke of the pit, 
and it is better that our hearth should be swept clean of them, without overcare as 
to which of them are largest or blackest.” 2, The positive of Christianity. “Speak 
ye truth each one with his neighbour.” In Zech. viii. 16 it is said, “Speak ye every 
man truth fo his neighbour.” The change from “to his neighbour” to “‘ with his neigh- 
bour” has the effect of defining the circle contemplated here as the Christian circie. 
Why are we to hold the truth sacred? ‘The ethical reason given by Kant is that we 
are to do so out of reverence to the humanity subsisting in our person. The Christian 
reason as given by the apostle here is virtually this, that we are to do so out of regard 
to the Christ that is in us. His words are, “For we are members one of another.” That 
is, my Christian neivhbour is a part of myself; and why should I wrong him? Not 
inapt.y Chrysostom says, “If the eye were to spy a serpent or a wild beast, will it lie to 
the foot?” We must do by our Christian neighbour as we would do by a part of our- 
selves which we would not see hurt. But what is it that makes our Christian neigh- 
bour so closely related to us? It is the Christ that is in him and in us. And in lying 
we are not only dishonouring our common humanity, but, in the Christian circle, we 
are dishonouring Christ who has made us one. The habit of speaking the truth each 
one with his neighbour is of difficult acquisition. There is so much that is false in 
the conventionalism of society, and such a desire in men to appear better than they 
really are, that there is often the spectacle of truth “ fallen in the street.” The way to 
acquire it is to put Christ before us in our neighbour as him whom, by the slightest 
divergence from the truth, we must not demean, 

11. Sinrun anager. 1. The negative of Christianity. “Let not the sun go down 
upon your wrath.” The word is rather exasperation (already an evil form of feeling), 
which, if nursed, fast settles down into wrath. It was a custom of the Pythagoreans 
that, if betrayed into railing by passion, before the sun went down they shook hands, 
kissed one another, and were reconciled. It is one of the uses of night that it is a call 
to be placable. ‘‘ We are not bad gods or demons in our impetuosity, but men, men 
that go to sleep as children do and must. Being spaced off in this manner by stop- 
pages, we consent to limits. We are softened and gentled in feeling more, perhaps, than 
we would like to be. A man must be next to a devil who wakes angry.” The 
Christian reason against nursing wrath is that it is a giving place to the devil For 
it is in connection with wrath that it is said, “ Neither give place to the devil.” He who 
rises from his bed unsoftened, who seeks about for new reasons for his wrath, is giving 
the devil peculiar opportunity. And when the devil gets in through the door of 
nassion that is nursed, a man will do deeds then that, in his cool moments, he would 
have shrunk from with the utmost abhorrence. Vindictiveness was a characteristic of 
the heroes of the ancient heathen world, and does not call forth from such a delineator 
of them as Homer an expression of disapprobation. It is still found in not dissimilar 
form in the savage, who ruthlessly pursues his enemy until he has scalped him, 
Withia the Christian sphere indulgence of anger is peculiarly unbecoming, and 


188 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. ἴσα. rv. 1 --52, 


must result in the ejection of Christ and, with him, of peace and right guidance. 
2. The positive of Christiunity. “Be ye angry.” And we need not wonder at the 
injunction when we take into account that anger is a hundred times in Scripture attri- 
buted to God, and also that it is said of Christ that he looked round about on the 
hypocrites among his hearers with anger. “We are so made that pity is not more 
naturally awakened by the sight of suffering, fear by the approach of danger, delight 
by the vision of beauty, gratitude by deeds of generous kindness, than anger by many 
kinds of wrong-doing. ‘Ihe men whose hearts never glow with enthusiasm at witnessing 
lofty self-sacrifice, never burn with indignation against cowardice, falsehood, and profli- 
gacy ; the men whose eyes never flash, whose pulse never quickens, whose words move 
on in an unbroken flow, and never rush along tumultuously like a cataract, either in 
praise or blame,—never yet did any work worth doing either for God or man” (Dale). 
But, as if special danger attended anger, the injunction to it is followed up, and thrown 
into a certain subordination, by the caution—‘ And sin not.” (1) Anger is to be pro- 
portioned to the offence. There must be justice in our anger. The passionate man is 
often causelessly angry. His passion is roused by ἃ mere inconvenience to himself for 
which no one is to blame, or by a hasty view of the action at which he takes offence. 
A mere personal slight is not a sufficient cause for anger, especially when we remember 
him who was led as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearcrs is dumb, 
so he opened not his mouth. Rather are we to reserve our anger for what hurts the 
truth in us or in others, Let our indignation be poured out on the attempt to corrupt 
our principles, to steal our fair fame, on the cowardice that keeps a man from standing 
by his convictions, on the selfishness that can keep a wife and family miserable, on the 
dishonour that is done to God by our want of faith and niggardliness in supporting bis 
cause. “It does not appear,” says Butler, “that the feeling of indignativ, generally 
speaking, is at all too high amongst mankind.” ‘“ Yea, what indignation!” says the 
apostle, in enumerating the [fruits of godly sorrow. (2) Anger is not to interfere with 
love. While Christ looked round on the hypocrites with anger he was at the same time 
grieved because of the hardening of their hearts. And we must ever draw this dis- 
tinction between the sinner and his sin. Grievedness of heart: for the sinner and strong 
condemnation of his sin can and should go hand-in-hand. Even as we love him we 
musi show him how we regard his conduct so far as that is calculated to do him good. 
Suci going forth of anger (having justice in it) is fitted to sustain love. 

Ill. Sveanme. 1. The negative of Christianity. “Let him that stole steal no 
more.” Whether we translate the first part of the injunction “him that stole,” or, as 
is often done, “him that steals,” the latter part, “stcal no more,” implies that there 
was danger of some in the Ephesian Church falling into this sin. And we need not 
wonder at this, when we consider their pre-Christian state. They were accustomed, 
in heathen society, to theft being punished (which would keep up a certain moral 
sentiment against it), but at the same time, they were brought up in a certain laxity 
with regard to what was theirs and what was their neighbour’s. And is not the 
Ephesian Church in this respect. representative? While there are very few connected 
with our Churches who will steal, so as to expose themselves to the punishment of the 
law, there are those who are chargeable with what, if strictly looked into, is dis- 
honesty. They do not give value in labour for money received. Or they contract 
debts, or come under obligations which they have no reasonable expectation of meeting ; 
or they are not doing their utmost, in the way of exertion and economy, to get out 
of debt. Or, under the pressure of competition, they fall in with the evil custom of 
the trade, and adulterate. There are many ways of unjustly hindering the wealth 
or outward estate of our neighbour. There may be dishonesty even in the desire to 
have what does not belong to us. But nothing could be more emphatic than the decla- 
ration here that, whatever our temptations, whatever losses it may entail, we are not 
to steal at all. 2. The positive of Christianity. “ But rather let him labour, working 
with his hands the thing that is good, that he may have whereof to give to him that 
hath need.” There is presented here the Christian aspect of labour. It is according 
to the rule of Christ that we should work and not be idle. And if it is in literally 
working with our hands that we spend our energies, yet is that not demeaning, for 
Christ sanctified such work by working as a carpenter. It is further according to the 
~ule of Christ that we should work the thing that is good, that is to say, have an. honest 


om. Iv, 1—32.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 189 


business and do our best (time and circumstance considered), There is further the 
motive with which we are to work. There is the incentive of providing for our own, 
and specially our own household, and of providing for our household not merely for 
the present, but, in view of the uncertainty of our life, also as we can for the future. 
And if any one of ours needed special nourishment or change of air, that would bea 
reason for our working hard that what was needed might be supplied. But in the 
language here employed there is ἃ look to the needy in body or in soul beyond our own 
immediate circle. And it is taught that the Christian is to labour with the view and 
in the hope of having something over, after making all reasonable allowance for his own, 
to bestow on the poor and to send the gospel to the heathen. It is this in our aim 
which is needed to make labour however assiduous and lawful, distinctively Christian. 
And the exhorter here himself set a Christian example, “In all things I gave you an 
example, how that so labouring ye ought to help the weak, and to remember the words 
of the Lord Jesus, how he himself said, It is more blessed to give than to receive.” 
And he, even the humblest labourer, who strives in his labour to have something over 
for Christ (in him that hath need), will not fail, or if he can be said to fail, yet will 
his effort lead to his labour being accepted of Christ. And if this is the true gospel of 
labour, then how much labour is there which must be rejected in which there is a 
wrong done to Christ in his not receiving his dues or acknowledement ? 

IV. UnwHonesome spercH. 1. The negative of Christianity. “Let no corrupt 
speech proceed out of your mouth.” ‘Perhaps the image which the word (corrupt) 
calls up was not distinctly present to the apostle’s mind; but it might have been, for it is 
avery just one. The epithet is used to describe vegetables, meat, and fish which are 
beginning to go bad ; and there are some people whose conversation is quite as unwhole- 
some as food which is not quite fresh. Unsound itself, it injures the moral health and 
vigour of those who listen to it.” Without being poisonous, words may be unwhole- 
some, Falsehood he has already condemned. Violence and dctraction in speech fall 
ander the next head. Filthiness and foolish talking and jesting come up in the 
beginning of the next chapter. Words may be neither false, nor violent, nor defama- 
tory, nor foul, nor senseless, nor profane, and yet be unwholesome. And to such we 
limit our attention here. There are some who give the chief place in their conversation 
to business or household affairs, There are others who give it to fashion, pleasure, 
amusement. There are others again who give it to the little affairs of their neighbours 
-or to politics. Conversation may properly enough turn upon these things; but when 
it is so occupied with them as to rouse the impression that the world in one or other of 
these forms is everything, as to shut out the thought of God, as to take away the 
feeling of the seriousness of life, then (like food that is not quite fresh) it is fitted to 
do harm. There is not, in such conversation, nufriment for the moral being, exercise 
for the moral powers. It is to be said, too, that the spirit f worldly conversation is 
gathered up in certain worldly macxims such as these: that we must look after ourselves 5 
that we must take the good of the world; that we must have our time of gaiety; 
that we must be like our neighbours. These maxims (as excuses for selfishness, thought= 
lessness) are unsound; and tbe apostle, speaking for Christ, would say emphatically, 
“Let no such corrupt speech proceed out of your mouth.” And the peculiarly Christian 
reason against that kind of speech is given in the words, “ And grieve not the Holy 
Spirit of God, in whom ye were sealed unto the day of redemption.” It will be seen 
that the apostle regards speech in a sacred light—he would have it as a medium or 
organ of the Holy Spirit. It is taught that the Divine Spirit is intensely interested in 
all the movements of our life. There is not a department to which his interest does 
not extend, and which he would not have permeated with his holy influences. And 
when he is thwarted in his holy ends he is grieved as a mother is grieved when a son 
whom she loves as none else can is not acting according to her wishes and prayers, 
And it is to be noticed that what is represented as grieving the Spirit is that which is 
hurtful, not so much by its heinousness as by its commonness, Against graver faults 
we are placed more on our guard; but we do not think how we grieve the Holy Spirit 
by the feeble moral tone of our conversation. The Spirit is grieved with the conversa- 
tion of the unconverted (which is necessarily unwholesome); but he is especially 
grieved when Christians thwart him by a conversation which is not of him. For on 
them, as already expressed in the first chapter, his seal was placed, against the day of 


190 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS (ou. rv. 1—32 


their final redemption. You, then, who have the seal of the Holy Spirit of God on you, 
as marked for redemption, grieve him not by unedifying conversation. 2, The positive 
of Christianity. “But such as is good for edifying as the need may be, that it may 
give grace to them that hear.” The Christian element in conversation is that a regard 
be paid to edification. We are made to communicate with others by speech, not that 
we may impose on them, or play with them, or regard them carelessly, but that we 
may edify them. ‘here is not only that which is edifying, but edifying for the 
occasion, And “a word fitly spoken is like apples of gold in pictures of silver.” And 
what constitutes its fitness is not its mere artistic form or reconditeness, but especially 
a depth of feeling in it, and a moral discrimination, that make it meet a need and 
prove a blessing to them that hear. A word of this kind, that may not be wanting in 
sharpness, but can convey comfort too and direction and incitement to good, what an 
accomplishment it is to be able to speak it! And, however far we are behind, let us 
strive after the Christian ideal of conversation which is here placed before us. 

V. Bap temper. 1, The negative of Christianity. “ Let all bitterness, and wrath, 
and anger, and clamour, and railing, be put away from you, with all malice.” by 
bitterness here we are to understand all want of sweetness of temper. This is indicated 
by what are mentioned as its manifestations, It takes the form of wrath, or a sudden 
outburst of passion, Or it takes the form of the more scttled feeling of anger {he 
wrath, again, takes the form of clamour, or violent speech. And the anger takes the 
form of railing, or more deliberate and continued speaking against a brother. And the 
evil temper in these its manifestations, in all the varieties that belong to it (as is 
indicated by the word “all”), is represented as having its subsistence in malice, by 
which we are to understand ill feeling, and that not simply in its worst form, but (as 
is also indicated by “all”) in all its forms. This apostolic analysis of bad temper 
shows that he regarded it in a serious light. He did not regard it as some would, as 
a mere physical infirmity. Constitution has to do with it in this respect, that some 
have more to contend against than others. But, whatever our constitutional temper 
is, we are bound to bring it under law to Christ. Bad temper, therefore, is a sin, afi 
unchristian state, of which we are to repent, and from which we are, according to the 
thought here, to be forcibly delivered. Jor “ put away” heie is stronger than “ put 
away ” in the twenty-fifth verse, and implies ihe putting forth of something like force 
upon us (by the stronger than we), in order that we may get rightly away from it. 
2. The positive of Christianity. ‘ And be ye kind one to another, tender-hearted, 
forgiving each other, even as God also in Christ forgave vou.” The kindness here 
inculcated is that good feeling toward others which keej's us from unseemly manilesta- 
tions, and sweetens our whole bearing as brethren. And this kindness is to extend 
(where there is occasion) to tenderness of heart (or, as it used to be in Col. iii. 12, with 
the same allusion as here, “‘ bowels of mercies”). And this tenderness of heart is to 
take the very beautiful and distinctively Christian form of forgivingness. For God in 
Christ forgave us. The allusion is to the historical fact of Christ once for all putting 
away sin by the sacrifice of himself. Thus God not only showed himself forgiving, 
but actually made forgiveness a gospel reality, It is after the manner of the apostle 
to ground deep human duty. He has especially a satisfaction in falling back on the 
great fact of the atonement. Forgiveness is not an optional matter with us, of some- 
thing that we may want without losing our Christianity ; but it is that to which we 
are peculiarly, indissolubly bound by the fact that God has gone before us in it in his 
dealing with us. Let us, then, have that nobility, generosity of disposition, that 
emanation from God himself, which will lead us to forgive those that sin against us, 


Vers. 1—3,.— Walking worthy of our vocation. “1 therefore, the prisoner of the 
Lord,” ete. The verses, looked at homiletically, suggest the following truths:— 

I, THAT MAN’S EXTERNAL CONDITION IN THIS WORLD IS NO TRUE TEST OF HIS REAL 
wortu. A greater man than Paul, greater in true thought, lofty aims, disinterested 
sympathies, self-sacrificing love, Christ-like devotion, and philanthropy, never lived. 
He was great in himself, great in his spiritual influence, great in the estimation of all 
capable of appreciating worth. Yet he was a “prisoner” and doomed Ὁ martyrdom— 
8 condition the most ignominious and painful, This fact shows: 1. The corruption φ 


on. Iv. 1—382.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, 191 


human society. So blind in moral judgment and so perverse in heart has civil society 
been, almost from the beginning, that it has doomed its best men to degradation, 
suffering, and often martyrdom. 2. The high probability of a future retributive dis- 
pensation. The beheading of John the Baptist, the imprisonment of a Paul, the 
crucifying of the Christ, proclaim with a tongue of thunder a coming judgment, a day 
when ‘all ungodly men shall be convinced of all ungodly things which they have 
unzodly committed.” 

IL. THat THE END OF ALL TRUE THEOLOGY IS THE IMPROVEMENT OF CHARACTER. 
The apostle, after laying down in the preceding chapters the grandest theological 
truths, begins in these verses an application of these truths to practical life. ‘I beseech 
you therefore.” ‘ Therefore.” hy? Because of the wonderful things I have stated. 
Theology, if it remains with us merely as a science, will do us no spiritual service. It 
may stimulate thought, widen the realm of intelligence, afford scope and incentive to 
our speculative faculties, and develop our powers of logic and controversy. But what 
boots all this? Devils in depravity and torture are thevlogians, It is only when 
theological truths pass from the iutellect to the heart, and thence circulate as blood 
through every particle of our being—in other words, when doctrines are translated into 
deeds—that they really serve us. Theology is bread; but undigested bread does not 
impart health, but impairs it, does not invigorate the man, but enfecbles him. A great 
theologian is often a moral invalid. ; 

Ill. THat THE PRIVILEGES OF A MORAL BEING ARE THE MEASURB OF HIS OBLIGATIONS, 
“ Walk worthy of the vocation,” ete. The Bible teaches us our duty, not so much by , 
written precepts as by principles, either expressed or implied. Indeed, it seems to me 
no code o! legislative propositions, though its volumes filled the world, could supply 
directions for the boundless activities of an undying soul, You cannot bring all the 
obliyatious of souls into any number of written sentences. Hence we have principles, 
aud often one principle will meet all the possible activities of a soul, determine its duty 
in every separate act. ‘The principle we have stated is an example. When a real 
Christian is told to “act worthy of his vocation,” he is told everything touching all 
conceivable obligations. This point supplies us with two general remarks. 1. Christians 
are called into a Divine sonship, and their duty is to walk worthy of that. The call 
you have in the fifth verse of the first chapter. “Having predestinated us unto the 
adoption of children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his 
will.” We are called to be the sons of God. What is our duty? ΤῸ act worthy of 
our relationsbip, act as sons ought to act towards such a Father. Give him: (1) The 
liighest reverence. Our heavenly Father is not only greatest to us, but greatest to the 
universe. Therefore reverence him. (2) The highest gratitude. We owe everythiig 
to him—boing and the highest blessings of being. Therefore to him our profoundest and 
incessant thanks are due, (8) The highest esteem. He is the best of Beings, the 
Fountain of all virtues, the Standard of all character, the Totality of goodness. There- 
fore he should be loved with all our soul and strength. (4) ‘Ihe highest confidence. 
Yield to him a chverful trust, a boundless reliance. Trust in him for ever. (5) ‘The 
highest attention. He should occupy more of our thoughts than any other being. 
You should study his character, trace his ways, anticipate his wishes, imbibe his Spirit, 
jinitate his character, and thus become partakers of his nature. When Christians 
are told to walk worthy of their sonship, what more can be said? It means to live a 
pure, useful, elevated, morally royal life, 2. Christians are called into a spiritual 
corporation, and their duty is to walk worthy of that. When on earth Christ founded 
a new socivty, its members consisted of those who practically accepted him as their 
great Teacher, Example, Saviour, Lord. That society, few in nombers at first, has 
been increasing ever since. Millions have gone to heaven, and millions are still on 
this earth found in connection with all Churches, and not a few in connecticn with 
none. This society, though its members are divided by sentiment and ritual and 
distance, ‘are nevertheless one—one in spirit, purpose, life. They are but branches of one 
tree the Root of which is Christ, members of one body the Head of which is Christ. 
Now, every Christian is called into this grand corporation. And the apostle here statcs 
two things concerning our relation to it. (1) The grand purpose we shoul aim at. 
“ Bindeavouring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.” “ Unity of the 
Spirit,” means the ynity of which the Spirit is the Author. Qnity, nut merely doctrina! 


192 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. [ση. rv, 1—32, 


or ecclesiastical, for there may be doctrinal and ecclesiastical unity where. there is 
spiritual separation, It is the unity of souls in Christ. Now, every one belonging to 
this corporation should diligently endeavour to maintain its unity. This unity is 
consonant with diversity ; the waves are different, but the ocean is one; the branches 
are different, but the tree is one; the members are different, but the body is one; the 
stars are different, but the system is one. Men’s thoughts may be different, but men’s 
loves may be one, and loves are the bonds of souls. (2) The method for promoting 
this purpose. Three things are indicated here. (a) Humility. “ With all lowliness 
and meekness.” Pride, arrogance, and haughtiness in all its forms, have ever been 
amongst the most disturbing elements in Church life. (6) Mutual forbearance. ‘ For- 
bearing one another.” ‘The best members of this Church are imperlect in belief, 
sympathies, and conduct ; hence mutual forbearance is necessary in order to maintain 
unity. He who feels disposed to quarrel with every fault of his associates may spend 
his time in doing nothing else. (c) Brotherly love. “ Forbearing one another in love.” 
Love is the healer of discords. No hand but hers can retune the discordant harp of 
Church life. 'These—lowliness, meekness, long-suffering, loving forbearance—quiet, 
unpretending, unshowy virtues are amongst the best means for promoting true unity in 
the Church of God. Who is the most useful Christian? Not as a rule he who bas 
_the most transcendent genius, brilliant talents, and commanding eloquence, bur he 
who has the most of this quiet, loving, forbearing spirit. The world may do without 
its Niagaras, whose thundering roar and majestic rush excite the highest amazement 
of mankind, but it cannot spare the thousand rivulets that glide unseen and unheard 
every moment through the earth, imparting life and verdure and beauty wherever 
they go. And so the Church may do without its men of splendid abilities, but it 
cannot do without its men of tender, loving, forbearing souls.—D. T. 


Vers. 3—6.—The unities of Christianity a reason for union amongst Christians. 
“Endeavouring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. There is one 
body, and one Spirit, even as ye are called in one hope of your calling; one Lord, one 
faith, one baptism, one God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and 
in you all.” These various unities in Christianity are here specitied by the apostle in 
order to enforce the importance and obligation of a loving concord amongst all true 
Christians. By noticing these unities with a little closer attention we shall see how 
they formed in the apostle’s mind an argument for a loving union amongst all the 
disciples of Christ. 

I. All Christians are members of ONE SPIRITUAL ORGANIZATION. “One body.” Though 
they are very numerous and ever increasing, though they differ widely in many morally 
unfundamental points, and live in different lands and different worlds, still they are 
parts of one great whole. The tree, though: it has a thousand branches all varying in 
size and shape and hue, is an organic whole. ‘his unity, though not visible, really 
exists. To be a Christian is to be a branch of the one tree, a stone in the one building, 
a member of the one body. Now, this fact is certainly a strong reason for the cherishing 
amongst all of brotherly love and hearty fellowship. ‘That there should be no schism 
in the body ; but that the members should have the same care one for another, And 
whether one member suffer, all the members suffer with it; or one member be honoured, 
all the members rejoice with it.” 

II. All Christians are animated by one erEat Spirit. “One Spirit.” What the body 
is to the human soul, this great organization, this universal Church, is to the Spirit 
of the living God. 1. Servant. As every member of the body is the servant of the 
soul, every genuine Christian is the servant of the Spirit, obeys his dictates in every- 
thing. 2. Symbol, As the body reveals and expresses the soul by its looks, words, 
and operations, so the true Church reveals the Divine Spirit; reveals its quickening, 
redeeming, elevating, sanctifyinginfluence. 3. Residence. As the body isthe residence 
of the soul, even so the Church is the temple for the Holy Ghost to dwell-in. If 
there is this one Spirit running through all, guiding, animating, overruling all, should 
there not be through all a mutual, loving sympathy and interest ? 

TIT. All Christians have oNE GLORIOUS HEAVEN. ‘‘Qne hope.” What is the object 
of a true Christian’s hope? Not happiness, He whose grand object in life is his own 
happiness is under the influence of that selfishness which is the gscuce of sin and the 


on. Iv, 1—32.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 193 


devil of the soul. That spirit in Churches which cries, “Oh that I had the wings of a 
dove ! then would I fly away and be at rest,” is discontented selfishness, nothing more, 
Alas! that there should be churches, chapels, aud pulpits in England ministering to 
an insatiable avarice that considers this beautiful world not good enough for its home ! 
But if the object of a true Christian’s hope is not happiness, what then? Moral 
goodness. Goodness as exemplified in the life of Jesus. ‘To become like Christ, to be 
partakers of the Divine nature, to be holy even as God is holy,—this is the great object 
of a true Christian’s hope. And herein is heaven and nowhere else. To be happy is 
to be good, to be good is to be like God, and this is the grand object of genuine Christian 
hope. “ ‘Then shall I be satisfied when I awake up in thine own image.” Moral 
goodness is the only true Paradise of souls. 

IV. All Christians have one soverzicn Master. “One Lord.” Who is this one 
Lord? By the general consent of acknowledged expositors, the one Lord Jesus Christ. 
“One is your Master, even Christ.” There are men in Christendom who assume titles 
indicating authority.over human souls. We have the Pope of Rome, the lord bishop, 
and the “ Primate of all England.” ‘Terribly sad it is that in the name of him who 
had nowhere to lay his head, and who taught that the least should be greatest in his 
kingdom, there should be found men either so dull or daring as to assume such titles 
as these. Call no man “ master,” said this “one Lord.” He is the Head of the Church 
which is his budy, the only Head. Is not this also a potent reason for loving concord 
among Christians? They have to draw their ductrines from one Teacher, they have 
to learn their duty from one Master, they have to fashion their character after one 
- Model, to depend for reconciliation to God upon one Mediator. 

V. All Christians have oNE SUPREME CREED. “ One faith.” This means, as we have 
seen, one Odject of faith. What is the one creed? Thevlogical propositions put forth 
as articles of belicf? Ifso, there are many faiths—faiths almost as numerous as there 
are Christian professors, No two men can perhaps belicve the same thing in exactly 
the saine way; the same proposition shapes itself differently to different souls. The 
New ‘l'estament teaches with unmistakable explicitness that the true creed of a 
Christian is not a propositional manifesto, but a personal life—the life of Christ. In 
more than thirty passages of one Gospel, the Gospel of St. John, we find with reference 
to Christ the expressions, “trusting to me,” “trusting to him,” or “trusting to the 
Son.” ‘Take two or three as specimens. ‘This is the work of God, that ye believe on 
him whom he hath sent.” Again, “He that believeth on me hath everlasting life.” 
Again, “ He that believeth on Aim shall not be damned.” Again, “ He that believeth 
on me, the works that I do,” etc. ‘ Do this in remembrance of me.” Christ is the one 
Creed. [416 is, in truth, the Bible. See how this one creed argues the importance of 
loviug union amongst Christians. If our creed is a series uf propositions we shall be 
divided, but if our creed is the personal life of One all-holy, all-loving, all-good, we 
shall be united. If all the members of all the Churches believed with a living faith in 
the one personal Christ, there would be a loving concord of souls. 

VI. All Christians have ΟΝῈ SPIRITUAL CLEANSING. “One baptism.” The primary 
meaning of “ baptism ” is cleansing. Βαπτισμός is rendered “ washing ” in several places 
(Maik vii, 4,8; Heb. ix. 10). ‘There are two kinds of baptisms or cleansings mentioned 
in the New ‘Testament—the material and the spiritual, that of water and that of fire. 
The latter, namely, the fiery baptism of the Spirit, is the great thing. This 
undoubtedly is the one baptism, the one cleansing. 1, This is the one essential 
cluausing. Without this, though we were baptized in all the rivers of the world, we 
are not members of that one body of which Christ is the Head. Millions have entered 
heaven without water baptism, but not one without the spiritual. 2. This is the one 
Divine cleansing. It is the Spirit’s work. This is the “ washing of regeneration” and 
the renewing of the Holy Ghost. Is not this one essential, Divine cleansing another 
good argument for unity of love in all Christians ὃ 

VII. All Christians have onE ADORABLE Gop. “One God and Father of all, who 
is above all, and through all, and in you all.” 1, There is but one God. This fact is 
supported by the structure and order. of nature; stands in direct antagonism to atheism, 
fetichism, polytheism, and pantheism; and is accepted as a fundamental truth in all 
evangelical Churches throughout the world. The glorious fact reveals the greatness 
of the Creaior, the definiteness of moral obligations, the fitness of religion for the 

EPHESIANS, a 


194 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. lou. rv. 1—32, 


constitution of man, and the universal brotherhood of souls, 2. This one God ἐφ 
universal Father, “Father of all.” “Of all and through all.” “ Allis not neuter: 
πάντων." It is true that God is the Author of all nature, is over all nature, and lives 
through all nature; but the apostle’s reference here is undoubtedly to intelligent 
existences, and it may be that he intends only the members of the true Church. All 
tie members of the true Church recognize him as “ the Father of all, over all, through 
all, and in all.” 

Conctusion. Here, then, in the wnities of Christianity are the bonds of true union 
amongst men. Notwithstanding all the discords and conflicts that rage and revel 
through the world, there lies dcep down in the heart of humanity an ineradicable desire 
for unity. The greatest events that have marked and helped the progress of the human 
race are the outcomes of this desire. Mankind have tried for this unity in many 
different ways. They have tried by: 1. Political 1.euwns. Tn ancient times kings and 
warriors endeavoured to bring men together under one iron sceptre. The Assyrian, 
the Persian, the Greek, the Roman, each in his turn made the desperate endeavour. 
In modern times Spain and France and Russia have tried and failed. Far enough 
are we from denouncing or even depreciatins such a grand political purpose. For our 
own part, we should like to see what we think will one day appear on this earth—one 
great cosmopolitan government—a government embracing within its majestic arms of 
righteous and sanitary law all the children of men the world over. The fact that 
England now sways her sceptre over India and Australia shows that neither diversities 
of race, language, colour, religion, habit, nor remoteness of position from the central 
power are neccssary obstructions to the establishment of such « rule. With sucha 
government immense and manifold would be the advantages. The liberties of all 
would‘be secured. ‘The spirit of nationality, the prolific parent of desolating wars, 
would find no place. All would be fellow-citizens of one state. All the tyrannies and 
rivalries of little despots would be played out. The age of standing armies would be 
over. The markets of the world be open alike to all. Such a government, I believe, 
will come. The gradual absorption of the smaller into the larger states, the ever- 
multiplying facilities of intercourse between the remotest parts of the globe and 
diversified races of mankind, and the ever-advancing intellectual, moral, numerical, 
and colonizing superiority.of the Anglo-Saxon race charm my poor soul at times with 
the belief that such an empire is in the tenor of things inevitable. But let it come. 
The real unity for which the human soul craves will not be met. Law cannot create 
love. 2. Lcclesiastical means. Religion has made one great attempt to bind the 
human race into one grand confederation, The Church of Rome sets up one head to 
which all souls must bow, prescribes one ritual through which all souls must move, 
propounds one creed to which all souls must adhere. The object is a noble one; our 
hearts go with it. But the means, involving priestly assumptious and the infrinzement 
of the rights of conscience, are amongst the worst damnabilities of history. Hence it 
has failed in its object. Aiming at unity, it has led to endless divisions. Many a 
peace-loving soul, pained with the controversies of the sects, has sought refuge in 
Rome, but has found it a stormy as well as perilous port. 3. Commercial means. 
Merchandise in this age is preached as the uniting power. Self-interest is to be the 
golden chain to bind all men together. Nothing is more unphilosophic than this. 
Self-interest is not a uniting but an insulating power. The battles of the market, if 
not as bloody, are as base and as heartless as those of the field and the ocean. The 
true principles of union are in the text. [or universal union there must be universal 
love, for universal love there must be universal excellence, and for universal excellence 
there must be the universal recognition of the one body, the one Spirit, the one heaven, 
the one Master, the one creed, the one cleansing, the one God and Father of all.—D, T. 


Vers, 7—16.—Redemptive influence the gift of Christ. “But unto every one of us 
is given grace according to the measure of the gift of Christ. Wherefore he saith, Wher 
he ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men. (Now that 
he ascended, what is it but that he also descended first into the lower parts of the 
earth ? He that descended is the same also that ascended up far above all heavens, 
that he might fill all things.) And he gave some, apostles; and some, prophets; and 
sume, evangelists; and some, pastors and teachers; for the perfecting of the sainta, gor 


CH. Iv. 1—82.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, 195 


the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ : till we all come in the 
unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect’ man, unto 
the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ: that we henceforth be no more 
children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight 
of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive; but speaking the 
truth in love, may grow up into him in all things, whichis the Head, even Christ: from 
whom the whole body fitly joined together and compacted by that which every joint 
supplieth, according to the effectual working in the measure of every part, maketh 
increase of the body unto the edifying of itself in love.” The subject is—WMoral restora- 
tive influence the yift of Christ. The “grace” mentioned in the seventh verse refers 
undoubtedly to the spiritual influences of God in the salvation and perfection of 
man. There are four things in this remarkable passage concerning this grace, this 
restorative influence. 

I, THIs GIFT 18 COMMUNICATED BY CuRist. “ But unto every oneof us is given grace 
according to the measure of the gift of Christ.’ The expression, ‘according to the 
measure of the gift of Christ,” means, I think, that its bestowment is entirely according 
to his sovereign purpose, 1. Some have a higher measure of grace than others. Sorae have 
wider and clearer views of truth, a richer experience of Divine love and faithfulness, 
broader and stronger sympathies, more goul-uplifting hopes and aspirations than others. 
There are babes in Christ and there are men in Christ. Some are qualified to be 
ministers, martyrs, apostles, etc. Some are only fitted for a humble place in his vine- 
yard, 2. This measure ‘és determined by the will of Christ. It is according to “the 
measure of the gift of Christ,” not according to the measure of a man’s capacity, merit, 
or effort. The fact removes all ground for boasting in the most distinguished in his 
Church. By the grace of God each disciple is what he is. 

II. THIs GIFT Is COMMUNICATED BY CHRIST AS THE RESULT OF HIS WONDERFUL 
History. ‘ Wherefore he saith, When he ascended up on high, he led captivity captive.” - 
1. His history was a history of wonderful triumphs. ‘He led captivity captive.” He 
achieved the most brilliant victories. He triumphed over “ principalities and powers, 
and made a show of them openly.” He triumphed over death, rose from the grave, 
and became the Prince of life. He triumphs over the enmity of the human heart and 
brings the souls of the rebellious into captivity to himself. 2. His histury was a 
history of wonderful changes. (1) It involved the lowest descension. ‘ He descended 
into the lower parts of the earth.” He not only came down to the condition of humanity, 
but he took his place in the lowest social grade. ‘He made himself of no reputa- 
tion,” etc. He descended even into the grave and Hades. (2) It involved the highest 
ascension, “ He ascended on high . . . ascended up far above all heavens.” How many 
heavens are there? Who can tell the height of the lowest? He is “ far above” the 
highest. He thus descended and ascended in order that “he might fill” all human 
things with his spiritual influence, fill all human souls with his ideas, principles, 
and aims. 

III. THIs GIFT 185 COMMUNICATED BY CHRIST IN A GREAT VARIETY OF MINISTBIES, 
“He gave some, apostles; some, prophets; some, evangelists; and some, pastors and 
teachers.” ‘Apostles.’ No one was an apostle but those immediately appointed by 
Christ, who had seen him after his resurrection and endowed with a special inspiration. 
“ Prophets.’ Those who, being divinely inspired, taught in the name of God, “ Evange- 
lists.” Probably itinerant preachers, missionaries, such as Philip. “ Pastors and 
teachers.” Overseers and instructors. All, who in any way promote spiritual 
Christianity in the world, from those who were the most feeble in power to those 
of loftiest capacity, are the gift of Christ. He calls them, qualifies them, and appoints 
them their respective spheres. 

IV. THis airr 1s COMMUNICATED BY CHRIST IN ORDER TO PERFECT His CouRCH. “ For 
the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry.” Spiritual perfection is the 
grand aim ofall. 1. Perfection in service. ‘For the work of the ministry.” The 
twelfth verse teaches that a perfect ministry implies a perfect character. There is no 
perfect service where there is not a perfect character. A man must be good to do good. 
2. Perfection in unity. “Till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowe 
ledge of the Son of God.” This may mean oneness or harmony of mind in relation te 
the doctrine and spirit of Christ, ἃ common thought and sympathy in relation to the 


196 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. [ση. tv. 1—32, 


SonofGod. 8. Perfection in character. “Unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the 
stature of the fulness of Christ.” Christ is the Standard of excellence, and perfection 
of character is conformity to him. His character is the measure. To be Christ-like is 
to be perfect. 4. Perfection in strength. ‘That we henceforth be no more children, 
tossed to and fro, carried about with every wind of doctrine.’ (1) The strength of 
Jirmness. Possessing power enough to stand against all the winds and waves of reli- 
gious opinions. There are some men at the mercy of every new doctrine. Their souls 
have no anchorage; they are not “rooted and grounded in the faith.” (2) 'The strength 
of determination. ‘“ By the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness.” The ideas scem 
to be not influenced by the mere contingencies of sentiment nor the craftiness of heretical 
teachers. 5. Perfection in Church growth. ‘Speaking the truth in love, may grow 
up into him in all things, which is the Head, even Christ.” The two verses teach: 
(1) That Church growth is an advancing assimilation to Christ. ‘We may grow up 
into him in all things, which is the Head, even Christ.” The true growth of the soul 
is progress towards a perfect conformity to Christ. (2) That Church growth requires 
the loving exhibition of truth. “Speaking the truth in love.” There is a truth, a 
reality in the gospel, and the ministry of this truth in love is necessary to promote the 
true growth of the Church. (8) That Church growth is in every part dependent upon 
its vital connection with Christ. “From whom the whole body fitly joined together,” 
ete. (4) That Church growth requires the healthy action of all its members. “ By 
that which every joint supplieth,” ete.—D. T. 


Vers, 17—19.—Symptoms of moral madness. ‘This I say therefore, and testify in 
the Lord, that ye henceforth walk not as other Gentiles walk, in the vanity of their 
mind, having the understanding darkened, being alienated from the life of God 

_ through the ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of their heart: who 
being past feeling have given themselves over unto lasciviousness, to work all unclean- 
ness with greediness.” In these verses the Christians at Ephesus are warned against 
the course of life pursued by the Gentiles, whom he describes as the prey of mental 
delusion, benighted in intellect, unbridled in licentiousness. Our subject is—Symptoms 
of moral madness. What is “ vanity of mind” in a scriptural sense ὃ Not mere mental 
fatuity, Ματαιότης, vanity, includes moral worthlessness and corruption. Sin is folly, 
and sinners are justly represented as fools. It is said of the prodigal son, that “ when 
he came to himself” he began to inquire. A sinner is not himself. ‘“ We learn for the 
first time,” says Dr. Arnot, “that the man has been mad by learning that his reason is 
restored, It is a characteristic of the insane that they never know or confess their 
insanity until it has passed away: it is when he has ‘come to himself’ that he first 
discovers he has been beside himself. The two beings to whom a man living in 
sin is most ἃ stranger are himself and God ; when the right mind returns he becomes 
acquainted with both again. The first adt of the prodigal, when light dawned on his 
darkness, was to converse with himself, and the second to return to his father.” We 
learn from these verses that this moral madness is associated with several things. 

1. Wiri AN INTELLECT WITHOUT TRUE LIGHT. There are two expressions here indi- 
cating the state of a sinner’s intellect. ‘“ Understanding darkened” and “ ignorance 
that isin them.” When we say that the sinner’s intellect is in the dark, we mean, of 
course, in respect to the spiritual realities and interests of his being. He may have the 
light of poetic fancy and of secular intelligence—the stars of general science may beam 
on his horizon ; but so far as moral light is concerned, he is in the dark. His eyes are 
blinded. Three things show this. 1. His adoption of the partial to the rejection of 
the complete in enjoyment. He has sensual plcasures, but these pleasures even in their 
highest measure constitute but an infinitesimal portion of those enjoyments for which 
human nature craves and for which it is organized—the pleasures of holy loves, devuut 
meditations, sublime fellowships, and uplifting hopes and aims. Is not the man mad 
who chooses the partial and rejects the complete? 2. His adoption of the fleeting to 
the rejection of the enduring in enjoyment. ‘The pleasures and dignities he strives 
after are all connected with this life, which in its longest periods is brief and its 
securest conditions uncertain. What is our life? “A vapour.” All is flowing as a 
stream, all is transient asa dream. The joys and honours of émmortality he practically 
ignores and rejects. Is not this madness? 3. His adoption of the rusnous to the 


oH. rv. 1—32.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, 197 


rejection of the restorative in enjoyment. By the adoption of the partial and the fleeting 
to the rejection of the complete and permanent, he pursues a course that.involves the 
ruin of himself, the utter loss of all good. Are not these facts sufficient to show the 
darkness of the sinner’s mind and the dense ignorance that reigns within him? 

Il, ΊΤΗ a soUL WITHOUT THE TRUE Gop. “ Alienated from the life of God.” No 
soul, no creature in the world can live a moment without God. “ By him we live, and 
move, and have our being.” Yet there is a solemn sense in which moral beings can and 
do live aloof from him, live without him. Sinners are “ without God” in the world. 
“ He is not in all their thoughts.” They shut him out from the whole sphere of their 
feelings, thoughts, and activities. Not only do they practically ignore his presence and 
his claims, but his very existence. They are without God. Bractical atheists. Is not 
this moral madness? 1. Is it not moral madness to shut the eye to the greatest Object 
in the universe—One compared with whom the creation itself is as nothing ? 2. Is it 
not moral madness to disregard the most absolute Master of our destiny—the one Being 
in whose hand our breath is; One whose very word can make for us an eternal hell or 
heaven? 8, Is it not moral madness to have no sympathy with the best Being in 
existence—the Fountain of all love, truth, and blessedness ? 

III], Wira A HEART WITHOUT TRUE SENSIBILITY. “Blindness [hardness] of their 
heart.” “ Past feeling.” This insensibility, whilst it has been brought about by moral 
irrationality and ignorance, reacts, deepens the darkness of the understanding, and 
intensifies the folly of the soul. When the man’s heart gets so hardened as to be “ past 
feeling,” he becomes utterly incapable of taking right views of spiritual things, The 
impure atmosphere of a corrupt and hardened heart will obscure the vision of the 
intcliect. When the heart is “ past feeling,” man becomes so stupid in intellect as to 
be utterly incapable of seeing the beauty or feeling the force of spiritual truth. 1. To 
be “ past feeling ” is to be past the power of true improvement. Where there is no feel- 
ing there is no pain, and where there is no pain there will be no impulse for the search 
of aremedy; A bodily disease without pain is the most hopeless, and a moral disease 
without pain must prove fatal. “ Past feeling.” The moral heart run to “fat.” 2. To 
be “ past feeling” is to. be past the power of érue enjoyment. There is no pleasure 
without feeling. 

IV. Wits A LIFE WITHOUT TRUE ViRTUE. ‘ Given themselves over unto lascivious- 
ness, to work all uncleanness with greediness,” The passage includes two things. 
1. A voluntary abandonment to sin. “Given themselves over unto lasciviousness,” 
etc. Having lost spiritual intelligence, God, and sensibility, the soul abandons itself to 
moral corruption. It does it voluntarily. “ Given themselves.” They are not forced 
by God or the devil. What a sight!—souls made in the image of God plunging into 
a hideous, suoless, lifeless, lawless chaos! 2. An avaricious appetite for sin. ‘“ With 
greediness.” The word “ greediness” elsewhere means “covetousness ”—a desire to 
have more, 

. ConcLtusion. Learn: 1. That a clear intellect requires a clean heart. 2. That a 
clean heart requires a vital connection with God. Religion is essential to a sound 
intellect.—D. T. 


Vers. 20—24.—The true method of studying Christianity. ‘ But ye have not so 
learned Christ ; if so be that ye have heard him, and have been taught by him, as the 
truth is in Jesus: that ye put off concerning the former conversation the old man, 
which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts; and be renewed in the spirit of your 
mind; and that ye put on the new man, which after God is created in righteousness 
and true holiness.” These verses, including those back to the seventeenth, contain a 
general exhortation to holiness, The exhortation takes two forms—the negative and 
the positive, The negative we have noticed in our previous homily, vers. 17—19; the 
positive is now before us. The subject is—The true method of studying Christianity. 
Christianity is to be “ learned.” It is not an inbred knowledge. Man has no intuitions 
about it. Nor is it a knowledge imparted in any way irrespective of the use of our 
faculties and means. It comes to a man as the result of “learning.” The man who 
does not rightly study will never know it. But what is the true method of studying ὃ 
This is our present question, a question which we shall endeavour to answer in the 
light of the passage before us, 


198 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. Tou. rv. 1—82. 


1. THE TRUE METHOD OF STUDYING CHRISTIANITY REQUIRES THAT IT SHOULD BE 
STUDIED IN Carist. “Truth... in Jesus.” Christianity must be looked upon as 
scen in Christ. 1. Not as seen in religious professors, ‘his would give a false view. 
2. Not as seen in religious books. This would give a false view. 3. Not us seen in 
religious institutions. These would give a false view. There is nothing cold in truth 
or narrow, as seen in Jesus, but all that is broad, warm, free, sublime. 

IJ. THE TRUE METHOD OF STUDYING CHRISTIANITY REQUIRES THAT IT SHOULD BE 
STUDIED UNDER THE TUITION OF CHRIST. We are “taught by him,” or, as some trans- 
late it,“ taught in him.” Christ is the only effective Teacher of his own religion. Ifthe 
sun is to be seen it must show itself—all the stars and moons of the universe cannot 
reveal it; so with Christ. But how are we to place ourselves under his tuition? 
Three things are necessary. 1. We should realize our true nioral relation to truth as tt 
ts in him. Truth in him has a special relation to us, not merely as men, but as corrupt, 
guilty, and ruined sinners. We must feel ourselves to be the character to which it is 
specially addressed. 3. We must endeavour to identify ourselves with the particular 
class of character which it indicates. “Truth in Jesus” has reference to special classes 
of sinners, such as the worldling, the formalist, the hypocrite, the inquirer, the peni- 
tent. We must put ourselves in the right class. 3. We must invoke the aid of his 
Spirit. Christ’s body is not in the world, but his Spirit is, The bodies and souls of 
other great men have left the world—Plato, Seneca, etc. They are not with the 
students of their works, but Christ is. He is with all his students. 

III. THE TRUE METHOD OF STUDYING CHRISTIANITY REQUIRES THAT WE SHOULD STUDY 
IT IN ORDER TO BE MADE CaRIST-LIKE. “ Which after God ”—that is, God’s image—“ is 
created in righteousness and true holiness.” It is not to be studied for intellectual, 
ecclesiastical, secular, or professional purposes, but for moral ends—studied in order to 
make us like God. The moral transformation is here indicated as consisting of two 
things. 1. The renunciation of the old and corrupt character. The “old man” is put 
off. (1) Character is the man. It is moral character that makes the human animal a 
man. “Asaman thinketh in heart so is he.” His character forms his world, his 
heaven or his hell. (2) A sinful character is the old man. It is old because it is the 
Jjirst character we get. This must be put off. Old principles, purposes, habits, motives, 
thrown away. 2. The adoption of a new principle of character. ‘“ Be renewed in the 
spirit of your mind.” Renewed in the central springs of being. The assimilation of 
our character to the grandest ideal which after God is created, and so on.—D, T. 


Vers. 25—32.—The abjured and the enjoined tn Christian life. “ Wherefore,” 
etc. In the preceding verses, as we have seen, under the head of The true method 
of studying Christianity, the apostle exhorted the Ephesians “to put off the old man 
and to put on the new man.” He here proceeds to particularize and urge this the great 
practical work of Christianity. He abjures the elements of the old man and enjoins 
the elements of the new. Our subject is the abjured and the enjoined in the Christian 
life. 

1. THE ABJURED IN CHRISTIAN Lire. There are certain things here which are, alas! 
often found in connection with nominal Christians, and which are therefore too often 
regarded as identified with the Christian system, which are here abjured in language 
most earnest and strong. What are they? 1. Lying speech. “ Putting away lying.” 
A lie is a falsehood intended to deceive, with an immoral design; it is a misrepresenta- 
tion of that to another about which.he has ἃ right to know the truth. What, then, is 
fiction and parable, say you? There is no justifiable fiction that does not agree with 
fact and serve the cause of reality and morals. Lying is one of the most prevalent 
sins. The ancient heathens everywhere practised it, and moderns too. All travellers 
and missionaries bear testimony to this, Heathens are not to be believed on their 
oaths. Alas! the vice is not confined to heathendom; it prevails throughout the 
civilized world. Lies fill the social atmosphere. .Men in every department of life are 
deceiving and being deceived by their fellow-men, and often for selfish and immoral 
ends. Christianity condemns lies. ‘“ Lying lips are an abomination unto the Lord.” 
And “liars at last shall have their part in the lake that burneth with fire and 
brimstone.” Christianity is essentially and eternally antagonistic to all insincerities 
and unrealities, Vanity, cowardice, and greed are the prolific factors of falsehoods 


on. Iv. 1—32.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 199 


2. Sinful anger. ‘Be ye angry, and sin not.” We say, ‘‘sinful anger,” for the text 
implies that there is an anger that is not sinful. Anger is the mind in emotional 
antagonism, and in a world of unreality, sin, and crime there is much to justify the 
strongest antagonism of the soul. Christ himself looked upon the conduct of the 
Jews with anger (Mark iii. 6). Indignation sometimes fired his breast, and “ woes” 
like thunderbolts rolled from his lips. The stronger a being’s love for the right, the 
nightier his indignation for the wrong, The text implies two things concerning sinful 
anger. (1) That it is abiding, Hence the command, “ Let not the sun go down upon 
your wrath.” Anger should not be allowed to continue in the mind, because it is 
painful to the soul; it is a fire that burns. He who cherishes it could not better 
gratify the vengeance of an enemy, for be is in agony all the while. The great Creator, 
in whose nature there is “ no fury,” never made the human soul for anger. “ Let not 
the sun go down upon your wrath.” Do not take it to bed with you; it will break 
your slumber and it will breed the devils of revenge. “Anger resteth in the bosom 
of fovis.” There is another thing here implied concerning sinful anger. (2) It is 
favourable to the devil. ‘“ Neither give place to the devil.” An angry soul is just the 
sphere to which the devil has the freest access and can best work out his malignant 
ends. All the assassinations, murders, and wars he works through angry souls, Don’t 
give place to the devil. Human souls may keep the devil out. He cannot enter 
without their consent. 8, Social dishonesty. “Let him that stole steal no more.” 
Stealing in some way or other is a vice as prevalent as lying. Our popular ideas of 
larceny are not deep or broad enough for Christianity. Englishmen regard those as 
thieves only whom the law has convicted of pilfering, and who are generally amongst 
the poor and needy. But in the eye of Christianity he is a thief who takes from 
another his rightful due. The tradesman who deals in short weights and measures, 
and overcharges for his wares, is a thief; the servant who does not occupy faithfully in 
his master’s service the hours and faculties for which he is paid, is a thief; the physician 
who prolongs his visit to his patient beyond what is necessary, in order to get gain, 
is a thief; the rulers who tax the people to pay them enormous salaries for offices 
inefficiently and often injuriously filled, are thieves, To all these Christianity says, 
“Let him that stole steal no more;” be honest. 4. Corrupt language. “ Let no 
corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth.” It is a putrescent language that 
is here abjured. What is a foul speech in the sense of Christianity ? Not the ungram- 
matic in structure or the inelegant in style. The irreligious speech, which treats 
sacred things with frivolous profanity and sneering ridicule, is foul and corrupt; the 
selfish speech, which argues and persuades solely for personal gratification, is foul and 
corrupt; the malicious speech, which endeavours to undermine the influence, damage 
the interests, and injure the reputation of others, is foul and corrupt; the sensuous 
speech, that seeks to influence the animal passions and pollute the pure love of man- 
kind, is foul and corrupt. All such language—and, alas! it abounds amongst us—is 
indeed putrescent. As heaps of decomposing vegetable and animal matter send forth 
gases into the atmosphere injurious to the physical health of the world, all corrupt 
communications proceeding from the mouths of men impregnate the mental atmosphere 
with elements damaging to the moral health of souls, 5, The anti-Divine. “ And 
grieve not the Holy Spirit of God.” Of course we are not to suppose that the eternal 
Spirit literally endures grief. He is the ever-blessed God. What is meant is, “do not 
do that which is repugnant to the heart and desires of the infinite Spirit.’ And what 
is thus repugnant to the Spirit? All that the Spirit here abjures, as well as moral evil 
of all kinds. A good reason is here added by Paul, ‘‘ Whereby ye are sealed unto the 
day of redemption.” This expression implies two things. ὦ There is a perfection 
awaiting the genuine disciples of Christ—“ the day of redemption ”—redemption from 
all evils, corporeal, intellectual, social, spiritual. Blessed day! (2) The Divine Spirit 
has secured them to this, They are sealed for it, How flagrant the ingratitude and 
impiety of opposing such a spirit! Another thing abjured here is: 6. Malevolent 
conduct, Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamour, and evil-speaking, be 
put away from you, with all malice.” Malice, or malevolence, is the root of all. It is 
malice that generates the bitter things in social life; it is malice that kindles the fires 
of “wrath and anger;” it is malice that makes the tumultuous “clamours” and the 
contentious brawl, Let this malice be destroyed, and social love and vurity and 


200 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. (om. rv. 1—32 


peace shall prevail. Such are some of the evils that Christianity abjures, and, in 
abjuring, it abjures tnat which is the disgrace, the guilt, and the curse of mankind. 
With an exulting confidenve, I say to infidels that whatever is bad in the world or 
the Church, instead of growing out of Christianity, is in direct antagonism to it. All 
wrong is antichrist; all right is Christian. 

II. THe ENJOINED IN CHRISTIAN LIFE, Christian life is not a negation. It does 
not consist in the mere deprivation of the morally wrong; its essence is the spirit o 
goodness—love. This love, in its social character, is forcibly inculcated in these words, 
‘We are here taught: 1. That the social love enjuined is courteous, “ Be ye kind one 
to another.” Christianity requires us to cherish a benignant spirit, and maintain an 
amiable and considerate deportment towards all mankind, Where this kindness of 
nature is there will be true courtesy and a gentle bearing in all our intercourse with 
men. There is a politeness of manner in society which has no heart, no nature; it is 
mere mechanism and polish; it is often in alliance with the coarse in thought, the 
selfish in spirit, the putrid in moral feeling. Such politeness is theatrical. The coarse- 
minded churl on the stage assumes the costume and plays the part of a gentleman. 
The spirit of Christianity is antagonistic to all that is coarse, crabbed, and morose. 
Love “ doth not behave itself unseemly.” 2. That the social love enjoined is compas- 
sionate. “Tender-hearted.” There is suffering in society—pbysical, mental, moral, 
social. Children of sorrow and trial are found in every walk of life. Towards those 
Christianity inculcates “ tender-hearted” compassion. ‘“ Put on... as the elect of 
God, holy and beloved, bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meckness, 
long-suffering ; forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if any man have a 
quarrel against any: even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye” (Col. iii. 12, 18). ““Be 
ye all of one mind, having compassion one of another, love as brethren, be pitiful, be 
courteous: not rendering evil for evil, or railing for railing: but contrariwise blessing ; 
kuowing that ye are thereunto called, that ye should inherit a blessing ” (1 Pet. iii. 8, 9). 
8. That the social love enjoined is forgiving. “‘ Forgiving one another, even as God for 
Christ’s sake hath forgiven you.” Few men pass through life without meeting with 
those who commit offences against them; those who seek to damage their secular 
interests, their social enjoyments, or their moral reputation. How does Christianity 
require its disciples to act towards them? Not with the spirit of vengeance, but with 
that of forgiveness. “ Forgiving one another.” The words contain three facts. (1) 
That God hath forgiven Christians. Glorious fact this. (2) That God in forgiving 
Christians has acted in Christ. ‘ As God for Christ’s sake hath forgiven you,” Θεός ἐν 
Xpicr@—in Christ. God works through various organs, through material nature, through 
moral mind, and through Jesus Christ. But it is only through the last—Christ—that 
he forgives, ‘God is in Christ reconciling the world unto himself.” It is only in 
Christ that he works in the sinner that state of mind which separates him from his 
sin, (3) That God’s forgiveness of Christians is a rule for their forgiveness. “ Even 
as God.” How does God grant forgiveness? (a) Freely. No urging required, no 
constraint. (Ὁ) Abundantly. “He will abundantly pardon.” “How oft shall my 
brother sin against me, and I forgive him ? until seven times?” This was Peter’s ques- 
tion to Christ ; and what was the reply? “ Jesus saith unto him, I say not unto thee, Until 
seven times: but, Until seventy times seven” (Matt. xviii. 21, 22). 4, That the social 
love enjoined is God-like. “Be ye therefore followers of God, as dear children.” 
* Become, then, followers of God, as beloved children (Ellicott). ‘ God is love.” Seek 
to become like him in love. His love is disinterested, compassionate, forgiving, bound- 
less, and ever-acting. This is the standard to be aimed at; nothing lower. (1) God 
can be imitated in this respect. We cannot become like God in wisdom, power, sove- 
reignty, but we can in love. The child can love as well as the man, and the man 
as Well as the seraph. The God of love hath made all souls to love. (2) God must 
be imitated in this respect. It is essential to happiness. Heaven is in this love, and 
nowhere else. “ He that loveth dwelleth in God, and God in him.” 5. That the social 
love is self-sacrificing. ‘And walk in love, as Christ also hath loved us, and hath 
given himself for us an offering and a sacrifice to God for a sweet-smelling savour.” 
(1) The self*sacrificing love which Christianity enjoins is like that exemplified in Christ. 
‘Christ “hath given himself for us.” “ He gave himself for our sins.” ‘‘ He loved us, 
and gave himself for ua.” Christ so loved mankind that he sacrificed his time, 


on. rv, 1—32.) THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 201 


energy, peace, reputation, life, all to save them. The love that Christianity enjoins 
must be like this, nothing inferior to this, nothing short of this; self-sacrificing love is 
the love of Christianity, It is the true heroic element. (2) The self-sacrificing love 
which Christianity enjoins is acceptable to God. It is “a sweet-smelling savour.” Its 
exhibition in Christ was delightful to the heart of God, and the same self-sacrifice in 
man can alone make man pleasing in his sight. 

Conotusion. What a sublime system is Christianity! It abjures in the life of its 
disciples all that is false, malign, unjust, impure, and profane, and enjoins that spirit of 
love which purifies, ennobles, and beatifies.—D. T. 


Vers. 1—3.— Walking worthily. It is touching to see how the great apostle, who 
had a right to issus commands to the Churches in the name of Christ, prefers to beseech 
his readers with gentle entreaty as “the prisoner in the Lord.” This method is as 
much a mark of his wisdom as of his humility and kindness of heart. For we are all 
more easily moved by persuasion and sympathy than by patronage and authority. 

I, CuRIsTIANs ARE CALLED TO A HIGH VocaTION. 1. There isa Divine call. We 
are not left to drift through life aimlessly, nor are we permitted to carve out careers 
for ourselves. Divine purposes go belore us, mapping out our course of future service ; 
and Divine voices in the gospel and in our hearts bid us follow our vocation. 2. The 
call is lofty and worthy of all honour. Christians are not saved with a bare and 
beggarly deliverance, like shipwrecked mariners flung upon the beach, half drowned 
anc bereft of everything. When we enter the Christian life we commence a course of 
high service, vast enterprise, and splendid aims. 3. The purpose of this vocatioa is to 
glorify God and bless the world by realizing the idea of the Christian Church. In the 
previous chapter St. Paul has been describing some of the great privileges of Christians, 
whieh consist chiefly in their being built into one great temple and growing together in 
union, The breaking down of national, ecclesiastical, intellectual, and moral barriers, 
and the building up of one great family, knit together by love and united through 
a common union with Christ, is St. Paul’s magnificent conception of the fruits that the 
gospel is to bear on earth. 

11. Ir 1s THe ΤΥ or CHRISTIANS TO WALK WORTHILY OF THEIR HIGH CALLING. 
1. The responsibility of fulfilling our vocation rests upon us. We are called, not 
driven, and we can disobey the Divine voice. But though we are free from compulsion, 
we are not free from responsibility. For God has a right to call us whither he will, 
and Christ has laid us under peculiar obligations by his work and sacrifice for us. 
2. This fulfilment of our vocation must be in our daily conduct. We are to “walk 
worthily.” Belief and worship are not enough. The life and the whole work and 
daily occupation are to follow the Divine call, 3. Christian consistency is squaring our 
conduct with our calling. Many make much of mere self-consistency; but it is 
well often to be inconsistent with ourselves, or we can never progress, much less repent 
and amend. Nor is it enough to make our actions consistent with our opinions, unless 
both opinions and actions are consistent with truth, with God’s will, and with our 
vocation. 

III. WaLkINa WoRTHILY oF THE CHRISTIAN CALLING CONSISTS CHIEFLY IN MAIN- 
TAINING AND INCREASING OUR MUTUAL BROTHERHOOD. Love is the queen of the New 
Testament graces. Selfishness, moroseness, lack of sympathy, and the like are 
sins against the peculiar genius of the gospel. Τὸ be zealous in defending the faith, 
to be pure as white marble in saintly separation from vice, to be strict in integrity, etc., 
will not be enough ; for our calling is to a brotherhood, and our worthy walking must 
help this. 1. Negatively, we must have lowliness which declines to assert one’s self 
before one’s brethren, meekness which acts gently to them, and long-suffering which 
bears with any provocations they may give us, 2. Positively, we must extend Christian 
unity and the spirit of peace. The peaceful brotherly spirit must not only be passively 
harmless, it must be earnest, active, and diligent.—W. F. A. 


Vers. 4—6.—Christian unity. This is a frequently recurring theme in the Epistle 
to the Ephesians, and it is always treated with an emphasis that marks its supreme 
importance, and with a prophetic hopefulness that regards the higher development of it 
as one of the grandest features of the ideal future, 


202 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. ἴση. rv. 1—32 


1, WaHenrin Caristian unity consists. 1. Eaternally it consists in the “one 
body.” Plainly the “one body” is the Church, the community of Christians. It 
should be clear to an impartial reader of the New Testament that neither Christ nor 
his apostles contemplated the ideal of the kingdom of heaven on earth as we see that 
kingdom realized only in a Christendom torn and distracted with the bitter rivalries 
and mutual excommunications of innumerable sects. The Church of Christ, the 
Church in St. Paul’s conception, was to be catholic—one great family, harmonious, 
mutually sympathetic and mutually helpful. 2. Internally it consists in the “one 
Spirit.” So long as there is not oneness of spirit in the Church, the attempt to preserve 
external union by force is futile; nay, it is positively hurtful. It is best not to have 
a mock semblance of union when at heart we differ strongly. But if there is a unity 
of spirit, that should be regarded as the most essential thing. History shows that the 
greatest breaches of unity have been caused by the illiberal efforts of bigots to constrain 
uniformity. If we want true unity we must dispense with agreement in doctrine, 
form of worship and ecclesiastical order, and be content with oneness of spirit. This 
unity will be realized, not by increasing, but by minimizing, the points of uniformity; 
in comprehensiveness, not iv stringent discipline; with larger charity, never with more 
absolute authority. 

II. Towaxkps WHAT END CHRISTIAN UNITY 18 TENDING. The Christian calling points 
to “one hope.” All things make for final integration (ch. ἱ, 10). We fail of our vocation 
if we are satisfied with a churlish isolation. There will be varieties of life in the future, 
no doubt, as there will be “‘ many mansions.” But all Christians will be united in the 
one city of God, even in the one house of our Father (John xiv. 2). It becomes, 
therefore, our manifest duty to heal the breaches of Zion. Controversialists should ask 
twemselves whether they bring the millennium nearer by their pugnacious advocacy of 
pet doctrines, or drive it further off by deepening the fissures of a sorely divided 
Christendom ; and ecclesiastical advocates of Church unity should consider whether 
it is likely they will win over to their side all the divergent sects by standing on the 
narrowest possible ground and erecting about it frowning ramparts, 

IIL. ON wHaT ORIGINAL FOUNDATIONS CHRISTIAN UNITY 18 BASED. 1, One Lord, 
We all have one and the same Christ, and in him weare une. In proportion as Christi- 
anity becomes less an affair of theological dogmas and ecclesiastical systems, and more 
a religion of personal devotion to Christ, shall we be able to realize our true unity. 
2. One faith. All Christians must experience the same spiritual faith in becoming 
Christ’s, and must walk equally by faith. Opinions and rules may differ, but we do 
not live by opinions and rules—we live by faith, Now, faith is the same spiritual act 
in child and in philosopher, in penitent and in saint, in the shouting recruit of the 
Salvation Army and in the grave Quaker, in the evangelicil Methodist and in the devout 
restorer of mediwval theology. 3. One baptism. There is one outward sacrament 
common to nearly the whole of Christendom significant of the washing and renewal all 
need and all can receive in Christ. 4. One God and Father. A common worship 
unites, Communion with our one Father makes us members of one family.—W. F, A. 


Ver. 7.—Measured grace, I. CHRISTIANS ARE RECIPIENTS OF GRACE. 1. Without 
grace we can do nothing. All our attainments will be proportionate to the amount and 
kind of grace we receive. We cannot fulfil our vocation nor realize the grand unity of 
the Church by unaided human efforts. 2. But yrace is vouchsafed to Christians. It is 
the peculiar privilege of the New Testament dispensation that it brings the energy of 
grace as well as the light of truth. 

II. CunisTIAN GRACE 18 THE GIFT OF CuRIstT. 1. Grace must bea gift. It would 
cease to be grace if we could create, earn, or deserve it. All tho blessings of the gospel 
are free gilts, as are also our natural endowments. 2. Christian grace comes direct 
from ro His sacrifice won it, 1118 ascension enables him to dispense it (vers. 
8—10). 

TIL Tas GRAOE 18 GIVEN TO ALL CurisTIANs. It is not reserved for high ecclesi- 
astical officials and select saints. We are no Christians if we have it not. The Church 
is the body of all Christians, and it is one because the same grace flows through the 
whole brotherhood. The gospel is broad and democratir, 

VI. Tus @Rack Is DESPKASED TG EACH INDIVIDUAL S*VERALLY. Wach one receives 


eH. Iv, 1—32.) THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 203 


the gift. We cannot be blessed by Divine grace in crowds and masses. The Church 
can only be endowed with grace when her private members are personally blessed. We 
do not receive grace by becoming part of the grand Catholic Church. But we realize 
the unity of the Church when we have been first blessed with Christ’s grace in our 
own souls. 

V. THIS GRACE 18 MEASURED OUT IN VARYING PROPORTIONS. In Christ there was 
grace without measure. In us it is measured. Christ has a right to measure it, 
because it is a gift which he can withhold or bestow as he pleases. Yetif it is measured 
there is no stint, for if Christ has first given us himself, we may be sure that he will 
never keep back any needful lower blessings. The measure of the grace is determined 
by our spiritual capacity, our faith, our need, our special mission.—W. F. A. 


Vers. 9, 10.—The universal experience of Christ. I. THe ΑΒΟΈΝΒΙΟΝ oF CHRIST 
IMPLIES THAT HE HAD PREVIOUSLY DESCENDED. 1. It implies that he was low down at 
some period. Had he always enjoyed his rightful honours there could have been 
no act of rising to them. The coronation shows that the sovereign had once been 
a subject. The greatness of the elevation of Christ and the stir and change it produces 
are significant of the low depth of an earlier state. 2. It implies that he had been 
highly exalted at a previous period. The mere act of ascension may not show this, but 
the spiritual character of it does. All things ultimately find their level. The high- 
shooting fountain is an evidence that its water has come froma great elevation. 3. It 
implies that by his deep humiliation Christ merited his great exaltution. He did not 
simply deserve it by way of compensation. He earned the high honour of the Ascension 
by the patient sacrifice of himself in his descent down to a life of lowly service, down 
to the cross, down even to the dim land of the dead (Phil. ii, 5—11). Thus the last 
is first, and he who humbled himself is exalted. 

iL THE ASCENSION AND PREVIOUS DESCENDING OF CHRIST ENABLE HIM TO FILL 
ALL THINGS. 1. His presence enters into every grade of being. From his awful 
primeval glory down to the dread depths of Hades and then up to the throne and the 
right hand of God, by the vast sweep and range of his profound humiliation and 
superb exaltation, along every step of existence traversed, Christ comes into personal 
contact with all life and death. 2. His experience gives him knowledge of every grade 
of being. -And with this knowledge he has sympathy for all. Our lack of wide 
sympathies is chiefly owing to our narrow experience. Christ’s sympathy is as universal 
as his experience. In his exaltation he does not forget the scenes that moved his heart 
in lowlier walks. 

«“... Resting by th’ incarnate Lord, 
Once bleeding, now triumphant for my sake, 
1 mark him, how by seraph hosts adored, 
He to earth’s lowest cares is still awake.” 


3. Filling all things by experience, knowledge, and sympathy, he has power over all 
things. Down even tothe spirits in prison to whom he preached by the Divine Spirit, 
and thigugh every rank of life, he has influences to exert, graces to bestow, redemption 
to accoxaplish. ‘There is no order of things beyond the reach of Christ. As the great 
reward of his sacrifice and triumph, of his deepest humiliation and his highest exalta- 
tion, he fills heaven, earth, and hell with a presence which, if he is the same now as 
when he lived among men, is everywhere healing and redemptive.—W. F. A, 


Vers, 13—16.—The full-grown man. The object for which the various gifts that 
flow from the ascension of Christ (see ver. 8) are bestowed is here described. That 
object is not the mere enjoyment of the gifts themselves. Jt is practical and for 
a distinct purpose, viz. to accomplish “the building up of the body of Christ.” For 
this same end the offices of the Christian ministry and all other ordinances and insti- 
tutions of Christianity are now ordained. It is not enough to hold services and gather 
together decorous congregations. Nor is it even enough to secure converts. The final 
object is to build up the Church itself, by developing its manhood and cementing 
its unity. The end is twofold; and though the two parts of it are as intimately 
connected in experience as they are here blended together in the language of St. Paul, 
they can be considered separately. The first element in the building up of the 


204 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. fo. rv. 1—32, 


Church is the development of individual Christians from spiritual infancy to spiritual 
manhood; the second is the consolidation of the several members of the Church into 
the one budy of Christ—the inward growth to the stature of the fulness of Christ, 
the outward growth of the various parts of that great organism of which Christ is the 
Head. 

I. THE INWARD GROWTH OF SPIRITUAL MANHOOD. Individual Christians must 
grow if the whole Church is to grow. 1. The characteristics of the growth. It is the 
gradual attainment of manhood. There are babes in Christ among men who are 
old in years. The work of the gospel is not accomplished till it has made strong 
men of us. A religion of soft sentiment and imbecile intelligence, such as some 
would commend as a rebuke to our pride, would find no favour with St. Paul. We 
was a man of robust intellect and vigorous energy. The childlikeness of the Chrisuan 
is far from the childishness of the sentimental religionist. Many of the greatest 
heroes have had a singular childlikeness which has only enhanced the manliness 
of their lives. The perfect Christian is just the perfect man. In particular he must 
have: (1) Increase of knowledge. (2) Stability of belief; the lack of personal convictions 
that is so common among us is a symptom of intellectual feebleness. We do not 
want rigid dogmatism, but surely as our thinking and experience progress some 
truths should emerge out of the mist of doubt clear and certain, some ground should 
be securely won, though much must still be beyond our comprehension. (3) Mdelity ; 
“speaking the truth,” or rather “dealing truly;” for this a manly firmness must 
be acquired. (4) Love; “in love,” etc. 2. The relation of this growth to Christ. 
(1) Christ is the object of our growing knowledge; we have to grow in “the know- 
ledge of the Son of God.” (2) Christ is the standard of Christian manliness. ‘The 
measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ” is what we are called to grow up 
to. (8) Christ is the end of Christian effort. We have to grow “into him.” The 
degree of our Christian progress may be determined by our nearness to Christ. 
Apparent increase of knowledge, energy, etc., is real decline if we are drifting further 
from Christ. ‘he perfect Christian is at once he who is most Christ-iike in character 
and he who is nearest to Christ in living communion. 

Il. Taz ovTwaRD GROWTH oF THE CHURCH. The whole body grows with the 
gradual increase of its several parts. But this general increase has a character and 
a history of its own. The Church grows up to manhood. Through all the ages 
of Christendom it has been the object of Christ to develop and educate his people 
till the infant Church of the first age should become the’ manly Church of the last. 
This thought warns us against the foolish veneration for antiquity which Lord 
Bacon repudiated, reminding us that these later days are the truly ancient times 
when the world has grown old in experience. Doubtless we may learn much by 
the study οἱ patristic and primitive Christianity. But we shall be in error if we 
imagine that all we have to do is to revive the days of the Church’s childhood ; and 
we shall be far from the broad, strong, spirit of St. Paul if we timidly shrink from 
those new advances that make for the increase of the Church’s manhood. The 
Church, as well as the individual Christian must grow in knowledge; it should aico 
grow in fixity of established faith, in fidelity, and in love. The true growth of the 
Church will also show (1) more harmony and unity of sympathy and co-operation 
in work—* fitly framed and knit together;” (2) at the same time more elasticity, 
versatility, and variety of life and action—“ every joint” supplying its own share of 
work; (3) enlargement in numbers and stze—“‘ increase of the body ;” and (4) ccuser 
union with Christ—the whole body must “grow up in all things unto him which is 
the Head.”—W. F, A. 


Ver. 21.—As the truth ts in Jesus. These words describe the method, not the 
substance, of Christian teaching ; the latter is adverted to in the next verse. The 
historical name, “ Jesus,” instead of the more common official name, “ Christ,” indicates 
that this teaching is given through the life of our Lord on earth. We come to 
the knowledge of truth by hearing him, by being taught of him, by seeing it as it is 
in him. 

I. THE KNOWLEDGE OF YRUTH 18 OF SUPREME iMPORTANCE Tu Us. The means 
is proportioned to the ond. If the life of Christ is necessary for the revelation 


ou. Iv. 1—32.} THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 205 


of truth, the truth thus revealed must be of first moment, Emotion without truth 
is vapid sentiment; and action without truth can have no moral character, and is as 
likely to be hurtful as useful. It is a blind man’s groping. We can dispense with 
a superfluity of dogma. We have too many words about truth. But truth itself, 
the living spiritual reality, is the very breath of our souls. To Know ourselves and 
our vocation, to know God, his love and his will, to know the spiritual order of 
things as far as it touches our own lives and conduct, is of vital interest. 

II, TRuTH Is REVEALED IN Curist. Truth is written on the great book of 
creation, but in obscure hieroglyphics, for nature is an inarticulate prophet. Trutk 
has also come through the inspiration of thought and conscience in poets and seers. 
But then it is always in words; and words make it but a clumsy garment hiding 
its finer beauty and, at best, speaking at second hand. In Christ we see truth 
intelligible, powerful, touching. It is revealed in his very self and in his words 
and deeds as they are the outcome and signs of his character and nature. Christ 
is the truth. He has but to be and to be seen and heard for truth to be revealed. 

1Π. Tais REVELATION OF TRUTH IN CHRIST I8 OF A DISTINCTIVE CHARACTER. 
1. It is human. Truth is seen in Jesus just because he is a real and perfvct Man. 
As man is made in the image of God, the very being of a perfect man must be 
a manifestation of Divine thoughts, (1) Therefore any dogmas that are contrary to 
humanity are false. (2) Therefore, also, we need not fear truth. She has a human 
countenance. 2. It is Wving. ‘Truth in words is cold and dead, though it may 
be clear and beautiful. Truth in Jesus is alive, revealing itself in action, putting 
forth energy, responding to our sympathy. 3. It is spiritual. Truth of religion 
and of conduct is what we seein Jesus, not reminiscences of secular history nor 
anticipations of material science. ‘The highest truth concerns God and the soul, 
duty and the unseen world. 4. It is beautiful. Christ’s glory was full of grace and 
truth. In his face truth has no terrors, but the most winning attractions and the 
most inoving loveliness. 

IV. SucH A PRESENTATION OF TRUTH CALLS FORTH DUTIES ON OUR PART. 1. We 
have to “learn Christ.” That is the one lesson for our souls. We may learn all 
systems of theology and yet know nothing of the highest truth, if we do not 
know Christ. ‘'hey who sit at the feet of Jesus drink from the deepest fountains. 
As Christ is best described to us in the four Gospels, these Gospels are the chief 
source of Christian knowledge. Yet inasmuch as the apostles interpret the mind of 
Christ, we may learn Christ from the whole of the New Testament. But we must 
also come to a personal communion with Christ in order to know him aright. 2. We 
have to prove how we have learned Christ by our conduct. This knowledge is to 
shape our actions. Fidelity, purity, and charity of life must make men see what 
truth we have found in Jesus.—W. F. A. 


Ver. 26.—Anger. I. ΑΝΘῈΒ 1s a pouty. 1. It is natural. The man who is 
never angry is lacking in moral fibre. Christ was sometimes angry (Mark iii. 5). 
God is angry with the wicked (Ps. vii. 11). 2. It is just. We cannot rightly 
rebuke evil without anger. Lies and cruelty should not be treated mildly. Christ 
would not have been faithful to righteousness if he had not shown indignation 
in response to hypocrisy. 8. It is useful. We may save a man by first being angry 
with him. A mild complacency may be the greatest cruelty to a bad man. Even 
when we cannot rouse the conscience of the guilty by anger we may protect the 
weak and wronged who claim our first sympathy. 

II. ANGER BRINGS A DANGER. It is the most perilous of duties even when it is 
obligatory. 1. It is in danger of being indulged for our own satisfaction instead of 
the resistance and checking of moral evil. _ Personal revenge is likely to usurp the 
place of righteous indignation, 2. It is in danger of running into excess, It is a 
passion, and every passion tends to irrational extravagance. The angry man must 
beware of losing his temper. 

Ti]. THE LIMITS OF RIGHTEOUS ANGER SHOULD BE OAREFULLY MARKED, 1, We 
must avoid the mingling of wicked feelings with necessary anger. While angry with 
our’ brother we must not cease to love him. We may be most angry with those we 
ove most. But when anger provokes us to wish harm to any one, it degenerates te 


206 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. (ox. 1v. 1—32. 


hatred and becomes a great sin. 2. We must not cherish anger for long. The 
mercy of God is everlasting; his wrath is for a season (Ps. ciii. 9). It is the devil 
ouly whose habitual mood is anger. Men may do fearful harm by the sudden 
ebullition of a hasty temper—harm which may be repented of in vain for long years. 
Nevertheless, the sullen persistence of ill-feeling for weeks and longer that some 
people practise is in itself more culpable. It would be well to remember every 
night that we cannot have Gud’s forgiveness of our sins of the day unless we hava 
first forgiven those who have sinned against us. 8. We must not lose self-control 
in anger. ‘ Neither give place to the devil.” 

IV. THe CHRISTIAN SAFEGUARD AGAINST THE ABUSE OF ANGER 18 LOVE. No 
wan can be safely angry with his brother unless he first love him. It is only they 
that love much who can make a wise use of the furious weapon cf anger. If we 
are “kind one to another, tender-hearted, forgiving each other,” we shall be able 
to show righteous anger without lowering ourselves to personal spite. Then our 
anger will be a pain to us and we shall long to abandon it for more congenial feelinys. 
So shall we be like God, whose wrath is sinless, because kx loves his children 
through all the anger their sin has called forth.—W. F. A. 


Ver. 30.—Grieving the Holy Spirit of God. 1. Waavit 1Β To GRizrve THE HoLy 
Spirit or Gop. We are startled at the expression. Few of us would have thought of 
using it if we had not found it in the Bible. It cannot be a mere figure of speech. It 
must describe a strange, sad, touching fact. 1. God is a living Spirit. He can be 
grieved. 2, God is our Father, related to us, loving us. It is of the self-sacyificing 
nature of love that it lays itself out to be wounded when it is treated unworthily. We 
can always hurt most those who love us most. 3. God is within us. The Holy Spirit 
is God dwelling in our spirits. Because he is so near he is much concerned with our 
character and conduct. 

11. How ΜῈ MAY GRIEVE THE HoLy Spirit or Gop. 1. All sin is grievous to 
him, as holiness is hurt by unholiness and love by unworthiness. This should be one 
warning against our carelessness in falling into temptation. If we do not feel it, God 
does. A child who would not refrain from a bad thing on its own account, checks 
himself as he thinks how it would vex his mother. We should be warned by remem- 
bering that our sin hurts God ;—did it not kill Christ? 2. St. Paul has in mind the 
particular sin of corrupt speech (ver. 29). This defiles the soul and dishonours the 
temple in which the Spirit of God dwells. Flippant conversation on sacred subjects, as 
well as language that is absolutely debased, is grievous in the ears of God, not only on 
its own account, but because it reveals a low tone of spiritual life and a want of the 
reverence aud love that we owe to the Holy Spirit. 

ΠΙ. WHY WE sHOULD BE MOST OAREFUL NOT TO GRIEVE THE Hoty Spirit oF 
Gop. 1. Because of the obligations of gratitude for past grace. If we are spiritual 
Christians we are “sealed;” 1.6. we have the mark of God’s recognition and owning 
given by the Spirit. After accepting the uniform of the Divine King, how can we 
heedlessly bring dishonour on his Name? 2. Because of the responsibilities of our 
present condition, We are sealed “in the Spirit.” To be in living relation with the 
Spirit of God is the condition of all who are new creatures in Christ. This higher 
fellowship brings higher claims. 3. Because of the hope of our future redemption. 
Christians are sealed “ unto the day of redemption.” ‘The first day of redemption is the 
day of Christ’s death, but that marks only the beginning of deliverance. To each soul 
the day of God’s forgiveness and welcome of the penitent is a day of redemption ; but 
perfect redemption is deliverance from all evil. This is at present a hope, and the 
hope depends on the work of the Spirit of God. If we are grieving the Spirit of God 
how can we ask for his aid? ‘There is danger lest one grieve the Holy Spirit so that 
he ae α his departure, and then how dark and woeful will the deserted soul be!— 
Ww. F. : 


Vers. 81, 32.—Charity tothe undeserving. I. ΤῊΕ ΧΕΘΑΤΙΨΕ DUTIE8. “ Let all bitter- 
ness, etc., be put away from you.” Various influences tempt us to the indulgence of 
these dark passions. 1. Natural disposition. Some men appear to be born with an 
acrid and mordant temper, as some plants secrete irritant poisons. 2. Provocation. 


oa, V. 1—33.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 


207 


Anger rouses anger as fire kindles fire, The reference to forgiveness shows that St 
Paul is especially condemning outbursts of wrath against people who have treated us 
maliciously, 3. Evil example. “Clamour and railing” are public offences. When 
many men concur in pouring wrath on a selected victim it is difficult to stand aside 
from the current of abuse and recognize the unholiness of it. The admonition may be 
applied (1) to public life, that politics may be freed from the degradation of personal 
spite ; (2) to affairs of religion in condemnation of the odium theologicum, and also 
of the odium antitheologicum,—why should we hate a man because his opinion is not 
ours? (8) to social life, since it is better to suffer an injury unavenged than to add a 
second injury in return. 

Il, Tue positive putizs, Christianity is not satisfied with passive meckness, We 
must not only turn the cheek to the smiter, we must love our enemies—a duty of 
positive feeling and action. 1. General kindness. This would destroy the selfishness 
that is at the root of all revengeful feelings. He who has injured us is οὐχ brother. 
The ties of our common brotherhood that urge us to love him should be stronger than the 
provocations of his unkindness that would make us bitter against him. 2. Tender- 
heartedness. This should make us pity the offender for the shame and guilt he has 
brought upon himself, and long for reconciliation with him. 3. Forgiveness, The final 
step for the healing of positive injury is the most necessary, for without it we can have 
no Divine’ forgiveness, nor can we truly love our enemy. 

III. Tue @RaNnp Motive. ‘ Even as God also in Christ forgave you.” As we must 
forgive others before God will forgive us, so when he has forgiven us a stronger reason 
is added to urge us to forgive those who may in future injure us. 1. The Divine for- 
giveness is the reason for our forgiveness and kindness to others. The parable of 
the unforgiving servant reveals the gross inconsistency of an unforgiving spirit in 
Christian men and women (Matt. xviii. 23—35). How can we who simply exist 
because God has forgiven us deny forgiveness to our brethren? If God who is 
infinitely above us has condescended to forgiveness, shall we stand more strictly on our 
petty rights? If God has forgiven us our innumerable, great, and awful sins against 
him, can we be backward in pardoning the much fewer and slighter sins of our fellow- 
men against us? Forgiven the debt of ten thousand talents, how have we the face to 
exact the debt of a hundred pence? 2. The Divine forgiveness is the pattern of our 
forgiveness. It is (1) at the greatest cost—“in Christ,” through the gift of God’s 
own Son; (2) covering all sins, the worst and blackest without exception ; (3) perfect, 
full, and ungrudging—remembering our sins no more, removing them from us as far 
as the east is from the west, burying them in the sea; (4) cheerful and generous— 
putting the ring and best robe on the penitent ; (5) free, not earned by sacrifice, 
penance, or good works. Such should be on our forgiveness of one another.—W. F. A. 


EXPOSITION, 


CHAPTER V. 


Ver. 1.—Be ye therefore imitators of God, 
as children beloved. These words are closely 
connected with the preceding. In ch. iv. 
32 he had urged the example of God in 
one very momentous matter; he now urges 
it ina more general sense and on another 
ground. We ought to forgive men because 
God has forgiven us—all admit that; but 
moreover, we ought to imitate our Father in 
his forgiveness and in his loving spirit, be- 
because beloved children should always 
imitate, and will always strive to imitate, 
what is good in a beloved father. For- 
giving love is one of the great glories of our 
Father; it has been made peculiarly attrac- 
tive in our eyes, because it has been exer- 


cised by him towards us; every considera- 
tion, therefore, ought to induce us to show 
the same spirit. 

Ver. 2.—And walk in love. Taking up 
anew the exhortation of ch. iv. 1. Let your 
ordinary life be spent in an atmosphere of 
love. Drink it in from heaven, as plants 
drink in the sunshine; radiate it forth from 
eyes and face; let hands and feet be active 
in the service; let looks, words, and acts all 
be steeped in it. Even as Christ also loved 
us, The passing from the Father to the 
Son as our Example is not a new departure; 
for the Son reveals the Father, the Son’s 
love is the counterpart of the Father’s, made 
visible to us in the way most fitted to im- 
press us. Though Christ’s love, like his 
Father's, is eternal, the aorist is used, to, 


208 


THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 


[ou. v. 1—33, 


denote that spccific act of love which 
is immediately in view. And gave him- 
self for us. The Pauline phrase (Gal. 
1. 4; 11. 20; Titus 11. 14; 1 Tim. ii. 6), 
simple, but very comprehensive: “ himself” 
—all that he was as God, all that he became 
as Man, a complete self-surrender, ὦ whole 
burnt offering. “For us,” not merely on 
our behalf, but in our room (after verbs of 
giving, dying, etc.); this, indeed, being im- 
plied in the idea immediately following of a 
sacrifice, which, alike to the Jewish and 
pagan mind, conveyed the idea of a life 
given in room of another. An offering and 
a sacrifice to God. Offering and sacrifice are 
nearly syfionymous, but the first probably 
includes the whole earthly career of Christ 
incarnate—his holy life, blessed example, 
gracious teaching, loving companionship, as 
well as his atoning death, which last is more 
precisely the θυσία, sacrifice. The offering 
and sacrifice were presented to God, to 
satisfy his justice, fulfil the demands of his 
law, and glorify his holy and righteous 
government. Fora sweet-smelling savour. 
Allusion tc Noah’s sacrifice of every clean 
beast and of every fowl—“ the Lord smelled 
a sweet savour;” that is, the whole trans- 
action, not the offering merely, but the 
spirit in which it was offered likewise, was 
grateful toGod. The whole work of Christ, 
and the beautiful spirit in which he offcred 
himself, were grateful to the Father, and 
procure saving blessings for all who by 
faith make the offering their own. 

Vers. 3—21.—Tur WaLk SUITABLE TO 
THE CHILDREN oF LIGHT. 

“Ver. 3.—But. Another of the remarkable 
contrasts of this Epistle; the fumes of lust 
are doubly odious in contact with the sweet 
savour of Christ’s offering. Fornication and 
all impurity, or covetousness. The combina- 
tion of covetousness with sins of the flesh, 
occurring several times in the apostle’s 
writings (1 Cor. v.11; ch. v. 3; Col. iii. 5), 
is rather unexpected. TAcovetla, covetous- 
ness, means the desire of having more, which 
is peculiarly true of sensual sins; but it is 
not coupled with them by a καὶ, but dis- 
joined by an 4, indicating something of 
another class. In the mind of the apostle, 
sensuality was inseparable from greed, un- 
natural craving for more, dissatisfaction with 
what was enough; hence the neighbourhood 
of the two vices. Let it not be even named 
among you, as becometh saints. The practice 
of such sins was out of the question; but 
even speaking of them, as matters of ordi- 
nary conversation, was unsuitable for saints; 
the very conversation of Christians must be 
pure. The exhortation bears on Christians 
in their social relations; had the apostle 
been treating of the duty of the individual, 
he would have urged that such sins should 


never be admitted even to the thoughts or 
the imagination. 

Ver. 4.—And filthiness; αἰσχρότης, im- 
plying that such things are disgraceful, 
ugly, revolting, the opposite of καλός, fair, 
comely, attractive. And foolish talking or 
jesting, which are not becoming. This would 
be well understood in sensual, frivolous 
Ephesus; a light, bantering, jesting kind 
of talk, seasoned with double entendres and 
obscene allusions, very pernicious in its 
moral effect. There is no reason to suppose 
that the apostle meant to condemn all play 
of humour, which is a Divine gift, and which 
in moderation has its own useful place as 8 
means of refreshing and invigorating the 
spirit; it was the jesting associated with 
ribaldry that drew his reproof. But rather 
giving of thanks. Ev xapiorla is somewhat 
similar in sound to εὐτραπελία, jesting: the 
reason for putting the one in opposition to 
the other is not very apparent; the meaning 
seems to be that, in place of giving vent to 
lively feelings in frivolous talk and jesting, 
it is better for Christians to do so by pour- 
ing out their hearts in thanksgivings to God 
for all his goodness, 

Ver. 5.—For this ye know well; an appeal 
to their own consciences, made confidently, 
as beyond all doubt. That no fornicator, 
nor unclean person, nor covetous man, who 
is an idolater, hath any inheritance in the 
kingdom. Covetousness, the twin-brother 
sin of uncleanness, is denounced as idolatry 
It is worshipping the creature more than the 
Creator, depending on vast stores of earthly 
substance in place of the favour and blessing 
of God. It must receive the doom of the 
idolater; instead of inheriting the kingdom, 
he must die the death. The doom in this 
verse is not future, but present—not shall 
have, but hath, inheritance, etc. (comp. ch. i. 
11,18). The lust of greed overreaches itself; 
it loses all that is truly worth having; it 
may have this and that—lands, houses, and 
goods—but it has not one scrap in the king- 
dom. Of ChristandGod. The two are united 
in the closest way, as equals, implying the 
divinity of Christ and his oneness with the 
Father in the administration of the kingdom. 

Ver. 6.—Let no man deceive you with 
empty words. No man, whether pagan or 
nominal Christian: the pagan defending a 
life of pleasure as the only thing to be had 
with even a smack of good in it; the Chris- 
tian mitigating pleasant sins, saying that 
the young must have an outlet for their 
warm feelings, that men in business must 
δι all their soul into it, and that life must 

e brightened by a little mirth and jollity. 
As opposed to what the apostle hes laid 
down (ver. 5),such words are empty, destitute 
of all solidity or truth. For on accouns of 
these things the wrath of God cometh on thn 


ow. v. 1—33.]. THE EPISTLE TO 


THE EPHESIANS. 209 


children of disobedience. The sophistry is 
swept away by an awful fact—the wrath 
cometh, is coming, and will come too in the 
future life. It comes in the form of natural 

unishment, Nature avenging her broken 
lows by deadly diseases; in the form, too, of 
disappointment, remorse, desolation of soul ; 
and in the form of judgments, like that 
which befell Sodom and Gomorrah, or the 
sword which never departed from David’s 
house. 

Ver. 7.—Be not ye therefore partakers 
with them. If you are partakers of their 
sins, you must be of their punishments too, 
Refuse all partnership, therefore. Your 
natural instincts recoil from partnership in 
punishment; let your spiritual instincts re- 
coil from partnership in sin. 

Ver. 8.—For ye were once darkness, but 
are now light in the Lord. Another expres- 
sive “but.” To make the contrast more em- 
phatic, it is not said, “ ye were in darkness, 
but are now in light;”” but, “ye were dark- 
ness itself, and are now light itself,” and this 
last is explained by the usual formula, “in 
the Lord.” There was a celebrated Ephesian 
philosopher, Alexander, who was called “The 
Light;”’ but not from that source had the 
light come. The idea of light-giving is also 
involved in their being light. “ Arise, shine, 
for thy light is come.” ‘Walk as children of 
light. Another expressive image, denoting 
close connection with light, as if they were 
actually born of it; hence their lives should 
be full of it. The figure connecting dark- 
ness with sin and light with purity, common 
to all languages, underlies the exhortation. 

Ver. 9.—For the fruit of light is [shown] 
in all goodness and righteousness and 
truth. The exhortation is confirmed by this 
statement of what is the natural result of 
light—goodness, the disposition that leads 
to good works; righteousness, rectitude, or 
integrity, which is most careful against all 
disorder and injustice, and renders to all 
their due, and especially to God the things 
that are God’s; and truth, meaning ἃ regard 
for truth in every form and way—believing 
it, reverencing it, speaking it, acting accord- 
ing to it, hoping and rejoicing in it, being 
sincere and honest, not false or treacherous. 

Ver. 10.—Proving what is well-pleasing 
to the Lord. A general rule applicable to 
the whole walk. To prove is to ascertain 
by test and experiment. Our whole walk 
should be dirccted to finding out what 
things are pleasing to Christ, rejecting at 
onos everything that is not so, and clinging 
to all that is. Weare not to follow the tra- 
dition of our people, and not to take a vague 
view of duty; we are to prove the matter, to 
put it to the test. For the supreme practical 
rule of the Christian’s life must be to please 
Christ. 

EPHESIANS, 


Ver. 11.—And have no fellowship with 
the unfruitful works of darkness. The point 
of this exhortation is in the adjective “un- 
fruitful.” The works of darkness are un- 
fruitful: they produce no goodness, give 
rise to no satisfaction, to no moral resulta 
that are “a joy for ever;” or, if fruit they 
have, it is shame, remorse, despair. Con- 
trast this with the renovating, satisfying, 
joy-producing, fruits of righteousness. But 
rather even reprove them. Do not be con- 
tent with a passive attitude towards them, 
but take the aggressive and expose their 
wickedness, whether in public or in the 
domestic circle. A testimony has to be 
lifted up against ways that are so shameful 
and that bring down the wrath of God. 

Ver. 12.—For the things that are done by 
them in secret it is a shame even to speak of. 
The groves of Ephesus were notorious for 
the shamefulness of lust. To speak of such 
deeds was not only wrong, but shameful; so 
extreme is the delicacy which Christianity 
fosters. Too much pains cannot be taken, 
by parents, masters of schools, and others, 
to foster this delicacy among the young— 
to exclude from conversation the faintest 
touch of what is unbecoming. 

Ver. 13.—But all things when they are 
reproved are made manifest by the light. 
As, for instance, when our Lord reproved the 
hypocrisy of the Pharisees—their practices 
had not seemed to the disciples very evil 
before, but when Christ threw on them the 
pure light of truth, they were made manifest 
in their true character—they appeared and 
they still appear, odious. A just reproof 
places evil in a light that shows its true 
character. For everything which is made 
manifest is light. Literally, this is a trui»m; 
anything shone on is no longer dark, but 
light. The nearest approach to this, morally, 
is that light has a transforming power; 
when the light of the gospel shines on any- 
thing dark or evil, it transforms it into what 
is light or good. This is not uniformly true; 
all the light of heaven turned on hell would 
not make it morally liggg; but it is the 
general property and tendency of moral 
light to transform. The exhortation would 
thus mean—Use your light to reprove what 
is evil or dark, for not only will the true 
character of the evil thereby be made 
apparent, but your light will have a trans- 
forming power. But if this were the mean- 
ing, we should expect in the end of the 
verse, not φῶς ἐστι, but φῶς yweral, to denote 
this transformation. The rendering of 
A.V., giving to φανερούμενον an active 
meaning (“ whatsoever doth make manifest 
is light”), is rejected by most gram- 
marians, as not being consistent with the 
usage of the word. The meaning which 
that rendering gives is this: “ Light is the 

» 


210 


THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, 


[οΗ. v. 1—33, 


element which makes all clear.” Weshould 
thus have in the latter clause a proposition, 
affirming as universal what in the former 
clause is affirmed of one particular case; 
“things reproved are made manifest by the 
light, for it is only light that makes things 
clear.” The exhortation to reprove would 
thus be confirmed by the consideration that 
the only way of making immoral things ap- 
pear in their proper character is to let in on 
them the light of the gospel. The great 
practical point is that Christians ought to let 
in and diffuse the light. 

Ver. 14.—Therefore he saith, Awake thou 
that sleepest, and arise from the dead, and 
Christ shall give thee light. This is 
evidently intended to give an additional 
impulse to the Ephesians to walk as children 
of the light; but a difficulty arises as to the 
source of the quotation. There is no 
difficulty with the formula, “he saith,” 
which, like the same expression in ch. iv. 8, 
is clearly to be referred to God. But no 
such words occur in the Old Testament, 
The passage that comes nearest to them is 
Isa. 1x. 1,“ Arise, shine; for thy light is come, 
and the glory of the Lord hath risen upon 
thee.” The simplest and best explanation 
is, not that the apostle quoted from any lost 
book, but that he did not mean to give the 
words, but only the spirit of the passage. 
This is evident from his introducing the 
word “Christ.” It must be owned that the 
apostle makes a very free use of the pro- 
phet’s words. But the fundamental idea in 
the prophecy is, that when the Church gets 
the light of heaven, she is not to lie still, as if 
she were asleep or dead, but is to be active, 
is to make use of the light, is to use it for 
{lluminating the world. The apostle main- 
tains that the Ephesian Church had got the 
light of heaven; she, therefore, was rot to 
sleep or loiter, but spring forth as if from 
the grave, aud pour light on the world. 
The changes which the apostle makes on 
the form of the prophecy are remarkable, 
and show that it was fo its spirit and sub- 
stance rather than to its precise form and 
letter that he attached the authority of 
inspiration. 

Ver. 15.—Take heed then how ye walk 
strictly. The construction is somewhat 
peculiar, combining two ideas-—see that you 
walk strictly, but consider well the kind of 
strictness. Do not walk loosely, without 
fixed principles of action; but make sure 
that your rules are of the true kind. Many 


are strict who are not wisely strict; they 


have rules, but not good rules. Not as un- 
wise, but as wise. This rendering brings 
out the force of ἄσοφοι and σοφυὶ : “ fools” 
(A.YV.) is rather strong, for it is not utter 
folly that is reproved, but easy-mindedness, 
want of earnest consideration in a matter 80 


doiintialy vital, so as to know what is truly 
est. 

Ver. 16.—Redeeming the time, because the 
days are evil; or, buying up for yourselves 
the opportunity, the idea being that of a 
merchant who, knowing the value of ἐπ 
article and the good use to which he can 
put it, buys it up. The opportunity is the 
opportunity of spreading the light and act- 
ing according to it; and the reason assigned, 
“bevause the days are evil,” indicates that, 
owing to the prevalence of evil, there is 
much need for the light over which the 
Christian has control. It may be hinted 
lik-wise that the prevalence of evil is apt to 
cool the love and diminish the zeal of the 
Christian ; hence the need for special eager- 
ness of spirit in the matter—he must 
greedily watch for his opportunity. 

Ver. 17.—Wherefore be ye not unwise, 
but understanding what is the will of the 
Lord. The “wherefore” bears on all the 
preceding argument: because ye are children 
of light; because light is so valuable and so 
indispensable; because your whole circum- 
stances demand so much care and earnest- 
ness. “ Unwise” is equivalent to senseless; 
“ understanding,” to both knowing and lay- 
ing to heart, as in parable of sower: “When 
any one heareth the word of the kingdom, 
and understandeth it not,” ¢.e. does not con- 
sider or ponder it, ‘then cometh the wicked 
one,” etc, The will of the Lord is the great 
rule of the Christian life; to know and in 
the deeper sense understand this, is to walk 


‘wisely and to walk surely. 


Ver. 18—And be not intoxicated with 
wine, wherein is dissoluteness, Drunkcn- 
ness is suggested because it is a work of 
darkness; it is the foe to vigilance and 
earnestness, and it leads all who yield to it 
to act unwisely. It is the so-ial aspect of 
drunkenness the apostle has in view—the 
exhilarating influence of wine in company, 
giving a rush of high spirits. ᾿Ασωτία, from 
α and σωζω, the opposite of savingness, 
wastefulness, dissoluteness, or the process 
of being dissolved, involving perdition. 
Spoken of the prodigal son, “riotous 
living ;” the habit which sends everything to 
wreck and ruin. But be filled with the 
Spirit. Instead of resorting to wine to cheer 
and animate you, throw your hearts open to 
the Holy Spirit, so that he may come and 
fill them; seek the joy that the Spirit in- 
spires when he makes you to sit with 
Christ in heavenly places, so that, instead 
of pouring out your joyous feelings in 
bacchanalian songs, you may do so in 
Christian hymns. 

Ver. 19.—Speaking to one another. Liite- 
rally, this would denote antiphonal singing, 
but this is rather an artificial idea for 
so simple times. It seems here to denote 


on. v. 1—33.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 


21] 


one person singing one hymn, then another 
another, and so on; and the meetings 
would seem to have been for social Christian 
enjoyment rather than for the public wor- 
ship of God. In the Epistle to the Colos- 
sians it is, “Teaching aud admonishing one 
another with psalms,” and this has more of 
the idea of public worship; and if it be 
proper to express joyful feelings in the com- 
paratively private social gatherings of Chris- 
tians, it is proper to do the same in united 
public worship. In psalms and hymns and 
aviritual songs. The precise meaning of 
these terms is not easily seen ; “psalms” we 
should naturally apply to the Old Testament 
psalms, but the want of the article makes 
the meaning more general, equivalent to 
“songs with the character of the psalms;” 
“hymna,” songs celebrating the praises of the 
Divine Being, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; 
“spiritual songs” or odes of a more general 
cast, meditative, historical, hortatory, or 
didactic. But these must be “spiritual,” 
such as the Holy Spirit would lead us to 
use and would use with us for our good. 
The two clauses correspond: “be filled with 
the Spirit ;” “speaking in spiritual songs.” 
Receive the Spirit-- pour out the Spirit; let 
your songs be effusions sent forth from your 
hearts with the aroma of the Holy Spirit. 
Singing and making melody with your heart 
to the Lord; ἐ.6. to the Lord Jesus. Some 
have argued that while ἄδοντες denotes sing- 
ing, ψάλλοντες means striking the musical 
instrument. But ψάλλω is so frequently 
used in a more general sense, that it can 
hardly be restricted to this meaning here. 
The great thought is that this musical 
service must not be musical only, but ἃ 
service of the heart, in rendering which the 
heart must be in ἃ state of worship. 

Ver. 20.—Giving thanks always for all 
things; this being not only a most Christian 
duty, but an excellent way to keep the 
heart in good tone, to keep up happy feel- 
ings--the duty not being occasional, but 
“always,” and not for things primd facie 
agreeable only, but “for all things” (see 
Job ii. 10; Rom. viii. 28). In the Name of 
our Lord Jesus Christ to God, even the Father. 
God the Father is the proper Object of 
thanksgiving, as of prayer generally; but 
the thanks are to be given in the Name 
of Christ. That is, through him who has 
brought in the economy of grace, whereby for 
wrath we get blessing, for suffering we get 
reward, for misery glory; whereby, in short, 
the whole aspect of life is brightened, and 
even the greatest trials and sorrows turned 
into real blessings. 

Ver. 21.—Subjecting yourselves one to 
another in the fear of Christ, The last of 
the participial exhortations depending on 
the general exhortation of ver. 15 to walk 


strictly. Most commentators connect it with 
the three immediately preceding participles 
(speaking, singing, giving thanks), but are 
unable to find a link of connection. Better 
connect with ver. 15. Mutual subjection is 
part of a wise, circumspect walk, te. mutual 
recognition of each other's rights and of our 
obligations to serve them. In some sense 
we are all servants, i.e. we are bound to 
serve others; the very father is, in this 
sense, servant of his child. So in the Chris- 
tian Church we are all in a sense servants 
(“By love serve one another,” Gal. v. 15; 
comp. Matt. xx. 26—28; John xiii. 15, 16). 
This view is in harmony with the humble 
spirit of the gospel. Pride leads us to 
demand rigorously from others what we 
fancy they owe to us; humility, to give to 
others what Christ teaches that we owe to 
them. The one feeling is to be discouraged, 
the other exercised and strengthened. In 
the verses following we have this precept 
split up into its constituent filaments. The 
reading of R.V., “in the fear of Christ,” has 
more authority than A.V., “in the fear of 
God.” It brings to our mind the wonderful 
example of Christ in this element of cha- 
racter (comp. Luke ii. 51; Heb. v. 8). Re- 
verential regard for him should inspire us 
with the same spirit (Phil. ii. 5—8). 

Ver. 22—ch. vi. 9.—ExuortaTion To Re- 
LATIVE DutIzs. 

Ver. 22.—Wives, submit yourselves to your 
own husbands, as to the Lord. Though Chria- 
tianity emancipates and elevates woman, it 
does not release her from the duty of sub- 
jection (comp. 1 Pet. iii. 1—6). The relation 
to the husband is intensified in order to 
enforce the duty: “ your own husbands,” τοῖς 
idiots ἀνδράσι: as We say, “she deserted her 
own child.” The “as to” denotes a parallel 
duty: as it is your duty to be subject to 
Christ, so also to your husbands (see next 
verse). 

Ver. 23.—For the husband is the head of 
the wife, as Christ also is the Head of the 
Church. ‘The woman was made for the man 
(Gen. ii. 18; 1 Tim. ii. 13), showing the 
Divine purpose that the man should be the 
head and centre of the household, and that 
the position of the wife, as wife, should 
be one of subordination. Parallel to this 
arrangement is the relation of Christ te 
the Church. In words, at least, all admit 
the headship of Christ, and the subordina- 
tion of the Church to him. The Christian 
household, on a much lower level, should 
exemplify the same relation. Being himself 
saviour of the body. This is not said mf 
way of contrast, but still by way of paralle 
The very saviourship of Christ should find 
an analogy in the Christian husband. The 
husband should be the ever-vigilant and 
self-denying protector, guardian, deliverer, 


212 


THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 


(on. v. 1—33, 


of his family, though his saving power can 
never come near the high level of Christ’s. 
A husband reckless of these obligations 
virtually ceases to have any claim on the 
subjection of the wife and the family. The 
very comparison of the husband to the Sa- 
viour implies that, while there is a certain 
analogy, there is a still greater contrast. 
This is implied in the first word of the 
following verse. Between the lines we read 
this thought: “Not that the parallel between 
Christ’s saving function and the husband’s 
extends to the highest things.” 

Ver. 24.— But [it exists so far as to enforce 
this exhortation] as the Church is subject to 
Christ, so let the wives be to their husbands 
in everything. Let there be a subjection in 
the one case parallel to that in the other, for 
such is the Divine will and purpose. Any 
subjection due to the husband must be modi- 
fied. by what is due to God, for as the 
husband may not require for himself, so the 
wife may not give to him, what is God’s: 
God’s will is paramount over all. Of the 
three wills that may be in collision, viz. 
God’s, the husbands, and the wife’s—the 
duty of the wife is to take them in this 
order, having regard first to God’s, next to 
her hus!and’s, and last to her own. 

Ver. 25.—Husbands, love your wives, even 
as Christ also loved the Church, and gave him- 
self for her. The husband’s duty to the wife 
is enforced by another parallel—it ought to 
correspond to Christ’s love for the Church. 
This parallel restores the balance; if it 
should seem hard for the wife to be in sub- 
jection, the spirit of love, Christ-like love, 
on the part of the husband makes the duly 
easy. Christ did not merely pity the Church, 
or merely desire her good, but loved her; 
her image was stamped on his heart and her 
name graven on his hands; he desired to 
have her for his companion, longing for a 
return of her affection, for the establish- 
ment of sympathy between her and him. 
And he gave himself for her (comp. ver. 2), 
showing that her happiness and welfare 
were dearer to him than his own—the true 
test of deep, real love. 

Ver. 26.—That he might sanctify her, 
having cleansed her by the washing of water 
with the Word. The immediate object of 
Christ was to cleanse her, and for this end 
he used the Word as a purifying agent, 
washing her by means of it, The difference 
between selfish and unselfish love is secn 
here: a selfish lover cares for his wife in 
his own interest—like Samson, desires to 
have her simply because she pleases him, 
and, in his converse with her, thinks, not 
of her good, but of his own enjoyment; but 
tho love of an unselfish lover constrains 
him to seek her good, to do nothing that 
will hurt her and damage her in any manner 


of way, but to do everything that he be- 
lieves will advance ler well-being, cspe- 
cially in the highest sense. He finds her 
polluted (comp. Ezek. xvi.), and his great 
instrument of cleansing is “the Word” 
(comp. John xv. 3; xvii. 5)—the Word in all 
its searching, humbling, rebuking, correct- 
ing, informing, stimulating, refreshing, con- 
soling power. There is no express allusion 
to baptism, τῷ λουτρῷ τοῦ ὕδατος is explained 
by ἐν ῥήματι, “the Word” being the great 
sanctifying medium, and baptism a figure 
(1 Pet. iii. 21). 

Ver. 27.—That he might present to him- 
self the Church glorious. The ultimate end, 
to which ver. 26 is introductory. Christ 
both gives and takes the bride; he presenta 
her to himself—the day of his espousals 
being in the state of glory (Rev. xxi. 2), 
and all the training of this life being 416- 
signed to fit her for that condition. She 
becomes glorious at last through assimila- 
tion to himself (2 Cor. iii. 18 ; John xvii. 22). 
Not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such 
thing. The idea is that of a body perfectly 
free from blemish, typical of a soul per- 
fectly delivered from sin—of a character 
perfected in all grace and goodness. But 
that it should be holy and without blemish. 
The same truth expressed in positive form, 
which in the preceding clause is expressed 
in the negative. Nothing could more clearly 
denote ‘perfection of character—the full 
development of the character with whatever 
of .variety may arise from differences in 
natural gifts and constitution, or convey a 
more glorious idea of the destiny of re- 
deemed humanity. To be, as it were, the 
bride of Christ is a high destiny in point of 
condition ; but it would be miserable if cha- 
racter did not tally with condition; this 
agreement, however, is secured, for the 
Church is to be holy and without blemish.. 

Ver. 28.—Even so ought husbands also to 
love their own wives as their own bodies, 
A new illustration is introduced here to 
throw light on the bearing-of the husband 
to his wife, and the οὕτως seems to refer, not 
to what goes before, but to what follows 
(comp. in ver. 33). He that loveth his owa 
wife loveth himself. His wife is part of 
himself, so that not to love her as bimeeclf 
is not only a sin against law, but a sin 
against nature, 

Ver. 29.—For no man ever hated his own 
flesh ; but nourisheth and cherisheth it, even 
as Christ also the Church. To hate one’s 
wife is as irrational as to hate one’s own flesh, 
and as, on the other hand, men constantly 
nourish aud cherish their flesh, protecting 
it from hurt, seeking to heal it when hurt, 
and generally to promote ita welfare and 
comfort, so ought husbands to act towards 
their wives. In this aspect of the case, too, 


ou. v. 1—33,] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 


213 


the sharp eye of the apostle finds an analogy 
botweea the relation of the. wife to the 
husband and that of the Church to Christ, 
expanded in the next verse. 

Ver. 30.—For we are members of his body 
[being], of his flesh, and of his bones (the 
last seven words omitted in many manu- 
scripts and in the R.V.). The reference is 
to the original formation of woman as nar- 
rated in Gen. ii. Her very name indicated 
that she was “taken from man.” She was 
taken from him and given to him. So the 
Church is taken from Christ and given to 
him. Taken from his body, sprung from 
his incarnation and his crucifixion and 
resurrection, the spiritual offspring of his 
humanity, and then given to him, to be his 
servant, nay, above a servant, his companion, 
friend, and confidaut for evermore. If it 
had not been for the body of Christ (Heb. x. 
5) the Church could have had no existence. 
No bride fit for the King of heaven could 
have sprung from the earth. As Eve came 
from the opened side of Adam, so figura- 
tively the Church springs from the pierced 
side of Jesua. 

Ver. 31.—For this cause shall a man leave 
his father and mother, and shall cleave to his 
wife, and they two shall come to be one 
flesh. Quoted in substance from Gen. ii. 24. 
It seems to be introduced simply to show 
the closeness of the relation between man 
and wife; it is such as in a sense to super- 
sede that between parent and child. The 
apostle (as appears from the next verse) has in 
view, at the same time, the parallel truth— 
the closeness of the relation between Christ 
and the Church; it too in a sense super- 
sedes the relations of nature (comp. Luke 
xiv. 26; Matt. xii. 50). 

Ver. 832.—This mystery is δ great one; 


but I am speaking with reference to Christ 
and the Church. The matter referred to 
is the typical relation between the marriage 
of man and wife, and the union of Christ 
and the Church. It is called « mystery, 
and it is not said, as is said of another 
mystery, referred to before (ch. iii. 5), that 
it has been completely explained. Some 
light has been thrown upon it, but that is 
all. It is implied that there is something 
of mystery in many of the relations between 
things natural and things spiritual, but 
that in the depth and grandeur of the sub- 
ject, the mystery connected with the mar- 
riage relation is pre-eminent—it is “a great 
mystery.” The analogy of the wind to the 
Holy Spirit; the springing up of plants to 
the resurrection; the melancholy sounds of 
nature to the prevalence of sin; and many 
other analogies, present vague shadows ot 
truth, the clear, full forms of which we can- 
not sce. When the day breaks and “the 
shadows flee away,” such things will 
appear in a clearer light. 

Ver. 33.—Nevertheless let each of you 
severally so love his own wife even as him- 
self. The “nevertheless” refers to the un- 
solved part of the mystery: whatever may 
be mysterious, there is no mystery as to this, 
as to the duty of each husband to love his 


wife even as himself: that, as already shown, 


is clear from many considerations. And let 
the wife see that she fear her husband. Not, 
of course, with the slavish fear of one 
terrified and trembling becauge of a stronger 
being, but with the holy respect due to one 
to whom, by the will of God, she stands in 
a subordinate relation. The relation of 
Sarah to Abraham may again be referred 
to as indicating the true ideal of the relation 
of the wife to the husband. 


HOMILETICS, 


Vers. 1—14.— The walk suitable to the children of light: no fellowship with sins of 
the flesh. The fearful prevalence of sensual vice at Ephesus naturally led the apostle to 
dwell on it emphatically as one of the worst rags of the old man, a rag to be wholly 
and for ever cast away. But, indeed, there are few heathen communities where 
sensual vice does not flourish when men have it in their power to indulge in it. It is 
singular how universal sin is in connection with the irregular and disorderly indulgence 
of the bodily appetites. It would seem as if God made this a special matter of 
probation, for when these appetites get the upper hand, they lead into terrible excesses, 
and,‘ by bringing disease on both mind and body, avenge the sin to which they have 
impelled. First, they tempt men to sin, and then, as if in heartless mockery, they 
scourge them for having sinned. We find here— 

I, Sins oF THE FLESH DENOUNCED, with a corresponding sin of the spirit—covetous- 
ness (vers. 3, 4). 

II. Reasons WHY SUCH SINS SHOULD BE RENOUNCED BY CurisTIANs, 1. No such 
person has any inheritance in the kingdom of God (ver. 5). 2. The wrath of God 
cometh —is present and visible— for such things on very evil men (Sodom and 
Gomorrah, Canaanites, etc.) (ver. 6). 8. They belong to the world of darkness, and 


214 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. [cu. v. 1-73 


Christians are children of light (ver. 8). 4. Christians, as living in the Spirit, should 
bring forth the fruit of the Spirit (ver. 9). 5. They*should ascertain and follow only 
what is pleasing to Christ (ver. 10). 

III. Reasons WHY SUCH SINS SHOULD BE REPROVED BY CHRisTIANs. 1, They are so 
evil that it is a sin even to speak of them (ver. 12). 2. The true character of such 
sins is seen by light let in on them (ver. 18). 3. ‘Ihe light has a tendency to trans- 
form (ver. 13), and by letting in the light that shows the odiousness of the sin you 
may be the means of changing the sinner; while you reprove you may also improve 
him, 4. It is for this purpose the Church has got the light—when the light is 
brought to her, her Lord calls on her to awake and shine (ver. 15). Such precepts 
and considerations have a wider bearing than Ephesus and its groves. Sins of the 
fesh flourish even in Christian lands. Young men! lay these things to heart; fear 
God and keep his commandments, and be not misled by any of the sophistry to 
which you listen; for tney that are Christ’s have crucified the flesh, with the affections 
and lusts. 


Vers. 15—21.— Walk circumspectly, or svrictly. The apostle goes on to urge a 
circumspect, wise, and earnest life, closely conformed in all things to the will of God, 
fashioned according to that idea of wisdom which is set forth in the proverb, “The fear 
of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom.” Nothing is of more value than fixed 
principles for guiding our life. One settled conviction may be of inestimable value; 
e.g. the conviction that nothing can come to any good in the end which is against the 
will of God. Whenever greatness is achieved in any sphere of life it is through the force 
of well-kept rules, Every great author, artist, statesman, has owed his success to 
certain principles of action to which he has rigidly adhered. It has been remarked that 
the puritan age was an age of convictions; ours is an age of opinions. But what we 
need is convictions, and pre-eminently the conviction that the only true, safe, and 
blessed rule of life is to follow implicitly the will of God. We find here rules for a 
careful Christian life, (1) apart, (2) in Christian society. 

I. Apart. 1, Walk circumspectly, or strictly, not carelessly, 2. Walk wisely, 
taking pains to ascertain that you so walk as to gain the great end. 8. Redeem the 
time, or buy back the opportunity (see Exposition). 4. Understand; i.e. lay to heart 
and follow the will of Christ. 6. Avoid intoxication and all wild excitement and 
unhallowed pleasure. 6. Be filled with the Spirit, and the holy, blessed emotions which 
he genders, 

11. In Curistian society. 1. Cultivate Christian song, and make melody in your 
heart to the Lord. 2. Let thanksgiving have a special place in your exercises. 3. 
Submit yourselves one to another in the fear of the Lord. As Christians have not 
only duties, but also joys, belonging to their individual life, so they have both duties 
and joys belonging to their social life. What is most characteristic of the social duties 
of Christians is mutual submission ; consideration of one another—of what is due by 
one to another, and still more of the loving service which one may be able to render 
to the other. What is most characteristic of their social joys is the element of thank- 
fulness in which they flourish ; they should ever live as those who in Christ have received 
mercies beyond all calculation; and they should make abundant use of song to give 
expression to such feelings and to deepen them in so doing. This joyous element goes 
a long way to give brightness to the social life of Christians; they will not miss the 
more carnal delights on which worldly men set so much store, but will feel that God 
puts joy in their hearts, more than in the time that their corn and wine increased. 


Vers, 22—33.— Duties of wives and husbands. The Apostle Peter, in his First Epistle, 
after dwelling on the privileges of believers, strongly urges them to have their con- 
versation honest or fair among the Gentiles, exemplifying, by the purity and beauty of 
their life, the excellence of the principles and privileges of the gospel; and then he 
branches out into three cases or relations that afford scope for this mode of life—that 
of subjects to their rulers, that of servants to their masters, and that of wives to their 
husbands and husbands to their wives. Though Peter and Paul moved in different 
orbits, yet, from the strength of the convictions held by them in common, and tie 
guidance of the Holy Spirit in them both, they were led to enforce wonderfully similar 


on. v. 1—33.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 215 


applications of the great principles of the gospel. Paul, like Pcter, brings forward 
three relations, the only difference being that, in place of the relation of subjects to 
their rulers, he has that of children to their parents, and the corresponding duty of 
parents to their children. We have the clearest proof of its being the purpose of 
Christianity to purify and elevate the common relations of life. Much of the visible 
fruit of true religion lies in its making better subjects, better spouses, better children, 
better servants. Pagans were struck with the excellence of Christian women. The 
mother of Chrysostom won golden opinions by remaining a widow from her twenty-first 
year, ‘“ What women these Christians have!” was the exclamation of some. Christian 
women were wonderful missionaries in the early centuries by their devout, pure, and 
earnest lives; many was the pagan who, “ without the Word, was won by the con- 
versation of the wife.” Such lives are doubly blessed—blessed in themselves, and 
blessed in their influence on the world. : 

I. Tue wire’s bury. Submission to the husband as to the Lord (ver. 22), Reasons 
for this. 1. The husband is the head of the wife (ver. 23). 2. ‘There is a parallel 
between the husband and Christ (ver. 23). 3. Evenin respect of Christ’s saving power, 
the parallel holds to a limited, though very limited, extent (ver. 23). 4, The parallel 
is close enough to require the subjection of the wife (ver. 24). 

IL. Tue nuspann’s puty. To love his wife. This is enforced: 1. By the consideration 
of what Christ felt and did for his Church. (1) He loved the Church (ver. 25). (2) 
He gave himself for her (ver. 25), And the object for which he did so. (a) His 
immediate object (ver. 26). (Ὁ) His ultimate object (ver. 27). 2. By the consideration 
of the closeness of the relation of the wife to the husband as his own flesh. This 
relation is considered (1) naturally (vers. 28, 29); (2) symbolically (ver. 80), The 
Church taken from Christ; given to Christ. The relation of the husband to his wife 
supersedes (in a manner) the relations of nature. The relation of the Church to 
Christ does so too (ver. 31). But the subject is mysterious (ver. 32). Yet one practical 
obligation is very clear (ver. 33). 

The constitution of the Church, like that of natural society, involves mutual duties. 
Nothing can be complete unless each party performs his share, While it is the woman’s 
part to be in subjection, it is the husband’s part to love. The one balances the other. 
It is the duty of the wife to be subject even though the husband does not love, and the 
duty of the husband to love even though the wife is not subject; but how hard, difficult, 
almost impossible, such duties thus become! If the husband withhold love, he is 
wronging his wife, and altogether subverting the relation between them. Let it ever 
be observed that, while God has joined husband and wife together, he has joined the 
husband’s love to the wife’s subjection; what, therefore, God hath juined together, let 
not man put asunder, 


HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 


Ver. 1.—" Followers of God.” This is the high destiny of God’s children. 

L Tur pury HERE COMMANDED. “Be ye imitators of me.” It is to do (1) what Gud 
does; (2) because he does it; (3) as he does it. The special point of imitation here is 
the duty of showing a forgiving spirit to one another. , 

Il. WHY WE SHOULD ImITaTE Gop. 1. Because we are his “dear children.” Whom 
should children imitate but their father? Believers have had experience of their Father's 
wisdom, love, and power, and it is only an instinct of filial love to imitate such a 
Father. 2. Because we were originally made in his image (Gen. i. 26), and though that 
image has been marred by sin, it is to be renewed in the process of a Christian 
experience (ch. iv. 23). 8. Holiness consists in the imitation of God. “ Because it 
is written, Be ye holy, for 1 am holy” (1 Pet. i. 16). 4. The prospect of ‘perfect likeness 
to God in the day of our Lord’s appearing. (1 John iii. 2.) 

ΠῚ. Means TOWARDS THE FULFILMENT OF THIS DUTY. 1. Pray without ceasing, 
especially for fuller measures of his grace, for larger disclosures of his love, for a deeper 
insight into his truth. 2. Live continually as being under his eye. (Ps, cxxxix. 6, 7.) 
ἃ. Consider how others have followed him. (1 Cor. xi. 1.)—T. C. 


Ver. 2.—The walk of love. We are bound to love one another. 


216 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. [cu. v. 1—83, 


I, ΤῪῊΙΒ WAS THE GREAT DUTY oF THE Law. “ All the Law is fulfilled in one word, 
even in this, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself” (Gal. v. 14). “The end of 
the commandment is love” (1 Tim. i. 5). All our duty to our neighbour is summed 
up in love. Love supplies the motive-power to all right relations with our fellow-men. 

If. Tas was THE NEW COMMANDMENT oF CHRist. “A new commandment give I 
unto you, that ye love one another” (John xiii. 34). The love thus newly enjoined has 
certain important characteristics. 1. 76 must be the love of deeds, not words, “ Let 
us not love in word, neither in tongue, but in deed and in truth” (1 John iii. 18). 2. 7 
must be ardent, “* Above all things have fervent charity among yourselves” (1 Pet. iv. 
7, 8). 3. It must be self-sacrificing. ‘ We ought also to lay down our lives for the 
brethren ” (1 John iii. 16). 4. I¢ ought to be a love well guided and controlled. ‘‘ This 
I pray, that your love may abound yet more and more in knowledge and all judgment ” 
(Phil. i. 9). 5. It ought to be a constant love like that of Christ. “ Having loved 
his own which were in the world, he loved them unto the end” (John xiii.1). 6. Zt 
ought to be a decisive test as to our condition in God’s sight. “He that loveth his 
brother abideth in the light, and there is none occasion of stumbling in him” (1 John 
ii, 10). “ We know that we have passed from death unto life, because we love the 
brethren ” (1 John iii. 14), 7. I¢ must be a love recommended by the hiyhest examples. 
“God is love.” “If God so loved us, we ought also to love one another.” We are to 
“walk in love, as Christ also loved us.” “ Let the same mind be in you which was 
also in Christ Jesus” (Phil. ii, 5)—T. 0. 


Ver. 2.— The pattern of Christian love. “As Christ also hath loved us, and hath 
given himself for us an offering and a sacrifice to God for a sweet-smelling savour.” 
Jesus was an example of love in his life, for he went about every day doing goed (Acts 
x. 38). But it is to his suffering of death that the apostle points us for the most 
sublime and impressive illustration of his love. The words suggest many pregnant 
thoughts. ἦ 

I. WHo OFFERED HIMSELF? It was Christ, the only begotten Son of God. It was 
his own voluntary act. “Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his 
life for his friends” (John xv. 13). ‘Who loved me, and gave himself for me” (Gal. 
ii. 20). It was love that prompted the gift of himself—eternal, infinite, free, 

IJ. WHat DID HE OFFER? Himself. Not the blood of others, much less the blood 
of bulls and goats, It was the offering of the body of Christ (Heb. x. 10). 

IlI. For wHom? For us, while we were yet enemies (Rom. v. 10). Whether he 
died in our stead or merely for our benefit is determined by the context, which 
represents him as giving himself “an offering and a sacrifice.” This language marks 
the distinctly substitutionary character of Christ’s death, just as he is himself described 
elsewhere as “a ransom for many.” 

IV. To wHoM DID HE OFFER HIMSELF? ToGod. That is, with the design that 
God might accept the sacrifice. God had pleasure in the death and atonement of 
his Son. 

V. In woat ΜΑΝΝΕΕ “As an offcring and a sacrifice.” The term “offering” 
applies to propitiatory sacrifices, as well as to free-will offerings (Heb. x. 18, 14). The 
additional word, “sacrifice,” marks the clearly propitiatory character af his offering 

Heb. vii. 27). 
( VI. Wirh waat pesutt? “ For a sweet-smelling savour.” This phrase is applied 
to propitiatory as well as to free-will offerings, as, for example, to the burnt offerings of 
Noah (Gen. viii. 21). The sacrifice of Christ was well-pleasing to God, who could 
henceforth manifest his character “‘as just, and the Justitier of him who believeth in 
Jesus.” The whole passage teaches us: 1. The unsoundness of that theology which sees 
in the sufferings of Christ, not a propitiatory sacrifice, but the love, faith, and sub- 
mission of God’s Son, as an example to man. This view is altogether one-sided. 2, 
The unsoundness of that theology which sees in his sufferings a mere exhibition of 
love, without that element of righteousness which made these sufferings necessary. If 
love alone could save, why should he have suffered or died at all? It is the atoning 
love that is the element of consolation to man. 3. The unsoundness of that theology 
which sees the redeeming power of Christ in his birth rather than in his death, as if 
the event of Bathlehem were transcendently more important than the event of 


6H. v. 1—33 ] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 217 


Golgotha. 4. That there isin Christ’s love, not merely a force of argument or motive, 
but a very rule or measure, of the love which we ought to exercise toward each other 
in the bonds of the gospel.—-T. C. 


Vers. 3—5.— Warnings against impurity of all kinds, The sins here described were 
common among the heathen, and received no adequate check from their moral guides. 
Indeed, the old pagan world regarded them as things indifferent. They are, for the 
most part, sins against ourselves, as the sins condemned in the previous verses are sins 
against our neighbours. They are to be condemned on many grounds, 

I, THEY ARE EXPRESS VIOLATIONS OF THE Diving Law. (Exod. xx. 14.) 

II. THEY ARE DISHONOURING ΤῸ GoD AND HIS HOLINESS. The corruption that is in 
the world through lust is inconsistent with the Divine nature (2 Pet. i. 4). 

II. ‘ney THWART THE DESIGN OF THE GOSPEL OF CHRIST, which is“ to purify a 
people to himself” (Titus ii. 14); “to cleanse us from all filthiness of the flesh and 
spirit ” (2 Cor. vii. 1). Jesus suffered in the flesh that we should die to the flesh (1 
Pet. iv. 1). 

IV. Tey GRIEVE THE Hoty Spier, whose office is to sanctify us (ch. iv. 29, 30), 
* That }ure and holy dove will not dwell in a cage of unclean and filthy birds.” 

VY. THEY DISHONOUR THE BODY, which is the temple of the Holy Ghost (1 Cor. vi, 18). 
They waste it as well as dishonour it (Prov. v. 11). 

VI. ΤΉΒΥ WAR AGAINST THE SOUL in every sense of the term—against its life, its 
aspirsiieas, its happiness (1 Pet. ii. 11). They even darken the judgment and the 
understanding (Hos. iv. 11). No sort of sin so hardens the heart. 

VII. Tuey provoke Gop’s anger. (Col. iii. 5, 6; Jer. v. 7; ch.v.6.) “For the 
wrath of God cometh upon the children of disobedience.” They subject transgressors 
to God’s judgment, for“ whoremongers and adulterers God will judge ” (Heb. xiii. 4). 
And they keep them out of heaven (1 Cor. vi. 9; ver. 5). These sins of impurity are 
not even to be named among saints, who are to be pure in thought, pure in heart, pure 
in speech, pure in life. ‘“ Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal body, that ye 
should obey it in the lusts thereof” (Rom. vi. 12). 100 this end we must: 1 Avoid all 
the occasions that prompt to impurity : (1) idleness (Ezek. xvi. 49); (2) evil company 
(Prov. vii. 25); and (3) all other sins (Prov. i. 25). 2, Make a covenant with our eyes 
(Job xxxi. 1). 3. Watch over our thoughts (Mal. ii. 16). 4. Delight in God’s Word 
(Prov. ii. 10, 16), ὅ. Continue in prayer (Ps. cxix. 37).—T. 0. 


Vers. 3—5.—Warning against covet ss. It is singular to find covetousness, 
which is often the sin of respectability, linked with sins of gross impurity. In reality 
it springs from selfishness, like these other sins. It has its origin in the same unholy 
root, 

I. ConsIDER THE NATURE OF CcoveTousNess. It is the inordinate love of riches, 
manifesting itself in several ways. 1. In the eager anaiety to attain wealth, without 
respect either to God’s glory or our own spiritual good. 2. In a sinful acquisition of 
wealth by extortion or fraud. (1 Kings xxi. 2,13; Prov. x. 2; xxviii.8.) 3. Ina 
reluctance to use our wealth for good ends. (1 Tim. vi. 17, ry 

II. How 18 cOVETOUSNESS TO BE REGARDED AS “IDOLATRY”? It is to make a god of 
our possessions and to give them the homage of our hearts. All the essential elements 
of idolatry are included in this worldly disposition, The covetous man transfers to 
riches the love, desire, joy, trust, and labour which God demands for himself. His sin 
is all the greater because he knows that his god is no god. The warning of the text 
is applicable (1) to all whose thoughtsrun more upon earth than upon heaven (Luke xii. 
22, 25, 29); (2) to all whose comfort depends upon worldly successes (Luke xii. 19) ; 
(3) to all who grudge the time that is spent in rel gious duties (Amos viii, 5). The 
sin of covetousness is, therefore, to be jealously avoided (1) because it is odious to God— 
“ The covetous whom the Lord abhorreth” (Ps. x. 3); (2) because it is destructive to 
ourselves, in turning our hearts from God (1 John ii. 15), in filling our hearts with 
trouble and care (1 Tim. vi. 9, 10), and in keeping us out of the kingdom of God 
(ver. 5) . Let us, therefore, estimate the world at its true value, meditate much on 
the fatherly care of our God (Luke xii. 31, 82; Matt. vi. 25, 26), act in faith upon the 
promise (Heb. xiii.5), and remember the terrible brand of idolatry which rests upon 


218 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, (ou, v. 1—83. 


covetousness. Itisa solemn thought that the most common of all sins is the most 
serious in God’s sight. Yet there is nothing in the condemnation of this sin that 
justifies the theory of other-worldliness, or the neglect of the duties of common 
life—T. O, 


Ver. 4.—Warning against unbecoming speech. “ Neither filthiness, nor foolish 
talking, nor jesting, which are not convenient: but rather giving of tnanks.” 

1, THERE ARE THREE VARIETIES OF UNEDIFYING SPEECH. 1. “ Filthiness.” This term, 
though referring to acts as much as words, points especially to that obscenity of speech 
which is so disgusting to the moral sense of man. It is proof of a corrupt heart—for 
“out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh ”—and, more than anything 
else, makes the tongue “a fire, a world of iniquity,” even ‘set on fire of hell.” 
2. “ Foolish talking.” This is the talking that will have many idle words to answer for 
at the day of judgment (Matt. xii. 36). It is more than mere random gossip; it is the 
talk of fools which is folly and sin; it includes “corrupt specch” (ch, iv. 29). It is 
aimless, senseless, frivolous talk. Our talk ought to be full of reason and purpose, and 
bright with happy suggestion. 8, “Jesting.” The apostle does not condemn the 
pleasantry which lends such a grace and joy to conversation, but the wit that is allied 
to lewdness, brimming over in double entendres, and tending to demioralization, 

II. THE APOSTLE’S JUDGMENT UPON THESE KINDS OF SPEECH. “ Which are not con- 
venient.” 1. They are not so in themselves, for the character of impropriety essentially 
attaches to each of them. 2. They are not so in the speakers, who incur a still deeper 
reproach and prepare for themselves a graver judgment. 8. They are not so for the 
hearers, who, though they may be amused for the moment, are not profited, but rather 
debased by such conversation. 

III. Tue ricHT UsE oF THE TONGUE. “Giving of thanks.” Christian cheerfulness 
ought to express itself, not in buffoonery or levity, but in thanksciving and praise. We 
have much to be thankful for in our daily lot, and the thought of the indulgent 
kindness which supplies all our need ought to repress anything like fuolish or scurrilous 
discourse. ‘The language of thankfulness will minister grace to the hearers—T. O. 


Ver. 6.—Divine wrath upon disobedience. It was necessary for the apostle to mark 
the true nature and real end of impurity in all its manifestations, ‘ Let no man deceive 
you with vain words.” 

I. Iv 18 NO UNUSUAL EXPERIENCE FOR WICKED MEN NOT TO SEE THE WICKEDN2ESS 
OF THEIR ACTS. The heathen regarded moral purity as a thing indifferent, and many 
of their moral guides palliated some of the worst features of pagan sensuality. They 
argued, as some have argued in modern times with a wickcd levity of purpose, that 
sins of impurity have their origin and their justification in the very constitution of our 
nature, that they are not inconsistent with many social virtues, and that they are not 
injurious to others. It is one of the blinding effects of sin that men do not see their 
sin “ through the ignorance that isin them, because of the blindness of their heart ” 
(ch. iv. 18). 

II. Ir 1s A MISTAKE TO SUPPOSE THAT THE WRATH OF GOD IS LIMITED TO THE 
PRESENT LIFE, and is merely entailed throngh the connection established by the 
Divine government between sin and suffering. ‘here is such a connection written in 
the physical constitution of man. Sinners often in this life receive in themselves 
“‘that recompense of their error which is meet” (Rom. i. 27). The drunkard is 
punished here in broken health, in loss of substance, reputation, and happiness, But 
we are not to suppose that the laws of Providence which ensure these results exhaust 
the fulness of Divine wrath against sin, Scripture tells us plainly that sins of impurity 
entail exclusion “from the kingdom of Christ and of God” (ver. 5); that he will 
judge whoremongers and adulterers (Heb. xiii. 5), and that “the abominable, and 
murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars, shall have 
their part in the lake that burneth with fire and brimstone ” (Rev. xxi. 8).—T. O. 


Ver. 7.—Separation from evil. The apostle counsels believers not to be valent 
with sinners, That is, in their sins, not their punishment, We are here taught— 
I. Tat rr 18 POssIBLE FOR BELIEVERS TO PARTAKE OF ΓῊΝ s.Né OF OTHERS. They 


cH, v. 1—33.} THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, 219 


may do so by conniving at them, by not checking or punishing them, by not mourning 
over them, as well as by actually committing them. It is a dishonour to God, a lure to 
others, a mischief to ourselves, to stand in the way of transgressors, 

II, THAT BELIEVERS OUGHT TO MAINTAIN A VERY SEPARATE WALK IN THE WORLD. 
They who have named the name of Christ ought to depart from iniquity (2 Tim. ii, 19). 
The cry to them ever is, “ Come out from among them, and be ye separate ” (2 Cor. vi. 17). 
There is no common standing-room for Christ and Belial in the Church. This does 
not countenance our separation from society; for Jesus, who was “separate from sinners,” 
was always in society that he might win sinners to God. Our walk is yet to be as 
separate as it is to be circumspect, that we may stand apart from the plagues that will 
descend upon a doomed world.—T’ Ο, 


Ver. 8.—The darkness turned into light. As a reason for their not lapsing into 
vices from which they had escaped, the apostle reminds them of the darkness of their 
pagan condition. 

IL, THEY WERE ONCE DARKNESSITSELF. “Ye were sometimes darkness.” The phrase 
is very impressive, for it indicates a moral as well as an intellectual darkness, A hard 
heart is always linked with a blinded understanding. The two act and react upon each 
other, becoming alternately cause and effect. Men do not care to retain the knowledge 
of God in their thoughts, and God, in judgment, gives them over to a reprobate mind. 
The most enlightened natures of the ancient world were thus “darkness” itself. 
Athens, the eye of Greece, inscribed upon an altar the confession of its ignorance. The 
phrase, “ darkness,” suggests three thoughts. 1. There is feir in darkness—the fear 
of enemies, the fear of death, the fear of undefined agencies. Heathenism was full of 
fears, Death was a dark and terrible spectre. 2. There ts discomfort in darkness, 
Light, its opposite, is the symbol of joy. 8, There is danger in darkness. Fnemies 
use the nights for their deeds of violence. We stumble on a dark night; we fall 
down precipices; we take a wrong road, How expressive is the term as applied to 
the heathen ! 

11. Tuey ΑΒΕ now “ἸΙΘῊΤ ΙΝ THE Lorp.” Conversion has wrought a radical 
change in the understanding as well as the heart. Believers are now light “in fellow- 
ship with the Lord” (1 John i. 8). There is more implied than the flashing into 
4 human mind the knowledge of the truth; there is the renewing of that mind into the 
love of the truth which it knows. Otherwise the light would torment and not comfort. 
But believers, thus doubly furnished may well be called “light in the Lord.” 
The light of the sun does not stream down directly upon the world; at least, it comes 
to the service of men reflected from a thousand objects which receive it upon their 
surfaces; similarly the world sees the glory of the Sun of righteousness reflected in the 
millions of saints who are “lights in the Lord.” 

III. Tue DUTY OF BELIEVERS IN THESE CIRCUMSTANCES—“ WALK AS CHILDREN OF 
ticnt.” That is, as those in nearest connection with it. 1. As light signifies joy, 
believers walk in the joy of an assured hope and a perpetual cleansing. “ If we walx in 
the light, as he is in the light, . . . the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us from 
all sin” (1 John i. 7). 2. We walk in the day and therefore should not stumble. 
“The darkness is past, and the true light now shineth” (1 John ii. 8). We ought to 
keep an eye fixed on the straight path of duty, and avoid the by-paths that lead to 
darkness and ruin. 3. If we walk in the.light, we ought cleurly to recoynize the 
fellowship of all travellers to Zion. “ If we walk in the light . . . we have fellowship 
one with another.” We are going the same way, inspired by the same hopes, meeting 
the same difficulties, arriving at last at the same home.—T. O. 


Ver. 9.—The fruit of the light. It is shown or seen in all the forms of “goodness 
and righteousness and truth.” The good, the right, the true, are only to be realized 
through the light that streams from the Sun of righteousness— the true light ” that 
now shineth.” The apostle says the fruit, not the fruits, of the light—as if to show that 
ἐξ takes all the three colours to make this light. Christianity would be a very imperfect 
manifestation of God if a single one of these elements were missing from the true light. 

J, Goopness. It is spoken of elsewhere as a fruit of the Spirit (Gal. v. 22), and 
therefore is not mere beneficence, for it has its source in religious principle, This 


220 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. (cx. v. 1- - 88 


excellence, in its various aspects of kindness and generosity, is kindled by the light 
that illuminates the understanding. : 

II, Ricutsousness. The light which communicates a knowledge of righteousness 
to the mind also infuses a love of righteousness into the affections, ‘This principle 
has a due sense of Divine obligation, and subjects the believer in every relation of life 
to the guidance of Divine Law, 

JI. Trurs. This is a direct emanation of the light. It is religious truth, working 
ultimately to truth of character in all the genuine forms of Christian life—T. C. 


Ver. 10.— The experimental test of the Lord's will, As the ninth verse isa parenthesis, 
the apostle states that it is by walking as children of light we are in a position to 
prove “ what is well-pleasing unto the Lord.” 

I. ConsIDER THE TRUE STANDARD OF JUDGMENT AS TO RIGHT AND wrRoNG. The 
believer is not to discover it in whatever may be well-pleasing to himself, but in what 
is well-pleasing to the Lord. It is the Lord Jesus Christ who is Lord of the conscience 
to regulate all our thoughts and all our actions. He has a supreme lordship over our 
life as well as over our death: “For whether we live we live unto the Lord.” He is 
thus not merely Saviour and Example, but Director of his people in all the concerns of 
religious life. In difficult situations, therefore, the true casuistry of life is to ask—Will 
this action be well-pleasing to Christ ? 

11. ConsIDER THE SUBJECTIVE TEST OF THIS Divine ὙΠ. Believers are enabled, in 
the clear light in which they walk, to discover the right path. It is through their being 
trausformed by the renewing of their mind that they “ prove what is that good, and 
acceptable, and perfect, will of God” (Rom. xii. 2). Similarly we learn that “if any 
man will do his will, be shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God” (John vii. 17). 
Light admitted into the understanding contributes to win the affections, and, the 
affections won, open wide the doors for the admission of more light. ‘To know the law 
you love and to love the law you kuow is the best condition in which human beings 
can be. It is the union of clear light in the understanding with perfect purity of heart 
which distinguishes the kingdom of redemption in its final practical triumph.—T. C. 


Vers, 11—13.—Separation and rebuke the true attitude toward works of darkness. 
The apostle thus describes the duty of Christians in reference to evil works. 

1. THE CHARACTER OF THESE works. “ Unfruitful works of darkness.” They 
spring out of darkness, they delight in darkness, they lead to darkness eternal. They 
are not naturally unfruitful, for they are fearfully prolitic of result, but, in the light of 
God they are fruitless, because most unlike to the fruits of light, which are goodness, 
rivhtcousness, and truth, They have “no fruit unto holiness,” with an end of eternal 
life (Rom. vi. 22). 

II. THE DUTY OF SEPARATION FROM THEM. This is a negative security. Christians 
are to stand apart from every evil work. There must be no fellowship with darkness. 
The friendship of the world can only be purchased at the cost of the Father’s friendship 

Jas. iv. 4). 

: ΠΙ. ‘ta DUTY OF REBUKING WORKS OF DARKNESS. This is to be done with the 
view of producing a consciousness of guilt and evil. The Christian attitude must be 
aggressive toward all the forms of sin. The rebuke is to be administered (1) with the 
lips, using all plainness, yet with prudence and mceekness, so as to win Gentiles to 
the truth ; (2) with our lives, which, by their holy separateness, ought to demonstrate 
the folly and sin of the world, A holy man is a visible reproof of sin. 

IV. ‘l'HE REASON FOR THIS ATTITUDE OF SEPARATION AND REBUKE, The heinousness 
of the sins and the necessity of making them manifest to the sinner’s conscience. 
1. The sins are (1) done in secret, (2) and they are too shameful for mention. Such sins 
would naturally shun the light of day, for “every one that doeth evil hateth the light” 
(John iii. 20), and could not be committed to language without risk of defilement to 
others. 2. Yet they are not beyond cure. The light of Divine truth must be let fall 
upon them, that they may be corrected. “ All things that are reproved are made mani- 
fest by the light.” There is a necessary connection in Scripture between truth and 
holiness, and the truth must first be applied to the ignorant and the wicked, that, it 
may make way for the sanctifying agency of the Spirit, The sun-glass of truth held 


cu. v. 1—33.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 221 


in the hand of the rebuker will concentrate the light from heaven upon the conscience 
of the sinner so that he will see it full of all nameless lus!s, and that very light will 
kindle a fire to consume them, unless the sinner, loving darkness, should turn away 
from the unwelcome light. Therefore let Christians remember the duty of pious and 
prudent reproof, which may not only put sin to shame, if not to silence, but lead the 
oe from ae to light, from the kingdom of Satan to the kingdom of God’s 
dear Son.—T. C. 


Ver. 14.—The trumpet-call of the gospel. Since it is light that manifests, there 
must be a rousing voice to awake the sleeper, that the light of life may be poured fully 
upon him. 

I, THE PERSON ADDRESSED. “Thou that sleepest.” Sleep is an apt figure to 
describe the sinner. 1. He lives in on unreal world, full of dreams and fancies, quite 
unconscious of the real world around him. The sinner dreams of safety and peace. He 
is carnally secure (Rom. xiii. 10; 1 Thess. v. 6). He may even walk in his sleep. 
2. He is wholly unprotected against danger. If he knew of his danger, he would not 
be asleep. He needs, therefore, to be toused. 3. His work is wholly suspended. So 
long as the sinner sleeps in spiritual death he does no good, he gets no good, he cares 
for nothing. The figure of the text is, therefore, very expressive. 

IL THE COMMAND ADDRESSED TO THE sLuEPER. “Awake... and arise from the 
dead.” The first thing is to open the eyes; but we are not to suppose that the sinner has 
any power of himself to open them, any more than the man with the withered hand had 
power to stretch it forth before Christ said, “Stretch forth thine hand.” It is the light 
which Christ is to shed upon the sleeper that will awake him. Just as the sun in the 
natural heavens, shining upon the eye of a sleeper, awakes bim, so the beams of the Sun 
of righteousness end the sleep of death. 1. The cry, “ Awake!” is the voice of love. 
A mother’s love will lull her child to sleep, but if the house is on fire, it will take 
another turn, and startle the child from its slumbers. 2. The ery, “ Awake!” is the 
voice of wisdom. The sinner loses much by sleeping. The thief pilfers by night. ‘The 
tare-sower goes forth in darkness to sow his seed. If you sleep on till death, you lose 
everything. 3. The cry is a voice of command. Who commands? It is he who 
redeemed you with his precious blood. 4. It is a voice you have often heard—in 
sermons, in sickness, in sorrows, in calamities. 

111. Tue PROMISE TO THE SLEEPER. “ And Christ shall give thee light.” The light 
that comes from Christ can reach even the dead: “The hour is coming, and now is, 
when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God: and they that hear shall live” 
(John v. 25). The dead are not quickened before they hear his voice, but his voice 
causes them to hear and live. Christ will give you light to carry you out of the society 
of the dead into the companionship of the children of light, because it has already 
introduced you into the fellowship of the Father and the Son. “Let us therefore cast 
off the works of darkness, and put on the armour of light.”—-T. C. 


Vers. 15, 16.—The circumspect walk. I. Irs nucesstry. The duty of reproof 
involved the necessity of circumspection in those who were bound to administer it. 
It may be a small thing to Christians “to be judged of man’s judgment” (1 Cor. iv. 3), 
yet they cannot afford to disregard the force of public opinion. They ought to “have a 
good report of them which are without” (1 Tim. iii. 7). It is evidently with reference to 
onlookers that the counsel of the apostle is given: “ Walk in wisdom toward them that 
are without, redeeming the time” (Col. iv. 5). When we consider the number of our 
enemies, the inconstancy of our minds, the strictness of the Divine requirements, 
and the jealousy our Divine Master cherishes over his people, it is impossible to walk 
acceptably unless we walk circumspectly. 

IL. THE NATURE OF THIS WALK. We are to “walk circumspectly, not as fools, but 
as wise.” 1. We are to have knowledge of the true way (Jer. vi. 16; Matt. vii. 14), not 
as the fool, who misses the path. 2. We are to follow the light that falls upon our path, 
not like the fool, who turns aside to darkness, only to stumble in it (Prov. iv. 27). 
8. We are to foresee the dangers of the way and provide against them, not like “the 
simple, who pass on and are punished ” (Prov, xxii. 3). 4. Weare to have the Lord for 
our Companion by the way, like “ Enoch, who walked with God” (Gen, v. 22), The 


229 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. {ou v. 188. 


fool seeks the company of the foolish. 5. We are to keep in view the en of our wally 
“ Receiving the end of your faith, even the salvation of your souls” (1 Tet. i. 9). 

III. THE APPLICATION OF THIS PRINCIPLE TO THE PROFITABLE USE OF OPPORTUNITY. 
“Redeeming the time, because the days are evil.” ‘There can be no wise or careful 
walking without a due consideration buth of the value of time and of the importance of 
using our opportunities for doing good. 1. The nature of this redemption of time. It 
is not the mere effort to rescue the fleeting hours of our life from idleness, vanity, dis- 
traction, or excessive devotion to business, but an effort to lay hold of opportunities for 
doing good, to make the most of them, to allow no distractions of pleasure or life to 
stand in the way of their right employment. Jesus, in his extreme youth, was eager 
to be “about his Father’s business” (Luke ii. 49). We are to do good unto all men “as 
we have opportunity ” (Gal. vi. 10). We are to do good to our very enemies, after the 
example of that Father who ‘“‘maketh his sun to rise upon the evil and the good” 
ae v. 45). We are to use our opportunities also for receiving good, giving all 

iligence to make our calling and our election sure (2 Pet. i. 10). 2. Reasons for 
redeeming the time. “ Because the days are evil.” It is not because our days are few, 
though that is also a very good reason. (1) We have lost much time already (1 Pet. iv. 
3); (2) we do not know how much time yet remains to us (Jas. iv. 14); (8) we have 
to give an account of all our time and opportunities. The reason assigned by the apostle 
is the evil of the days. Time must not be lost if the evil is to be quickly and effectively 
counteracted. The apostle does not hint the nature of the evil. Yet it is allowable to 
suppose that the days were evil, not in themselves, but by reason of man’s wickedness 
and folly. (1) It is the evil of sin, rather than the evil of punishment, that is meant. 
(2) It is part of the evil that men do not see it at all. (8) It is part of the evil that 
they do not mourn over it. (4) It is part of the evil that they will do nothing to 
remove it. There is, therefore, all the more reason for Christians bestirring themselves 
in all seasons and spheres of action to counteract the evil of the days.—T. Ο, 


Ver. 17.—The right understanding of duty. This is necessary to its efficient 
performance. 

I. Unwispom. The thought of the apostle turns upon the misapplication or mis- 
direction of our powers. “Be ye not unthinking and senseless.” It is a sin against 
our rational nature, azainst our high calling, against the Lord, not to use our intellectual 
faculties with supreme relation to the Lord’s will. 

11. THE IMPORTANCE OF A TRUE KNOWLEDGE oF THE LorD’s WILL. Retigion is 8 
question of knowledge as well as feeling. Knowledge supplies the basis of feeling. 
Though Scripture tells us not to lean to our own understanding, it tells us to love 
with knowledge and all judgment, The knowledge is needed both to stimulate and 
to regulate the love. We must know our duties, dangers, temptations, in respect to 
every condition of life in which we are placed by Divine providence. It is the will of 
the Lord Jesus Christ which supplies the true standard of action to every Christian. 
The direction of our life is to be determined by his precepts.—T. C., 


Ver. 18.— Warning against drunkenness, The tremendous sin of intemperance must 
have had a great hold upon a commercial city like Ephesus. It was necessary that 
Christians should beware of such an insidious vice. 

I. Ir pisuonours THE Law or Gop. (Rom. xiii. 13.) 

11. Ir pIsTURBS THE REASON OF MAN. 

III. Ir ENDANGERS THE HEALTH OF THE BODY, 

IV. Iv rsunes THE sovuL. (Hos. iv. 11.) 

V. Iv WASTES THE SUBSTANCE AND TENDS TO BEGGARY. (Prov. xxiil. 21.) 

VI. Ir consuMESs PRECIOUS TIME AND DETERIORATES THE CHARACTER OF WORK. 

VIL. Iv 1s THE CAUSE OF OTHER SINS. Such as swearing, strife, licentiousness 
(Prov. xxiii. 19). 

VIII. Ir unrirs rok RELIGIOUS DUTIES. 

IX. Ir ΚΕΕΡΒ souls OUT OF THE KINeDoM oF Gop. (1 Cor. vi. 9.) Therefore 
Christians ought to avoid it, abstaining altogether from intoxicating drinks on the 
grounds of Christian expediency, and using their influence to rescue others from {ta 
ruinous fascination.—T. 0, 


ou. v. 1—33.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 223 


Vers, 18—21.—The true antidote to drunkenness, There is a real contrast here 
exhibited between fulness of wine and fulness of the Spirit. There is an intensity of 
feeling produced in both cases. “ There is one intensity of feeling produced by stimu- 
lating the senses; another, by vivifying the spiritual lite within. The one commences 
with impulses from without, the other is guarded by forces from within.” The one 
tends to ruin, the other to salvation. The Spirit-fulness “will keep the soul holy, the 
body chaste, and render the Christian fit for the service of God on earth and meet for 
the fruition and enjoyment of God in heaven.” The exhilaration caused by the Spirit 
finds a threefold expression. 

I. In PsaLMs, HYMNS, AND SPIRITUAL sonas. 1. The heathen festivals were 
remarkable for songs of drunken revelry. The excitement of the worshippers found 
vent in singing. Christians are likewise to express their exhilaration in songs. “The 
hearts and spirits of good men are full of spiritual mirth and joy ; they are as merry in 
the Lord as sinners in their lust ; itis, therefore, lawful and laudable for them to express 
their mirth and give vent to their spiritual joy by singing.” 2. There is a happy 
variety in such songs adapted to the various moods of the singers. We have the 
Psalms of David; we have the hymns composed by pious men like Zacharias and 
Simeon ; and we have the compositions, for public assemblies, of those inspired by the 
Holy Spirit (1 Cor. xiv.). 3. There must be a harmony in these songs between the 
artistic service of the voice and the inner melody of the heart. Otherwise the spirit 
and meaning of the exercise will disappear. 4. Singing has always been a powerful 
instrument of promoting the spread of true religion (Reformation, periods of revival). 
5. ‘The singing here enjoined was for social intercourse as well as for the public assem- 
blies of worship. Christians ought to exercise their gifts of song to spiritual ends. 

11. In eivine or tHAanKs. The heart which is filled with the Spirit brims over 
with thankfulness. 1. To whom thanks are to be given. “Τὸ God, even the Father.” 
To God as the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and therefore our Father in him. (1) 
Because it is only from him we have anything that is good (Jas. i, 17); (2) because 
it is only by him we are preserved from evil (Ps. cxxi. 7); (8) because he ouly is good 
in himself (Luke xviii. 19). 2. How should we give thanks to him? (1) By humble 
confession of our unworthiness (Gen. xxxii. 10; ch. iii. 8); (2) by humble acknowledz- 
ment of his mercies (Prov. iii. 6; Ps. cxlv. 1—9); (8) by improving everything to his 
glory (Prov. iii. 9); (4) by walking before him in all well-pleasing. 8. What must we 
thank him for? “ For all things.” (1) For our mercies—for sparing mercy, for recover- 
ing mercy, for mercies both received and expected, You cannot expect a blessing in them 
unless you are thankful for them; and the more thankful you are for mercies received 
the more reason is there for your expecting more. (2) For all providences—for pros- 
perity or adversity, for health or sickness. he afflictions may be mixed with mercies, 
and may be the means of quickening our graces (Ps. cxix. 67). 4. How often must we 
thank him? “ Always.” It must be continuous, The heart must be kept in a con- 
stantly thankful frame, and not expend itself at mere intervals in acts of devout 
thanksgiving. 5. Through whom are our thanksgivings to be made acceptable to God? 
* In the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ.” We are authorized to use this Name as our 
warrant for expecting the acceptance of our services as well as the fullest enjoyment of 
all spiritual mercies. 

Ill. Morvan supmission. The effect of the Spirit’s full enjoyment is to produce a 
humble and loving spirit among Christian people. 1. The duty of mutual submission. 
This principle, which is inconsistent with a perverse egotism or a self-opinionated 
superiority, has great and happy effects. It reduces the friction of human life, and 
contributes greatly to its comfort and peace. It has nothing in common with the 
servile and obsequious temper which is such a dishonour to manhood, Let us mutually 
condescend to each other. “In lowliness of mind let each esteem other better than 
themselves ” (Phil. ii. 8). ‘ All of you be subject. one to another, and be clothed with 
humility” (1 Pet. v. 5). We are not isolated units in society. “The essential 
equality of men and their mutual dependence lay the foundation for the obligation of 
mutual subjection.” 2. The element or sphere in which this duty is to be maintained, 
“In the fear of Christ.” This is not terror, but the solemn reverence with which we bow 
to the authority of our Divine Lord. Our submission is grounde¢. in our reverence for 
Lim, im our fear of offending him by our airs of assumption or authority, in our supreme 


254 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. [cx.-v. 1—38 


regard for his holy will. Thus Christianity lifts the commonest duties and civilities 
and amenities of social life into the highest sphere, by connecting them with tlie 
supreme lordship of Christ over his saints—T. Ο, 


Vers, 22—24.— The duties of wives. In enforcing relative duties the apostle reminds 
us that religion takes hold of all possible conditions and callings of men. Religion is 
the great formative grace for men. We are set in a curiously various scheme of rela- 
tions, in which the two principles of union and subjection are beautifully blended. 
‘The three relations in which these principles are seen in operation are peculiar to family 
life. The wife is first mentioned, then the children, then the servants. Religion rounds 
out the life of the family in a lovely completeness, Consider— 

1. THE puTIEs oF Wives. They are all summed up in the one word—subjection. 
It is singular that the apostle does not command the wife to love her husband as the 
husband is commanded to love his wife. Her love is commanded elsewhere (Titus ii. 4), 
but not here. It has been observed that what is instinctive is not enforced, but only 
what is necessary to hallow and direct our instincts. The husband is to be the head; 
yet he is not commanded to govern; but he is commanded to love, as the means of 
securing subjection or submission on the part of the wife. She, again, loves more 
naturally and more passionately than man; her love is no subject of command, it is 
taken for granted ; and the apostle commands her to obey and honour her husband as 
the best expression of this love. Jeremy Taylor says, “He rules her by authority, 
she rules bim by love; she ought by all means to please hima, and he must by no 
means displease her.” Her great duty, then, is subjection. Let us see what it 
involves. 1. I¢ ts not servitude. It is not like the obedience of servants to masters, 
nor even like that of children to parents. It is a submisson that recognizes the 
busband’s rule as just, tender, and wise. 2. It ἐδ α wise and loving obedience. Wives 
are “to be obedient to their own husbands” (‘Titus ii. 5), Sa-ah is quoted by another 
apostle as an example of this obedience (1 Pet. iii. 1—6). It was necessary to empha- 
size this duty at a time when Christianity gave woman a new position of dignity ard 
privilege, and when there might have been a temptation on the part of Christian wives 
who had unbelieving husbands to assert an authority over them inconsist-nt with the 
original institution of marriage. There is to be no dual auth«rity in the family. The 
gospel made then both “heirs together of the grace of life,” as it made “ both male 
and female one in Christ,” yet, even in religious or ecclesiastical matters, she was not 
to usurp authority over the man, but “to be in silence” (1'fim. ii. 12). 8, H¢ is an 
obedience within limits, though the wives are enjoined to be aubject to their husbands 
“in everything,” that is, in everything within the due sphere of a husband’s autho- 
rity, for they are not to obey him in anything contrary to Go:\ and his Law. They are 
to obey God rather than man. 4. 1 is an obedience fashioned in its conditions and spirit 
upon the subjection of the Church to Christ. “As the Chur,h is subject unto Christ, 
so let the wives be to their own husbands in everything.” ‘1 his implies that the wife’s 
obedience is not to be forced or feigned, but springing naturally out of her affection 
to her husband, her dependence upon him, and her recognitica of the just grounds of his 
superiority. 5. J¢ implies fear, or reverence. “Let the vife see that she reverence 
her husband” (ver. 89), not despising him in her heart, as Michal despised David 
(2 Sam. vi. 16), but, like Sarah, calling her husband “lord” (1 Pet. iii. 6). The chaste 
conversation of the wife is to be “ coupled with fear” to assert its own power. 

IL. Tue REASONS FOR THIS SUBMISSION. 1, The husband’s recognized headship in the 
original institution of marriage. “The head of the woman is the man ” (1 Cor. xi. 8). 
Her obedience, therefore, while a religious duty, has its foundation in nature. (1) The 
man was first formed. “ Adam was first formed, then Eve” (1 Tim. ii. 13). (2) The 
man was not created for the woman, but the woman for the man (1 Cor. xi. 9). (3) 
The woman was first in transgression, “ Adam was not deceived, but the woman being 
deceived was in the transgression” (1 Tim. ii. 14). (4) The woman is the “glory of 
the man,” but “the man is the image and glory of God” (1 Cor, xi. 7). 2. Her 
dependent position. As the “ weaker vessel,” she needs protection, while he far excels 
her in those qualities which entitle to command. Yet his superiority in these respects 
is consistent with his inferiority to the woman in gentleness, patience, sympathy love 
delicacy of sentiment. 3. The fitness of things. She is “to be subject to her own 


cu. v. 1—33.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 225 


husband.” This expressive phrase points to the closeness, exclusiveness, and specialty 
of the relationship. It is thus a great mischief to unsex woman by denying or dis- 
regarding the superiority of man. 4. The similarity of the relation to that between the 
Church and Christ. ‘“ As the Church is subject unto Christ, so let the wives be to their 
own husbands in everything.” As Christ is the Source of authority and direction to the 
Church, as he exercises both with meekness and gentleness, so is the husband to the 
wife. She is bound, therefore, to give him the obedience the Church gives to Christ, 
limited, of course, by the nature of the relation and the authority of God. She is not 
to identify her husband’s claims with Christ, as if her Saviour could supersede or weaken 
the just authority of her husband over her. A religious wife loves and honours her 
husband all the more from the very intenseness of her love to Christ. Her very 
obedience, too, fashioned upon the obedience of the Church to Christ, becomes tributary 
to her influence over her husband, Chiristianity has lifted woman to a high place, but 
without unsexing her. The old pagan writer, Libanius, might well exclaim, “Oh 
what women these Christians have! ”—T. C, 


Vers. 25—33.— The duties of husbands. As the duties of wives are comprehended 
in the single duty of subjection, the duties of husbands are comprehended in the single 
duty of love. The injunction is significantly repeated three times, as if to indicate 
that it was essentially needed to correct or qualify his sense of sovereignty or 
superiority over her. Consider three points. 

1. Tue CHARACTERISTICS OF A HUSBAND’s LOVE. 1. Jt ts peculiar in its nature, 
unlike the love of parent or child, friend or neighbour. “ He is to love his wife even 
as himself.” 2. It ts single, exclusive, and undivided in its object ; for the husband is to 
devote to his one wife all the affection of his life. ‘Rejoice with the wife of thy 
youth” (Prov. v. 18,19). This fact is the condemnation of bigamy and polygamy. 
3. It is to be considerate and tender, excluding all bitterness, ‘‘ Husbands, love your 
wives, and be not bitter against them” (Col. iii. 19). Husbands are “to dwell with 
their wives according to knowledge” (1 Pet. 111, 7); that is, with a due consideration 
to their condition as “the weaker vessel,” and with a disposition to hide or bear with 
thoir weaknesses or infirmities. It is to be a love that will make it unnecessary for the 
husband ever to command his wife. The gospel counterpart of “ Wives, submit your- 
selves to your own husbands,” is not “ Husbands, command your wives,” but “love 
your wives.” 4. It is to be mutual. The wife’s love is presupposed, though elsewhere 
it is expressly commanded (Titus ii. 4). The husband is to love her as she loves him. 
The rightful confidence and sympathy of married life are impossible without mutual 
affection. All marriages of convenience or self-interest are thus condemned. Love 
rhust be the basis of marriage. 5. It is to be constant and lasting, notwithstanding all 
the weaknesses or failings of the wife. 

Il. THE METHODS IN WHICH THIS LOVE IS TO FIND EXPRESSION. 1. In providing 
for the temporal support of a wife. The husband is to “nourish and cherish” his wife. 
He that provideth not for his own is worse than an unbeliever (1 Tim. v.38). 2 He 
must consult her happiness and pleasure; for “he that is married is to care that he 
may please his wife” (1 Cor. vii. 33). 3. He must protect her life, her honour, her good 
name ; for she is “ the weaker vessel.” He must “give honour to the wife” (1 Pet. iii. 7). 
4, He is to seek her spiritual welfare. He is to pray for her and with her, remembering 
that she is an heir with him of the grace of life, “that your prayers be not hindered.” 

III. THE REASONS FOR THIS coMMAND. 1. The original law of marriage. “ For 
this cause shall a man leave his father and mother, and shall cleave to his wife, and the 
twain shall become one flesh.” The union implies such an identification of interest, pro- 
perty, and relationship to the world as to make them almost one person. 2. The wife 
is the husband’s vther self. She is not only one flesh with himself, but she is his very 
body. “No man ever yet hated his own flesh,” except the fanatics of ascetic devotion. 
3. The help, comfort, and blessing she brings to him. She is given to him as “an help- 
meet;” she is his companion. “ Yet she is thy companion and the wife of thy cove- 
nant” (Mal. ii. 14). The heart of the husband “safely trusts in her” (Prov. xii. 4). 
4. She is the weaker vessel. <A spirit of chivalry ought to surround her with the shield 
of protecting love. 5. She is “the glory of the man” (1 Cor. xi. 7)—his honour and 
oruament and delight. 6. His union with her is typical of the blessed union that exists 

EPHESIANS, Qa 


226 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. (ox. v. 1—33. 


between Christ and the Church. All the love and self-sacrifice and service which Christ 
expended upon the Church supply the type of a husband’s duty to his wife.—T. Ο, 


Vers. 25—-32.—The union between Christ and the Church, The apostle unites, with 
an exposition of the duties of conjugal life, a very impressive statement of the nature 
of the union between Christ and the Church, This statement is exceedingly important, 
quite irrespective of its supplying an illustration of the ground and measure of a 
hasband’s affection for his wife. There are three truths here exhibited respecting the 
union of Christ and his Church, 

I. Curist 1s THE HEAD oF THE CHURCH AS WELL AS THE SAVIOUR OF THE BODY. 
He not only saves the Church, but governs it; he not only redeemed it by his atoning 
death, but is its continuous Preserver and Director, his life the very life of his people: 
“ Because I live, ye shall live also.” 

TI. Curis? PREPARES THE CHURCH FOR HIMSELF AS HIS SPOTLESS BRIDE. ‘1. The 
language implies that the Church was originally impure, in fact, like the foundling 
infant of the prophet exposed on the day of its birth, “to the loathing of its person” 
(Ezek. xvi.). If she had not been so, there would have been no need of Christ’s 
glorious cleansing. 2. It was through his death that Christ designed to make his people 
holy. “ He gave himself” for them (ver. 25). The language is clearly sacrificial. The 
gift involved a death of unut'erable anguish, yet he shrank not from it in his unutter- 
able love. It is the death which secures our ultimate holiness, for it reconciles us to 
God and secures to us the gift of the Holy Spirit. We are redeemed from the curse of 
the Law, that “we might receive the promise of the Spirit” (Gal. iii. 18,14). 3. The 
application of the atonement. “That he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing 
of water by the Word;” or, rather, “that, having purified it, he might consecrate it.” 
The Church is thus set apart as his bride—“ the Lamb’s wife.” It is thus that Christ 
sanctifies his people with his blood (IHeb. x. 10; xiii, 11, 12), not merely by way of 
expiation, but by way of consecrating them to himself. The instrumental means of the 
Church’s sanctification is “the washing of water by the Word.” This points clearly 
to baptism, which is elsewhere described as “the laver of regeneration;” but it is 
baptism inseparably linked with “the Word.” What is the spiritual import of this 
baptism? It neither regenerates nor secures the remission of sins. It is true that 
it is called “the laver of regeneration” (Titus iii, 5), and that remission of sins is 
connected with it. “Arise, be baptized, and wash away thy sins” (Acts xxii. 16). 
But no more is ascribed in Scripture to baptism than to the Word of God. Laptism 
cleanses from sin as the Word does. We are saved by the truth, begotten by the truth, 
sanctified by the truth. But this language does not imply that the Word regenerates 
every one who hears it, or that it possesses a magic power to work saving results, 
“ Faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God” (Rom. x. 17); but many 
who hear do not believe. Besides, salvation, as in the case of infants, is not linked 
inseparably with the Word. Historically, we know from the instances of baptism 
recorded Pf the New Testament that faith preceded baptism. ‘lherefore baptism 
cannot regenerate. We believe, however, that baptism is both a sign and a seal of the 
covenant of grace, without believing that it has any regenerating power in itself. The 
Lord connects the blessings of salvation with a believing reception of baptism, just 
as he does with ἃ believing acceptance of the Word. For the apostle is here speaking 
of the effect of baptism on the Church, not upon those who are aliens from its blessings. 
4. The design of the Lord in this purification of the Church. “That he might present 
it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing; but that 
it should be holy and without blemish.” (1) This refers evidently to the time of our 
Lord’s second coming, when he is to be admired in all them that believe. It cannot refer 
to the Church in this world, which, even in its best states, has many a spot and many 
awrinkle. (2) 1 implies that the Lord will himself present his Church “as his pur- 
chased possession,” and he and no other will receive the Church as his bride to himself. 
(8) The condition of the Church will be one of spotless glory. She will have neither 
the spots of sin or error to mar her beauty nor the wrinkles of decay, but will be 
“holy and without blemish.” δ. Jé was love that prompted and directed the whole 
process which is to have such a glorious result. ‘ As Uhrist also loved the Church.” 

TIL Cuaist AND THE CHUROH ABE ONE MEMBERSHIP. “For we are members of his 


on. v. 1—33.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 227 


body, of his flesh, and of his bones” (ver. 80). 1. This does not refer to the incarna- 
tion, for the assumption of human nature allied our Saviour to the whole race of man, 
This membership applies to believers only, 2. Neither does it refer, as Romanists say, 
to the Lord’s Supper, in which, partaking of his flesh, we are flesh of his flesh. 8, It 
signifies community of life, like that which connected Eve in her creation with the 
flesh of Adam, We are elsewhere said to be saved by his flesh (ch. ii. 15), by his 
blood (ch. ii. 18), by his body (Rom. vii. 4), by the body of his flesh (Col. i. 22); and 
his flesh is called our life, and described as essential to eternal life. ‘Except ye eat 
the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you” (John vi. 
53, 54). There is, no doubt, great mystery here, and therefore the relation between 
Christ and his Church may well be called so (ver, 82).—T. O, 


Vers. 1—16.—The love and the wrath of God enforcing morality. Paul fs still 
working. for the unity of the Church and calling for that watchful and pure walk on 
the part of the Ephesians which can alone promote it. He consequently brings to 
bear upon them the allied motives of the love and the wrath of God. And here we may 
remark, in passing, that the moralities which have tried to work themselves without the 
aid of Divine sanctions have proved practically powerless. No “independent morality ” 
has as yet rendered any appreciable service to the world. We still need to be over- 
shadowed by the Divine. Paul, moreover, begins with love, and then passes on to the 
fact of the Divine wrath, And— 

I, Tue Love or GoD PATERNAL AND FRATERNAL SHOULD MOVE US TO MUTUAL LOVE 
(Vers. 1, 2.) The Ephesians are exhorted to follow their Divine Father as dear children. 
The constant love of the heavenly Father lights all the children on their way and 
rebukes their want of love. The first motive in this section is, therefore, paterial love 
a call to children of God to be loving like their Father in heaven. But the second 
motive is from the fraternal love of Christ, which led him out of consideration for us 
to “give himself up for us, an offering and a sacrifice to God for an odour of a sweet 
smell” (Revised Version). The self-sacrifice of Christ, we are here taught, was a very 
precious offering in the Father’s sight. In the cross the Father for the first time saw 
perfect obedience carried up to the point and in the article of death. While in one 
aspect Jesus realized the Father’s wrath on the cross, because the Substitute for sinners, 
in another aspect he was contemplated by the Father with the utmost complacency, 
Self-sacrifice is fully appreciated by our Father in heaven. Now, if God regarded with 
infinite delight the self-sacrifice of the only begotten Son for the sake of his brethren, 
there is no way in which we can delight our Father so much as by following in 
the Elder Brother’s footsteps and being ready to sacrifice ourselves out of love to the 
brethren, What a spirit this would infuse into our Church life! Harless notices that 
in this passage Christ is really represented as both Priest and Victim. In the same 
way we may delight the mind of God in being victims and priests in our loving 
relations to the brethren, 

Il. ΠῊΞ wrata oF Gop 18 A REALITY TOWARDS THE COVETOUS AND UNCLEAN. 
(Vers. 83—7.) ‘The idea that God will not be angry with wicked men must be 
dismissed from all minds. Jtighteous indignation against certain forms of evil is an 
experience of a most imperative and holy character. We should lose our reverence 
for a God who did not become angry with sinners, It was the more needful to 
affirm this truth at Ephesus, since the deities of heathenism were supposed to be 
addicted to such crimes as uncleanness and covetousness. Olympus was filled, by 
the impure imaginations of men, with a set of men and women who were for the 
most part fit for peuitentiaries and state prisons, Morality received no backing from 
the mythology. But the thought that a God so loving as our heavenly Father is 
wrathful with the covetous and the unclean, and allows his wrath to burn against 
them, is surely calculated to wean men from such sins, There seems to have been 
insinuations in Paul’s time that the Divine wrath against impurity and covetousness 
was mythical, just as such insinuation prevails at present. But surely the frightful 
punishment which these sins entail in the order of nature speak to the spirit of man 
about the reality of the Divine wrath. Not all the ameliorations of science can 
bring it about that men can so sin with impunity; the unclean are cursed in the 
very nature of things with a grievous curse, and the covetous suffer of necessity 


228 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, (on. v. 1—33 


in their pinched and miserly souls. God is an angry God against those who love 
sin, and our only course is to forsake it. Harless and Olshausen believe the word 
here rendered “ covetousness” to mean in this connection “intemperance,” the desire, 
not for gold, but for fleshly gratification—the making a god of the belly, and so an 
idolatry. Of course, if this sense be taken of πλεονεξία, it agrees better with the 
context and makes more emphatic Paul’s appeal for purity. Do we make as much 
in these days of the Divine wrath as we should? As the love-pain of God, as one 
writer has called it, it is surely well fitted to enforce morality. 

IIL Pav. FURTHER SHOWS THAT THE DEEDS OF DARKNESS ARE UNFRUITFUL. 
(Vers. 8—11.) He tells the Ephesians they were once in darkness, and did these 
deeds of darkness. But they have come into the light which is shed upon our 
path by our radiant Lord. They must walk, consequently, as children of the light, 
remembering that the fruit of the light (so Revised Version) is in all goodness and 
righteousness and truth. Thus they would prove what is well-pleasing unto the 
Lord. In so doing they would have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of 
darkness, but would rather reprove them. Now, in arguing that the works of dark- 
ness are “unfruitful,” Paul is advocating morality on the ground of expediency. He 
has already applied the Divine sanctions, but he does not hesitate to back these up 
by showing that what God wills is good. Natural law endorses the Divine precepts. 
But this is quite distinct from the position that the natural law can secure obedience 
when it stands alone, All experience disproves this. Utilitarianism is not a suffi- 
ciently broad basis for a sound morality. But the expediency of moral rectitude is 
an important argument in its favour. Sooner or later a man who commits deeds of 
darkness finds he has made a mistake. 

IV. Bur 17 Is A PURE LIFE WHICH WILL REALLY REPROVE THEM. (Vers. 12—14.) 
It is thought sometimes by superficial people that accurate descriptions of the deeds 
of darkness will do something to disgust people with them. But this is Satan advising 
man again to become wiser by eating forbidden fruit. Paul’s opinion is that it is a 
shame to speak and therefore to think of what is done by the sinful in secret. All 
the prurient curiosity which feasts itself like flies on foul corruption is of the devil. 
The true plan, therefore, is not to mention such matters. Let them be buried in 
oblivion, but let Christians awake from all lethargic slumber, and arise from the 
corruption of spiritual death, and in the light of-Christ live purely. Thus shall the 
deeds of darkness be reproved. All that we have to do then is to carry in the light, 
and the darkness and its deeds will stand convicted before us. The Ephesians are to 
indulge in no scandalous conversation under the pretence of defeating the doers of the 
dark deeds ; but they are to walk in the light of Christ and be pure, and lo! the sinners 
shall hide themselves before them. 

V. TimE MAY BE REDEEMED BY HOLY Livinc. (Vers. 15, 16.) There has been 
some discussion as to the exact meaning of “time” in this passage. Harless is clearly 
of opinion—in which, as in most matters, he is followed by his French disciple, 
M. Monod—that “opportunity ” (der rechte Zeitpunkt) best expresses τὸν καιρόν. Paul 
is consequently anxious that in evil days, such as those upon which the Ephesians 
have fallen, they should be watchful and wise enough to “buy up eagerly their 
opportunity,” and do the best they can for their age. This is by holy living. There 
is no other way of understanding the times and fulfilling our course in them. It will 
thus be seen that Paul appeals to the Ephesians, by both the love and wrath of God, 
by the expediency and power of a pure life, to walk worthy of their high calling. In 
this way he expects to enlist them in the great army of united and brotherly souls 


who are gathering round Jesus our King and Head. May we all respond to his 
appeal!'—R. M. Εἰ, 


Vers. 17—21.—Inspiration, spirituous and spiritual. Following up his exhortations 
about holy living, Paul now proceeds to the subject of understanding the Lord’s will. 
{In doing so he comes across the necessity which human nature feels for excitement 
of some kind, and, warning the Ephesians against the low excitement of wine, he 


1 Upon ‘Redeeming the Time,’ Saurin has two sermons in his tome viii. pp. 187—268; 
and donathant Edwards has a short discourse on ‘The Preciousness of Time,’ founded 
on ver. 1 


cu, v. 1—383.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, 229 


commends the high excitement of the Spirit, with all its pleasurable manifestations, 
In other words, he speaks of inspiration, but condemns the spirituous while he 
commends the spiritual. We have thus suggested— 

I. THE NEED OF SOME STIMULUS FROM BEYOND OURSELVES. (Vers. 17, 18.) This 
is apparent from the fact that every one needs some excitement, as it is called, to keep 
him moving—something to “interrupt our quiet and ordinary state of mind with some 
more lively feeling, which makes us live more consciously and in a manner quicker 
than we do in common.” We all feel this. Now, this goes to show that we are not 
self-contained, no matter how much we desire to be so, but need a helping hand from 
without our personalities, Withhold food, and we perish. Withhold all stimulus from 
us, and we go of necessity to pieces. The whole question comes to be, therefore, where 
we shall get our required stimulus, 

II. THE sTIMULUS OF WINE IS ATTENDED WITH DANGER. (Ver. 18.) This is an 
inspiration which comes through sense. Now, all of us need a stimulus through our 
senses, Food is such a stimulus, A well-digested meal makes life move faster and 
quicker than fasting would. But the vinous inspiration leads to “riot” (Revised 
Version), and is inconsistent with that unity of the Church for which the gospel 
calls. We should abstain from such a dangerous stimulus as this, for its effect has been 
hostile to unity of spirit. But we might extend the precaution here to all those 
excitements of a sensual nature which exhaust and retard the spirit. As Robertson 
says, “ Wine is but a specimen of a class of stimulants. All that begins from 
without belongs to the same class. The stimulus may be afforded by almost any 
enjoyment of the senses. Drunkenness may come from anything wherein is excess— 
from over-indulgence in society, in pleasure, in music, and in the delight of listening 
to oratory, nay, even from the excitement of sermons and religious meetings. The 
prophet tells us of those who are drunken, and not with wine.” Arnold, in the 
same way, bases upon this passage warnings against excess of bodily exercise, excess of 
intellectual exercise, excess even in our hours of work, excess, in a word, so far as 
it militates against Christian sober-mindedness., 

TIL. THE INSPIRATION FROM ABOVE CAN HAVE NO ATTENDANT EXCESS. (Vers. 18, 19.) 
We may be filled with the Spirit, and no riot result, nothing which will do anything 
but foster the glorious unity. For, as Arnold shows, the gospel and the inspirations 
from God “at once excite and soothe,” so that the soul is kept in holy equilibrium, 
and the inspiration has its natural manifestion. 1. There will be harmony wn social 
song. Poetry and music will become tributary to unity of spirit. The Holy Ghost 
will permeate by his harmonizing presence social praise. 2. The praise offered to the 
Lord will be heurtfelt. It will not be a form of praise, but the very heart going up to 
heaven. 3. Thanksgiving will be mightily promoted. In the midst of manifold 
mercies our God in heaven looks for constant thankfulness from us. And, indeed, if 
we understand his love we shall be prompted to give thanks “always for all things,” 
in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ. 4. And inspiration will promote mutual 
subjection in the fear of Christ (so Revised Version). Thus it comes to pass that 
an inspired people proves a praising and united people. What harmony the socicty 
filled with the Spirit realizes! It is heaven begun below. What we need, therefore, 
is a Pentecost. If the Holy Spirit is pleased to fill us, then shall our discords vanish 
and our hearts beat in unison. It is by inspiration that the unity of the Church shall 
be secured.—R. M. E. 


Vers. 22—33.— What husbands and wives owe to Christ. In exhorting the Ephesians 
to purity and enthusiasm of life, Paul is naturally led to the family institution and the 
relations to be found there. In the heathen world the relations between men and women 
were degrading. As Pressensé says, in his most suggestive book, ‘La Famille Chrétienne,’ 
“One found in the pagan family neither purity nor love. At the moment when Jesu 
Christ came, it had reached the last degree of degradation, and one can apply to the 
family itself those words of the Gospel, ‘He has come to seek and to save that which 
was lost.’” In this passage of Ephesians we have an insight into what Christ bas 
done for the family. He has made of marriage the choice symbol of his own relation 
to the Church, and so family life is lifted into a Divine and spiritual light. The con- 
sideration of Christ for his people regulates the consideration husband should show te 


220 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, ἴση. v. 1—33% 


wife; and the loyalty of Christ’s people to their Master indicates the loyalty the wife 
should show the husband. Husbands and wives thus owe to Christ the purification of 
their relations and the sanctification of the home ! 

I, Jesus LEFT HIS HEAVENLY HOME TO BE UNITED TO HIS BRIDE, THE CHUROR. 
(Ver. 31.) It is evident that the parallel between the son leaving father and 
mother that he may cleave unto his wife, and Jesus leaving the bosom of the 
Father to be united to the bride, the Church, is what is in the apostle’s mind. He saya 
that he speaks of Christ and the Church (ver. 32). And in no more beautiful way 
can the self-denial of Jesus in leaving heaven be presented. Heaven had been from all 
eternity the happy home of the only begotten Son. He had lain in the Father’s bosom 
acd enjoyed ineffable bliss. But thoughts of marriage came, and the Father favoured 
the Son’sidea. The morning dawned when Jesus must leave the homestead, and go forth 
to win his bride. Angels may well have wondered at the step and doubted its wisdom. 
But the step is taken, The home is left, and never again can it be what it once was. 
It is to be tenanted in due time with a bride, the Lamb’s wife, composed of a multitude 
that no man can number, happy souls, each and all in deepest unity with the Son. We 
do not sufficiently appreciate the magnificent design of God in the marriage of his only 
Son, or the condescension of the Son in forming such an alliance as he has done, For 
no condescension in earthly marriages can more than feebly illustrate the condescension 
of the Divine Son in taking a human bride. Princes may marry paupers, but the 
difference between poverty and princely wealth is as nothing compared with the 
difference between human nature and what is Divine. But besides, the human nature 
was not pure upon which he set his love; it was sinful, lost, ruined. Imagine a prince, 
out of pure as distinguished from passionate love, singling out some poor, abandoned 
woman, and arranging for her education and health and elevation in thought and 
feeling, until at last he can fairly marry her and give her share of his gloiies and his 
home ;—this is but a faint image of what Jesus the Son of God has done in selecting as 
a bride the ruined human race. He determined to win his bride, and so he took sinless 
human nature on him, and arranged for the union of once sinful, but through grace 
sanctified, human nature with himself. 

IL, Tue care or JESUS FOR THE CHURCH 18 THE IDEAL AT WHICH HUSBANDS 
SHOULD AIM IN CARING FOR THEIR WIVES. (Vers. 25—33.) This is Paul’s idea in this 
whole passage. Let us notice the order of the thought. 1. Christ loved the Church. 
This sovereign and yet most unselfish love led to the whole history of Christ’s devotion. 
His great heart recognized the possibilities of love when manifested to lost souls, and 
determined to realize them. 2. He gave himself for it. Here was heroic love, In the 
oature of things husbands cannot give themselves to death for their wives and after- 
wards enjoy their confidence. But Christ was able to give himself for the Church and 
then to enter into union with it. But it surely shows that a husband who truly 
loves his wife should be ready to die for her. 3. His self-sacrifice was to secure the 
Church’s sanctification. The Church was naturally polluted, sinful, degraded; but 
the whole history of Christ’s devotion goes to show that he had our sanctification in 
view. While setting his love on sinful souls, he hated our sin, and provided blood to 
cleanse our sin away. And the sanctification Christ secures for his bride is to be 
perfect. She is to be without “spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing ;” she is to be “ holy 
and without blemish.” In other words, the sanctification is to be thorough. And 
is this not to show that husbands who are true to their wives should keep their 
sanctification steady as a star before them? If a husband does allin his power to 
promote his wife’s holiness, she can never be the victim of any unholy lust, but sancti- 
fication will characterize every relation. 4, The love thus lavished on the wife is the love 
of a man’s “ betier self.” To encourage this gallant and holy devotion to women, Paul 
further shows the compensation. The husband and wife are one, just as Christ and the 
Church are one. In loving his wife ἃ man is really loving himself. It is self-love as 
distinguished from selfishness. It is the love of a man’s “better self.” A man is 
not expected to hate his own flesh, but to nourish and cherish it ; self-preservation 
dictates such a course; in the same way husbands should love their wives, cherish- 
ing them as really their “ better halves,” or rather, “ better selves,” and feeling assured 
that a man’s real interests all lie in the direction of tender consideration towards hig 
wife. It thus appears that Jesus has furnished the true ideal of devotion. We go not 


cH. Vv. 1—33.) THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 23) 


to belted knights or tales of chivalry for our ideas about devotion to our wives, but to 
the foot of the cross, that we may see in Jesus our perfect Example! 

III. Tae CHURCH’S REVERENTIAL LOVE TO CHRIST 185 THE IDEAL OF WIFELY 
DEVOTION. (Vers.22—25.) If Paul would summon husbands up to the heights of con- 
secration by the example of Christ, he would also summon wives up to a corresponding 
return of reverential devotion. The Church, in her love and obedience to Christ, is the 
pattern of wifely devotion. Now, this leads us to consider how Christ rules in his 
Church. It is not an inconsiderate despotism, but an intelligent, considerate rule of love. 
His wishes are expressed with infinite tenderness. There is no fury in his command- 
ments, The Church feels and finds that they are not grievous, And so believers are 
loyal to the Lord from the heart, Nothing is so delightful as to obey him. Suppose, 
then, that such a spirit characterized the wife’s relations to her husband ; that she 
saw in his every expressed wish the outcome of love, and obeyed him in the belief that 
obedience was her privilege as well as duty,—what Edenic homes men and women would 
‘possess on earth! And here it may be well to notice a fact brought out in Pressensé’s 
volume already referred to, and it is this, that the New Testament has evidently entered 
into many more details about the family than about the constitution of the Church. The 
reason is obvious. The battle of the faith is to be won through the family. The family 
is God’s unit. The Church is but a family enlarged; heaven, again, is only a family 
still more enlarged. God as a Father overshadows all! If Christianity ensures a holy 
family ; if she wins families from worldiness to holiness of life ;—then she may indeed 
lift up her head assured that redemption is drawing nigh. Christian homes on earth, 
paradise restored,—these are really the creations which we look for; and beyond the 
shadows a still statelier home arises in “the Father’s house with its many mansions” 
prepared for the reception of the bride. The family on earth is sanctified that the family 
in heaven may be prepared for; the heavenly home is but the perfection of the earthly, 
if this is Christian to its core.—R. M. E. 


Vers, 1—14.— What to imitate and to avoid. I. Tue ΓΜΙΤΑΤΙΟΝ or Gop anp Curist. 
1. The imitation of God. “Be ye therefore imitators of God, as beloved children.” 
The force of example is abundantly acknowledged. How much do most of us suffer 
from the low standard of opinion and practice with which we are surrounded? On the 
other hand, we have all felt what it is to come into contact with one who is raised 
above the common standard. By his strength of principle and generous sentiments 
and noble endeavours he kindles our aspiration. We should like to be what he is. 
The wonderful thing here is tbat God places us (which is of far greater consequence) 
under the influence of his own example. This is the only place in which we are dis- 
tinctly called to imitate God. But the same truth is given expression to by Christ 
when he says, “ That ye may be the sons of your Father which is in heaven, for he 
waketh his sun to rise on the evil and the goud, and sendeth rain on the just and the 
unjust... . Ye therefore shall be perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect.” Paul 
has just exhorted us to imitate God in his forgivingness. This imitation of God pro- 
ceeds on what was referred to before—our being made after the Divine image. It pro- 
ceeds 6n what is referred to here—God being our Father, and as such communicating a 
kindred nature to us, But for this kindred nature with God we should have no more 
conception of him than the brutes have. ‘The idea of God, sublime and awful as it 
is, is the idea of our own spiritual nature purified and enlarged to infinity. The 
infinite Light would be for ever hidden from us, did not kindred rays dawn and 
brighten within us.” It belongs to the dignity of our nature (our being partakers of 
the Divine nature) that there can be proposed to us as our end likeness to God. It is 
designed that there should be a perpetual unfolding and enlarging of our spiritual 
powers and excellences, All our desires, hopes, efforts, are to be toward this. We are 
to be filled with the Divine thoughts, replenished with the Divine energy, warmed 
-with the Divine love. Asa child catches the very tone of his father, so are we to catch 
the tone of our heavenly Father. There is a reason given for our being eager to 
tnitate God, We are his beloved children. Oh, the love bestowed on us! Sonship 
forfeited and then restored. What a contradiction, to be children peculiarly loved and 
not to seek likeness to God! But this lcads on to the other thought. 2. The imitation 
of God ts also the imitation of Christ. “And walk in love, even as Christ also loved 


232 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. cou. v. 1—32. 


you, and gave himself up for us, an offering and a sacrifice to God for an odour of a 
sweet smell.” Christ is presented for imitation in his love. We are not to understand 
that love was an attribute more distinctive of Christ than of God. -For love is the 
greatest attribute of God. But we are to understand that Christ was especially the 
manifestation of the iove of God. In Christ’s love we see what God’s love is. And to 
imitate Christ in his love is the best way to imitate God. And how does love manifest 
itself? Selfishness manifests itself in ¢solation. Love, on the other hand, manifests 
itself in approachableness. And this was the form which Christ’s love took. He loved 
us so much as to come within human conditions—to become one of ourselves. And 
that (wonderful as it is) was not the extent of his approach to us, For, coming into 
our nature, he next threw himself into our position, he became our Representative. 
And he presented before God for us the offering of a perfect life. He especially, in his 
death, presented the sacrifice which had full atoning virtue for oursin, And this pre- 
sentation of himself as an offering and a sacrifice to God (with the love that prompted 
it) was for an odour of a sweet smell. More grateful than to the sense of smell was 
the incense that the High Priest took with him into the holy of holies was to the 
heart of God the incense from his life and sacrifice which Christ took with him into 
heaven, It is an incense which continually rises before God with acceptance. The 
love which prompted to this and carried it out to completion is here proposed for our 
imitation. But how need we think of copying such a pattern? As well set down a 
child to copy a masterpiece of a Raphael or an Angelo? But let us take these things 
into consideration. (1) He has made provision for our tmitating him. We are to be 
thankful to God, that, amid many bad examples and imperfect examples of good men, 
he has given us one perfectly good example. He has shown us that a life of. the 
highest unselfishness is not impracticable in our humanity. If that had been all, the 
effect would only have been to fill us with despair. But the apostle does not encourage 
us to imitate Christ without pointing to his sacrifice of atonement. His atonement 
having been accepted for us, his perfect life has been accepted too, as that which with 
assisting grace we may now hopefully strive after. (2) Compared with the example of 
God, the example of Christ is more circumstantial, We know that God is love, but in 
Christ we see, under many conditions, how love operates. There is much detail upon 
which we can dwell and from which we can obtain help as to the details of our life. 
(3) Jt is an example easily followed from its familiarity. It was a perfect example ; 
but not in the way of being apart from us, but rather in the way of being so close to us 
as to be easily understood. It was the time— 


“ When truth, embodied in a tale, 
Did enter in at lowly doors.” 


(4) It was an example accompanied with the strongest incentive to imitation. It was 
not merely that he taught us the reasonableness of a good life, and exemplified it; but 
he placed us under infinite obligation in dying for us, and then, having obtained this 
immense advantage, he comes forward and asks us to imitate him. (5) We are to 
imitate him in his love by walking in love as he did. This does not imply any 
unnatural straining; but, in the ordinary walks of life, we may find sufficient sphere for 
the exercise and growth of love. We are specially to imitate Christ in the missionary 
character of his love. We are to feel for sinners as in need of salvation. And we are 
to sacrifice much in order that those ends for which he died, and on which his heart is 
set, may be furthered. Let us, then, choose Christ as our Pattern with the whole energy 
of our wills. And let us follow him, not as perhaps we may have done, with a faint 
and yielding purpose, but in the full conviction that in following him we shall best 
imitate God. 

II. Tutne@s To BE CONDEMNED. 1. The things that are not to be named. “But 
fornication, and all uncleanness, or covetousness, let it not even be named among you, 
as becometh saints.” The apostle points here to a fact which is sometimes forgotten, 
that there is a sphere of that which is not to be named. There are, for instance, books 
written, in which blasphemous things are said against the Saviour. There is this 
reason for not reading these books or not repeating blasphemous expressions contained 
in them, that they stick to and pollute the imagination. So the apostle teaches that 
saints are to be so cultivated in their sensibilities, to have such a delicacy of feeling, 


on, v. 1—83.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 233 


that they will not talk about or hint at things connected with fornication and 
uncleanness. To take to them in conversation indicates a coarseness of mind, a polluted 
state of the imagination. That is the proper circle, whether family, or Church, or 
neighbourhood, from which the very name of such things is banished. We are 
surprised that covetousness is classed as it is here among the things which are not to be 
named. It isa sin about which strange things are said in the New Testament. It is 
said that the love of money ts a root of all kinds of evil. The apostle teaches here that 
saints are to have such sensitiveness as to be repelled from the very mention of 
‘covetousness, as that which would pollute their lips. Think of a community educated 
up to that state of refinement. 2. The things which are not befitting. ‘ Nor filthiness, 
nor foolish talking, or jesting, which are not befitting: but rather giving of thanks.” 
There are things, the apostle teaches, which are to be condemned on the lower ground 
of their being improper, or conducing to no good end. By the first mentioned we.are 
to understand, especially, that which is foul in speech. If we distinguish fvolish talk- 
ing from other faults of speech which are mentioned in this Epistle, we must limit it 
to what is senseless in speech. Fools have a way of talking in wanton disregard of 
what is rational, as though their rational powers were given them to be played with. 
The word translated “jesting” is sometimes used in a good sense. And Barrow has 
shown that there is a wit which is nut to be condemned, but which is fitted to minister 
harmless delight to conversation, to expose things base and vile to due contempt, to 
reprove some vices and reclaim some persons, to confute errors that do not deserve solid 
confutation, to repel unjust reproach and obloquy, and to counterbalance the improper 
use of it. “It is bad objects or bad adjuncts, which do spoil its indifference and 
innocence: it is the abuse thereof to which (as all pleasant things are dangerous, and 
apt to degenerate into baits of intemperance and excess) it is very liable, that corrupteth 
it, and seemeth to be the ground why in so general terms it is prohibited by the 
apostle.” “ All profane jesting, all speaking loosely and wantonly about holy things, 
making such things the matter of sport and mockery, playing and trifling with them, 
is certainly prohibited as an intolerably vain and wicked practice.” ‘All injurious, 
abusive, scurrilous jesting, which causeth or needlessly tendeth to the discrace, damage, 
vexation, or prejudice in any kind of our neighbour, is also prohibited.” ‘“ ‘There are 
some times and circumstances of things wherein it concerneth and becometh men to be 
serious in mind, grave in demeanour, and plain in discourse,” To what the apostle 
condemns as not befitting he opposes giving of thanks. There is a fitness in thanks- 
giving at all times (“giving thanks always,” as it is said in the twentieth verse); but we 
are to understand that there is a singular fitness in the present connection. Thanks- 
giving is speech put to the best use (implying both seriousness and joyfulness). Let 
there be that, the apostle would say, and it will rectify and hallow all speech. 3. The 
things which are not safe. “For this ye know of a surety, that no fornicator, nor 
unclean person, nor covetous man, which is an idolater, hath any inheritance in the 
kingdom of Christ and God.” The apostle is confident, as declaring what was attested 
by their own consciousness or practical acquaintance with the kingdom. It is the 
kingdom, not only of God, but of Christ and God, that is to say, a kingdom peculiarly 
associated with the cross of Christ, in which God shows his deep detestation of sin by 
punishing it in his Son. A kingdom that is ruled over by One who shed his blood 
that sin might be done away, cannot receive into it those who sin and do not mean to 
give up their sins. By their very antagonism to the whole spirit, law, ends, of the 
kingdom, they shut the door against themselves, We are surprised again that the 
covetous man appears in such company, and further bere that he is singled out for 
special remark. ““ Nor covetous man, which is an idolater.” There is idolatry in the 
other sins, that is, sensual pleasure is put in the place of God. And that may be the 
light in which the apostle views the devotees of pleasure as shut out from inheritance 
in the kingdom. But the covetous man is put forward as being an ¢dolater by pre- 
eminence. Christ had already said, “Ye cannot serve God and mammon,.” The 
covetous man is not he who values money and seeks to serve God therewith. But, 
according to the thought here, he is one who ¢dolizes money, values it in itvelf and not 
for God’s ends, sets his affections on it, trusts in it; and, such being his relation to it, 
then it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for him to enter 
into the kingdom of God. It is true of the coyetous man, as it is not true of the others, 


234 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. ἴση. v. 1—33 


that he can go on in his sin without incurring the opprobrium of men, and (partly from 
the difficulty of drawing the exact line between the right and the wrong love of gain) 
without suspecting himself that it is getting a hold upon him, and thus (without such 
checks as the others have) getting hardened in his sin, we can understand how he 
should be called by pre-eminence the idolater. [Warning. “Let no man deceive you 
with empty words: for because of these things cometh the wrath of God upon the sons 
of disobedience. Be not ye therefore partakers with them.” It would seein that there 
were apologists for vice, who, by their representations, tried to entice the Ephesian 
Christians back to Gentile ways. One of their representations was that, besides being 
pleasant, it was safe to do these things. So apologists for vice are ready to say this 
and many other things still. But “let no man deceive you with empty words,” Such 
words have not as their contents eternal truth. “For because of these things cometh 
the. wrath of God upon the sons of disobedience.” ‘The sons of disobedience are those 
who (in their love for sin) disobey the gospel of Christ, by which alone there is 
deliverance from wrath. Refusing God’s mercy, how can they escape God’s wrath? 
‘They are not only lying under ordinary judgments or condemnation now, but they 
have yet to be dealt with for these very sins. ‘“ After their hardness and impenitent 
hearts they are treasuring up for themselves wrath in the day of wrath and revelation 
of the righteous judgment of God.” It is for those, then, who regard their safety (to 
bring in no higher consideration), whatever apologists may say, to refuse to be partakers 
with the disobedient. 4. The things that are dark. (1) Vhey are in their walk to 
be separate from their former state. “Ye were once darkness, but are now light in 
the Lord: walk as children of light.” They had been brought up in heathen darkness. 
It was that in which they lived and moved and had their being. And so, by appro- 
priation, it was more or less embcdded in their nature. But now, living and moving 
and having their being in the Lord, that is, in light (as contrasted with heathen dark- 
ness), and being enlightened by him through his gospel and Spirit, they were light. 
And such being their state, there was a call to walk as children of light. We are to 
walk under the incitement of the glorious fruit of Christian illumination. “For the 
fruit of the light is in all goodness and righteousness and truth.” ‘The philosophic 
triad is the true, the good, and the beautiful. The Christian triad as given here, and 
with which we ought to be familiar, is the good, the right, and the true. The good, 
or excellence of the heart, comes first; for that is first in God. Then follows the right, 
or regard to conscience, to eternal principle, And, lastly, there is the true, or regard 
to reality, not only in fact, but in thought (including the perfect in form). Weare good 
in cherishing a spirit of love; we are righteous in doing our duty; we are true in con- 
forming to Divine forms of thought. Having these three in us, then it may be said 
that the beauty of the Lord our God is upon us. We are to walk in the way of proving 
what is well-pleasing to Christ. “ Proving what is well-pleasing unto the Lord.” It is 
not what the apologists for vice say; it is what Christ says. It is that which is to be 
tested. It is implied that we have the means of testing all things in this light. here 
are many things which, put to the test by us, we must reject. ‘lhey are revealed in 
our Christian consciousness as wrong. There arc other things which we see to be good, 
not merely in the convincing light of truth, but in our own blessed experience in the 
doing of thern we feel that we have the approval of the Master, we can even now hear 
his words, “ Well done, good and faithful servant.” Our position, then, must be separa- 
tion from darkness. “ And have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness.” 
The fruit of light is one, a glorious indivisible cluster. ‘The works of darkness are 
many. The fruit of light is fitted to incite us, The works of darkness should deter 
us. They are unfruitful. They yield nothing that is worthy of the name of fruit, 
but only shame and death. (2) They are to take an aggressive position toward dark- 
ness, “ But rather even reprove them,” ΒΟΥ were not to pass them over in silence 
or find excuses for them, but to hold them up to reprobation to the doers of them. 
As darkness was aggressive toward them, so were they as light (even for their own 
safety) to be aggressive toward the darkness. They were to lift up the Gentiles to 
their own position. It is added, as showing the clamant need for reproof, “For the 
things which are done by them in secret it is a shame even to speak of.” It is added 
further, as showing the use or end of reproof, “ But all things when they are reproved 
are made manilest by the light.” ‘All those secret sins sre laid hare in their real 


ou. v. L—33.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, 235 


moral character, unveiled and brought into distinctness before the moral consciousness, 
by the light of Uhristian truth, which is at work in your reproof; by the light, I say, 
itis made manifest—for, it is added, ‘everything that is made manifest is light,’ has 
ceased thereby to have the nature of darkness, and is now of the essence of light.” 
And thus, whether there was amendment or not, they would be making an inroad on 
the territory of darkness, making dark deeds stand out in the livht. (8) They ave to take 
this aggressive position in consistency with the awakening call of God. ‘ Wherefore 
he saith, Awake, thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall shine 
upon thee.” The words are from Isa, lx. 1, 2, and receive from the apostle a Christian 
adaptation. (a) Jt is a call to the child of darkness, He is described as sleeping and 
dead, that is, in sin, He is insensible to the infinite importance of spiritual and 
eternal things. (Ὁ) Jt is α cull to awake and arise. “Awake, thou that sleepest, 
and arise from the dead.” He does not let the child of the night alone. He comes to 
the sleeper and bids him awake, to the dead and bids him arise. And in his very 
summons there is an awakening, quickening power. (c) J¢ ts a call to which a promise 
ts attached. ‘‘ And Christ shall shine upon thee.” As if it were said, “'lhe sun is 
already up, and will pour his enlightening rays upon thee.” So while we are sleeping 
and dead in our sin, it is true that the Sun of righteousness is up shining upon this 
world of ours, and we must up and catch his rays. Other men are up and doing their 
work under the light of this Sua; why should we be asleep and dead in sin ?—R. F, 


Vers. 15—21.—Ezhortation to exercise wisdom in regard to our manner of walk. 
“ Look therefore carefully how ye walk, not as unwise, but as wise.” ‘The object to which 
we are to look is this—how we walk; in other words, the conduct of our life, In 
regard to this we are to be careful. At cross-roads there are sometimes finger-posts put 
up to indicate where the different roads lead to, that travellers may be at no loss. By 
looking carefully at these, they may save themselves much trouble and delay. So it 
becomes every traveller to eternity to know the road that he is taking, whether itis the 
narrow or the broad, There are tinger-posts put up by God (in the Word) by which we 
may asceriain this and put ourselves right if we have to our grief taken the wrong 
road, But, seeing many do not make use of these finger-posts (do not look at them at 
all, or only carelessly, and thus exhibit great fully), the exhortation takes the negative 
as well as the positive form. ‘ Not as unwise, but as wise.” ‘I'he word translated “ care- 
fully ” may also be translated “ precisely,” and suggests this, that we are not only to look 
to the general correctness of our conduct, but to look to it down to the smallest details, 
It is only by thus going carefully over it in detail, with no foregone conclusion in our 
mind, but earnestly seeking God to search us and to discover to us what can be altered 
for the better, that we may be able to bring it out into some beauty of conception as a 
whole. There are two thinys in regard to which we are to exercise wisdom. 

I. Time. “ Redeeming the time, because the days are evil.” ‘lhe right management 
of our time is what we are particularly to look to. The exhortation is to redeem the 
time, that is, the time meted out to us on earth, in which to fulfil the Divine purposes. 
Literally, as given in the margin, we are to buy up the opportunity. The idea is that 
every moment has its own duty assigned to it, By doing the duty in the moment, we 
make a purchase of the opportunity, we turn it intoa gain. We keep abreast of time; 
we avoid subsequent collision of duties. Whereas by not doing the duty in the moment, 
we contract debt, we fall behind. Instead of being the free owners of our time, we 
become slavish debtors to it. We are to be like merchants that seize every vantage that 
is going. Merchants, that travel about from place to place, do not geta vantage at every 
turn. ‘They must lay their account by an amount of fruitless 0011. But as heavenly 
merchants, we arein this enviable position, that every moment comes laden with golden 
opportunity. And we are to make our moments as they pass rich in all the gains of a 
good life. 1. Good planning. If we would redeem the time in its days, then we must 
anticipate them by wise economical arrangements, We must see them coming, and know 
how (God willing) we are to “i them up. The lizht that we have got from past days 
we are to put into some workable scheme for the days tocome, To the excellence of a 
day-plan it is essential that we rightly proportion between the various duties of life (so 
that none are left out or do not get their proper place). We are to keep up the right 
proportion between our severer and our lighter engagements. It behov2s every one to 


236 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. [ox. v, 1- -88, 


have a task, a definite task, a task that taxes his energies, And if he does not have it 
by necessity of procuring his daily bread, yet shoule he have it by necessity of steadying 
himself. But it is not good for the bow to be always bent, and, if we manage well, we 
shall find time (and find it good for the doing of our task too) to relax ourselves in social 
enjoyment. Weare also to keep up the right proportion between our religious and our 
secular duttes. The latter, as a general arrangement, must take up a large proportion 
of our time. Six to one is the proportion indicated in the command. But in every 
well-planned life there will be fuund ample time for religious duties. Every day is to 
begin with an acknowledgment of God. It may seem utopian to expect morning 
devotions of one who has to be at his work at six o’clock, And yet it only requires a 
little taken off sleep or off the previous evening to secure the necessary time for 
God. And surely that is not too much to expect of any Christian in the interest of a 
well-ordered life. Morning devotions alone will not make the day good. Only when 
these have been conscientiously engaged in there will be felt to be an obligation to 
make the day’s work harmonize with them. The evening may be utilized for self-im- 
provement and ministries to others. And the day is to end, as it began, with God. It 
is only by such planning (in the name of him who is not the author of confusion), that 
we can expect to be like merchants accumulating a large fortune. 2. Good planning 
followed up by decisiveness in execution. There is a reason given for redeeming the 
time: “ Because the days are evil.” The very earth has taken a complexion from the 
degeneracy of the dwellers on it. And so our days are evil, and not such as they would 
have been under normal conditions. (1) The days are evil because many of them are 
lost already. We have known the degeneracy of the days in our own experience, We 
have lost many a good opportunity. This thought should act as a powerful stimulus 
to us. The apostle gives revenge as the last and crowning fruit of a godly sorrow. 
“Yea, what revenge!” he says. We are to take revenge upon ourselves that we have 
given so much of our valuable strength and time to our adversary. The workman 
knows what it is to make up lost time. When he falls behind with his tale of work, he 
has to work longer hours or to apply himself with double energy when he is at it. So, 
because our days have been ill spent in the past (before conversion and after conversion 
too) are we to work with redoubled energy in the future. (2) The days are evil because 
of the many temptations they bring. In our calm moments (sorrowful for the past) we 
think of spending our time in a certain way that seems good to us. But circumstanccs 
are not altogether with us. In a world where evil has obtained such a hold we must 
lay our account to our being solicited from without more or less urgently to depart from 
our plan. And what makes the solicitation much to be feared is that we are enfeebled 
from our past. If we had conquered obstacles as we went along, we should have been 
in a freer, stronger position to-day. But we have to drag our antecedents with us, like 
an old debt. We have undigested time, lying like a burden on our present energies, 
And though, with repentance and forgiveness, there is a sense of freedom and hope 
imparted to us, yet there is that which is to be conquered in evil habit. The only way 
of conquest is to deal rigorously with all interruptions of duty, as they arise, as those 
who would see the time redeemed, and not its losses added to. (3) The days are evil 
because they are few. We have time to make up (in the face of great temptations), and 
little time to make it up in. Had we a thousand years to live, the case would be 
altered. That would be a comparatively long period in which to make up what 
we had lost in thirty or fifty or seventy years. But when the days are evil in this 
sense, that we cannot calculate on a single day as ours, there is surely urzent reason 
for making up our losses without delay. Were all the interests of life crowded into one 
moment, were we told that upon the use we made of that moment depended our future 
happiness or misery,—how urgently should we be called upon to use it aright! What 
is actually the arrangement differs little from that, We really live on from moment 
to moment, not knowing which is to be our last. How wise, then, to seek to make out 
of every passing moment eternal gain! Inference in which there is a recurrence to the 
general exhortation and a transition to the second particular. ‘“ Wherefore be ye not 
foolish, but understand what the will of the Lord is.” The teaching here is that Christ 
is Lord of our time. He has the sovereign appointment of the time of our coming here 
and the time of our going hence. All our undertakings are conditioned by this: “If 
the Lord will.” He has sovereign rights over our time. To him we owe the firstfruite 


on. v. 1—33.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, 237 


of our time, as we owe the firstfruits of our substance. From Christ we get the whole 
plan of our life. The right management of our time, then, is to understand what the 
will of the Lord is, what Christ would have us todo. Seeking Christ’s mind as to the 
employment of our time, we may expect that we shall obtain from him the strength 
necessary to conquer all the obstacles of our time, and to do the work of each day in 
its day, according as the duty of the day requires, 

IL Wing. 1. Dissuasive from false excitement. “ And be not drunken with wine, 
wherein is riot.” It is evident from the language which is here employed that the wine 
drunk in those times was intoxicating. ‘The apostolic advice must be regarded as even 
more applicable to drinks of stronger intoxicating qualities, which are manufactured now. 
It has its application to the intoxicating cup of the world in every form—to the intoxi- 
cation of novel-reading, to the intoxication of keenness in business, to the intoxication 
of political excitement. This advice is not inaptly connected with the previous advice 
as to the right management of time. For it is when time is not properly filled up, when 
it is insipid, monotonous, or when it is filled up with wrong-doing, that there is the 
temptation to go after some form or other of earthly excitement. It cannot be said that 
the use of wine at all is forbilden by this precept. But there is certainly sounded in 
connection with it the note of alarm. There is put up beside it the red flag of danger. 
“ Be not drunken with wine.” Drunkenness is the feverish desire, the morbid craving, 
for drink. The man with his noble powers becomes one huge, ever-seeking, never-satis- 
fied appetite. It is a vice into which all classes are in danger of falling. If the idle 
take to drinking to relieve the tedium of existence, the overwrouzht take to it to make 
up exhausted strength. ‘he young take to it from a love of excitement, and the aged 
and debilitated take to it to get new tone to their system. Men of a coarse nature take 
to it because they are incapable of higher pleasures, and men of fine sensibility take 
to it because it is a source of inspiration to the intellect. Men of social tendencies 
take to it because it helps good fellowship; and the saddest thing is that women tako 
to it in private, because of a peculiarly sensitive frame and inequalities of feeling. It 
is a vice, then, which must be said to be of a peculiarly fascinating, dangerous nature. 
And let no one think that he is out of danger. Many of those who have fallen were 
not like falling at first. {ΠΥ did not take drink at all for a time, and their friends 

-had hope in them that they would prove temperate men. And when (with other social 
surroundings in some cases) they began to make any use of it, they seemed to be taking 
it in a perfectly innocent or needful way, until the liking was formed, and they 
could not do without a certain and an increasing amount of drink. Now, let it 
be observed on what ground the apostle condemns drunkenness. It is in the line of 
his thought that we are to exercise wisdom as to our manner of walk. Wherein, he 
says, 18 riot. Drunkenness is a madness. There is a form of it to which this 
description is specially applicable, that which is known as delirium tremens. But 
even in its ordinary working it has a close resemblance to madness. It takes away 
from men the guiding power of reason, their self-possession, their self-restraint, and leads 
them to make such exhibitions of themselves as in their calm mcments they would be 
ashamed of. “ Riot,” which is the word employed in the Revised translation, is defined 
by Johnson to be “ wild and loose festivity.” 


“ When his headstrong riot hath no curb, 
When rage and hot blood are his counsellors, 
When means and lavish manners meet together.” 


(1) The word “riot” points to the prodigal manner of the drunkard. The drunkard is 
prodigal of his means. 
“So senseless of expense 
That he will know neither how to maintain it 
Nor cease his flow of riot.” 


He spends on self-indulgence what, if saved, would not only increase the comfort of his 
home, but would do much good besides. The drunkard is prodigal of his ¢éme, and thus 
violates the previous precept. he golden opportunity, which he might employ for 
informing his mind or instructing his children, he wastes in the public-house. The 
drunkard is prodigal of the stuf’ of which his frame ts made. He wastes his physical 


238 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, [cn. v. 1—33 


powers, takes away his clearness of head, his steadiness of hand, and his general vigour, 
induces disease and premature death (again violating the previous precept in throwing 
away years that in the paths of temperance would have been his), The drunkard is 

rodigal of his worth to his fellows, as the temperate man is preservative in this respect. 
When the Indian general saw disaster waiting on his country’s arms, because, alas! in 
an emergency his regiments were found besotted with drink, “Call out Havelock’s 
saints!” he exclaimed ; “they are never drunk, and Havelock is always ready.” The 
drunkard is prodigal of his better feelings, He deadens his home feelings. He does not 
value the society of his wife and children; he does not study their happiness; nay, he 
can see them want in order that he may be gratified. He deadens his spiritual sensi- 
bilities. And to his wife the most dreadful thought may be, not that she js set aside 
or the children neglected, but that for his idol he is casting off his God. (2) The word 
“riot” points to the noisy manner of the drunkard. Men under excitement are naturally 
demonstrative, and the drunkard is peculiarly noisy (and in that senseless) in his 
demonstrations. There is the noise of drunken laughter. ‘ As the crackling of thorns 
under a pot, so [empty and shortlived] is the laughtcr of the fool.” There is the noise ot 
drunken songs. There is the song (of its own kind) which goes along with the drink- 
ing of wine (Isa. xxiv. 8). In the convivial song men tell each other vociferously ot 
their freedom from care, of their cood-heartedress (though there may be the spectres of 
poverty, of broken hearts, in their homes); or they may go to the lower depth of the 
indelicate and the profane. But how all such hilarity is out of place! “1 will turn,” 
it is said in the Prophet Amos, “your feasts into mourning, and all your songs into 
lamentation.” And there is the echo of this in James: “ Be afflicted and mourn and 
weep, let your laughter be turned to mourning and your joy to heaviness.” ‘There is 
the noise of drunken brawls. There is often, under the excitement of strong drink, a 
combativeness in words and a combativeness in acts. ‘Who hath contentions? who 
hath babbling? who hath wounds without cause? They that tarry long at the wine.” 
It cannot be said that the apostle gives a decision in favour of total abstinence. He 
nowhere counsels total abstinence as a duty in itself or in relation to his times. At 
the same time, he gives no decision adverse to tutal abstinence. And we know that else- 
where he lays down a principle of expediency which, under certain conditions, makes 
total abstinence a Christian duty. Many good people think that these conditions exist 
in our country at the present time. They feel that the evil of intemperance has risen 
to such a height as to be a national vice (threatening our very position as ἃ nation), 
and they wish to stand as clear of it as they can. They feel that tnere are endangered 
persons in their home, or circle of their acquaintances, or Christian congregation with 
which they are connected; and they wish to guard them as well as they can. They 
feel that they are in danger themselves, and they wish to be on their guard. And 
those who for such reasons as these can sacrifice their gratification are deserving of all 
honour. Let us see that (in the discouragement of drinking) our influence is duly on the 
side of temperance, that we are doing nothing to hinder others in ther struggle (often 
painful) towards virtue and happiness. 2. Persuasive to true excitement. “But be 
filled with the Spirit.” The apostle does not forbid all excitement; rather for the 
excitement which he negatives as false would he substitute a truc excitement. (1) We 
can be drunken with wine ; we are to be filled (never can be drunken) with the Spirit. 
There is warning connected with the use of wine, but there is no warning connected 
with the reception of the exhilarating influences of the Spirit. Our appetite is encouraged 
here: “ Be filled with the Spirit.” We can never be too much abandoned to spiritual 
appetite; it can never grow in us to dangerous strength. In our carnality we know too 
little of what it is to be joyfully excited in our highest nature. Cowper tells us how he 
must have died with joy if special strength had not been given him to bear the Divine 
disclosures, And Jonathan Edwards tells how he felt as though rapt and swallowed up 
in God. Doubtless such a state (so far ordinary) was the foundation for the super- 
natural communications which John received in Patmos. Let it not be thought that 
this is too high. There must be something of this pure excitement experienced in us, 
if we would be cured of love for false excitement. We do not despise other cures ; but 
this is the best eure for drunkenness, this is the all-effectual posit/ve which we are to 
put inits place. (2) The manifestations of eacitement from wine are unseemly ; the 
manifestations of excitement from the Spirit are pure and lovely. (a) Singing. It is 


cH. v. 1—33.) THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 289 


known how to take advantage of harmonious sound in encouraging men to go into battle 
in “the shrill trump, the spirit-stirring drum, the ear-piercing fife.” It is also known 
how to use it as an auxiliary in the service of superstition, revelry, and vice, And God, 
in his infinite wisdom, has seen fit to make use of the same instrumentality. In the old 
Jewish temple four thousand Levites, an entire fourth division of them, were employed 
in connection with the service of praise. God has inspired and enabled men to write 
psalms and hymns for the sanctuary ; and he has also enabled men to compose suitable 
music for them. The singing of musical words, with or without an instrumental 
accompaniment, has a wonderful power in stirring emotion, in waking sweet and glad 
memories, and even in exciting the imagination in a certain vagueness aud immensity 
which belongs to the sounds. As in a sea-shell pressed to the ear we are said to hear 
the sound of the ocean from which it has come, so in the sweet strains of music may 
we hear a sounding as from the eternal shores, 


“Thou, Lord, art the Father of music: 
Sweet sounds are a whisper from thee.” 


In an elevated mood (as here supposed) we naturally give expression to our feelings in 
song, “Is any cheerful? let him sing praise.” (a) Singing together. “ Speaking one 
to another in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs.” Men, under the excitement 
of the Spirit, delight to sing spiritual songs (as distinguished from the songs of the 
drunkard). Under this come the psalms in their grand historic position, And there also 
come hymns, that is, songs other than the psalms, which are used in praise. We are 
to speak one to another by means of these. Pliny records of the early Christians that 
they were wont on a fixed day to meet before daylight (to avoid persecution), and to 
recite a hymn among themselves by turns to Christ as to God. Luther greatly advanced 
the cause of the Reformation by his hymns, which were sung at the firesides of the people. 
How we can thus breathe the spirit of confidence, of courage, of hope, into one another! 
Having encouraged ourselves in the Rock of our strength, we turn and thus speak to 
our fellow-worshippers, one to the rest, or one section to another— 


“Yo people, place your confidence 
Tn him continually ; 
Before him pour ye out your heart: 
God is our Refuge high.” 


(8) Singing with the heart. “Singing and making melody with your heart to the 
Lord.” Singing together can only occupy a small proportion of our time. But in our 
other engagements we may be s0 full of trust, so free from care, that we sing with the 
heart. And the song that we sing all day is set to the Name of Christ, to the work of 
redemption, 
“There are in this low stunning tide 
Of human care and crime, 
With whom the melodies abide 
Of the everlasting chime; 
Who carry music in their heart 
Through dusky lane and wrangling mart, 
Plying their daily task with busier feet 
Because their secret souls a holy strain repeat.” 


(b) Thanksgiving. “Giving thanks always for all things, in the Name of our Lord Jesus 
Christ to God, even the Father.” This is another beautiful manifestation of spiritual 
excitement, In our higher moods we naturally turn to God in joyful gratitude. 
Thanksgiving (to which the drunkard must be a stranger, for he abuses his mercies), 
like song, is to run like a golden thread through the whole of our life. In the depths of 
our heart we can be always thankful, though the language of thankfulness cannot 
be always on our lips. We have to thank God that a joyful thrill of the Spirit can 
pass through our being, better than of wine, We have to thank God for innumerable 
mercies. 
“ New mercies each returning day 

Hover around us while we pray; 

New perils past, new sins forgiven, 

New thoughts of God, new hopes of heaven.” 


240 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. (on. v. 1—33. 


We have to thank God even for our afflictions, which are blessings in disguise ; fot 
though, in 80 far as they are evil, we are to be reconciled to them, yet we have to thank 
God for that which is good in them, viz. the merciful design, the accompanying com- 
fort, the resulting benefit. And as we receive all only through Christ, so we are to 
give thanks to the Father in the Name of Christ. (6) Subjection. “ Subjecting your- 
selves one to another in the fear of Christ.” It seems strange that this should be men- 
tioned as one of the manifestations of spiritual elevation, We can only think of it in 
this way. As men under the excitement of wine are apt to be self-assertive, heady, so 
under the excitement of the Spirit we have such a fund of joy in ourselves that we are 
content to fall into every position of subjection in which God would place us. The 
particulars of this subjection follow; it here only concerns us to note the peculiar feel- 
ing which is associated with it, viz. the fear of Christ, We know that from all the joy 
of his first visit as a youth to the temple, the joy of his being there about his Father's 
business, he could go down and be subject to his parents. And we know that, amid all 
the rapture of the transfiguration, he could yet think of subjection to the Father’s will 
in his decease. As, then, we reverence Christ and fear to offend him, let us (with all 
that we experience of the higher excitement) be subject one to another.—R. Ἐς, 


Vers. 22—23.—Relative duties. 1. Duty or wives. “ Wives, be in subjection 
unto your own husbands.” 1. Ground of subjection. (1) The husband represents Christ 
to the wife. ‘As unto the Lord.” The original of the position of husband is to be 
found in Christ. It is in this character that he appears in the forty-fifth psalm, in 
the Song of Songs, and in other parts of Scripture. He is the absolute impersonation 
of the idea (the Husband by pre-eminence); and what we find in the human family on 
earth is only a faint copy of the original, It is true, too, that the husband is not in 
the family in his own name, He derives his authority from Christ. He is there as 
representing Christ. He is there as though Christ were there. What, then, the wife is 
in duty bound to render to her husband, she is not to render to him simply, but to him 
as representing Christ. (2) It has its foundation in nature. The natural relationship. 
“For the husband is the head of the wife.” It is not implied in this that the husband 
is superior to the wife in all qualities, but only that he is her superior in those qualities 
which fit him for being head. Especially his superior strength and self-reliance mark 
him out for taking the leading part. He is husband, or band of the house—what 
keeps it undivided and keeps it up. He has to come between his wife and the world, 
to shield her from its glare and its harm. While she is a keeper at home, he has to go 
out and work for her, that he may provide for her maintenance and comfort. It is 
therefore fitting that she should lean upon him and be guided by him. The Christian 
analogy. ‘ As Christ also is the Head of the Church.” The headship is a great doctrine 
for the Church, already taught in this Epistle. As the wife in her weakness and dis- 
trustfulness of self leans upon her husband, so the Church in her weakness and felt 
insufficiency is to lean upon Christ. Worldly powers may be hostile, but she can 
uever be deprived of the protection of her Head. Protected by him, she must be die- 
tated to by one, but must take the law, pure and simple, from his lips. Jn the analogy 
there is an important difference. “ Being himself the Saviour of the body.” It must 
very seldom have happened that one has made a wife of her wliom he has rescued from 
a watery grave or other form of death. But it is true of Christ that he has made a 
spouse of her whom he has delivered from everlasting destruction. He is Saviour of the 
body, te. the Church. ‘That makes his headship peculiar (without analogy in the 
earthly type), and gives him a peculiar hold on the obedience of the Church, 2. 
Manner and extent of subjection. (1) Manner. “But” (that is, though Christ is 
nore than Protector, is also Saviour of the Church) “as the Church is subject to Christ, 
+o let the wives also be to their husbands.” The ideal set before her is that, as the 
Church deports herself toward Christ, so she is to deport herself toward her nusband. It 
has this advantage (high as it is) that, by entering into the spirit of her relationship to 
her husband, she should be greatly assisted in subjecting herself (as her husband under 
some disadvantaye must also subject himself) to Christ. (2) Latent. “In everything,’ 
‘The necessary limitation here is—in everything that he, acting in the Name of Christ, 
has a right to expect of her. If he were laying anything sinful or purely arbitrary 
aud tyrannical upon her, she would be justified in resisting him (appealing from him 


cH. v. 1—33.) THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 241 


to Christ). But if it is within his right, and what he judges important, then (even 
when she cannot give her approval) she should be willing to fall in with his arrangement. 

II. Dury or nusBaNnbs, ‘‘ Husbands, love your wives.” As the husband excels in 
the governing qualities, so she excels in the lovable qualities. 


‘For softness she, and sweet attractive grace.” 


Tf it can be said that he has more power, it can be said that (by her pure and modest 
feeling, her deep tenderness and devotion) she has more influence. 1. Manner. Chris- 
tian analogy. ‘ Even as Christ also loved the Church.” We are to think of the love 
of Christ here only under the special aspect in which the apostle presents it, viz. his 
conjugal love, or love of espousals, (1) His devotion to his spouse. “ And gave himself 
up for it” (or “her,” as in the original). “Israel served for a wife, and for a wife he 
kept sheep.” Years of servitude he had to give for Rachel; yet they seemed to him but 
a few days, for the love he bore to her. It was a hard price he had to pay for her; but 
we read here of what was infinitely harder, of One who had to give himself for his 
spouse. He had to forget himself in humiliation and sorrow and death for her, and 
yet, hard as that was beyond all conception, it appeared as though it was nothing, for 
the love he bore to her. (2) Purpose of his devotion. (a) Immediate purpose (process 
of sanctification). “That he might sauctify it, having cleansed it by the washing of 
water with the Word.” The language is taken from the ordinance of baptism. The 
fact is pointed to that the Church needs cleansing. Baptism goes upon the supposition 
that we are all by nature defiled with sin. It says this, “ We are all as an unclean 
thing.” The Church was in this state of impurity when the Son chose her for his bride. 
To this the words apply—He loved her foul that he might make her fair. Washed 
certainly she must be (as the bride used to be before marriage), to be fit for associating 
with the highest purity. The blessed fact is also pointed to that, there is what has 
cleansing power. “ By the washing of water,” it is said here. It is the water used in 
baptism that we are to think of, and that water in what it signifies, viz. the purifying 
influences of the Spirit. As water washes defilement from vessels, from the person, so 
the Spirit washes moral defilement from our hearts. This washing of water must be 
accompanied with the Word. For the Spirit cannot purify alone, but only through 
what the Word reveals, especially that blood of Christ which is said to cleanse from all 
sin. (Ὁ) Remote purpose (result of sanctification), “That he might present the 
Church to umes a glorious Church, not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing; 
but that it Mould be holy and without blemish.” By this we are to understand that 
Christ is to have in the Church a bride of incomparable beauty. When the cleansing 
process has been completed, the Church will be glorious (“all-glorious” is the language 
of the forty-fifth psalm, and the effect of the description here), more glorious than avy 
material substance can be, more glorious than the sun in the heavens. There will not 
be spot or trace left of her former defilement. There will not be wrinkle or sign 
appearing of coming age (such as comes to an ordinary bride). To make it more 
emphatic, it is added that there will not be any such thing, nothing whatever to mar 
her beauty. But still the description proceeds; she will be holy. Her beauty (as it 
will not be imperfect or fading) will not be outward, but will be the beauty of holi- 
ness, And she will be without blemish, so transcendently beautified that to add to 
her beauty would be (in things that are less) 


“To gild refined gold, to paint the lily, 
To throw a perfume on the violet.” 


At present the Son’s oride nas many a spot, many ἃ wrinkle (her cleansing must still 
go on, her beauty needs bringing out), but the time is coming (in the Divine purpose 
which cannot fail, in the conception of Christ which must be realized) when she will 
be a fit bride for him, And then it is that, as is said here, he is to present her to him- 
self. He is to leave it to no other (say, angelic attendants) to present her, but he is 
to take it into his own hand (notwithstanding the double character in which it requires 
him to act). And this done (the marriage an accomplished fact), then, as is said in 
the Prophet Zephaniah, he will rejoice over her with joy, He will rest in his love; he 
will joy over her with singing. This, then, ts the ideal which ts put before husbands. It 
&PHESIANS, R 


242 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, [on. v. 1—33. 


is what we could not have dared to have put before us of ourselves. It would have 
seemed profanity to have conjoined things so far apart. But thus it has been dictated 
for us by the Spirit of inspiration: “ Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ also 

_ loved the Church.” The husband is to possess, to cherish, and to manifest devoted love 
toward his wife. And if his is the position of authority, yet is he (an all-requiring 
love being also his) to forget himself in services rendered to her. And specially is ho 
taught from the high model that he is not to pamper his wife (or to be careful how to 
please his wife, as Paul puts the case of the married), but he is to regard her as given 
him for a higher end, aud to seck that she may possess all spiritual beauty. 2, Ground. 
“Even so ought husbands also to love their own wives as their own bodies,” The 
ground of the duty is that the wife is one flesh with the husband. There are two 
points (not immediately connected, but brought up afterward) which go to prove this. 
The first is that woman derived her being from man. Eve was taken out of Adam, 
and the language was used regarding her by Adam: “ This is now bone of my bone, 
and flesh of my flesh.” The second point is that, in the marriage union, man and 
woman are said to become one flesh. “For this cause shall a man leave his father and 
mother, and shall cleave to his wife; and the twain shall become one flesh.” The 
wife, then, being one flesh with the husband, there comes into operation (in support of 
the duty of the husband) the principle of self-preservation. ‘He that loveth his own 
wife loveth himself: for no man ever hated his own flesh; but nourisheth and cherisheth 
it.” The Christian analogy. ‘“ Even as Christ also the Church.” Christ bestows a 
fostering care on the Church ; and this is not only lovely, but it is thoroughly natural. 
For: (1) The Church is one flesh with Christ by derivation. “ Because we are members 
of his body.” Her spiritual being is from Christ as much as Eve’s physical being was 
from Adam. (2) The Church becomes one flesh with Christ in the marriage union. 
Here the words of the marriage ceremony are quoted with the added comment, “ This 
mystery is great: but I speak in regard of Christ and of the Church.” The language, 
“one flesh,” has a strangeness in its application to an ordinary marriage union, but the 
apostle is careful to let us know that he uses it in reference to the mystical union of 
Christ and the Church (by no distortion, for that is the archetype, or original pattern 
of all marriage, and, we must believe, was in the Divine mind when the words were 
uttered in Paradise), Shall we think of the Sun leaving his Father’s house and cleav- 
ing to his bride in human flesh? But we must not (as some have done) pry too 
curiously into it; for it is a mystery, and we must simply lay hold upon the great fact 
that it points to the union between Christ and the Church being so intimate that he 
loves her as he loves hiuself. 

III. Recaritvu.ation (order of duties inverted). Duty of husband. “ Nevertheless 
[ἐὸ. not to press the mystical bearings of the subject] do ye 8180 severally love each 
one his own wife even as himself.” It is again an ideal of very difficult attainment. 
What a fostering care is conjoined with his authority! And this to be Christ-like (in 
that fostering care which he is now bestowing upon his Church, and which he will one 
day bring to a mature result)? Duty of wife. ‘“ And let the wife see that she fear her 
husband.” He may personally be deficient (in comparison with her) in those qualities 
which fit him for being head, but nevertheless she is to show deference to him in 
rexpect of the position which he holds, In the precept here it is supposed that he has 
Christian worth (which is what the representative of Christ should have, what is the 
adornment of his position), And even when a Christian wife cannot look to Christian 
worth in her husband, yet must she preserve reverence toward him, while at the same 
time seeking to win him over to Christ. Two lessons may be learned here. 1. Mar- 
riage ἐδ a Christian ordinance. It is not, indeed, to be raised (as it is by the Roman 
Catholics) to the rank of a Christian sacrament; but neither is it to be reduced to a 
mere civil arrangement. It is here associated with the sublimest Christian thought. 
This, and the presence of Christ at the marriage in Cana of Galilee, give it a thorougtily 
Christian character and throw a Christian halo around it of the brightest nature. 
2. It is not to be liyhtly entered into, but in a Christian manner. Man and woman 
must belong to the Lord before they belong to each other, and are to enter into the 
married state that they may help each other to be more entirely the Lord’s. A Christian 
is not at liberty to marry one who is not a Christian (even in the hope of making him 
or her a Christian). A Christian even among Christians is to seek from the Lord. 


ox. v. 1—33.] TH EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 243 


“And now, before the word we speak 
That knits the bond man must not break, 
We fain would know thy mind. 
Lord, be the sweet conviction given 
To both that thou thyself in heaven 
The hallowed bond hast twined.” 


It is in that spirit that it ought to be contemplated. Without this there can be on 
security for happiness or for Christ being honoured in connection with the union 
formed.—R. F. 


Vers. 3—7.— Covetousness amongst the worst of human crimes. “ But fornication, 
and all uncleanness, or covetousness, let it not be once named among you, as becometh 
saints; neither filthiness, nor foolish talking, nor jesting, which are not convenient: 
but rather giving of thanks. For this ye know, that no whoremonger, nor unclean 
person, nor covetous man, who is an idolater, hath any inheritance in the kingdom of 
Christ and of God, Let no man deceive you with vain words: fur because of these 
things cometh the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience. Be not ye there- 
fore partakers with them.” The subject which we gather from these words is that 
covetousness is amongst the worst of human crimes, 

I, Iv 18 HERE CLASSED WITH CRIMES OF THE WORST CHARACTER. There are three 
sins amongst which covetousness is placed in the text: unbridled licentiousness, “ for- 
nication,” and “ whoremongery ”—revolting indecency; “ filthiness,” that which is so 
unchaste and impure as to awaken universal disgust; and immoral speech—speech that 
is frivolous, untruthful, obscene, profane. These are sins confessedly of enormous 
magnitude. All true souls recoil from them, all pure minds renounce them as a degra- 
dation of the race and an offence to Almighty Gud. But mark, amongst these covetous- 
ness is placed. It is ranked with them as related to them in moral vileness. More 
than this, it is singled out as worse than these—“ a covetous man, who is an édolater.” 
What is idolatry? Holding anything nearer to the heart than God. The “ covetous 
man” loves money more than anything else, and money is his god. We here in 
England are very zealous for the conversion of heathen idolaters. We create and 
sustain costly organizations, but there is no idolatry more real, more powerful, more 
damning, than the idolatry that prevails throughout England, What god in heathendom 
‘is more earnestly and constantly served than Mammon is served in this island? Before 
the introduction of Christianity into this country there were many idols here. “In 
Scotland stood the temple of Mars; in Cornwall, the temple of Mercury; in Bangor, 
the temple of Minerva; at Maldon, the temple of Victoria; in Bath, the temple of 
Apollo; at Leicester, the temple of Janus; at York, where St. Peter’s now stands, the 
temple ot Bellona; in London, on the site of St. Paul’s Cathedral, the temple of 
Diana; and at Westminster, where the Abbey rears its venerable pile, a temple of 
Apollo.” But Mammon now has a temple everywhere, a temple on every hill and in 
every valley, in every church and house. Mammon has said to England, “Thou shalt 
have none other gods beside me,” and England heartily responds, “ Amen.” 

IL. Iv 18 HERE CLASSED WITH THE WORST OF ORIMES, AS EXCLUDING FROM THE 
KiNepom oF Gop. “For this ye know, that no whoremonger, nor uuclean person, nor 
covetous man, who is an idolater, hath any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and 
of God.” From this passage may be inferred: 1, That heaven isa kingdom. There 
is rule and order there. 2. That heaven is a Divine kingdom. “ Kingdom of Christ 
and of God.” Christ reigns there. He is in the midst of the throne; his Spirit 
animates all; his Spirit fills all with adoring wonder and worship. Christ reigns as 
God there. Βασιλείᾳ τοῦ Χριστοῦ καὶ Θεοῦ. Christ and God. The heavens are a king- 
dom managed, not by Divine partnership,—it is governed by God in Christ. 8, That 
heaven excludes evil characters of all descriptions. How clearly and forcibly this is 
declared in Scripture !—‘ The works of the flesh are manifest, which are these; Adultery, 
fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousuess . . . of the which I tell you before, as I have 
also told you in time past, that they which do such things shall not inherit the king. 
dom of God " (Gal. v. 19—21). ‘‘ Without are dogs, and sorcerers, and whoremongers, 
and murderers, and idolaters, and whosoever loveth and maketh a lie.” With the 
excluded will be the covefous man, Yes, though he has been a member of a Christian 


244 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. (on. v. 1—33. 


Church, though cultured in intellect, chaste in feeling, and refined in manners, though 
an eloquent preacher of the gospel of benevolence, he will find no admission into that 
world. He will be “without.” With whom? Will he have a place set apart for 
himself? No, with the common damned. 

III. Ir 185 HERE CLASSED WITH THE WORST OF CRIMES REPUGNANT TO THE Divine 
nature. “For because of these things cometh the wrath of God.” Paul says, in his 
letter to the Romans, that “the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against al! 
ungodliness and unrighteousness of men.” His deep, settled, immutable antagonism 
to wrong of all kinds is clearly revealed in the gospel of Jesus Christ. But is there 
any sin more repugnant to the Divine nature than covetousness, which is idolatry ? 
What sin has the Almighty denounced with greater frequency and force than that of 
idolatry ? But why should covetousness be so abhorrent to the Almighty ? 1. Because 
tt involves a mal-appropriution of the blessings of Providence. God’s will is that 
whatever a man, either by. good fortune or by industry, obtains of this world’s goods, 
should be expended for the advancement of truth and the general promotion of human 
happiness. But the covetous man appropriates all to pamper his own appetites, gratify 
his own vanity, and promote his own selfish and ambitious ends. 2. Because it involves 
an utter perversion of his own spiritual nature. The powers of the soul are not given 
to amass material wealth, nor the affections to love it. On the contrary, they were 
given to gather elements of the highest knowledge, and to love and serve the Infinite 
supremely in all, The soul was made to have God, not money, as the dominant subject 
of thought and the dominant object of love. 3. Because it involves the promotivn of 
misery in the universe. Nothing is more repugnant to the heart of the loving God 
than misery. The cause of universal happiness is his, but the covetous man is neces- 
sarily a promoter of misery in his own soul, misery in his circle, misery through the 
creation. God’s order is that no man should live unto himself, that all should labour 
for the common weal; in this way only the good of the universe can be served, its 
blessedness advanced, and its order maintained. Every man who sets himself up as 
his own end in labour and life opposes all the arrangements of God. He does what 
he can to create discords in its harmonies, miasma in its atmosphere, poison in its 
streams, ‘ wonder, then, that the “wrath of God” is against “the covetour 
man.”—D, T. 


Vers. 8—10.—Christian life. “For ye were sometimes darkness, but now are ye 
light in the Lord: walk as children of light: (for the fruit of the Spirit is in all good- 
ness and righteousness and truth ;) proving what is acceptable unto the Lord.” These 
verses present to us the Christian life in its transformation, obligation, and demon- 
stration. 

I. Traxsrormation. A true Christian is one who has been changed from darkness 
into light. The figurative language implies: 1. A change from tmmorality to holiness. 
“ Darkness” is the emblem of depravity. “They that be drunken are drunken in the 
night.” The ghastly legions of hell win their most terrible victories in the gloom and 
silence of night. The “light” isa symbol of purity. 2. A change from ignorance to 
knowledge. Darkness clouds our vision, and hides from us the world in which we live. 
Man in an unregenerated state is in the moral world as a man in midnight. “ Light” 
is a symbol of intelligence. 8, A change from sadness to joy. Darkness is depressing. 
Even the irrational creatures feel its dejecting power. Sin is sadness; true religion is 
joy. “We are told that there is “no night in heaven.” It means that there is no 
immorality, no ignorance, no sorrow there. - How great the change that has taken 
place in a true Christian man! 

II. Opuieation. Two duties are here indicated. 1. Walking in light. “Walk as 
children of light.” Don’t go back into darkness. Nay, don’t remain in the twilight 
of Christian experience, but step farther and farther into the day. Leave the valleys, 
scale the hills, and come more directly under the broad beams of day. To walk in the 
light is to walk intelligently, safely, and joyously. 2. Pleasing God. The ninth verse 
being parenthetical, the last clause of the eighth verse should be read with the tenth, 
“ Walk as children of light, proving what is acceptable [well-pleasing] unto the Lord.” 
“Be not conformed to this world: but be ye transformed by the renewing of your 
mind, that ye may prove what is that good, and acceptable, and perfect will of God” 


ou. Υ. 1—33.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 245 


Rom. xii. 2). The expression “ well-pleasing” to God throws a light upwards on 
od and downwards on man. (1) It reveals God. It indicates (@) his moral suscep- 
tibility. He is not indifferent to the moral conduct of his creatures. It indicates (ὁ) 
his forgiving mercy. Man, though a sinner, can, through his infinite mercy, render 
himself acceptable to him, (2) It reveals man. (a) It indicates the highest end of 
his being. What higher object can a creature have than to please the Creator? (Ὁ) 
It indicates the highest blessedness of his being. The smile of the Creator is the 
heaven of the creature. 

III, Demonstration. The Christian man develops in his life certain glorious things, 
“The fruit of the Spirit [light] is in all goodness and righteousness and truth.” He 
demonstrates in his life: 1. Divine benejicence. ‘In all goodness.” He is full of social 
love, tender, compassionate, self-sacrificing. 2. Divine righteousness. He is a man of 
inflexible honesty, unswerving rectitude. In him the “righteousness of the Law is 
fulfilled.” 38. Divine reality. His thoughts, sympathies, actions, are in harmony with 
the eternal realities of being. He is neither a visionary nor a hypocrite, His thoughts 
are true, his life is sincere. 

Conotusion. What an infinite boon is the gospel to mankind! How glorious the 
transformation it effects! how righteous the obliyation it imposes! how great the power 
it confers !—a power to demonstrate in our life the good, the right, and the érue.—D. T. 


Vers. 5 ae ἢ Two worlds of one race. “And have no fellowship with the 
unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them. For it is a shame even to speak 
of those things which are done of them in secret. But all things that are reproved are 
made manifest by the light: for whatsoever doth make manifest is light. Wherefore 
he saith, Awake thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee 
light.” The text may be regarded as a portraiture of two distinct worlds of men on 
this earth—the world of the wicked and the world of the Christly. Here we have— 

I. THe woRLp or WIcKED MEN. The characteristics of these men are here indicated. 
1. They are worthless. Their works are “the unfruitful works of darkness.” Ungodly 
men live in moral darkness. The sun, which alone reveals things -as they are in the 
spiritual world, shines not in their heavens, All the light they have are the electric 
flashes of an impure atmosphere. They work in the dark, and their works are 
“unfruitful.” That is “unfruitful” of good. The soil that is sterile as regards its 
capability of producing fruit is often fertile in its capacity to produce noxious weeds 
and poisonous herbs ; so the ungodly soul—it is unfruitful in goodness, but prolific in 
crime. 2, They are clundestine. “Which are done of them in secret.” Though 
there may be an allusion here to the abominable mysteries which were celebrated in 
Greece under the screen of night and secrecy, it describes the general character of a 
sinful life. Allis secret, Sin is necessarily hypocritical; it speaks in a false voice; 
it works under masks, The more corrupt the human soul the more sneakish and 
clandestine. ‘The good alone can afford to be bland and open. 3. They are shameful, 
“For it isa shame even to speak of those things.” Heathenism has ever abounded 
and still abounds with nameless iniquities (Rom. 1. 24—32). But sin in all its forms 
is a shameful thing. It is essentially disgraceful, disreputable, and ignominious. A 
man has only to think calmly of it in the light of conscience and God, in order to bring 
burning blushes to his cheek. Sin isa shame. 4, They are sleepy. “ Wherefore he 
saith, Awake thou that sleepest.” A sinful soul is sleepy in a moral sense. It is 
unconscious of its moral surroundings—it is filled with illusory dreams; it must one 
day be aroused to a sense of reality. Unlike natural sleep, moral sleep does not refresh 
and invigorate, but enervates and destroys. 5. They are mortal. “Arise from the 
dead.” Everywhere the Bible represents sin as a state of death. The sinful soul is 
like a corpse. It is odious and the victim of external forces. Such is the world of 
wicked men around us. It is worthless, clandestine, shameful, sleepy, mortal, 

Il. THE worLp oF CuRistLy MEN. These are represented by the Christians at 
Ephesus, the men to whom the apostle is writing. ‘his world has a work to do with 
the other—the dark world of wickedness around them. And it is here indicated. 
What is it? 1. Separation. “Have no fellowship.” It does not mean, of course, 
that Christians are to have no intercourse or dealings with the ungodly. This could 
not be, and ought not to be if it could. It means that they are to have no spiritual 


246 THE EPISTLE TO THE ®PHESIANS. [cu. v. 1—33 


identification with them—no thoughts, purposes, or feelings alike. That, like Christ, 
they are to be “separate from sinners.” Morally detached as the lamp from the dark- 
ness. “I have written unto you not to keep company, if any man that is callea 
a brother be a fornicator, or covetous, or an idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an 
extortioner: with such a one no not to eat” (1 Cor. v.11). ‘ Wherefore come out 
from among them,” etc. (2 Cor. vi. 14—18). 2. Reprehension. “ But rather reprove 
them.” Reprove them by ip. In the name of purity and truth expose and 
denounce their wickeduess. Reprove them by life. Let the life stand in such a grand 
contrast to all that is sinful that it may be a stauding rebuke. 3. Illumination, “ All 
things that are reproved are made manifest by the light.” Hold forth the light of the 
gospel in the midst of a “crooked and perverse generation.” 4, Resuscitation. “‘ Awake 
thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead.” Thunder in the ear of the sleeper ; speak 
life into the heart of the dead. There is living light for all in Christ. “ Christ shall 
give thee light.” “He is the Light of the world.” ‘The idea of this verse seems to 
be that, if Christians will use all their efforts to convert men, they may expect Christ 
to shine upon them and bless them. The “light” that comes from him is a soul- 
quickening light. “The hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shail hear the 
voice of the Son of God: and they that hear shall live” (John v. 25). Elijah raised 
the dead ; sc did the apostles. We, also, in God’s great Name, can raise the dead— 
dead souls. The resurrection of a soul is a far grander work than the resurrection of a 
body. Let us sound the blast of the gospel trumpet over moral cemeteries, and the 
graves will open and dead souls come forth to life—D. T. 


Vers, 15—21.—({2) Two worlds of onerace. ‘See then that ye walk circumspectly, 
not as fools, but as wise, redeeming the time, because the days are evil. Wherefore be 
ye not unwise, but understanding what the will of the Lord is. And be not drunk 
with wine, wherein is excess; but be filled with the Spirit ; speaking to yourselves in 
psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing and making melody in your heart to 
the Lord; giving thanks always for all things unto God and the Father in the Name 
of our Lord Jesus-Christ; submitting yourselves one to another in the fear of God.’ 
All these verses must be brought in under the same heading as the verses discussed in 
our preceding article, viz.—Two worlds of one race. These verses continue to indi- 
eate the duties pertaining to the world of Christian men. ‘The duties which we pre- 
viously discussed were separation, reprehension, illumination, and resuscitation; tho 
duties which we have now to notice are Christian consistency, holy excitement, and 
social worship, 

I, Curistian consisteNoy. “See then that ye walk cireumspectly, not as fools, but 
as wise.” The verses teach that walking strictly in harmony with the Christian creed 
implies: 1. Wisdom. “ Not as fools, but as wise.” A conduct inconsistent with the 
Christian creed we profess is exceedingly foolish. (1) It damages our own moral 
nature. (2) It misrepresents the gospel of Christ. (8) It insults the omniscience of 
God. Hypocrisy is in every way unwise. 2.*Diligence. ‘Redeeming the time ”— 
“Buying up opportunities.” How is time to be redeemed? Not by regaining any 
portion of the past. The past is irrecoverably gone. Not by inoperative regrets con- 
cerning the wrong of the past. Not by mere sentimental desires that the future may 
be better. How then? (1) By deducing the true moral lessons of the past. (2) By 
a deep and devout determination to avoid all the evils of the past. (3) By turning 
every circumstance of our life to a right spiritual account. ‘“ Because the days are 
evu, says Paul. The times in which Paul wrote were corrupt; our times are corrupt. 
There are several things that make our times evil. (1) A ruling secularism. How 
mercenary is our age! (2) Religious formalism, The forms of religion abound every- 
where; the real spirit is rare. The “letter” is killing the “spirit.” (8) Sceptical 
rationalism, The world’s philosophy, as it is called, is for the most part anti-theistic, 
anti-supernatural, anti-Obristian. These elements fill the social atmosphere with the 
moral fungi that make our “days” evil, Because our days are charged with 80 many 
evils we should be diligent ; we should seize every opportunity to crush the wrong and 
to promote the right. 8, Inquiry. “Understanding what the will of the Lord is.” 

has a will concerning us, and it is our duty to endeavour to understand it, and for 
this purpose we must inquire into it. 


im, v. 1—83.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 247 


II, Hoy excitement, “ Be not drunk with wine, wherein is excess; but be filled 
with the Spirit.” This verse suggests several thoughts, 1. Man has an instinctive 
craving for excitement. The words evidently imply this, Paul assumes that his 
readers must have excitement, in telling them in what they should and in what they 
should not find it, Excitement is a necessity of our nature. The soul has a deep 
hunger for it. (1) Observation shows this. Look at society, either as it appears on 
the page of history or as it surrounds you now in all the activities of life, and you will 
find that the love of excitement explains much of all its restlessness, amusements, and 
tvils, (2) Consciousness shows this. All are conscious of this impulse. Monotony 
and stagnation become intolerable. We crave a quicker pulse, a warmer and a fuller 
passion. Yes, man has a native hunger for excitement. Hence the popularity of sensa- 
tional theatres, sports, books, scenes, music, sermons, 2. Man has recourse to ¢mproper 
expedients for excitement. “Be not drunk with wine.” Wine stimulates excitement. 
It quickens the pulse, it heats the blood, it fires the passions. Hence men like it. 
They use it, not for the sake of intoxication, but excitement. Wine-drinking is only 
ove of many improper expedients for excitement. Drunkenness is here a type of what- 
ever improperly stimulates the senses and enkindles the lusts. (1) There is sensualism, 
How many seek excitement in an inordinate gratification of mere animal propensities! 
(2) There is gambling. What thousands resort to the race-course, the exchange, the 
billiard-table, for excitement! (3) There is immoral literature. Luscious tales, filthy 
narratives, and sensational romances ;—these are eagerly sought because they make the 
imagination glow with impure fires. 

TIT. Sooran worsuip. “Speaking to yourselves,” etc, These verses (from the nine- 
teenth to the twenty-first) show what is meant by being “ filled with the Spirit.” 1. 
High spiritual intercourse with man. “Speaking to yourselves in psalms and hymns 
and spiritual songs.” Speaking to men the highest things in the highest forms of Jan- 
guage—poetry. High feeling alwaysrunsinto poetry. 2, Devout fellowship with Christ. 
“Singing ond making melody in your heart ¢o the Lord.” The soul pouring out its 
devotions in sweet melodies in the Divine ear. 3. Thankful recognition of Divine 
favours. “Giving thanks always for all things wnto God.” 4. Godly devotion to the 
common weal. “Submitting yourselves one to another in the fear of God.” All this 
is implied in being “filled with the Spirit.” And is there not -snfficient excitement 
here? To be filled with the Spirit is to be filled with the Spirit’s ideas; and what 
exciting ideas are his! With the Spirit’s purposes; and what inspiring purposes are 
his! With the Spirit’s love; and what an immensity of stirring impulses is in that 
love!—D. Τὶ 


Vers. 22—33.—Ideal marriage. ‘ Wives, submit yourselves unto your own hus- 
bands, as unto the Lord. For the husband is the head of the wife, even as Christ is 
the Head of the Church: and he is the Saviour of the body. Therefore as the Church 
is subject unto Christ, so let the wives be to their own husbands io everything. Lus- 
bands, love your wives, even as Christ also loved the Church, and gave himself for it; 
that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the Word, that he 
might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such 
thing; but that it should be holy and without blemish. So ought men to love their 
wives as their own bodies. He that loveth his wife loveth himself. For no man ever 
yet hated his own flesh; but nourisheth and cherisheth it, even as the Lord the 
Church: for we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones, For this cause 
shall a man leave his father and mother, and shall be joined unto his wife, and they 
two shall be one flesh. This is a great mystery: but I speak concerning Christ and 
the Church. Nevertheless let every one of you in particular so love his wife even as 
himself; and the wife see that she reverence her husband.” The subject of this 
passage is Ideal matrimony ; or, God’s idea of the marriage state. As we look into it, 
our convictions will deepen that the Divine idea is but very partially, if at all, developer 
in the matrimonial alliances of modern society. What is marriage? It comes not within 
the limits of our purpose or space to enter into a full discussion of the grand subject of 
human marriage, Our readers will find a very learned and exhaustive treatment of 
this question in Dr. William Smith’s ‘Dictionary of the Bible.’ Our remarks must be 
gonfved entirely to those phases of the subject which the passage under review stg- 


248 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. fox. v. 1—33. 


gests. On all hands it is admitted that marriage—that is, the union of one man to one 
woman—is a Divine ordination. Some philosophers see the principle of matrimony 
running through all nature, not only in the sexual distinction of all animals, but in 
the sexual form of all kinds of vegctable life. But the Bible is our authority. The 
Divine institution of marriage is clearly taught, both in the Old and the New Testaments. 
In the opening pages of the Divine volume we read these words, “ And the Lord God 
said, It isnot good that the man should be alone; I will make him an help meet for him.” 
And in the New Testament we have these words from the lips of the Son of God himself, 
“Have ye not read, that he which made them at the beginning made them male and 
female, and said, For this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and shall cleave to 
his wife: and they twain shall be one flesh? wherefore they are no more twain, but one 
flesh. What therefore God hath joined together, let not man put asunder” (Matt, xix. 
4—6). What does the text teach concerning marriage? It teaches— 

I. That marriage implies MoRAL ROYALTY ON THE PART OF THE HUSBAND. Wives 
are here commanded to submit themselves unto their husbands “as unto the Lord.” 
The husband is here called the “head of the wife, even as Christ is the Head of the 
Church,” and the apostle concludes the paragraph by saying, “ Let the wife see that she 
reverence her husband.” The idea of supremacy, therefore, on the part of the husband 
is manifest throughout the passage. But what is the rule to be? Not the rule of 
superior muscular force or intellectual power, Such a rule would be despotism and 
nothing less. The apostle teaches here that the husband’s rulership should be similar 
to that rulership that Christ holds over the Church. 1. The husband is to rule by 
moral influence. How does Christ rule the Church? Not by force, but by love; by 
the royalty of his character, the sublimity of his thoughts, the Divine grandeur of his 
aims, The Church bows lovingly to his authority, because of the supremacy of his 
excellence, Thus the husband is to rule the wife, for “the husband is the head of the 
wife, even as Christ is the Head of the Church.” It is only as the wife sees in her 
husband true moral grandeur that she can bow loyally to his sceptre and feel a loving 
reverence in her heart. 2. The husband is to rule for beneficent ends. (1) The rule is 
to be restorative. “He is the Saviour of the body.” ‘This refers to Christ. The 
Church is his body ; he is to it what the soul is to the body—the ever-present, animating, 
controlling spirit. So the grand object of the husband should be to save his wife—save 
her from all that is mean and coarse, from all that degrades the character or pains the soul, 
Her true elevation, and not the gratification of her vanity, or pride, or lower appetites, 
should be his master aim. (2) This rule is to be wniversal. “In everything.” It is to 
extend through the whole of domestic life. Indeed, a true moral rule over the heart will 
extend to “everything” in the woman’s life. (3) The rule is to be self-sacrificing in 
spirit. “ Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ loved the Church, and gave himself 
for it.” The husband’s love should be that of the highest chivalry—a love that 
shrinks at no sacrifice in order to bless and ennoble the partner of his choice. It must 
be of the same kind as that which prompted Christ to give himself for the salvation of 
the world. Ay, and he must have the same grand object, too—viz. the perfect cleansing 
of his bride from all that is morally corrupt. Christ loved the Church, and gave him- 
self for it; what for? ‘That he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of 
water by the Word, that he might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having 
spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing; but that it should be holy and without blemish.” 
It is said that the glowworm never shines after it has become a parent. Some women 
lose the lustre of all delicacy and refinement under the influence of men whom they call 
their husbands. The aim of the true husband should be to make the character of his 
wife a “glorious” character, “without spot or blemish.” Behold and admire this 
Divine picture of a true husband! The marriage in which there is not such a husband 
is no true marriage. It is an impious mockery. When a woman in the marriage 
ceremony of Churches is called upon to obey ἃ man smaller in inteJlect, narrower in 
sympathies, and inferior in moral character to herself, she is called upon to do violence 
to her nature—to do that, in fact, which the eternal laws of mind forbid her in sincerity 
and truth ever to perform. Who can admire the contemptible? who can reverence the 
mean? The man should appear as a morally royal man in her eyes, or he is no true 
husband at all. 

II, That marriage implies MORAL LOVABLENESS ON THE PART OF TUR BITE, “ fio 


on. v. 1—33.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 248 


ought men to love their wives as their own bodies.” If the wife is to be loved, she 
must be lovable, for it is as impossible for the human mind to love the morally 
unbeautiful as it is to believe a mathematical contradiction. There are women who 
are morally hideous, and from whom all manly natures must revolt with disgust. 
What is the truly lovable in a wife? Personal beauty? This may fascinate the eye 
for a short time, but it has no power to generate moral esteem, Brilliant genius or 
sparkling accomplishments? No; these may charm the fancy, but never evoke the 
true germ of manly love. What is the lovable? The text suggests two of its elements 
1. A vital sympathy with the spirit of a true husband. “So ought men to love their 
wives as their own bodies, He that loveth his wife loveth himself. For no man ever 
yet hated his own flesh ; but nourisheth and cherisheth it, even as the Lord the Church.” 
The true husband we have described: he is a royal man, who rules by moral influence 
for beneficent ends in the spirit of self-sacrificing love; and the true wife must have 
such a vital sympathy with that high moral spirit of his as to make the “twain one 
flesh.” His aims are elevated, his spirit is Christ-like, and her whole heart being in 
vital accord with his, they are “no more twain, but one flesh.” God, not priests nor 
hireling registrars, has joined them together. 2. A love-centralizing power of character. 
There must be that fascination and bewitchment of moral spirit about her that will 
draw the affections of her husband from all the dearest of other objects, and centre 
them on herself. “For this cause shall a man leave his father and mother, and shall be 
joined unto his wife, and they two shall be one flesh.” He should discover in her 
virtues so numerous and strong as to draw his sympathies even from the nearest of his 
other relations and centre them on her, feeling that he can repose in her his utmost 
confidence and bestow on her his choicest love. 

Conciusion. It is obvious that the world abounds with spurious marriages. The 
popular idea of marriage is a legalized union of one man to one woman. Though the 
union may be formed by mere sensual impulses and selfish considerations, it is still 
called a marriage. Though it be formed, not only without any relative fitness between 
the parties conjoined, but with a painful discrepancy in temper, age, health, education, it 
is still called a marriage. Though it be formed without any element of moral excellence 
as a foundation, and without mutual love for virtue—simply because no mutual virtue 
exists—astill it is calleda marriage. The woman may be destitute of every high quality, 
immersed in sensuality and pride, still at the altar the man pledges to her his love; 
and the man may be a little soul, in every respect inferior to the woman, yet at the 
altar she pledges him reverence and obedience, Nothing is more baneful to a country- 
than the corruption of the marriage institution. The law of England, alas! unites 
brutes and fiends together as well as saints. 


“Yor marriage is a matter of more worth 
Than to be dealt in by attorneyship: 
For what is wedlock forced, but a hell, 
An age of discord and continual strifo? 
Whereas the contrary bringeth forth happiness, 
And is ἃ pattern of celestial bliss.” 
ia aie | 


Ver. 1.— Imitators of God." 1. How rr 18 ῬΟΒΒΙΒΤΙ FOR US TO BE IMITATORS OF Gop. 
It is vain to try to imitate God if all resemblance to God is beyond our reach. But 
this is not the case. While speculative theology is fatally successful in magnifying 
the distance between man and God, practical revelation is ever bringing us nearer to God. 
1. We are like God by nature. God is spirit, and we are spiritual beings, As Chan- 
ning taught, all spirits are of one family. God made us in his own image. It is our 
work to revive that image where it has been obscured and to carry it up to higher 
resemblances. 2, We can imitate God in very small ways. Because he is infinite and 
we are finite we are not to infer that all common likeness is imipossible. The smallest 
pool may bear a perfect image of the sun. 3. We are susceptible of indefinite growth 
and improvement. Because we are sadly unlike God now it does not follow that we 
may never resemble him. “It is not yet made manifest what we shall be. We know 


that, if he shall be manifested, we shall be like him” (1 John iii, 2), God has revealed 


250 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. (cn. v. 1—383, 


himself to us. We cannot imitate what we do not know. Mysteries of the Divina 
nature must ever lie beyond our sight, Nevertheless, something real about God we do 
know. For we have seen Christ, and he who sees Christ sees God (John xiv, 9). 

IL IN WHAT RESPECTS WE ARE TO BECOME IMITATORS OF Gop. We cannot attain 
to his almighty cnergy nor to his unfathomable wisdom. Yet we may imitate the 
method of these Divine attributes in the exercise of corresponding human qualities. 
But the resemblance to God that is both most important and most attainable is moral 
and spilitual likeness in character and conduct. Consider especially in what points we 
most need to be like God. 1. Purity, 2. Truth. 3, Generous giving. There are 
men who are always grasping for themselves, and others who distribute abroad. ‘he 
latter are like God, who is ever raying out blessings, 4. Forbearance. In nothing do 
we more need to imitate God than in his gentleness with - sinners, his long-suffering 
patience, and his forgiving merey. 5. Love. This is nearest to the heart and very being 
of God, for Gud is love. He who loves his kind most widely and warmly is likest God 

see ver. 2). 

‘ II. Wuy WE sHoULD BE IMITATORS oF Gop. 1. It is our natural duty. Nothing 
short of this will satisfy the claims of right. It is not enough that we follow the best 
men and conform with the utmost propriety to the pious fashions of the times, nor even 
that we obey our own consciences. We have to make our conduct agree with God’s 
conscience. Duty is infinite—a ceaseless climbing to higher and yet higher regions of 
holiness. We cannot reach the pinnacle of perfection at once, and we are not guilty 
for not doing what lies beyond our present powers. But we are blameworthy if we aim 
at less than perfection and if we ever rest contented with any lower stage of progress. 
“ Ye therefore shal] be perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect.” (Matt.-v. 48), 2. 
Weare under obligations of gratitude to become imitators of Gud. The word “ therefore” 
calis our attention to these obligations. It points back to the previous words, wherein 
we are exhorted to forgive one another, even as God also in Christ forgave us, 8. Our 
highest blessedness will be found in our resemblance to God. He is ever blessed. 
Everything ungodlike must be ultimately a source of pain and death. Though the 
imitation of God begins in toil and sacrifice, it grows into the deepest peace and the 
richest gladness. ᾿ 

IV. By wHaT MEANS WE MAY BECOME IMITATORS OF Gop. 1. Worship, Heathen 
gods are objective representations, and even monstrous exaggerations, of the natures of 
their devotees. Such gods can have no good moral influence. But God, as he is 
Tevealed in Christ, is infinitely above us, and full of wonderful beauty and attraction. 
As we gaze upon his glory in rapt devotion we are changed into his likeness. We all 
imitate, consciously or unconsciously, what we admire. When we see a great picture 
we wish to paint; when we enjoy good music we desire to produce it; when we see 
noble deeds we are fired to emulate them. 2. Meditation. As St. Francis is said to 
have received the wounds of Christ on his own person by intense meditation on them, 
we may receive the spirituai likeness of our Lord—a more profitable resemblance—by 
contemplating and dwelling in the spirit of his life. Then also we shall have the like- 
ness of God. He who is nearest to God in prayer and communion grows likest God. 
8. Obedient action. We must do Divine deeds of holiness and charity if we would 
have the character that a habit of such deeds begets, All this God will supplement 
and vivify by the inspiration of his Holy Spirit breathing his own life and likeness 
into us. 

V. IN WHAT SPIRIT WE ARE TO BECOME IMITATORS OF Gop. “4.5 beloved children.” 
Thus loved children venerate and imitate their parents. Here is no room for spiritual 
pride, For when we lose the childlike spirit we fall away from the imitation of God. 
They who imitate God most truly are most simple and childlike, and that spirit of trust 
in a loving parent which is the highest educational influence in the child, must be in us 
if we would be good imitators of God.—W. F, A, 


Ver. 2.— The sacrifice of Christ. I. THE sacrIFIce OF CHRIST WAS VOLUNTARY. He 
gave himself, He said he had power—right as well as ability—to lay down his life 
(John x. 18), Had the sacrifice of Christ not been the free siving of himself, it would 
lave been like the human sacrifices of the heathen—a fearful deed in those who slew 
*jm and of no import to anv one else. The essence of the sacrifice. all that gave ta it 


cH. v. 1—33,] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 261 


propitiatory efficacy, was the willingness of the Sufferer who offered himself. God is 
not pleased with pain and death, What he is pleased with is the devotion, fidelity, and 
love that endure pain and death in the fulfilment of an unselfish and noble mission, 

II. THe ΒΑΟΒΙΡΊΟΒ oF CiikisT WAS OFFERED TO Gop. Christ was not simply a Martyr 
to truth, nor only a Suffercr in the cause of humanity. The cup that he drank was 
given to him by his Father. His persistence through mortal agony was in submission 
to the will of God. Gethsemane interprets Calvary. It reveals an essential element of 
the sacrifice of Christ that has been too much neglectrd in our theologies—the obedience: 
of Christ. St. Pau] saw this when he said that Christ became “obedient unto death.” 
Thus the cross was an altar and the crucifixion an offering to God, 

TIL. THe ΒΑΟΒΙΡΊΟΒ of CHRIST WAS WELL-PLEASING TO Gop. In primite language it 
it is said that when the smoke of Noah’s sacrifice went up to heaven “God smelled a 
sweet savour ”—literally, “a savour of satisfaction,” ἐ.6. it was acceptable to God. So 
Christ’s sacrifice is described as “‘an odour of a sweet smell.” Such an act of fidelity 
to God and love to man could not but be pleasing to God. ‘I'hus the sacrifice becomes 
a propitiation ; it becomes the means through which God looks favourably on those for 
whom it is offered. 

IV. THE sacririce oF CHRIST WAS MADE ON OUR BEHALF. “ For us.” Men had 
often offered sacrifices for themselves—to express their own devotion and to expiate 
their own sins. It is customary now for people to talk of making a present sacrifice in 
order to secure a future advantage. But Christ’s sacrifice was not for his own interests. 
[0 was the Shepherd giving his life for the sheep, the Friend laying down his life for his 
friends, His was the pain, ours is the gain; his the cross of death, ours the crown 
of life. 

V. THE SACRIFICE OF CHRIST WAS OCCASIONED BY HIS LOVE TO ὕ8. “Christ also 
loved you.” There was no necessity that Christ should die, Ordinary duty would not 
have required the sacrifice, for, though fidelity and obedience entered into it, these 
elements were consequent on the free undertaking of a work of love by Christ. Christ 
as & man was possessed of a great love of his kind that constrained him to die for the 
world; Christ as the Son of God and “the very image of his substance” (Heb. i. 3) 
died because he was full of the love of the Father for his lost children. 

VI. ‘THe ΒΑΟΒΙΡΊΟΒ oF CHRIST SHOULD LEAD US TO WALK IN LOVE. 1. In return for 
his love. Love should inspire love. If it does we shall show our love to Christ by 
loving our brethren. 2. In breathing his Spirit, Christianity is not merely appro- 
priating the fruits of the work of Christ. It is following in his footsteps. Christians 
are called to be imitators of Gud, especially as he is manifested in Christ, An imitation 
of God must therefore consist chiefly in an exercise of love like that of Christ. His 
love to us led him to submit to crucifixion. He asks us simply to walk in love— 
W.F. A. 


Ver. 14.—Awake! 1. A pesoriprion. A particular kind of manu is here addressed 
—thou that sleepest;” “the dead.” 1. The man is asl-ep, His sleep.is spiritual 
indifference. Whether or no he has an abstract belief in religion is not of the slightest 
moment. He may be an atheist or he may be orthodox of the orthodox. So long as 
he is sleeping it matters little what he might have been doing had he been awake. 
The sleeper may have his eyes open to secular interests; he may have a quick intellect 
in speculation or a vigorous energy in business. Yet angels who see that he is uncon- 
scious of the greatest realities must regard him as a dreamer or at best as a restless 
sleep-walker. 2. This sleep is a sign of death. It is more than sleep. It is unnatural 
and impossible to 8 soul in full energy. Spiritual perceptions must have been dulled 
and spiritual powers paralyzed to admit of this blindness and stupor in regard to Divine 
things. 

Ie A catL. Awake! Up! Arise! A loud voice disturbs the sleeper. 1. God 
calls, sometimes (1) in providence, rousing the careless soul by the shock of some 
sudden change ; and often @ in the gospel, for it is the duty of the preacher to speak 
in trumpet-notes, not merely to teach the attentive but also to rouse the listless. 2. 
It is important to respond to this call; for sleep is (1) a sinful neglect of duty; (2) a 
foolish loss of blessings—he who sleeps till the full day never sees the glory of the sun- 
risa; and (3) a dangerous condition—the longer ἃ man sleeps the more difficult will it 


252 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. (ow. v. 1—33, 


be to awake, and meanwhile death and judgment may be upon him. 8. It is possible 
to awake. ‘he spiritual sleep is partly voluntary and semi-conscious, As 8 man 
sometimes knows that he is dreaming so he may be made aware that he is spiritually 
asleep and may rouse himself if he will. There is rousing power, too, in the Divine 
voice. It vexes a man to have his rest disturbed, but as one who wakes the sleeper 
when his house is on fire it comes for his deliverance and he will do well to bestir 
himself. 

III. A promise. “Christ shall shine upon thee.” There is something to wake up 
for. Christ is the Light of the world. His people are now “livht in the Lord.” He 
brings to the waking soul truth, purity, and joy. When the storm rages and the dark 
night lingers, and to wake is only to take up again the burden of sorrow and grope in 
the hopeless gloom, a man has some excuse for sleeping. Despair may sleep, But 
the Christian finds a bright morning responding to his opening eyes, We are not to 
wake only to kindle a poor light for ourselves. We are rewarded for waking by tho 
cheering brightness of Christ. We must rouse ourselves, however, to enjoy it, Tho 
people that sit in darkness see the great light only when they awake and arise from 
the dead.—W. Ε΄ A. 


Ver. 15.—The value of time. I. ALL TIME Is OF HIGH VALUE. They who kill time 
destroy one of the best talents God has given them and rob him of a sacred trust he 
has lent to them. 1. Time is not our own property. We are servants and have to 
account to our Master for our use of his hours, 2. Great concerns have to be attended to. 
Not only is art long while life is short, but duty is great, the claims of service are 
many, and the wants of our fellow-men are numerous, In this world of toil and strife 
and sorrow every moment is of value for some good deed of mercy or some solid work of 
truth. 8, Lost time is irrecoverable. We cannot redeem the time that has been wasted. 
A repentant diligence may bring back the inheritance that was squandered away in 
extravagant folly; careful attention may bring back the wasted health; but time once 
gone is gone for ever. 4, Time may be made of increasing value, An hour is worth 
more in the use of one man than a day with another man, 

Il. SPECIAL OPPORTUNITIES ARE OF SPECIAL VALUE. St. Paul urges us to buy up 
“the seasons.” All time is not of equal value. There are moments of peculiar precious- 
ness. Woe to him who, through heedlessness or wilful negligence, lets them slip! The 
moment when the rope floats by the drowning man it must be seized or he dies. Strike 
the iron while it is hot. Sow the seed in the spring if you would reap the harvest in 
the autumn. 1, Youth has its golden opportunities that bélong to no other age. Young 
men especially should make the most of theirown season, 2. Manhood has its time of 
vigour for work that will be beyond the strength of old age. The wise man will watch 
for occasions of usefulness that his word may be “in season.” 

ILI. THE TRUE VALUE OF TIME CAN ONLY BE OBTAINED AT A Cost. We have to buy 
it up before we can make use of it. 1. We must spend thought in considering how we 
can best use our time and in watching for right opportunities. For want of due con- 
sideration there is a frightful lack of economy of energy and time. 2. We must 
sacrifice our own pleaswre in giving up time that we are tempted to expend on our- 
selves, our amusement or our rest, to the service of God. He who only gives to God 
his leisure moments, when he is worn and jaded with his own selfish work, makes bui 
a poor offering. 3. We must put out yreater energy in order to make our time of more 
value. Few of us work on the highest subjects at full pressure. The busiest might do 
more 2. ἢ yen they cannot as yet find time for serving Christ, they would make 
time.—W. F. A. 


Ver. 18.—Drunkenness and tts antidote. JI. Tue sry. It was the mistake of some 
of the earlier advocates of temperance to dwell too much on the economic arguments 
against drunkenness, to the neglect of those which are supplied by religion. That dis- 
sipation wrecks a man’s position in the world is plain and sad enough. But itis not 
worldly self-interest that is chiefly outraged thereby. The sin of drunkenness is its 
great condemnation. Itis asin against God and man. 1. Jé desecrates the temple of 
the Holy Ghost. 2. It unfits a man for his mission in the world. 3. It occasions 
brutal unkindness to others, robbing the family of daily bread for the sake of gross 


oH. v. 1—-33.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 258 


self-indulgence, bringing poverty and gloom, wretchedness and-terror on the home, and 
giving to children a hideous inheritance of disease and constitutional tendencies to the 
same vice. 4. Jt opens the door for other vices. Instead of pleading intoxication as an 
excuse for a crime committed in the madness of drink, a man should be made to feel 
that the wickedness of putting himself into such a condition was aggravated by the 
terrible results. 

II. Tue rempration. In order to remedy the fearful evil we must consider how it 
arises. 1. From customs of sociability. Drinking has been regarded as an almost 
necessary accompaniment of friendly intercourse. 2. From lack of mental occupation 
Men spending hours together of a winter’s night without any education to supply food 
for the mind resort to the glass as the one available relief from the tedium of doing 
nothing. 8, The craving for nervous stimulation. This is the real thirst of the exces- 
sive drinker. What is called “low spirits,” resulting from general ill health, or 
nervous debility, or trouble, or as the natural consequence of previous indulgence, 
creates the craving for stimulants. Early in the present century, Lord Jeffrey quoted 
a statement of a physician of Liverpool, respecting some of the most prosperous 
merchants of that town, “He informs me,” said the lord advocate, “that few of the 
richer sort live to be fifty, but die of a sort of atrophy. They eat too much, take little 
exercise, and, above all, have no nervous excitement.” This condition tempts to 
indulgence in nerve-stimulants, 

III. Toe ΑΝΤΙΡΟΤΕ. We must have an antidote if we would remedy the evil. 
Mere negative abstinence without anything to support and encourage it is impossible 
on a large scale and in the worst cases. St. Paul, by a flash of inspiration reveals the 
cure, “Be filled with the Spirit.” ‘hese are old words. Yet they read strangely in 
the present connection—so little have they been heeded by zealous but unimaginative 
and unspiritual social reformers. We are to pray for the Spirit of God which Christ 
assures us will be given to all who ask for it (Luke xi, 13). How is this to 
counteract drunkenness? 1. It counteracts the craving for nervous stimulation. It is 
itself a pure and vitalizing spiritual stimulus, infusing at once restfulness and energy. 
2. It supplies interest and occupation. For the Spirit of God is the inspiration of 
thought and power. 3. Jt purifies and elevates social intercourse. They who are 
filled with the Spirit will find that “singing and making melody in their hearts” is 
a more congenial accompaniment of social intercourse than drinking strong drinks. - 
W. FF. A, 


Ver. 19.—Christian worship. We have here, not only an interesting picture of 
worship as it was conducted in the early Church, but also apostolic directions for 
Christian worship that may be applied to all times, Consider some of the chief features 
of this worship. 

I. Ir 1s purz. The context shows that this point was of especial interest under the 
circumstances that obtained when the Epistle was written. The pure and simple 
observances of the Christian assembly at Ephesus must have stood in striking contrast 
to the riotous orgies that characterized the heathen festivities. In those pagan 
ceremonies intoxication and licentiousness were recognized accompaniments, Instead 
of indulging in drunkenness, the Christians seek to be filled with the Spirit ; abandoning 
immoral practices, they occupy themselves in social worship by singing and making 
melody in their hearts. Pagans separated morality from religion. To Christians 
neither is possible without the other. Christian worship must be offered up in the 
beauty of holiness. Christian conduct is purified and elevated by the inspiration of 
worship. 

11. IvissprriruaL. Weare tomake melody with our “heart.” The heart stands, 
not for the feelings only nor chiefly, but generally for the inner life. Worship must 
begin here, or the richest music and the sweetest song will be an empty mockery. 
Whatever be our forms of worship, we have constantly to remember that the spiritual 
God can only be really worshipped in spirit, in inward thoughts and feelings of 
devotion. 

III. Irisemorronay. Religionisnotall feeling. It is based on convictions, and it 
develops into actions. But religion does not dispense with emotions. It touches our 
whole nature—the emotional part with the rest. It makes great use of feclings ag 


254 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. [oE. v. 1—33, 


springs of active and sympathetic influences. We oucht to cherish feelings of love and 
adoration. In worship this element of religion finds its natural scope and exercise. 

IV. Ir 18 yoyous. Instead of gloomy rites and bloody sacrifices Christians have 
music and song in their worship, They are living under a gospel and should echo back 
the glad tidings of God’s love. They are coming to a Father and should approach 
him with happy home-confidence. They are following Christ, who gives his joy to his 
people (John xv, 11). 

V. Ir 18 vocau. It begins in the heart, but it does not remain hidden there. Deep 
feeling naturally wells out in strong utterance, Religious emotion is emcouraged and 
assisted by adequate expression, Of all parts of religion thanksgiving should be least 
reserved. 

VI. Ir 18 mustoaL. “Making melody.” We cannot make the service of praise too 

“beautiful, because we should offer to God what is best in form as well as in substance, 
and because the music of song assists the feeling that it expresses. Slovenly singing 
is a mark of indifference and irreverence. 

VIL. Ir 15 conere@aTionaL. “Speaking one to another.” This is probably an 
allusion to antiphonal congregational singing, But whatever be the method adopted, 
and thouczh a choir may take its part in the service, it is plainly the intention of St. 
Paul that all the people should sing, and that thus one should exhort and encourage 
another. We cannot praise God by proxy. ᾿ 

VIII. Ir 13 apprusseD ΤῸ Gop ΙΝ ΟἬΕΒΙΒΤ. “ΤῸ the Lord.” Pliny writes how the 
Christians in his time met in the early morning to sing hymns to one Christ. We are 
not to sing simply for our own delectation or spiritual culture, or merely to attract and 
a others, but mainly as addressing God and Christ in praise and communion.— 
W. F. A. 


Ver. 20.—Thanksgiving. There are three points in this exhortation to thanksgiving 
that arrest our attention, viz. the time, the objects, and the method. 

I. THE TIME FOR THANKSGIVING. There is a time for everything. When, therc- 
fore, is thanksziving seasonable? Always. As we should pray withont ceasing by 
living in constant communication with God, so a spirit of gratitude should pervade our 
whole life and express itself by the brightness and culour that it gives to every action 
(Ps. xxxiv.1). If the context limits the application of St. Paul’s words to public 
worship (ver, 17), the breadth of their incidence is still very significant. Every Chris- 
tian assembly should be joyous with praise, in every prayer sujplication should be 
mingled with thanksgiving (Phil. iv. 6). There are times when this is difficult, e.g. in 
trouble and in moods of spiritual depression, But the difficulty would be diminished 
if we thought less of our own feelings and more of the gifts and deeds of God’s good- 
ness, Modern religion is too subjective, and therefore it fluctuates with our varying 
phases of experience. Thanksgiving should call us out of ourselves to contemplate 
and praise God, Under the darkest cloud a thankful heart will see innumerable causes 
of gratitude, But let our thanksgiving be honest. If we do not feel grateful, do not 
Ict us try to force the expression of gratitude. 

Il, Taz opsects oF THANKSGIVING. “ All things.” 1. Personal blessings. While 
we thank God for common gifts to all mankind, our gratitude would be warmer and 
more genuine if we reflected on the special proofs of his goodness in our own lives. 2. 
Fresh blessings. If thanksgiving is to be perpetual it must constantly find new food 
for gratitude, This, of all parts of worship, should not be a mere repetition of old, 
worn thoughts, Our ideas on this point are too narrowed by conventionality. If we 
are careful to say grace before meat, why should we not be equally ready to thank God 
for a good book, a cheerful visit, or a refreshing walk? 8, Things that we cannot see 
to be blessings. Gratitude for troubles is difficult to realize. It is only possible through 
faith, But if we believe that God is blessing us in them we should thank him as one 
would thank a surgeon for even amputating a limb to save his patient’s life. 

11, THe ΜΒΤΗ͂ΟΡ or THANKSGIVING, 1. It should be offered to God our Father. 
It is a direct speaking to God. As he is the Father of mercies, his fathernood should 
be the attribute that is most in our thoughts when we praise him. We are not render- 
ing adulation to a distant monarch who claims it as the condition of sparing our lives; 
we are expressing our love and genuine devotion to our Father. There should, there- 


on. v. 1—33.J THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 255 


fore, be no cringing abjectness in our worship, It should be cheerful and confident. 2. 
The thanksgiving is to be given in the Name of Ohrist ; 1.6. (1) in recognition that God’s 
blessings cume to us throuzh Christ ; and (2) as receiving and appreciating them in the 
spirit of Christ.—W. F. A. 


Vers. 22—-33.— Husbands and wives. I, CHRISTIANITY OONSECRATES AND ELEVATES 
THE UNION OF HUSBAND AND Wire. 1. Christianity sanctions marriage. St. Paul, 
though an unmarried man, casts no slight on marriage. It is true that he discourages 
it under temporary trying circumstances (1 Cor. vii. 1), but it is also true that he 
plainly teaches, not only the lawfulness, but especially the dignity of Christian marriage 
in itself. The ascetic view of celibacy as a more holy state than marriaze is not found 
in the New Testament. “ Let marriage be had in honour among all” (Heb, xiii. 4). 
2. Christianity elevates marriage, St. Paul compares it with the union of Christ with 
his Church. He does not take the marriage relation to illustrate that union—an illus- 
tration that was familiar with the prophets in explaining the relation of God to Israel. 
He makes the comparison in the opposite way, taking the union of Christ and the 
Church as the true and perfect union, and therefore as the type of what marriage 
should be, viz. (1) close union and (2) spiritual union. Further, it is to be observed 
that Christianity elevates marriage (1) by giving women a religious equality with men 
—men and women have equal privileses in the gospel; and (2) by iuculcating purity, 
justice, gentleness, and unsclfisbness, 

11. THE HIGH CHRISTIAN IDEA OF MARRIAGE LAYS GREAT RESPONSIBILITIES ON 
HUSBANDS AND Wives. Care aud effort are necessary to realize so magnificent an ideal 
as a human copy of the mystical union of Christ and the Church. Care should be 
given in particular to the following requisites:—1. Mutual symputhy. It is not right 
that husbands and wives, in dividing the home life into separate departments, should fail 
tu take interest in one another’s cares and works, The husband should show sympathy 
for the wife’s domestic hopes, and fears, and joys, and troubles, and the wile fur the 
husband’s schemes and achievements and disappointments, 2, Mutual conjidence, 
This is essential to mutual symjathy. There should be no secret between husband 
and wife. Surely it is a mistake for a husband to hide his trouble from his wife out of 
a desire to spare her pain, and equally so for the wife to do the same in regard to her 
husband. The separation thus caused is a more serious evil than the pain that is 
prevented. 3, Mutual forbearance. Each must be prepared to meet with faults in the 
other. But each would be 1655. provoked by those faults if the husband would think 
-ather of what his wife has to endure in him than of what he may be annoyed at in 
her, and if the wife would reflect in the same way on her own failings. 4, Zhe conse- 
cration of marriage through union with Christ. Such a truly Christian marriage is 
safe from shipwreck. It is sad to see how rarely the Christian idea of marriage is 
realized ; but little better can be expected till men and women are aiming throughout 
ata higher life tan what is now prevalent in society—a life of spiritual union with 
Christ. —W. F. A. 


Vers. 25—27.—Christ’s treatment of his Church. St. Paul describes Christ’s treat- 
ment of his Church as an illustration of the way in which husbands should behave to 
their wives. But that vision of the spiritual world which is the ideal of earthly mar- 
riage is so attractive that it arrests the apostle’s attention on its own account. It may 
well do the same with us. 

I. Waat Curist HAS DONE FoR THE CHURCH. We are first directed to Christ’s 
work for the Church in the past. He loved it and gave himself up for it. 1. Christ 
loved the Ohur'ch. He loved the whole world, but he had a peculiar love for those who 
trusted and obeyed him—a love like that which is between him and God, a love of 
sympathy and confidence which could not be given to the world that did not trust and 
obey him and was loved only with the love of mercy. 2. Christ loved the Church 
before the Church was worthy of his love. His love begins the process of the purifica- 
tion of the Church. He does not love because his people are huly, but he makes them 
holy because he loves them. 3. Christ’s love to his Church led him to give himself up 
for it, His love was not an idle sentiment. It inspired his sacrifice of himself. ‘That 
sacrifice, then, is the great proof of his love. By all that he suffer: he confirms his 


256 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. [cH. vr. 1—24, 


love to the Church. The language of St. Paul may seem to imply that Christ did not 
die for the whole world, but only for the Church. On the other hand, however, it is to 
be observed that St. Paul taught that Christ would ultimately gather the whole world 
into his Church (ch. i. 10). 

Il. Wuat Cunist 1s Domne To THE CHURCH. 1. He is purifying it. The spiritua.. 
baptism of the Word, 7.6. the teaching of Christian truth, is the method, But Christ is 
in the truth, and he is actively purging the souls of his people. Therefore note (1) we 
have not to wait to be pure before seeking Christ and becoming members of his Church, 
but are rather to come in our sin, repenting and desiring amendment through his grace, 
in order that, after we have come to bim, he may purify us; and (2) we shall be purified 
if we enter the Church of Christ, for Christ will not suffer us io remain in the imper- 
fect condition in which he at first admits us. The Christian life throughout is a process 
cf sanctification. 2. Christ is nourishing and cherishing his Church (ver. 29). He 
feeds his people with the bread that is his body. He watches over them and deals 
gently and kindly with them, and by his grace strengthens and advances their spiritual 
life. Thus Christ has not accomplished a finished work and sacrifice. He is now 
carrying on the double process of cleansing and nourishing the Church. 

Til. WHat Curist WILL Do WITH THE CHurcH. 1. He will make it glorious. 
Christians are not to receive bare deliverance, but joy and glory. The Church is not 
only to have blessings bestowed upon her; she is to be raised herself in holiness and 
glory. She is to be (1) “ without spot,” every stain of sin vanishing ; and (2) “ with- 
out wrinkle,” all marks of age, weariness, and trouble passing away. 2. Christ will 
present the Church to himself. He is preparing his bride for the great marriage of the 
Lamb, The end of all is that, being first redeemed by Christ and then purified and 
strengthened, Christians may be ultimately united to him in eternal blessedness.— 
W. Εν A. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER VI. 


Ver. 1.—Children, obey your parents in 
the Lord: for this is right. The first duty 
ot children is obedience, and “in the Lord,” 
z.e.in Christ, this duty is confirmed. The 
ἐν Κυρίῳ qualifies, not “ parents,” but “ obey,” 
and indicates that the element or life which 
even children lead in fellowship with Christ 
makes such obedience more easy and more 
graceful. The duty itself rests on the first 
principles of morality—“ for this is right.” 
It is an obligation that rests on the very 
nature of things, and cannot change with 
the spirit of the age; it is in no degrce 
modified by what is called the spirit of 
independence in children. 

Ver. 2.—Honour thy father and mother 
(which is the first commandment with a 
promise). The exhortation, based on natural 
morality (ver. 1), is here confirmed from 
the Decalogue. “Honour” is higher than 
obedience (ver. 1); it is the regard due to 
those who, by Divine appointment, are 
above us, and to whom our most respectful 
consideration is due. Father and mother, 
though not quite on a footing of equality in 
their relation to each other (ch. v. 22), are 
equal 88 objects of honour and obedience 
to their children. It ie assumed here that 
they are Christians; where one was a 
Christian and not the other, the duty would 
be modified. But in these succinct verses 


the apostle Jays down general rules, and 
does not complicate his exhortations with 
exceptions. The latter part of the verse 
contains a special reason for the precept; it 
is the first commandment with a promise 
attached. But obviously the apostle meant 
more than this; for as in ver. 1 he had 
affirmed the duty to be one of natural reli- 
gion, so here he means to add that it is also 
part of the revealed will of God—it is one 
of the commandments; but still further, it 
is the first commandment with a promise. 
It may, perhaps, be suid that this is appeal- 
ing, not to the higher, but to the lower part 
of our nature—to our selfishness, not our 
goodness; but it is not an appeal to one 
part of our nature to the exclusion of the 
rest; it is an appeal to our whole nature, 
for it is a part of our nature to expect that 
in the end virtue will be rewarded and vice 
punished. In the case of children it is 
difticult to look far forward; the rewards 
and the punishments, to be influential, 
must be within the ken of vision, as it 
were; therefore it is quite suitable that, in 
writing to them, the apostle should lay 
emphasis on a promise which had its speeial 
fulfilment in the life that now is. 

Ver. 3.—That it may be well with thee, 
and thou mayest live long on the earth, A 
free rendering (after the manner of the 
apostle) of the reason annexed to the fifth 
commandment, “ that thy days may be long 


cH. vi. 1—24.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 


257 


in the land which the Lord thy God giveth 
thee.” While the Decalogue was an expres- 
sion of the will of Gol on matters of moral 
and indefeasible obligation, it had a local 
Hebrew element here and there. In the 
present case the apostle drops what is 
specially Hebrew, adapting the promise in 
spirit to a wider area. The special promise 
of long life in the land of Canaan is trans- 
iated into a general promise of prospcrity 
and longevity. As before, we must not 
suppose that the apostle excludes excep- 
tions. The promise is not for each indi- 
vidual; many good and obedient children 
do not live lung. But the general tendency 
of obedience to parents is towards the results 
specified. Where obedience to parents is 
found, there is usually found along with it 
temperance, self-control, industry, regular 
ways of life, and other habits that tend 
towards prosperity and longevity. In 
Christian families there is commonly affec- 
tion, unity, prayer, mutual helpfulness, 
reliance on God, trust in Christ, and all 
that makes life sweet and wholesome. The 
spirit of the promise is realized in such 
ways, and it may be likewise in special 
mercies vouchsafed to each family. 

Ver. 4.—And, ye fathers, provoke not your 
children to wrath. “Fathers” is inclusive 
of mothers, to whom the practical adminis- 
trution of the household and training of the 
children so much belong. The first counsel 
on the subject is negative, and probably has 
respect to a common pagan habit, against 
which Christians needed to be put on their 
guard, Irritation of children was common, 
through loss of temper and violence in 
reproving them, through capricious and 
unsteady treatment and unreasonable com- 
mands; but more especially (what is still 
so common) by the parents being violently 
angry when the children, inconsiderately, 
perhaps, disturbed or annoyed them, rather 
than when they deliberately did wrong. 
All this the apostle deprecates. But bring 
them up in the training and admonition of 
the Lord. The words παιδεία and νουθεσία 
are not easily defined in this connection ; 
the former is thought to denote the dis- 
cipline of training, with its appropriate 
rewards and punishments; the latter, in- 
struction. Both are to be “of the Lord,” 
such as he inspires and approves. Instil- 
ling sound principles of life, training to 
good habits, cautioning and protecting 
against moral dangers, encouraging prayer, 
Bible-reading, church-going, sabbath-keep- 
ing; taking pains to let them have good 
associates, and especially dealing with them 
prayerfully and earnestly, in order that 
they may accept Christ as their Saviour and 
follow him,—are among the matters included 
in this counscl. ᾿ 

EPHESIANS, 


Ver. 5.—Bond-servants, obey your masters 
according to the flesh. ‘here were miny 
slaves in the early Church, but, however 
unjust their position, the apostle could not 
but counsel them to obedience, this course 
being the best for ultimately working out 
their emancipation. ‘Ihe words of Ubrist 
were peculiarly welcome to them “that 
labour and are heavy laden;” and, as we 
find from Celsus and others, the early 
Church was much ridiculed for the large 
number of uneducated persons in its pale. 
With fear and trembling. Comp. 1 Cor. ii. 
8; Phil. ii. 12, from which it will be seen 
that this expression does not denote slavish 
dread, but great moral anxiety lest one should 
fail in duty. It was probably a proverbial 
expression. In the singleness of your heart, 
as to Christ. Not with a got-up semblance 
of obedience, but with inward sincerity, 
knowing that it is your duty; and even if 
it be irksome, doing it pleasantly, as though 
Chalet required it, and you were doing it to 

im. 

Ver. 6.—Not in the spirit of eye-service, 
as men-pleasers; but as the bond-servants 
of Christ, doing the will of God from the 
heart. Exegetical of the last exhortation, 
with a negative and a positive clause, 
according to the apostle’s frequent practice 
(comp. ch. ii. 8, 19; iii. 5; iv. 14, 15, 25, 
28, 29; v. 18, 27, 29; vi. 4). Eye-service 
and men-pleasing have reference only to 
what will pass muster in the world; Chris- 
tians must go deeper, as bound to Christ’s 
service by the great claim of redemption 
(1 Cor. vi. 20), and remembering that “ man 
looketh on the outward appearance, but the 
Lord looketh on the heart” (1 Sam. xvi. 7) 
The will of God is our great standard, and 
our daily prayer is, “Thy will be done on 
earth, as it is in heaven.” In heaven it is 
done “from the heart.” 

Ver. 7.—With good will doing service, as 
to the Lord, and not to men. Some join the 
last words of the preceding verse to this 
clause, “from the heart with good will,” 
etc., on the ground that it is not needed for 
ver. 6, for if you do the will of God at all, 
you must do it from the heart. But one 
may do the will of God in a sense outwardly 
and formally, therefore the clause is not 
superfluous in ver. 6, whereas, if one does 
service with good will, ore surely does it 
from the heart, so that the clause would be 
more superfluous here. Jesus is the Over- 
lord of every earthly lord, and his follower 
has but to substitute him by faith for his 
earthly master to enable him to do service 
with good will. 

Ver. 8.—Knowing that whatsover good 
thing each man shall have done, the same 
shall he receive from the Lord, whether be 
be bond or free. The hope of reward is 

8 


THE EPISTLE TO 


THE EPHESIANS. (cH. vi. 1—24, 


brought in to supplement the more disinte- 
rested motive, such addition being specially 
useful in the case of slaves (as of children, 
vers. 2, 3). For the slave the hope of 
reward is future—it is at the Lord’s coming 
that he will have his reward. 

Ver. 9.—And, ye masters, do the same 
things to them, forbearing threatening. 
Act corresponlingly toward your slaves, 
as if the eye of Christ were on you, which 
indeed it is; if you are ever tempted to 
grind them down, or defraud, or scold 
unreasonably and make their life bitter, 
remember that there is a Master above you, 
into whose ears their ery will come. If 
they are to do service to you as to the Lord, 
you are to require service of them as if you 
were the Lord. Therefore forbear threaten- 
ing; influence them by love more than by 
fear. Knowing that both their and your 
Master is in heaven; and there is no respect 
of persons with him. Both of you stand in 
the same relation to the great Lord, who is 
in heaven and over all (comp. ch. i. 20, 21). 
Your being higher in earthly station than 
they will not procure for you any indul- 
gence or consideration. You will be judged 
simply and solely according to your deeds. 
Your responsibility to the Judge and your 
obligations to the Saviour alike bind you 
to just and merciful treatment. If such 
principles were applicable to the relations 
of enforced labour, they are certainly not 
less 80 to tle relations of labour when free. 

Vers. 10—20.—Tum CuristiAN WaAR- 
FARE. 

Ver. 10.—Finally. The apostle has now 
reached his last passage, and by this word 
quickens the attention of his readers and 
prepares them for ἃ counsel eminently 
weighty in itself, and gathering up the pith 
and marrow, as it were, of what goes before. 
“My brethren,” A.V., is rejected byR.V. and 
most modern commentators, for lack of ex- 
ternal evidence. We nvte, however, that, 
whereas in the preceding verses he had dis- 
tributed the Ephesians into groups, giving an 
appropriate counsel to each, he now brings 
them again together, and has a concluding 
counsel for them all. Be strong in the Lord, 
and in the power of his might. Compare 
with ch. iii. 16, where the heavenly provision 
for obtaining strength is specified, and with 
ch. iv. 30, where we are cautioned against a 
course that will fritt-r away that provision. 
The ever-recurring formula, “in the Lord,” 
indicates the relation to Christ in which 
alone the strength can be experienced (comp. 
2 Cor. xii. 9). The might is Christ’s, but 
by fuith it becomes our strength. As the 
steam-engine genders the dynamic force, 
which belta and wheels communicate to the 
inert machinery of the factory, so Christ is 
the source of that spiritual strengtt which 


through faith is communicated to all his 
people. To be strong is our duty; to be 
weak is our sin. Strong trust, strong 
courage, strong endurance, strong hope, 
strong love, may all be had from him, if 
only our fellowship with him be maintained 
in uninterrupted vigour. 

Ver. 11.—Put on the entire armour of 
God. Chained to a soldier, the apostle’a 
mind would go forth naturally to the sub- 
ject of armour and warfare. Put on armour, 
for life is a battle-field; not a scene of soft 
enjoyment and ease, but of hard conflict, 
with foes within and without; put on the 
armour of God, provided by him for your 
protection and for aggression too, for it is 
good, well-adapted for your use,—God has 
thought of you, and has sent his armour 
for you; put on the whole armour of God, 
for each part of you needs to be protected, 
and you need suitable weapons for assailing 
all your foes. That ye may be able to stand 
against the wiles of the devil. Our chief 
enemy dves not engage us in open warfare, 
but deals in wiles and stratagems, which 
need to be watched against and prepared. 
for with peculiar care. 

Ver. 12.—For we wrestle not against flesh 
and blood. Our conflict is not with men, 
here denoted by “ flesh and blood,” which 
is usually a symbol of weakness, thercfore 
denoting that our opponents are not weak 
mortals, but powers of a far more formidable 
order. But against the principalities, against 
the powers. The same words as in ch. i.21; 
therefore the definite article is prefixed, as 
denoting what we are already familiar with: 
for though all of these, evil as well as good, 
have been put under Christ the Head, they 
have not been put under the members, but 
the evil among them are warring against 
these members with all the greater ferocity 
that they cannot assail the Head. Against 
the world-rulers of this [state of] darkness 
(comp. ch. ii. 2). “ World-rulers” denotes 
the extent of the dominion of these invisible 
foes—the term is applied only to the rulers 
of the most widely extended tracts; thera 
is no part of the globe to which their in- 
fluence does not extend, and where their 
dark rule does not show itself (comp. Luke 
iv. 6). “This darkness” expressively de- 
notes the element and the results of their 
rule. Observe contrast with Christ’s servants, 
who are children of light, equivalent to order, 
knowledge, purity, joy, peace, etc.; while the 
element of the devil and his servants is dark- 
ness, equivalent to confusion, ignorance, crime, 
terror, strife, and all misery. Against the 
spiritual hosts of wickedness in the heavenly 
places. The natural meaning, though 
questioned by some, is, either that these 
hosts of wickedness have their residence in 
heavenly places, or, that thesa places urc 


on. vi. 1--24.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE EPEHSIANS. 


258 


the scene of our conflict with them. The 
latter seems more agreeable to the context, 
for “in heavenly places”’ does not denote a 
geographical locality here any more than in 
ch. i, 8 and ii. 6. When it is said that “we 
have been seated with Christ in heavenly 
places,” the allusion is to the spiritual ex- 
perience of his people; in spirit they are 
at the gate of heaven, where their hearts 
are full of heavenly theughts and feelings ; 
tke statement now before us is that, even 
in such places, amid their most fervent ex- 
periences or their most sublime services, 
they are subject to the attacks of the spirits 
of wickedness. 

Ver. 13.—Wherefore take up the entire 
armour of God, that ye may be able to with- 
stand ia the evil day. Some have tried to 
affix a specific time to the “evil day” of the 
apostle, as if it were one or other of the 
days specified in the Apocalypse; but more 
probably it is a general phrase, like “the 
day of adversity,” or “the day of battle,” 
indicating a day that comes often. In fact, 
any day when the evil one comes upon us 
in force is the evil day, and our ignorance 
of the time when such assault may be 
made is what makes it so necessary for us 
to be watchful. And having done all, to 
stand. “Having done fully,” or ‘“com- 
pleted,” is the literal import of κατεργασά- 
μενοι, having refercnce, not only to the 
preparation for tlie battle, but to the fighting 
too. The command to be “strong in the 
Lord” is fitly associated with our “ having 
done all,’ because leaning on almighty 
strength implies the effort to put forth 
strength by our own instrumentality; when 
God’s strength comes to us it constrains us 
“to do all” that can be done by us or 
through us (comp. Ps. cxliv. 1; Phil. ii. 
12, 13). We are not called to do merely as 
well as our neighbours; nor even to do well 
on the whole, but t6 do all—to leave nothing 
undone that can contribute to the success 
of the battle; then we shall be able to 
stand, or stand firm. 

Ver. 14.—Stand therefore, having 
about your loins with truth. The “stand” in 
ver. 13 denotes the end of the conflict; this 
“stand” is at the beginning. Obviously 
there must be a firm stand at the beginning 
if there is to be at the end. In order to 
this, we must fasten the girdle round our 
loins—viz. truth, here used in a compre- 
hensive sense, denoting honesty; sincerity 
of profession in opposition to all sham, 
levity, bypocrisy ; and likewise the element 
of “truth in Jesus” (ch. v. 21), the sub- 
stance of the gospel revelation. We are to 
gird, ourselves in truth, ἐν ἀληθείᾳ, estab- 
lishing ourselves in that element, wrapping 
it round us; ἐν ἀληθείᾳ, literally, “ girded in 
truth.” And having put on the breastplate 


of righteousness. Comp. ch. v. 24, for at 
least one element of the rightcousness— 
righteousness wrought in us by the Holy 
Ghost after the image of Christ. But a 
more comprehensive use of the term is not 
excluded—the whole righteousness that we 
derive from Christ—righteousness imputed 
and righteousness infused. 

Ver. 15.—And having shod your feet with 
the preparation of the gospel of peace, 
The metaphor hecomes somewhat difficult 
to follow; the feet have to be shod or armed 
as with military sandals, and the sandal is 
the ἑτοιμασία, or preparedness of, or caused 
by, the gospel of peace. The idea seema 
to be that the mind is to be steadied, 
kept from fear and flutter, by means of the 
good news of peace—the good news that we 
are at peace with God; and “if God be for 
us, who can be against us?” The Roman 
sandal was furnished with nails that gripped 
the ground firmly, even when it was sloping 
or slippery; so the good news of peace 
keeps us upright and firm. 

Ver. 16.—Withal taking up the shield of 
faith. The θυξεός was a large oblong shield 
covering a great part of the body, not the 
ἀσπίς, smaller and more round. Faith, in 
its widest sense, constitutes this shield — 
faith in God as our Father, in Christ as our 
Redeemer, in the Spirit as our Sanctificr 
and Strengthener—faith in all the promises, 
and especially such promises as we find in 
Rev. ii. and iii. “to him that overcometh” 
(comp. promise to Ephesus, Rev. ii. 7). 
Wherewith ye shall be able to quench all 
the fiery darts of the evil one. “Fiery 
darts” were weapons tipped with inflam- 
mable materials, firebrands, curiously con- 
structed, adapted to set on fire. Metaphori- 
cally, considerations darted into the mind 
inflaming lust, pride, revenge, or other evil 
feelings, emanations from the great tempter, 
the evil one. That such considerations 
sometimes start up suddenly in the mind, 
against the deliberate desire, sometimes 
even in the middle of holy exercises, is the 
painful experience of every Christian, and 
must make him thankful for the shield on 
which they are quenched. An act of faith 
on Christ, placiug the soul consciously in 
his presence, recalling his atoning love and 
grace, and the promises of the Spirit, will 
extinguish these fiery temptations. 

Ver. 17.—And take the helmet of salva- 
tion. This is the head-covering (comp. Ps. 
oxl. 7). In 1 Thess. v. 8 we read, “ putting 
on for an helmet the hope of salvation.” 
The glorious truth that we are saved (comp. 
ch. ii. 5, 8) appropriated, rested on, rejoiced 
in, will protect even so vital a part as the 
head, will keep us from intellectual surren- 
der and rationalistic doubt. And the sword 
of the Spirit, which is the Word of God. The 


260 


THE EPISTLE TO TUE EPHESIANS. 


(ou. vx. 1—24, 


sword supplied by the Spirit, the Word being 
inspired by him, and employed by the Spirit ; 
for he enlightens us to know it, applies it to 
us, and teaches us to use it both defensively 
and offensively. Our Lord in his conflict 
with Satan, and also with the scribes and 
Pharisees, has taught us how this weapon 
is to be used, and with what wonderful 
effect. Paul, too, reasoning from the Scrip- 
tures and proving from them “that this 
Jesus whom I preach unto you is the 
Christ,” or (going back to the Old Testa- 
ment) the author vf the hundred and nine- 
teenth psalm, showing us how the soul is to 
be fed, quickened, strengthened and com- 
forted out of God’s Law, indicates the mani- 
fold use of the sword, and shows how earn- 
estly we should study and practice this 
sword exercise, for our own good and the 
good of others. 

Ver. 18.—With all prayer and supplica- 
tion praying. The metaphor of armour is 
now dropped, but not the idea of the con- 
flict, for what is now insisted on is of the 
most vital importance for successful warfare. 
Though prayer is virtually comprehended in 
most of the previous exhortations, it is now 
specifically enjoined, and in a great variety 
of ways; “all prayer and supplication,” 
equivalent to every form of it, e.g. ejacula- 
tory, secret, spoken, domestic, social, con- 
gregational. At all seasons. No period of 
life should be without it—youth, middle 
life, old age, all demand it; no condition of 
life—ad versity, prosperity, sunshine, desola- 
tion, under sore temptation, under important 
duty, under heavy trial, under all the 
changing circumstances of life, personal, 
social, Christian. See the hymn— 


“Go, when the morning shineth; 

Go, when the noon is bright; 
Go, when the day declineth ; 
Go, in the bush of night.” 


In the Spirit; for true prayer is spiritual, 
and it is not true prayer unless by the Holy 
Spirit the heart is filled with heavenward 
longings and aspirations, changing our 
prayer from cold form to heartfelt realities, 
The ordinary habit of the soul should be 
prayerful, realizing the presence of God and 
looking for his grace and guidance. And 
watching thereunto; that is, “towards” 
spirituality, against formality, as also against 
forgetfulness and neglect of prayer. Perhaps 
also the idea of watching for the answer is 
involved, as you wait for on answer when 
you have despatched a letter. In all perse- 
verance; this being very specially needed to 
meke prayer triumphant, as in the case of 
the Syro-phoenician mother, or in that of 
Monica, mother of Augustine, and many 
more. And prayer for all saints; this being 
one of the great objects for which saints are 


gathcred into the “one body” the Church. 
that they may be upheld and carried on, in 
warfare and in work, by mutual prayer, kept 
from slips and infirmities, and from deadly 
sins, and enabled one and all to “walk 
worthy of the vocation wherewith they are 
cvalled.” 

Ver. 19.—And for me. Mark the un- 
priestly idea; so far from Paul having a 
store of grace for all the Galatians, he needed 
their prayers that, out of the one living store, 
the needful grace might be given to him. That 
utterance may be given to me, in the opening 
of my mouth, to make known with boldness 
the mystery of the gospel. With all his 
practice in preaching, he felt that every 
instance of right utterance was a gift—* may 
be given to me;” especially when great 
matters were involved—“ in the opening of 
my mouth.” To open the mouth denotes an 
authoritative act of teaching (comp. Matt. 
v. 2); on such occasions he especially desired 
boldness, not stormy vehemence, but earnest- 
ness, fearlessness in making known the 
destination of the gospel, once secret, now 
designed for all (comp. ch. ii.). Boldness 
was needed because the message was so hate- 
ful to some and so contemptible to others. 

Ver. 20.—For which I am an ambassador 
in chains, Thereby not only physically 
helpless, but in danger of being subdued 
into tameness, the ordinary effect of captivity, 
and thus reduced to aspirit not befitting the 
bearer of a great message from the King of 
kings. That in it—ie. in the matter of it, 
of the gospel—I may speak boldly, as I 
ought to speak, 

Vers. 21, 22.—Mission or Tycutovs, 

Ver. 21.—But that ye also may know my 
affairs, how 1 do. Having referred to his 
captivity, he thought it natural for the Ephe- 
sians to desire more information about him, 
how he did or fared in his captivity. Tychi- 
ous, the beloved brother and faithful minis- 
ter in the Lord. Nothing more is known of 
him than that (with Trophimus) he was a 
inan of Asia (Acts xx. 4), who accompanied 
Paul when travelling from Macedonia to 
Asia, and was sent by him to various 
Churches (Col. iv. 7; 2 Tim. iv. 12; Titus 
iii. 12). The two qualities by which he is 
noted, lovableness and fidelity, have not only 
served to embalm his name, but show that 
he had much of Paul’s own character. Shall 
make known to you all things. 

Ver. 22.—Whom I have sent unto you for 
this very purpose, that ye may know our 
state, and that he may comfort your hearts. 
This serves to explain the absence of per- 
sonal remembrances, allusions, and messages 
in the Epistle. Tychicus, who had his full 
confidence, would tell them all by word of 
mouth. The concluding words show that it 
was not to gratify any mere personal feeling 


cH. vi. 1—24.] 


THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 


261 


that Paul directed Tychicus to make this 
communication; but knowing how much 
they felt for him, he believed it would bea 
comfort to hear how he fared. To pagans 
the idea of captivity was always dolorous 
and dreadful; it was well for them to learn 
how Christians could glory in tribulations 
(Rom. v. 8). Tychicus, the beloved brother, 
was evidently well fitted to apply to the 
Ephesians this comforting view of his state. 

Vers. 23, 24.—CLosina BENEDIOTION. 

Ver. 23.—Peace be to the brethren. There 
is a double invocation of blessing—to the 
brethren, and to all that love the Lord. 
“The brethren” must mean the members of 
the Church addressed, with special reference 
to the amalgamation in one body of Jews 
and Gentiles, or to the one family (ch. iii. 
15) in which they were brethren. Peace is 
the echo of ch. i. 2, and denotes the apostle’s 
desire for the continuance among them of 
the peace with God to which they had been 
admitted, as well as the prevalence of peace 
in every sense of the word. And love with 
faith. “Love” in the widest sense (ch. iii. 
17, 19)—the love of Christ to them, their love 
to Christ, and their love to one another; and 


love is coupled with faith, because faith is 
the companion of love, they are in the closest 
relation to each other. Faith in Christ 
receives him as he is offcred, in all his love 
and goodness; it sees his lcving face, and is 
changed into the same image. From God 
Aad Father and the Lord Jesus Christ (comp. 
ch. i. 2). 

Ver. 24.—Grace be with all them that love 
our Lord Jesus Christ in incorruptibility. 
As grace was the first word, so it is the 
last (comp. ch. i. 2), not as denoting any- 
thing essentially different from the blessings 
invoked in the preceding verse, but for 
varicty, and in order that the favourite word 
may be, both here and before, in the place 
of prominence. The expression is peculiar— 
love the Lord Jesus Christ ἐν ἀκαθαρσίᾳ. 
The word denotes, especially in Paul’s 
usage, what is unfading and permanent. 
The love that marks genuine Christians is 
not a passing gleam, like the morning cloud 
and the early dew, but an abiding emotion. 
Nowhere can we have ἃ more vivid idea of 
this incorruptible love than in the closing 
verses of Rom. viii., “I am persuaded that 
neither death nor life,” ete. 


HOMILETICS, 


Vers. 1—4.—Duties of children and parents. It must have been an interesting day 
in the Church of Ephesus when it was known that a pastoral letter would be read in 
the public assembly from the beloved and venerable apostle whose labours had been 
attended with such a blessing. Whether the meeting was held in early morning or 
late in the evening, every effort would be made by every Christian to be present, and 
even as they were walking towards the place of meeting, a certain briskness of manner 
and eagerness of expression would show that something beyond the common was in 
expectation. Those who had to pass the great temple of Diana would cast no lingering 
look behind, nor think of the contrast between that magnificent shrine of idolatry 
and the very humble building where the true God was worshipped, by whom all 
things were made. Even the children would not linger to peep at the gorgeous glory 
of the temple, for their parents would have told them that at their meeting a letter 
was going to be read from the great apostle, now unable to come to them because 
wicked men had imprisoned him, but still remembering them all, as his letter would 
show. Remembering the interest which, like his Master, the apostle had taken in the 
young, it would be an interesting question whether the letter to be read would not 
contain some passage for them, and, if it did, what would be its tenor? Perhaps the 
most attentive of them would be beginning to feel weary as five-sixths of the letter 
was read, but no word yet for them. But at last the message comes; and when it 
comes it appears that it is not only about them, but addressed to them ; the apostle 
looks them full in the face, and says, “Children.” And when the children’s morsel is 
brought out, it is perhaps not quite what they expected. It is not a sugared morsel, 
nor is it particularly affectionate in its terms. It is not a nice little story or a poetical 
allegory, carrying them to the realms of dreamland; it is just a simple, practical 
requirement—* Children, obey your parents in the Lord.” Possibly even the older 
hearers were rather surprised, and certainly there are many now who would have 
expected a more spiritual counsel. They would have expected him to say something to 
the children about Jesus, or about prayer, or about trying to teach the heathen around 
them; but he speaks on none of these things. He probably counted that, if ths 

- ~ children were right with their parents, other things would follow; if they obeyed their 


262 TUE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. [cu. νι. 1—24 


parciits, and their parents brought them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, 
God’s blessing would rest on their efforts and all would be well. But if the apostle 
did not speak to children in the modern fashivn, it is all the more important to notice 
and ponder the message which he actually gives them. 

I. Dury oF cHitpren. 1. Zo obey. 2. 10 honour their parents, The reasons are— 
(1) itis right ; (2) it is a commandment; (3) it is the first of the commandments 
with a promise; (4) that promise gives expectation of long life and prosperity. In 
one of the best books of the early Church, written by one of its greatest men—‘ The 
Confessions’ of St. Augustine—there is a chapter in which he humbly confesses his 
disobedience as a boy, in neglecting his lessons, and going to see games and sights in 
opposition to the wishes of his parents, Long after, when he came to be a Christian, 
the thought haunted and distressed him until, confessing it, and laying it on Jesus, he 
obtained the mercy and forgiveness of God. Long life among the Jews was a token of 
the Divine favour, and it seems to have been an emblem of the life to come. We need 
not count in all cases on a literal fulfilment of the Jewish promise; but we may rest 
assured that a spirit of honour to our parents tends to make our earthly lot better and 
brighter, and will have some recognition likewise in the life that is to come, 

II. Dury or parents. 1. Negatively. Not to provoke or irritate their children. 
But: 2. Positively, to bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. In 
the Old Testament, Samuel, and in the New Testament, Timothy, are samples of 
children so brought up. The Lord’s command is, “Bring up this child for me, and 
I will pay thee thy wages.” What infinitely precious results depend on the execution 
of these two precepts! Every well-trained Christian household is a nursery of all that 
tends to bless the world; while disorderly and unchristian families are hotbeds of vice 
andevil. The prayer of the hundred and forty-fourth psalm is never out of date: 
“That our sons may be as plants grown up in their youth; our daughters as corner- 
stones, polished after the similitude of a palace... . Happy is that people that is in 
such a case; yea, happy is that people whose God is the Lord.” 


Vers, 5—9.—Duties of servants and masters. I. Duty oF seRvaNTs. Recognized 
as constituent. members of the Church, and, however little esteemed by man, as greatly 
regarded by God. In Christ all are brethren, for all are brothers of Christ, therefore of 
one another. 1. V’he duty of servants is obedience. Qualities of the obedience. 
(1) With fear and trembling (see Exposition); (2) in singleness of heart; (8) as unto 
Christ and not to men; (4) not with eye-service, but as servants of Christ; (5) doing 
the will of God from the heart; (6) with good will, 2. The réward of good service. 
Whatsoever good you do, you shall receive of the Lord; he will repay you. We are 
apt to be jealous of this doctrine. It seems to undermine free grace. But no; 
salvation is wholly of grace; but one feature of grace is that, when you receive it and 
act on it, it begets, as it were, another gift of grace. If by grace the servant obey in 
the Lord, a further act of grace will follow; the obedience rendered will be rewarded 
and blessed. Better this surely than any amount of earthly reward! “God is not 
unrighteous to forget ” the faithful work of those who remember him above all other. 

11. Dury or masters. (1) Do the same things to them, observe their rights and do 
as you would be done by ; (2) forbear threatening. Reasons for this. (a) Yuu havea 
Master also, One in heaven, who oversees all you do; (0) there is no respect of persons 
with him. One of the great problems of the day is how to impregnate the relations of 
master and servant with the Christian spirit, and carry into effect the aim of such passages 
as this. We do not refer particularly to domestic service, for a servant, by entering a 
house, becomes in a sense a member of the family, and is thereby bound to fall in with the 
family order. The difficulty lies mainly with the case of large bodies of men working 
under a single employer. The problem is too intricate to be discussed here. But both 
masters and men necd to beware of offending Christ by a bitter and unreasonable spirit. 
Occasions for glorifying God by the manifestation of a noble Christian spirit may 
become occasions for letting out the selfishness of the carnal heart. Yet, complicated 
though the question is, it is probable that the true solution would be reached by all 
Christian men if the spirit of this text were carried out, if both masters and men 
tried to do all as to the Lord and not to men, and to esteem his approval the very 
highest reward to which they could look. 


oH, Vi. L—24.] THE-EPIS'TLE TO THE EPHESIANS, 263 


Vers, 10—20.—The Christian warfare. Even in common parlance we speak of 
“the battle of life.” Even for ordinary purposes we have to fight against indolence, 
evil lusts, dishonest tendencies, and many other things in ourselves; and against 
opposition, ill treatment, temptation on the part of others, and the depressing effects 
of trial and disappointment. All hard work is a fight; we have to fight against the 
sense of monotony, against the feeling of weariness, against the longing for ease; and 
when we are sick, or feeble, or depressed, it is often hard to hold on the straight path 
of hard duty and turn away from the allurements of pleasure. The ring of the 
hammer, the blow of the shuttle, the housewife’s active step from dawn to dewy eve, 
often tell of battles and victories in quiet spheres, that without the éclat have much 
more real glory than ordinary wars. But much more is the Christian life a battle. 
The chief enemies here are unseen. It is impossible to pursue an aimless, careless life 
and be a Christian. “If any man will come after me,” said Christ, “let him deny 
himself, and take up his cross and follow me.” Not only to be a Christian, but such 
a Christian as this Epistle delineates ; to walk worthy of the vocation with which we 
are called ; to be ever reaching forth toward the measure of the stature of the fulness 
of Christ; to be growing up into Christ toward that condition in which we shall be 
without spot or wrinkle or ariy such thing; to be advancing thus in spite of hosts of 
spiritual foes, working unseen, sapping and mining our Christian life, trying to entangle 
and enslave us in every way ;—this can be no easy task; it is a veritable battle, 
demanding constant vigilance and incessant care. It may seem strange that we should 
be exposed tv such enemies. Is not our blessed Lord exalted far above all principality 
and power and every name that is named, not only in this world, but also in that which 
is tocome? Has he not spoiled principalities and powers, making a show of them 
openly ? Is he not Head overall things to his Church ? Why, then, does he not crush 
all her foes? Doubtless because he has purposes of discipline to carry out in connection 
with these enemies, because, while he is willing to fight in and through his people, he 
does not see it right to crush his foes without their instrumentality ; in this way habits 
of vigilance and prayer and activity must be kept up by them ; but all the greater will 
be their joy when at last the victory is gained, and they get the reward of “him that 
overcometh.” In the Middle Ages, certain coarse means were employed to arrest 
attention to the formidable foes that beset the Christian soldier. Frescoes were painted 
on the walls of churches and other ecclesiastical buildings, representing souls which 
were sometimes seen coming out of dying bodies, while angels on the one side, and 
devils on the other, were striving to get them. The devils were grotesque, hideous, 
revolting monsters, more absurd than terrible, It was the way of that age to embody 
truths which in our material age are apt to be thought as ridiculous as the demons of 
the Italian frescoes. But there are spirits of evil hovering about us, trying to obscure 
and pervert the truth, to blind us to the fruits of sin, to dazzle our eyes with the glory 
of earth, to entangle us in subtle temptations, to fill our minds with doubts and fears 
and evil forebudings, luring us to the edge of the precipice, and ready, if they should 
get their way, to burst into their bitter scornful_laugh, as they behold us, through their 
wiles, weltering in the gulf of despair. Letusobserve: 1. The true Source of strength: 
“ΤῊ the Lord” (ver. 10). 2. The true armour to seek, ‘The whole armour of God” 
(ver.11). 8. The true enemies tobe overcome. (Vers. 11,12.) “The wiles of the devil,” 
and other unseen spiritual foes. 4. Zhe true employment and attitude of the Christian 
warrior: “ Withstand ...and stand” (ver. 18). 5. The various picces of the armour, 
and their use. (Vers. 14—18.) “Who is she that looketh forth as the morning, fair 
as the moon, clear as the sun, and terrible as an army with banners?” An army 
consists of men who not only have armour, but have been trained to use it. An 
unarmed army can only be food for the enemy’s artillery, material for a dreadful 
massacre. Let professing Christians see that they are armed, and that they are 
making a good use of their armour. Nature cries out for an easy life, for a truce with 
the world, the devil, and the flesh. In this sense our motto must be war, not peace ; 
for in this sense Christ came, not to send peace on earth, but a sword. 


Vers. 18—20.—" Praying always.” Here is a part of the Christian’s armour which 
had nothing corresponding to it in the panoply of the Roman soldier. Prayer comes in 
without any figure. We are taught that, even when every spiritual weapon is prepared 


264 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. (cx. νι. 1—24 


and directed against the spiritual foe, all is in vain without a direct appeal to God. 
When Jacob, looking for an attack by Esau, had completed his arrangements of his 
family and flocks, the most important part of his preparations remained—another 
warfare had to be carried on, he must wrestle with the angel for his blessing. So in 
the Christian conflict, even when the loins are girt with truth, the heart protected by 
the breastplate of righteousness, the feet shod with peace, the head crowned with the 
helmet of salvation, the person protected by the shield of faith, and when the hands 
are grasping and wielding the sword of the Spirit, there is another duty which is quite 
indispensable—prayer : “ Praying always with all prayer,” etc. This is in accordance 
with the whole tenor of the Bible: Enoch, walking with God; Abraham, interceding 
for Sodom; Moses, pleading on the mountain; Elijah, praying for rain; David, 
Hezekiah, Daniel, Simeon, Anna, our blessed Lord in Gethsemane,—all show us that 
fighting men ought always to pray and not to faint. The soul is thus strengthened 
and encouraged; it reaches the promises and rests on them; it feels that God is with it ; 
“ They that wait on the Lord renew their strength; they mount up with wings as 
eagles; they run, and are not weary; they walk, and are not faint.” The prayer required 
is marked by six features. 1. Manifold. With all prayer and supplication ; all kinds— 
secret, ejaculatory, domestic, social, public. 2. Imcessant. At all seasons: (1) at all 
times or periods of life, youth, manhood, age; (2) in connection with every employment, 
recreation, trial, mercy, undertaking, both great and small; (3) as a constant habit of 
the spirit, thinking on God, depending on him, working for him. 8. Spiritual. “In 
the Spirit”—in dependence on his aid and inspiring power, in opposition to the mere 
form or rhyming of “ pater nosters.” 4, Watcrful. (See Exposition.) 5. Persevering 
(see Exposition). 6. Comprehensive, ‘For all saints,” and especially for God’s 
servants in the gospel, the men who are bearing the burden and heat of the battle. 
Men may ridicule prayer; they may scoff at a praying man, a praying family, 
ἃ praying nation ; but the spectacle is really sublime. When Pére Hyacinthe, lecturing 
on the public immorality of his country, made the aisles of Notre Dame ring with his 
eloquence, he did not find cause to scoff at prayer. He said that it moved him to find 
England and the United States not ashamed to pray in the time of calamity, and to 
give thanks in the hour of deliverance. God, after all, is the Ruler among the nations, 
and his rule of good will stand true. “Them that honour me I will honour, but they 
that despise me shall be lightly esteemed.” 


Vers. 21, 22.—Tychicus. Many honourable men in the Bible have short biographies, 
but they are very expressive. Nothing else is known of Tychicus except that he was 
aman of Asia. But we see here that: 1. He devoted himself to the service of Christ 
(ver. 21). 2. He was faithfui im that service. 38. He was the fellow-labourer of other 
devoted men. 4. By his loving spirit he secured their love. 5. He was sympathetic, 
friendly, tender-hearted, suitable to be employed on a mission of comfort (ver. 22). 
6. His memory continues embalmed and fragrant for these two qualities—fidelity to 
his master, and kindly sympathy for his brother men. His short biography is full of 
instruction for the servants of Christ. He was unselfish, unworldly, unambitious; it 
were a blessing for the Church if the rank-and-file of its undistinguished ministers and 
other workers were like him. After all, few inscriptions on a tombstone would be 
more to be desired by the minister of Christ than this: “‘He served his Master and he 
loved his brethren.” 


᾿ Vers. 28, 24.—The benediction. The last drops of the Epistle are of the dew of 
eaven. 

I, THE BENEDICTION FOR THE BRETHREN. 1. Its substance. (1) Peace, (2) Love. 
(83) Faith. 2. Its source. “God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.” 

II, THE BENEDICTION FOR THE WHOLE CHURCH. Grace, sum and substance of the 
Epistle—“ the Epistle of grace.” With that he began, with that he ends. But the 
word is much richer after the exposition of the Epistle. It has been connected with 
two eternities, past and future, And with the infinity of the three-one God, Father, 
Son, aud Holy Ghost, the soul of the reader has been exercised and expanded to its 
utmost stretch, in trying to comprehend it; but it is incomprehensible. And now, 
with all, this added fulness of meaning, it falls on the head of all that love the Lord 


OH. vt. 1-24.) THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 208 


Jesus in incorruptibility. This treasure, multiplied, deepened, lengthened, heightened 
to infinity, I invoke on you, says the apostle, in the Name of God. Blessed privilege 
of the minister who can do so. Deep responsibility of the people to whom it is 
done. Great importance of the closing benediction in public service; tendency to think 
of it asa mere closing form. It contains the very essence of all blessing. Let it be 
eaceived reverently, pondered seriously, accepted joyously. 


HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 


Vers. 1—3.—The duties of children to parents. There is a beautiful and appro- 
priate simplicity in the counsel here addressed to children. Their duties are founded in 
nature. ‘lhey derive their being from their parents; they are fed by them; they are 
trained by them for the duties of life. 

I. THEIR DUTY 18 SUMMED UP IN THE ONE WORD “OBEDIENCE.” But it includes four 
important elements. 1. Love. This is au instinctive feeling, but it is not the less a 
commanded duty, for it is the spring of all hearty obedience. It makes obedience easy. 
Yet we are not to love our parents more than the Lord; we are rather to love them in 
the Lord. 2. Honour. This is only another form of obedience: “ Honour thy father 
and thy mother.” Children are never to set light by their parents (Deut. xxvii. 17); “A 
son honoureth his father” (Mal. i. 6); ‘‘Thou shalt rise up before the hoary head, and 
honour the face of the old man” (Lev. xix. 32). God has, indeed, given his own 
honour to parents. We may not always be called to obey them, but we are always tu 
honour them. ‘“ Hearken unto thy father that begat thee, and despise not thy mother 
when she is old” (Prov. xxiii. 22). This honour is allied to reverence: “‘ We have had 
fathers of our flesh who corrected us, and we gave them reverence” (Heb. xii. 9). 
3. Gratitude. It is our duty to requite our parents (1 Tim. v. 4), and our Lord 
implies that we are to do them good (Matt. xv. 4). We ought to remember their love, 
their care, their concern for us. Joseph provided for his father Jacob in old age, and 
the women said to Naomi of Boaz, “He shall be unto thee a restorer of thy life, and 
a nourisher of thine old age.” 4, Subjection. “Children, obey your parents in all 
things ;” that is, in all things falling within the sphere of a parent’s authority. If 
parents command their children to steal, or lie, or commit idolatry, they are not to 
be obeyed. They are to be obeyed “in the Lord.” There are several reasons to 
make obedience natural. (1) Parents know more than their children; therefore “a wise 
son heareth his father’s instruction ” (Prov. xiii. 1). The child must take much of his 
knowledge for granted on the mere authority of his father. (2) The habit of obedience 
is good as a discipline, It is even good for the health of a child, as a desultory 
and dawdling obedience breaks its temper and injures its health. (8) Children are not 
able to guide themselves ; for ‘folly is bound up in the heart of a child ” (Prov. xxii. 15). 
(4) Society is benefited by the due subordination of family life. 

II. THE REASON OF OBEDIENCE ASSIGNED IN THIS PASSAGE 18 SIMPLY “ FOR THIS 18 
Riau.” It is right (1) according to the light of nature ; (2) according to the Law of God. 
“Tt is well-pleasing unto the Lord” (Col. iii. 20). It is embodied in the Decalogue, 
and holds the first place among the duties of the second table, and “is the first command- 
ment with promise ”—the promise of a long life. This implies (1) that the fifth com- 
mandment is still binding on the Christians of this dispensation ; (2) that long life is to 
be desired ; (8) that disobedience to parents tends to shorten life. There may be 
undutiful children who live to old age, and dutiful children who die young, but the 
promise abides in its general purpose. It is like the saying, “The hand of the diligent 
maketh rich,” yet diligent persons have felt the bitterness of poverty. Children are 
therefore justified in having regard firstly to the command of God, and then to the 
recompense of the reward.—T. Ο, 


Ver. 4.—Duttes of parents. They are here summarily expressed, first in a negative 
and then in a positive form. 

I, THERE MUST BE INSTRUCTION. “Train up a child in the way he should go.” 
Parents must not suffer them to grow up without instruction, as Rousseau suggested, 
because not to teach religion is to teach impiety and infidelity ; not to teach truth is te 


266 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. fou. v1. 1—24, 


teacherror. 1, In what principles? (1) In the principles of the Divine Word, which are 
able to make the youngest “ wise unto salvation” (2 ‘lim. iii. 15). “‘ Desire the sincere 
milk of the Word, that ye may grow thereby” (1 Pet. ii. 2). This is counsel for babes, 
(2) Teach them they are sinners, (9) Lead them to Christ as the Saviour, and pray 
that the Lord may place his hands of power and blessing upon the little ones, as he did 
when on earth. (4) Train them in habits of piety, church-going, and religious action. 
2. In what manner? (1) Early, like Timothy; (2) gradually (Deut. vi. 6—9); (8) 

atiently (Deut. vi. 20—23); (4) lovingly ; (5) by example—your own example, and 
Roriptore examples; (6) prayerfully. 

Il. Tuer Must BE DiscrpLine. 1. Children soon manifest a corrupt and_ selfish 
nature, for folly is bound up in their hearts; therefore they need correction (Heb. xii. 
9). 2. Parents must isolate them by their personal authority from evil or evil com- 
panions or temptations to evil. 3. Parents must use discipline with due discretion ; 
they must not “provoke their children to wrath, lest they be discouraged” (1) by 
unreasonable commands; (2) by undue severity; (3) by exhibitions of anger. 

III. ENcouRAGEMENTS OR MOTIVES TO THE FAITHFUL DISCHARGE OF PARENTAL 
pouty. 1. The promise: “Train up a child in the way he should go, and when he is 
old he will not depart from it” (Prov. xxii. 6), 2. We shall have the interests οἱ 
eternity secured early in life. 3,.-We shall thus restrain them from many follies and 
sinful habits which would otherwise be the burden and curse of their after life. 4. We 
shall be promoting our own happiness and comfort in old age. ὅ. We shall be shaping 
the destinies of future generations.—T. C. 


Vers. 5—8.— Duties of servants. It is interesting to reflect that the New Testament 
devotes more space to the instruction of servants than to the instruction of either 
parents or children, husbands or wives. The servants, or rather slaves, were a large 
and interesting class in the cities of Asia Minor, often greatly more numerous than 
freemen, and very many of them had embraced the gospel with great heartiness. There 
were obvious reasons for a studious minuteness in the counsels given to such a class. 

I. THEIR DUTY I8 BUMMED UP IN THE SINGLE WORD “OBEDIENCE.” Christianity 
does not rudely strike at existing relations in life, but seeks to improve and sanctify 
them. In its appeals to slaves as well as to masters, it sowed the seed-corn, small as a 
grain of mustard seed, which grew into a harvest of emancipation in the ages which 
were tosee the full power of the gospel. Obedience was therefore the duty of slaves, or 
servants, “in all things” (Col. iii. 22), that is, in all things included within the 
sphere of a master’s rightful authority, not contrary to the Law of God, or the gospel of 
Christ, or the dictates of conscience. It is set forth first in a negative, then in a positive 
form, 1. Negatively. ‘ Not with eye-service, as men-pleasers.” This word is coined by 
the apostle for the occasion, Eye-service is eitlier work done only to please the eye, 
but which cannot bear to be tested, or it may be good work done only when the 
master’s eye is upon the worker. ‘This was a vice peculiar to slavery. But it enters 
into all forms of service. Dishonest work is to be avoided quite as much as dishonest 
words. An acted lie is as dishonourable asa spoken one. There must be no mere per- 
functory discharge of human duties. 2. Positively. (1) “ With fear and trembling.” 
Not from regard to the lash of the master, but with an anxious and tremulous desire to 
do our duty thoroughly. Obedience is to be yielded “ with all fear " (1 Pet. ii. 18), that 
is, with the fear of incurring the just rebukes of their masters, and “as fearing God ” 
(Col. iii. 22). (2) “In singleness of heart, as unto Christ.” In simplicity and sincerity 
of spirit, without dissimulation or hypocrisy. There is a great temptation to duplicity 
in tbose subjected to another’s will, especially if the service is irksome or unreasonable. 
Lei there be a single desire to do your duty. (8) “ With good-will doing service,” not 
grudgingly, or murmuringly, or by constraint, but with cheerfulness and alacrity, 
“seeking to please them well in all things,” that they may obtain their good will 
(Titus ii. 9). 

IL THE MOTIVES TO sUCH OBEDIENCE. 1, The command of God here addressed ta 
all servants. 2. The Lord’s mastership, for they are “the servants of Christ,” and are 
“doing service as to the Lord, and not to men.” Here is the constraining force of the 
Lord’s love. How this motive sweetens, sanctifies, ennobles work! The work is done, 
not for wages, not by constraint, but “unto the Lord,” and thercfore becomes part cf 


cu, WL 1—24.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, 267 


our worship. It is thus that the Lord has married the work of earth to the worship of 
heaven, 3, The rewards of this service : “ Knowing that whatsoever good thing any 
man doeth, the same shall he receive,. . . whether he be bond or free.” Whatever disap- 
pointment may mix itself with the service of men, the Lord will have a rich reward 
in store for the faithful worker. He is not unrighteous to forget your labour of love, 
for “of the Lord ye shall receive the reward of the inheritance” (Col. iii. 24). 4. 
The honour of the gospel. His Name and his doctrine will be blasphemed by a con- 
trary spirit (1 Tim. vi. 1; Titus 11. 10). 5. The example of Christ himself. He 
“took upon him the form of a servant ;” for “he came not to be ministered unto, but 
to minister.” He always did the things which pleased God, and has set us an example 
that we should follow in his steps.—T. C. 


Ver. 9.—The duties of masters. They needed to be instructed as well as their 
servants; for they had irresponsible power in their hands, and might be led to use it 
severely or cruelly. 

I. THEIR DUTIES WERE REOIPROOAL. They were “to do the same things unto them ” 
—not the same duties as servants were bound to do, but after the same manner, in 
obedience to God’s command, with the same singleness of heart, and with the same 
heartiness and good will. They were togive their servants what “ was just and equal.” 
They were to treat them with justice and equity, with a full recognition of their rights. 
The apostle, however, demands something more than just treatment; masters are to 
forbear the threatening which was a too familiar feature of slavery. They are not to 
rule them with rigour or harshness, or even with displays of temper, but with gentle- 
ness, moderation, and kindness, 

Il. THE ARGUMENT TO ENFORCE THE DUTIES OF MasTERS. “ Your Master also is in 
heaven; neither is there respect of persons with him.” He is the Judge of master and 
servant alike, and will not respect either of them on account of their station in life, but 
will reward them justly according to their works. Both masters and servants, therefore, 
cught to have an eye to the presence of their great Master in heaven, ought to seek his 
glory, and pray for his assistance and acceptance.—T. OC. 


Ver. 10.—The secret of spiritual strength. This strength is needed under all the 
burdéns, in all the conflicts and temptations of life, beneath its sorrows and its cares— 
strength of heart, strength of purpose, strength of will 

I, “Bg stxona.” This is a strange command, just as strange as it would be for a 
physician to say to a weak man, “Be strong.” It is like the command, “ Rejoice in 
the Lord;” but it seems more difficult by any volition of our own to add to our 
strength than to add to our joy. Yet, as we can do much to rezulate our emotions by 
determining what set of thoughts shall engage us, we can equally provide for an 
increase in our strength by a direct recourse to the secret and source of it. Our 
obedience to this command stands on the same footing as our obedience to God’s other 
commandments; and if we continue to be weak, it is more than our misfortune, it is 
our fault. But there is nothing strange when we consider the secret of the origin 
of this strength. Weare conscious of a sense of feebleness, of heartlessness, of hopeless- 
ness, which of itself goes far to disqualify us for duty, and gives us up an easy prey 
to the adversary οὗ souls.. It is to meet this want that God reveals himself to us as the 
great Giver of strength. ‘ 

11. “ΒΕ strone ΙΝ THE LorD, AND IN THE POWER OF HIS MIGHT.” The strength 
poured into us is strength in Christ, springing out of a realizing apprehension of the 
continued presence, love, and help of the Redeemer. “ My strength shall be made per- 
fect in weakness.” A fly is able to walk upon the ceiling of aroom. ‘The cause is to 
be found in the vacuum in its webbed foot caused by its very weight, and it is thus 
enabled to hold on by the smooth surface of the ceiling. So our safety lies likewise in 
our emptiness, The soldier fights-with greater confidence when he is led by a general 
who has been always successful, Wellington calculated the presence of Bonaparte at 
the head of an army as equal to a hundred thousand additional bayonecta, Thus we 
understand the invincibility of the French army under his leadership, Thus the 
Christian fights with greater resolution because Christ is the Captain of his salvation. 

Til. THe coMMAND IMPLIES A CONTINUOUS DEPENDENCE UPON THE Lord The 


268 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. [ust. γι, 1—24, 


strength is not given at once and in full measure, but according to the desire, the 
capacity, the faith, the need, the duty, the trial, Our lowest powers, those of the body, 
we get by growth, and they grow by exercise. Such is the law of our physical child- 
hood, and no other is the law of our spiritual being. The sense of weakness obliges us 
to repair every day afresh to him for fresh supplies. ‘“ He giveth power to the faint; to 
them that have no might he increaseth strength.”—T. ©. 


Vers, 11, 12.—The Divine panoply : tts necessity and design. Christians have a 
spiritual warfare on earth (2 Tim. iv. 7). They have to fight for God (1 Sam. xxv. 28), 
for truth (Jude 3), and for themselves (Rev. iii. 11). ~ 

I. Tue Divine armour. It is so called because God provides each individual part 
of it. It is armour for offence as well as defence—‘-forged on no earthly anvil and 
tempered by no human skill.” The armour of Rome—celibacy, poverty, obedience, 
asceticism—is for flight, not for conflict. This Divine armour we are not required to 
provide, but merely to put on, and its efficacy depends entirely upon the power of him 
who made it. 

II. 118 purpose. “That ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil.” 
The grand enemy of the Church is the devil, a superhuman tempter older than man. 
This language implies (1) the personal existence of Satan; (2) his possession of 
immense resources of cunning and craft; (3) his power to inject evil into the minds of 
the saints; (4) his great end to destroy the souls of men and the whole moral order 
of the world; (5) the possibility of resisting his wiles in the strength of the Divine 
armour. 

III. 118 necessrry. This Divine equipment is indispensable in view of the serried 
ranks of evil which are leagued against us under the leadership of Satan. Our conflict 
is not with feeble man. It is with fallen spirits. The language of the apostle implies 
(1) that these spirits have a hierarchy of their own of different orders; (2) that their 
malignant activity is exercised in the world of men under a reign of darkness ; (3) that 
their moral character is wickedness; (4) and that, as Satan is the prince of the power 
of the air, they seem to have their abode or the scene of their activity in the atmo- 
sphere that surrounds our earth. We need, therefore, to be strong and valiant in this 
warfare, (1) because we are fighting for our life; (2) because, though our enemies be 
strong, our Captain is stronger still; (8) because nothing but cowardice can lose the 
victory (Jas. iv. 7); (4) because, if we conquer, we shall ride triumphantly into heaven 
(2 Tim. iv. 7, 8).—T. C. 


Vers, 14—17.— The Divine panoply in tts separate parts. The spiritual equipment 
of the Christian is here desbiibed in. ἴδιαι" ἀπὸ belt, fie breastplate, the ἘΜ ΔΙΑ, the 
shield, the helmet, and the sword. 

I. TRUTH 18 THE BELT, AS RIGHTEOUSNESS IS THE BREASTPLATE. “ Having your loins 
girt about with truth.” As the belt or girdle kept the armour in its proper place, 
giving strength and buoyancy of action, so truth acts in relation to righteousness, 
faith, and peace. If truth were wanting, there could be none of these things, and 
nothing Christ-like or noble. The truth here does not mean truth of doctrine, as the 
Word of God is again referred to, nor even sincerity in the sense of truthfulness, but 
the truth subjectively apprehended, that is, the knowledge and belief of the truth, It 
is the conscious grasp of the truth which gives a Christian boundless confidence in his 
conflict with evil. Error, as a principle of life, dissolves strength and unnerves for the 
great fight with sin. Truth is our proper girdle, because we fight for a God of truth 
(Titus i, 2), and against Satan the father of lies (John viii. 44). Without it we 
are spiritless, heartless, and weak. 

IL THE BREASTPLATE. “ Having on the breastplate of righteousness.” The Roman 
soldier wore it to protect his heart, the centre of physical life. The breastplate of the 
Christian is here called “the righteousness,” evidently in allusion to Isa, lix. 17, 
where Jehovah puts on “righteousness as a breastplate, and a helmet of salvation on 
his head.” It can hardly mean moral rectitude, which, after all, would be but a poor 
guard against the reproaches of conscience or the assaults of Satan. This righteous- 
ness is that which the Apostle Paul desired for himself—“ the righteousness of God by 
faith” (Phil. iii, 8, 9) It is emphatically “the righteousness,” so perfect that it 


on, νι, 1—24,] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 269 


satisfied every demand of Law, and is perfectly proof against all assaults from within 
or from without. Let us not show the bare breast of our righteousness to the tempter, 
but rather the righteousness of God himself, imputed to us and received by faith, 
This breastplate was purchased by Christ at a dear rate; none are his soldiers who have 
not put it on; without it, God himself will fight against you; if you have it, you are 
sure of ultimate triumph (Rom. viii. 31, 32). 

III, Sanpaus. “ Having your feet shod with the preparedness of the gospel of 
peace.” The legs of the Roman soldier were covered with greaves, and below these 
were the sandals, or calige. Swiftness of foot was of great consequence in military 
movements. Christians are to show a readiness, a celerity, an alacrity of movement, 
in doing God’s will. This preparedness is the effect of the gospel of peace, which 
inspires us with severity and courage, and liberates us from those doubts which gene- 
rate weakness. ‘The unready warrior is liable to sudden and secret attacks. The 
Christian ought ever to be prepared to advance against the enemy, to obey his great 
Captain, to fight, to suffer, and to die in the cause of God and truth. 

IV. Tue sHieLp. “ Above all, taking the shield of faith.” The shield covered the 
whole body, as well as the armour itself. Faith is a shield in the spiritual warfare. 
It is that faith of which Christ is the Object, at once “ the substance of things hoped for, 
and the evidence of things not seen ;” that confidence which defends the understanding 
from error, the heart trom weakness or despair, the will from revolt against Divine 
command. It is, in a word, “ the victory that overcometh the world” (1 John v. 4,5). 
Its special service is “to queuch all the fiery darts of the wicked one.” Satan showers 
his burning arrows upon the soul of the Christian, either in the shape of blasphemous 
suggestions, or unholy thoughts, or dark despair ; but faith makes the soul impenetrable 
to such destructive missiles, because it falls back upon the Divine Word, and apprehends 
the mercy of God, the merits of Christ, andthe help of the Spirit. 

V. Tue neuer, “And take the helmet of salvation.” The helmet protects the 
head, the most exposed part of the body, enables the soldier to hold it up without the 
fear of injury, and to look calmly round upon the enemy’s movements. Salvation, and 
not the mere hope of it (1 Thess. v. 8), is the helmet that covers the head, is our true 
defence against the devil. It will make you active in all duties, courageous in all 
conflicts, cheerful in all conditions, and constant to the end of life. 

VI, Tue sworp. “And the sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God.” The 
other parts of the armour were defensive; this is both offensive and defensive. 1. The 
Word of God is a sword, because it pierces like a sword into the heart (Heb. iv. 12), 
because it pierces through all disguises of error, because it lays bare the “ wiles ” of the 
devil. It was wielded by Christ himself in his great temptation. [Ὁ is still the saint’s 
only weapon of offence. Whether the temptation is to atheism, to impiety, to despair, 
to unbelief, to covetousness, to pride, to hatred, or to worldliness, the legend, “It is 
written,” stands clearly revealed on the handle of this sword. 2. It is the sword of 
the Spirit, because he is its Author, its Interpreter, and he who makes it effectual to the 
defeat of all enemies.—T. C. 


Ver. 18.—The duty of prayer. We are not to regard prayer as a seventh weapon, 
but rather as exhibiting the spirit in which the Divine armour is to be assumed and 
the warfare carried on. It is easy to see the intimate relation existing between prayer 
and each individual part of the Christian’s armour. 1, It is to be prayer of all kinds— 
public and private, oral and mental, formal and ejaculatory. 2. It is to be spiritual 
prayer: “In the Spirit ;” for “ Ile makes intercession for the saints with groanings which 
cannot be uttered” (Rom. viii. 26). We must “pray in the Holy Ghost” (Jude 20). 
3. It is to be persevering prayer: “‘ At all times;” at every suitable season. We must 
cultivate an habitual frame of prayer. 4. Itis to be watchful prayer: “‘ Watching there- 
unto.” We must watch against watchlessness, watch for occasions of prayer, watch 
for answers to prayer. 5. It is to beintercessory prayer: “ For all saints.” It is most 
comprehensive in its character. It is based on the communion of saints. We have 
every heavenly motive for continuing in prayer. We have no ground to expect blessin 
without it (Ezek, xsxvi. 37). It is a means of getting all blessings, temporal, an 
spiritual (Matt, vii. 7; xxi. 22; Jas, i. 5). It is in itself the most heavenly duty 
we can perform (Phil. iii, 26).—T. ©. 


270 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. [ση. v1. 1—24, 


Vers. 19, 20.—Prayer for an ambassador in bonds. The apostle feels his need of 
the prayers of the saints, because he has ἃ true appreciation of the difficulty and 
importance of his work. 

1. Tue BLEssING HE ASKS FoR. It is no temporal blessing, not even release from 
imprisonment that he might more widely preach the gospel. It is simply that “ utter- 
ance might be given to him” to preach the mystery of the gospel with boldness. This 
implies (1) that courage was needed for the declaration of a gospel which was an offence 
to the world ; (2) that even an apostle was dependent upon God for simple utterance. 

II. A DOUBLE ARGUMENT TO BESPEAK AN AFFECTIONATE INTEREST IN THEIR PRAYERS. 
“For which I am an ambassador in bonds.” 1. He was an ambassador. The apostle 
never forgets the dignity of his office. He knows he is the representative of a great 
King, though he is immured in Roman prisons. Ministers are Christ’s ambassadors. 
“ We are ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us: we pray you 
in Christ’s stead, be ye reconciled to God” (2 Cor. v. 20). 2. He was an ambassador 
in bonds, The ambassadors of earthly sovereigns come with pomp and splendour. 
Their persons are sacred and inviolable; to touch them is to declare war. But this 
ambassador of Christ is in prison and afflicted. Brave ambassador in bonds! He is 
worthy of the prayers of the saints.—T. Ὁ. 


Vers. 21, 22.—The errand of .Tychicus to Ephesus. The apostle showed his affec- 
tionate concern for the Church at Ephesus, not only by writing them an Epistle, but in 
despatching a minister to inform them concerning his condition and labours as a 
prisoner, and to comfort their hearts under their various trials. It was a great mark of 
love and confid-nce to send a messenger so far, for Ephesus was many hundred miles 
distant from Rome. 

I, Tue MEssENGER was TycHicus. We ‘know little of him except what is told in 
several passages of Scripture. ‘“ Tychicus have I sent to Ephesus” (2 Tim. iv. 12), 
probably in reference to this very mission, He was an Asiatic, who remained faithful 
to the apostle amidst many desertions (Acts xx. 4); “a faithful minister in the Lord; ” 
as well as “a beloved brother” of the apostle—one thoroughly acquainted with all his 
affairs, and quite in harmony with all his aims. How powerfully the apostle influenced 
all the Churches by his chosen messengers! They reflected his feelings, they intensi- 
fied the impression made by his direct labours, they perpetuated the cordial relationship 
which bound him to all the Churches, ; 

11. THE DESIGN OF HIS JOURNEY. It was twofold. 1. To acquaint the Ephesians 
with his circumstances as a prisoner at Rome. There were many things in that 
imprisonmeut that the Ephesians would be anxious to know, besides the state of his 
lealth and spirits, They would like to know what facilities he still enjoyed for pro- 
secuting his labours, even as a prisoner; how the gospel was spreading in the great 
capital of the world; how the Judaic party was affecting his legitimate influence as an 
apostle; and what were the prospects of his release from imprisonment. 2. ‘l'o comfort 
the Ephesians, not merely by minute oral information respecting these matters, but by 
the higher lessons of the gospel. As a faithful minister in the Lord, Tychicus was 
capable of doing great service in explaining and enforcing the lessons of affliction, It 
is the business of niinisters to comfort the hearts of believers, who, whether at Ephesus 
or elsewhere, may suffer from persecution, from Satan’s temptations, from spiritual 
deadness, It is a poor state of the Church when sheis without such comforters.—T. C, 


Vers. 23, 24.—Dvuble apostolic blessing. The apostle ends the Epistle by a blessing 
addressed first to the brethren at Ephesus, and secondly to all true lovers of the Lord 
Jesus Christ. 

I. BLessine TO THE BROTHERHOOD. 1. Peace. This is not mere concord—-“ the 
peace to which they were called in one body ”—but everything that is implied in the 
favour of God, repose of spirit under the sprinklings of the blood of Christ, a continuous 
flow of spiritual blessings. 2. Love with faith. That is,a love joined to faith, not 
love and faith as two distinct blessings. Their faith was an actually existing fact; 
the apostle desired that love should be there, as at once the characteristic and the 
discoverer of faith. 8, The full blessing ts ascribed to God the Father and the Lard 
Jesus Christ. All the graces spring from Father and Son in the power of the Holy 


cu. vi, 1—24,] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 27t 


Spirit; for God the Father is at once the God of peace and the God cf love, and Jesus 
is our very Peace, in whom is fulness of grace and love. 

11. Buessine To ALL TRUE Lovers oF Cnrist. The Epistle ends, as it begins, with 
grace and peace. The apostle implores God’s favour upon all who love Christ in 
sincerity. 1. Christ is worthy of our love. He ought to be the supreme Object of our 
love, because of the loveliness of his character, because of his boundless love to his 
people, because of his work as our Mediator. 2. The love of Christ is a test of our 
religion. He who loves him has found grace in God’s sight, and will stand high in the 
Divine favour. If we love him not, we are anathema; for we love not God, we love 
not man, we love not ourselves. If we love him, we have a grace of the Spirit, and we 
shall value his gospel, his Word, his cause, his people, and we shall delight in his presence. 
3. The love must be sincere, free from those elements of decay or change that would 
work its destruction. It must be without hypocrisy, not in word only, but in deed ani 
in truth. 4, The apostle wishes grace to all such lovers of Christ, so that they might 
have fresh discoveries of his love, a fuller enjoyment of his person, and a larger supply 
of all spiritual gifts, Amen.—T. 0, 


' Vers. 1—4.—Christian nurture. Having shown how Christ sanctifies the marriage 
union and gives to husbands the ideal of devotion, the apostle proceeds in the present 
section to show the relation which should exist between children and parents. He 
directs children to the fifth commandment and to the promise it contains, and he calls 
upon fathers to afford their children Christian nurture in place of provocation, The 
section suggests— 

I, PARENTAL QUALIFIOATIONS. And here we fall back upon the previous sectien. 
It is when husbands and wives are related as Christ is to the Church, when self- 
sacrificing love is met by reverential obedience, that the parents are qualified to train 
up the children. It is surely significant also that upon the father the burden of the 
nurture is laid. For he is in danger of provoking the children by severity, and so is 
not naturally so sympathetic as the mother. Besides, if the Christian father keep 
Christ before him as his great Ideal, then the Divine fatherhood regulates his 
conscience and he nurtures the little ones accordingly.t ; 

Il. Tue Nurrure 1tseLF. The children are not to be provoked, but “ nurtured in the 
chastening and admonition of the Lord” (Revised Version). The former of these 
words (παιδεία) might mean, as Harless suggests, “education in general” (allgemeine 
Begriff); but it is better to restrict it to the discipline, made up of order and of act, 
under which the children grow, while the latter word (νουθεσία) will indicate educa- 
tion by word. “The same spirit,” says Monod, én loco, “which in our day relaxes 
filial obedience, softens paternal power; the abuse of independence among inferiors and 
the forgetfulness of authority among superiors, march hand-in-hand. Parents who 
have known how to guard themselves against an excessive rigour, whether as a matter 
of principle or of temperament, fall usually into the contrary excess; chastisement is 
banished from their household, and as for corporal punishment in particular, it is held 
most frequently for a mark of a hard heart or of a base-born spirit. Let us oppose to 
these prejudices Prov. xiii. 24; xxii. 15; xxiii, 18, 14; xxix. 17. By the rod we do 
not mean corporal punishment alone; we simply say that one ought not to exclude it 
(cf. Prov. xxiii. 14), and that there are some cases where nothing else will do. As for 
the rest, behold the principle which should direct Christian parents in such a case—to 
employ discipline of the sweetest possible character, but discipline suficient to repress 
the sin.” Let this careful discipline be supplemented by a careful instruction and the 
children shall be faithfully “nurtured ” for the Lord. 

III. THE EVOKED OBEDIENCE. (Vers. 1—3.) Children are to obey their parents; 
they are to honour their father and mother. There is to be reverence in the obedience. 
This will be secured if the parents are qualified by being God-like. It should, however, 
be rendered even when the parents are far from perfect. The loyalty of the children 
must not be determined by the character of the parents; as the natural governors, the 
parents are entitled to obedience even though they do not morally deserve it. The 


1 Cf, Bushnell’s striking volume, ‘Christian Nurture,’ especially the chapter on ‘ Parental 
Qualifications.’ 


272 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. (ox. vr. 1—24, 


obedience has no exception. Nor docs any majority make the obligation to cease.! 
Our obedience as God’s “dear children” should be the model of our filial obedience. 
Let us be loyal to our parents, just as we feel bound to be loyal to our Father in 
heaven! 

IV. THE ATTENDANT BLESSING. (Ver. 3.) All God’s commandments carry blessings 
in their bosoms. In the keeping of them there is great reward (Ps. xix. 11). But the 
fifth commandment has this temporal blessing associated with it of longevity. Obedient 
children, by a Divine law, live longer than disobedient ones. Dr. Crosby goes so far as to 
assert that this law of longevity has only “one apparent eaception—where the soul 
itself prefers to leave this world for a better, and where, therefore, the letter of the 

romise yields to its spirit, and God, instead of continuing the saint upon earth, takes 
firm to his desired home in heaven. Where this exception does not occur, we must 
believe that every one who dies before old age has disregarded this command.”2 Now, 
Christianity, in promoting nurture and evoking obedience, is so far securing the longevity 
of its children. We can see that the unity of Christian families must, ceteris paribus, 
foster health and longevity. In this way Bushnell’s assurance may come true of “ the 
out-populating power of the Christian stuck.”—R. M. E. 


Vers. 5—9.—The Christian treatment of slavery. The treatment of slavery by 
Christianity is one of the most interesting of themes. Because Christianity did not 
preach a servile war, that is, did not propose emancipation by force, it was imagined 
that it was a conniver in the selfish plot against the liberties of man. But Christianity 
confines itself to spiritual means. It is by a spirit that it regenerates mankind. Force 
and mechanical appliances may subserve its purposes, judgment may have to take place 
in consequence of men’s selfishness and sin, but the instrumentalities of Christianity are 
not carnal, but spiritual, and so mighty through God to the pulling down of the diabolic 
strongholds, It can be shown that the Mosaic legislation, as well as the Divine 
judgments in Old Testament times, were hostile to slavery. But we are now concerned 
with Paul’s policy about slaves, Suppose, then, that he had advocated revolt and 
immediate emancipation, The slaves would have been separated from their masters 
and a chasm created between them which would not have been filled for generations. 
Christianity would have been the disintegrater instead of the unifier of mankind, 
and the evils of separation would have been excessive, Was it not better to 
infuse a new spirit into service and masterhood? Was it not better to carry both 
into a Divine light, and so secure the master and slaves dwelling together in unity? 
Christianity consequently told master and slave how they were each related to the one 
Master in heaven, and so made them one. The actual emancipation has been the out- 
come of the Christian spirit. 

I, Bonp AND FREE WERE TOLD ABOUT A COMMON MASTER IN HEAVEN. (Vers. 7—9.) 
The slave was thus asked to look past his earthly master to his heavenly. He might 
be possessed by a master on earth, but a Master in heaven told him he was not his own, 
but bought with a price, and so bound to serve him with his body which was God’s. 
This lifted life at once to a new plane and infused into service a religious spirit. The 
Christian slave became the conscious property of Jesus. But at the same time, he felt 
that this slavery to God was “ perfect freedom,” that to be God’s “ slave” was to be at 
the same time his “freeman.” He was thus spiritually emancipated. Again, the 
master was given to understand that he had a Master in heaven, and was the slave 
of God. Hence his spiritual life gave to him the ideal of what authority is when 
its spirit is love. Lovingly dealt with by God above, he had a model of masterhood 
cp set before him, and his own relation to his slaves was of necessity modified 
thereby. δε 

I]. ΤΉΒΥ ΜΈΠΕ AssURED THAT HE WAS NO RESPEOTER OF PERSONS. (Ver. 9.) Here 
a blow was struck at the caste prejudices of the time. Here persons were lifted intc 
the light of eternal justice and seen in their native equality. Now, if God took no 


1 Cf. Dale on ‘ The Ten Commandments,’ on the Fifth; also Washburne’s ‘Social Law oi 
God, on ‘ The Law of the Household.’ 

τ Cf. ‘Thoughts on the Decalogue,’ p. 114. 

* Cf. Cheever’s eloquent appeal, ‘God against Slavery,’ pass¢m. 


ὅπ. vi. 1—24.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 273 


account of personal distinctions so as to draw any line between bond and free, if the 
distinctions dwelt on by men were of no account with him, the truth tended to 
annihilate the distinctions, Here was a great Leveller before whom high and low, rich 
and poor, bond and free, were absolutelv undistinguishable. It is this primary truth 
of all men having equal rights before the Supreme which has led in time to all men 
having equal rights before enlightened law, as for example in Britain, and which has 
secured the emancipation of men from meaningless distinctions. The method taken by 
Christianity has thus been to bring unmeaning distinctions into the light of God’s 
countenance, and when men realize that he disregards them, they are sure to see eye 
to eye with him in the end. It is by reason, not by force, that the emancipation is 
accomplished. : 

IIL THEY WERE ASKED TO SERVE EACH OTHER FOR THE HIGHER MASTER'S SAKE, 
Mutual service for God’s sake was the ideal set before masters and slaves by the 
gospel, For God himself became incarnate, “ not to be ministered unto, but to minister.” 
He came to show that “it is better to give than to receive.” He came to consecrate 
service, to glorify devotion to another’s welfare. When masters and slaves learn this, 
their relations will contract a cordiality, and be mutually helpful in a degree impossible 
otherwise. The gospel has thus quenched tyrannies by the dazéling light of God’s 
unsuspected justice. There was wisdom in the arrangement. Another policy would 
have disorganized society and brought evils greater than existed. Onesimus goes back 
to Philemon to be a son in his house rather than a slave, and to help his master in his 
progress home to the common Master in heaven. Patiently waiting in his spiritual 
freedom and doing his part, he can assure himself that the political emancipation will 
be realized in due season.—R. M. Εἰ. 


Vers. 10—24.—The Christian panoply. After having treated Christian morals so 
carefully and shown how Christianity elevates the individual, the family, and the slave, 
Paul proceeds, in the close of this remarkable Epistle, to speak of the enemies and the 
arms of a Christian. Life is seen to be a battle. ‘The enemies are manifold. It is 
not flesh and blood against which we fight. We leave the carnal warfare to the world. 
We contend against “ the principalities, against the powers, against the world-rulers of 
this darkness, against the spiritual hosts of wickedness in the heavenly places ” (Revised 
Version). These foes are of a spiritual character—false principles and their advocates, 
whether men in flesh and blood or demons in their invisible might. So that the 
Christian finds himself confronted by a most serious host, perhaps not in very strict 
order of battle, yet mobbed together into perplexing power. How is one to withstand 
the assault of so many? ‘There is but one way, by becoming “ strong in the Lord, and 
in the strength of his might” (Revised Version). And, blessed be his Name, he has 
furnished us with a complete panoply. We must put on the whole armour, that we 
may withstand all the devil’s wiles. Let us translate the figures into their simplicities. 

I, ΤῊΣ CuRIsTIAN 18 TO BE COMPACTED BY TRUTH. (Ver. 14.) In Oriental as well 
as Occidental warfare, the girdle or belt is all-important. It binds the soldier into a 
unity and makes him feel compact and firm. Now, truth, by which is meant God's 
truth in the man, not the man’s veracity, is what gives compactness to our whole being. 
When Jesus is realized as the embodied “truth” (ἀληθεία, the same word as here, 
John xiv. 6), when he is felt to be dwelling within us, then we become a unity and 
strength which we could not otherwise be. Our straggled powers are united in the fear 
of God (Ps. lxxxvi. 11). 

II. Tue CHRISTIAN 18 PROTECTED BY ENTERTAINING A SPIRIT OF RIGHTEOUSNESS, 
(Ver. 14.) Here again it is the Divine “justice” coming into us and permeating our 
being. Now, there is no such protection for us in our contact with others as this spirit 
of fairness, the desire to do what is right as between man and man. If we are able 
to let righteousness reign in all our relations, the hostility of men and devils will but 
little avail. It is to be “ God-like ” in all our attitudes, and nothing then can harm us. 

III. Tue CaRistIAN WILL MAKE PROGRESS ONLY THROUGH ENTERTAINING AN EVANGE- 
ListTic sPIRIT. (Ver. 15.) Here we have the public spirit coming to secure progress. 
The Christian has ceased to be self-centred. He cannot live the selfish life. He must 
be a missionary. The gospel of peace is to be sent round the world. In doing so he 
must have some share. He makes progress by giving the -vangelistic centrifugal force 

EPHESIANS. : 


274 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. [σπ. vi. 1—24, 


free play. Weare never so safe as when the safety of others has become our great 
concern. 

IV. Toe CurisTiaN QUENCHES ALL ASSAULTS OF SATAN BY THE POWER OF FAITH. 
(Ver. 16.) Now, Satan’s fiery darts belong to the region of sense. He appeals to passion. 
He assaults us through the appetites. But faith vanquishes him, and nothing else can 
do so. What are we to understand by “faith”? Not assent to propositions; not a mere 
realizing faculty, assuring us of things unseen; but a ¢rust extended to the personal and 
Divine Saviour who rules over all things. This loyalty to an unseen Sovereign enables 
us to see through the wiles of the arch-enemy, enables us to see how narrow are Satan’s 
limits, and how wide the order and interests of our Saviour’s kingdom. We are thus 
transported to the wider relations of the spiritual world, and the temptations through 
sense and passion fall extinguished at our feet. As we live by faith in him who rules 
the universe and dwells within us, Satan ‘finds himself defeated. 

V. Tue CHRIsTIAN’s HEAD IS COVERED BY THE ASSURANCE OF SALVATION. (Ver. 17.) 
It has been supposed that a victorious spirit will make men careless in the battle-field. 
But is itso? If soldiers believe themselves destined to be victorious, they will strain 
every nerve to make themselves so. The flush of victory in their heart gives power in 
the contest. Now, itis when we have got assurance of victory through our indwelling 
Lord that we can do valiant things for him. Suppose that a soldier goes to battle with 
head exposed, and no helmet protecting it, his anxiety about self will destroy his 
fighting power. But give him his pickelhaube, and he passes into the fight free trom 
self-care and with the one idea of doing his very best to win the battle. So is it witb 
the assurance to which faith is meant to lead us, 

VI. Tue CHRISTIAN WIELDS, AS HIS ONLY OFFENSIVE WEAPON, THE WorD oF Gop. 
(Ver. 17.) This is the sword with which he is to lay around him. The Bible is a 
wonderful weapon. It cuts men and devils to the heart. It enters into the very joints 
and marrow. ‘lhere is no such discerner of the thoughts and intents of men’s hearts. 
Now, when we consider that force is only the preliminary to reason—individuals or 
nations fight first and then make up peace upon some pretence of principle—we see 
that what Christianity does is to keep strictly to the sphere of reason, and to refuse all 
seduction into the field of brute force. The doctrine of non-resistance is the highest 
of all tributes to the reasonableness of Christianity. The Christian, then, who masters 
most thoroughly the Word of God will be the most powerful among his fellows. For 
after all, this inspired Word is abead of all human wisdom. It is the crown and 
anticipation of human genius. 1 we have mastered it in the spirit, we are ahead of our 
time and shall understand what we can best do for our generation. 

VII. Tue CarisTIAN 18 ALWAYS PRAYERFUL, AND ESPECIALLY FOR HI8 FELLOWS. 
(Vers. 18—24.) The fight in which a Christian is engaged is not for his own hand. 
It is a fight for a common cause, and in the struggle we are never alone. It is a ficht 
for the most part upon our knees, But as we wrestle, it is not for personal blessings 
only or chiefly, but for blessings to be conferred on others too. Our own garden is best 
kept when we can think of other gardens too. Hence Paul claims an interest in the 
Ephesians’ prayers, believing that they will fight their battle best if they remember 
him, And thus as the Epistle closes we see how Christianity emancipates us from 
aati? an cae us pray with ἃ large public spirit and with our eye on the common 
weal.—R. M. E. 


Vers, 1—4.— The duties of children and parents, I. Dury oF cuttpren. “Children, 
obey your parents.” 1. Sphere in which the obedience is to tuke place. “In the Lord.” 
It was said in ch. v. 21, as determining the character of the whole subjection that there 
is between human beings, that it is to be “in the fear of Christ.” That is to be inter- 
preted as meaning that, in each case, Christ is to be regarded as the authority (behind 
the visible) before which those who are subjected are to bow. The husband, we have 
seen, represents Christ (so far as it goes) to the wife. And so the parents represent 
Christ to the children, And then only can the children obey in the Lord when they 
regard their parents as placed over them in the Lord. In baptism parents acknowledge 
that their children belong to the Lord as standing over them. And, in accordance with 
this, children are to look to their parents as standing in the place of Christ to them, 
and to obey them as though they were obeying Christ. 2, Natural ground of the duty 


cm. vi. 1—24.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS.. 275 


“For this is right.” There is a relationship founded deep in nature between parents 
and those to whom they have given being. This is associated with an affection which 
is one of the most beautiful things in our nature. The strength of the parental affection 
qualifies the parents for being placed in authority over their children. And the filial 
affection leads the children to look to their parents as the natural source of authority 
over them. 3. Scriptural confirmation. ‘“ Honour thy father and mother.” This is 
the fifth commandment, and is wider in its range than obedience to parents. Contents 
of fifth commandment. (1) Children are to honour their parents by treating them with 
proper respect. Children are to respect their parents on the ground of their superior 
age. We are commanded to rise up before the hoary head, and honour the face of the 
old man. So children should show reverence to their parents because of their years. 
And those years are associated with superior attainments. A big ship leaving for 
another land needs to be cautiously piloted out of the dock and past the other ships in 
the harbour or river, away beyond the bar, and, it may be, through the channel, until 
it is out to the open sea. Men of special knowledge need to be employed for this, that 
the ship may not get on to the sandbanks or on to. the rocks. So children in their 
inexperience, their ignorance of the shoals and rocks and seamanship, need to be piloted 
by the superior wisdom of their parents until they are out to the open sea of life. And 
it is right that they should think of themselves with humility, and treat with respect 
those who are appointed their guides. There are certain natural signs by which this 
may be shown—a readiness to give place to them, to give them the best seat, to be 
silent when they speak, a tone of deference (while at the same time of confidence), and a 
certain courtesy in address which is not inconsistent with familiarity. When Solomon 
on his throne saw his mother approaching (inferior though she was to him in one 
relationship), he rose to meet her, and bowed himself unto her, and caused a seat to 
be set for her on his right hand. It would be well for children (who are sometimes 
inclined to be rude to their pareuts) to take an example from the wise king. .“ Cursed 
be he that setteth light by his father or his mother.” “The eye that mocketh at his 
father, and despiseth to obey his mother, the ravens of the valley shall pick it out, and 
the young eagles shall eat it;” that is, something terrible shall overtake him who dares 
to make light of his parents. (2) Children are to honour their parents by showing 
gratitude to them. How much are children laid under obligation to their parents! 
‘There was a time when they were entirely helpless, could neither walk nor speak, and, 
but for the care of parents, they would have perished. And parental cares for them do 
not soon cease. How they need to be watched, to be kept out of harm’s way! And 
when they are sick, how they need to be attended to day and night! The mother needs 
to labour on all day in the house (sometimes when she is not strong) to keep things 
right for them. And the father needs to go out and work that he may provide shelter, 
and clothing, and food, and schooling for them. The children are not in a position to 
know all the sacrifices their parents make for them, and the amount of thought that is 
bestowed on them, and the prayers that are put up for them. But they are receiving 
daily marks of their kindness, and they should receive these, not as though they were 
entitled to them, but with feelings of gratitude ever fresh. They will never have on 
earth better friends, greater benefactors, than Christ has given them in their parents. 
And let them value the gift. (3) Children are to honour their parents by being obedient 
to them. This is the point on which stress is laid (as though it summed up the 
command) by the apostle. There is nothing by which children can better requite all 
the trouble that their parents have had on their account than by their obedience, This 
is the most beautiful flower that there can be in their character as children. It is true 
of them (as of those who have not come out of the childish state) that they are creatures 
of impulse, and inclined to seize upon present gratification, without thinking whether 
it is for their good or not. Parents, as preferring their future happiness to present 
gratification, must lay commands on-them, and the commands should be felt to be easy 
as coming from those who are at the same time heaping kindness on them, Qhildren 
should be prompt to obey. They should not wait until they are threatened. They 
shoald not yield with a grudge. They should not think of opposing their untutored 
wills and crude wishes to the disciplined wills and ripe judgments of their parents. Let 
them honour their pareuts by giving them all obedience. (4) Children are to honour 
their parents by being helpful to them, There are little services which, from an early 


276 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, (cu. vr. 1—24 


age, children can render to their parents. They should be pleased even to leave their 
play to run an errand for them. They should not grudge doing things about the house 
to relieve an overworked mother. Sometimes sick parents have been thrown on their 
children, and then it bas been seen what little hands can do. Some parents havea very 
hard struggle, and children may relieve them of much care and save them not a little 
expense by taking care of what takes money to replace, There are some children who 
only think how much they can get out of their parents (do not think whether their 
parents can afford it, or have to want to give them). Children who wish to honour 
their parents will be unwilling that they should want for them, and will think how 
much they can save to their parents of labour and expense. (5) Children are to honour 
their parents by placing confidence in them. Parents and children are friends, and 
there is nothing on which friendship more hinges than confidence. Parents are intended 
to know all that their children do, and it is wrong for children to conceal anything from 
them. If they wish to undertake anything, let them ask their parents’ consent. Let 
nothing be done on which they would not wish their parents’ eyes to rest. If they have 
done wrong, let them frankly come forward and confess their faults, and ask forgive- 
ness, But let there be no concealment, no artifice, no untruthfulness. Children who 
practise deceit on their parents are likely to form character according to one of the most 
detestable types. All will come to regard them, with distrust. (6) Children are ‘to 
honour their parents by attending to their instructions. Children are to take full 
advantage of the provision made by their parents for their education; but their duty does 
not end there, They are to lend a ready ear to their parents when they talk to them, 
especially about serious subjects. They should love to hear the story of Christ and his 
love. They should not turn away their ear when their parents tell them what dis- 

positions they are to cultivate, what temptations they are to shun, what company they 

are to keep, what books they are to read; when they tell them to be respectful, truth- 
ful, honest, kind, and above all dutiful to their Father in heaven. ‘My son, hear the 
instruction of thy father, and forsake not the law of thy mother. For they shall be 
an ornament of grace unto thy head, and chains about thy neck.” Promise annemed to 
the fifth commandment. ‘“ Which is the first commandment with promise, that it may 
be well with thee, and thou mayest live long on the earth.” It is no longer the land 
of Canaan that is mentioned, as it was when the promise was first given. The whoie 
earth (not merely the heavenly Canaan) is to be regarded as the land of promise now 
for God’s people. The promise is not to be understood as absolutely guaranteeing long 

life to dutiful children. For there are some who die in childhood and who have not 

been less exemplary than those who get the blessing of a longer life. ‘The good die 

first,” it is said, and there is truth in the saying. Some who have been early taken 

away have exhibited a singular sweetness and a ripeness beyond their years. Still, it is 

true (apart from other considerations that may come in) that long life is promised to 

children who honour their father and mother. And we can see how God (in his 

ordinary providence) works towards this end. Those who are dutiful to their parents 

are likely to grow up good members of society. They are not likely to bring their life 

to an untimely end in disgraceful quarrels or by crime. They are not likely to shorten 
their days by intemperance or by idleness. They: are likely, too, to grow up good 
members of the Church, and may have their lives prolonged to them hecause of their 
usefulness. When Peter’s life was in danger, prayer was made without ceasing of the 
Church unto God for him, And his life was spared because of its felt valuableness. 
So if we interest people in us, by services rendered to them, their good wishes and 
prayers may go to our days being lengthened out for us. 

Il. Dury or parenvs. Fathers are addressed; mothers might have been addressed 
as well. But one class only being mentioned it is those who represent the others. 
1. Negatively. “ And, ye fathers, provoke not your children to wrath.” Parents have 
not 8 right to act as they please toward their children. They are responsible to 
him who has placed them over their children, and are bound to act in his spirit. 
Parents provoke their children to wrath when they give them a sense of wrong. (1) 
By over-commandment. Parents have a right to exact of their children; but there are 
limits to what is to be exacted of them. To heap command upou command, prohibition 
upon prohibition, is not to accomplish the end aimed at, When the requirement is 
more than can reasonably be rendered, it becomes vexatious. The children lose the 


on. vi. 1—24,} THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 277 


sense of their ability to obey, and under compulsion are provoked to wrath. (2) By 
unreasonable blame. It is true of children that they need a creat amount of encourage- 
ment, And where it is deserved it ought to be freely bestowed. ΤῸ bestow it where 
it is not deserved is to encourage unreality. Faults (at least the more serious, where 
they are numerous) are to be dealt with. But extreme care must be taken never to 
impute blame undeservedly or tentatively to children. There should be no hint of 
blame unless there is sure ground to go upon. For if children are stung with a sense 
of injustice, then, provoked to wrath, they are apt to think that they may as well do 
the things with which they are credited. (3) By passionateness. Children can under- 
stand a burst of indignation for some serious offence, and are the better for it. But they 
are also quick to understand when their parents lose command of themselves and 
punish beyond what the offence deserves. This is carefully to be avoided, for passion- 
ateness provokes passionateness; the passionate father makes @ passionate son. 2, 
Positively. “But nurture them in the chastening and admonition of the Lord.” Such 
nurture is to be understood as a tender plant needs. If it is to be brought to any per- 
fection, then it needs to be suited as to soil, as to exposure, as to temperature, as to 
nourishment, as to protection from insects, as to its particular habits. So parents have 
tender plants given them in their children to rear up, sometimes exceptionally tender, 
but tender in any circumstances. They have to keep them from the storms and blasts 
that would wither them. ‘hey have their physical development carefully to watch over. 
Their intellectual development, too, needs great care, that they may not grow up stunted, 
And especially has care to be bestowed on the nurture of their spiritual powers. (1) 
This nurture is to have a distinctively Christian character. The appliances mentioned 
are described as being “of the Lord.” ‘That‘is, they are such appliances as those acting 
for Christ should use. They are to be used toWard Christian ends, ‘hey are to be used 
toward the children being trained up as Christians. Parents are to train up their 
children as those committed to their care by Christ. They are to train them up for 
Christ. They are to indoctrinate them with Christian truth. They are to seek to 
attach them, not merely to themselves, but through themselves to Christ. They are to 
seek that their whole being may be subject to and centre round Christ. (2) The 
Christian appliances, (a) Chastening. It is difficult (apparently impossible) to get 
words in the English Janguage to represent the two words that are in the Greek original. 
They are in a general way to be distinguished as discipline by power and discipline by 
reason, This distinction is effected in the words which are used in the Revised trans- 
lation (“ chastening and admonition”), but by an undue limitation of the meaning. The 
first word is more than discipline by punishment; the punishment is accidental, or what 
is only occasionally to be resorted to in discipline. It is rather all that drilling which 
ἃ parent gives his children in virtue of the executive (magisterial) power which is 
placed in him. He has certain rules by which he goes in training his children, and he 
has got the power to enforce them. The first lesson he has to teach them is that he is 
their master. And so they are, at first, purely in his strong grasp. In vain is all their 
resistance. As soon as they can lisp words they must use them in prayer. They are 
passive in his hand, and he can make them utter what he pleases. He makes them 
observe simplicity, restraint, good manners in eating, that they may not learn to make 
too much of the pleasures of the table. He makes them say “grace before meat,” that 
they may learn betimes from whom all table-comforts come. He makes them attend 
to their lessons, that they may know that they have got to work and not to be idlers. 
He makes them be select as to their companionships, that they may not get out into 
evil associations. He appoints certain hours for the house, that they may learn order 
and punctuality. He does not ask them if they will go to church, but he makes them 
go to church with him. That is the kind of drilling that is meant here, and when it is 
necessary it must be backed up by chastening, or judicious punishment for good. (6) 
Admonition. This is also a word of too narrow a meaning. The Greek word means 

enerally an appeal to reason. This commences at a later stage, viz. when intellect 
esina to open, It is not necessary that a parent should always explain to a child the 
reasons of his procedure. But it is important that, as a rule, children should have 
explained to them the evil of the course they are asked to avoid, and the advantages of 
the course they are asked to follow. And if they evince a tendency to any evil course, it 
is right that they should be remonstrated with or reproved, The importance of an appeal 


278 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. (cH. v1. 1—24 


to reason is that it has in view the ernancipation of the children from parental 
authority. The time has to come when they have to go from under their parents, and 
be thrown upon their own responsibilities and resources. And it is all-important that, 
when they go out to the world and meet its temptations, they should be fortified with 
good habits and reasons which they have in their minds for a course of subriety, of 
industry, and of godliness, Parents, then, should feel their responsibility with regard 
to the proper up-bringing of their children. This responsibility is great in view of the 
evil that is so natural to them, and in view of the evil example with which they are 
surrounded. They should see to it that they are first of all Christians themselves, lead- 
ing a Christian life before their children. ‘They are especially to see that they are 
Christians in the methods which they use with their children.—K. F. 


Vers. 5—9.—The duties of servants and masters, I, Dury or sexvants. “Servants, 
be obedient unto them that according to the flesh are your masters.” The Revisers 
have shown good judgment in retaining “servants” here, and putting ““ bond-servants ἢ 
in the margin. For though “bond” (the same word) isin the eighth verse distinguished 
from “free,” yet the thouglt requires a modification of the meaning. It would be 
pedantic to translate in the sixth verse “ bond-servants of Christ” (or elsewhere, “ Paul 
a slave of Christ”), for slavery is the idea we exclude from the service of Christ. And 
this wider use of the word is favoured by the word not being used for “ masters” which 
conveys the idea of despotic authority. Further, the principles laid down have no 
exclusive reference to slaves. They are such as would have had force if this perverted 
form of service had never existed. It is right, then, to use a word which covers all 
forms of service. It is true that (owing,to the carrying out of the apostolic principles, 
and gencrally the influence of Christianity) times have very much changed. There is 
almost now®ere now bondage on the one side and absolutism on the other. The relations 
between masters and servants are of a freer nature, and depend on reasonableness on 
both sides. ‘his being the case, it is to be desired, not that self-interest or class- 
interest should rule these relations, but the principles here laid down by the apostle, 
1. The grounding of the duty. ‘ With fear and trembliog, in singleness of your heart, 
as unto Christ.” (1) The master is representative of Christ. Four times are servants 
reminded of this. The apostolic exhortation is saturated with it. A very unworthy 
representative the despot of the household or slave-holder (in the very conception of the 
thing, apart from personal qualities) was. But the apostle does not stigmatize him as 
a usurper, a pretender, and call upon the slaves to rise and cast off his despotism. 
Strange to say (having him principally in his mind), he regards him as legitimately 
filling the place of Christ. That is to say, underneath all that slave-holding (whatever 
it was) there was still a representation, a true representation, of the authority of Christ, 
before which the slave was to bow. And that was going to the root of the matter. 
It was more decisive and penetrative than if he had asked them to be reconciled to the 
evil of their position on the ground that Christ had suffered greater evil when in the 
world. He refused to regard the relation as disannulled by the accident of despotism ; 
in the master according to the flesh (whoever he might be) he saw a real representation 
of the authority of Christ, and he called upon them to render obedience unto him as 
unto Christ. All cannot be masters. For disciplinary purposes, some are servants 
and some are masters, and some both servants and masters. In the early and Middle 
Ages there were men who were carried away with a frenzy of obedience. ‘Those words, 
“ T am among you as one that serveth,” seemed to put a bad mark on the master state, 
and to mark out the servant state as not only the safer, but the grander, more Christ- 
like state of the two. And so they put themselves under superiors, begged in Christ’s 

“name to be ruled, and thought they approached Christ when they performed the most 
menial duties. It must be understood that the state which with Christ carries the 
blessing is that (whether of master or servant) which is not self-sought, but in which 
Christ sees fit to place us. (2) The appropriate disposition toward the master as the 
representative of Christ. “With fear and trembling.” ‘The slave was to fear and 
tremble before his master, not because that despotic master of his was able to put him 
in chains or to take away his life, but because he represented an authority above 
backed by boundless power, which was able to deal with him, and would righteously 


daal with him far neclectad dutv That heine the eraund the duty ramaing unmndifind 


ef, vr. 1—24.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, 279 


The workman is to fear and tremble before his master, the domestic is to fear and 
tremble before her mistress, not because the master or mistress is better born, or has 
more wealth, or has a title (for in that there is little to cause fear and trembling), but 
because he or she represents an authority in heaven that in no case is to be trifled with. 
“Tn singleness of your heart.” That is to say, the servant must give the reality, and 
not the semblance of service. And the only ground on which this can be thoroughly 
secured is by regarding his service as done unto Christ. 2. Fault to be avoided. “ Not 
in the way of eye-service, as men-pleasers.” ‘he word translated “ eye-service” seerns to 
have been of the apostle’s own coining, and is strikingly descriptive. The eye-servant 
is one who takes the rule of his action from the eye of his master. His object or motive 
(as expressed in the word “ men-pleasers ”) is to get credit for whatever he does. Such 
ἃ person may work with a will when he thinks of the master’s eye being upon him, 
and expects that it will be put to his credit. Even in such a case the principle is 
wrong, It would lead him to “scamp” his work when he thought that his master’s 
eye was not on him, and that he would not be made to suffer for it. Could it be 
secured (which it cannot be) that the master’s eye was always on the servant, and 
that the servant always got credit for what he did, yet work done on such a principle 
(whatever it may be in political economy), from a Christian point of view is radically 
wrong. 8. Positive excellence to be sought. (1) In relation to work, “ But as servants 
of Christ, doing the will of God from the heart.” The servants of Christ must apply 
the principles of Christ to their work. According to the teaching of the apostle, a 
servant’s thought is not to be this—how little work he can get off with; nor this, 
in the first place (though it is an important consideration)—what is the will of his 
master; but this—what is the will of God, ze. what does God expect of him in amount, 
in excellency, to be rendered to his master. Having found out this, he is to do his 
work, not in the spirit of drudgery, but with a true, it may be an ardent, love fer it, as 
it is here put— from the heart.” To do the will of God in this way may sometimes 
require not a little Christian courage. In these days there are trade-unions, com- 
binations among the workmen, with the view of protecting their rights. Though 
unobjectionable in principle, yet (like other combinations) they may sometimes be 
dominated by selfishness, and act tyrannically. Anda Christian workman may be in 
the position of choosing between the will of God and incurring the opprobrium of his 
fellow-workmen. If he is worthy of his master’s Master, he will not, to please his 
fellow-workmen, give stinted, heartless work, but he will brave the consequences of 
doing his duty, saying, “I must obey God rather than man.” (2) In relation to his 
master, “With good will doing service, as unto the Lord, and not unto men.” A 
servant may not be able altogether to approve of the treatment he receives. What is 
exacted of him (and what he cheerfully renders, as being the will of God) may be 
unjust. Nevertheless, as a Christian, he is to keep up good feeling toward his master. 
He is always to respect him because of his position. More than that, he is to have “good 
will” toward him, that good will which (as the angelic doxology shows) is so much of 
the essence of the gospel. And he is not merely to have good will toward him as a 
man, but good will also toward him in the particular relationship in which he is placed 
to him as his master. And he is to have this good will toward him, not on worldly 
grounds, nor on purely rational grounds, nor on purely theistic grounds, but specially 
on Christian grounds, “ As unto the Lord,” and not unto a master by himself or out 
of relation to the Lord. That is to say, he is to bear good will toward his master as 
being (by no figure of speech, but in very fact) the Lord’s representative, and thus, 
it may be said, for the Lord’s sake, and further, that the Lord’s ends in the relationship 
so far as he is concerned) may be served. 4. Encouragement to duty. “ Knowing 
that whatsoever good thing each one docth, the same shall he receive again from the 
Lord, whether he be bond or free.” The slave, or bondman, here referred to (and very 
common then) was considered to be entitled to nothing. His earthly receivings were very 
meagre, unless in lashes when he came under the displeasure of his master. The apostle, 
then, is to be understood as holding out to him this encouragement (for he names him 
particularly, that there may be no mistake), that, if he did his work in a Christian 
manner, then he would be a receiver, equally with the free man—he would be a receiver, 
if not on earth, yet in heaven; he would receive from the Lord Jesus Christ himself, 
He who saved his soul as well as that of the free man, aud put both on the same 


280 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. ἴση. νι. 1—24. 


platform of privilege, would see to it that no smallest piece of work done to an earthly 
master for his sake (overlooked here) would o unrewarded in heaven. And the same 
thing is to be said of the free servant; for he also is particularized. It is true that 
if he is guilty of eye-service, if he “ scamps ” his work, that will be put against him in 
heaven, and there will be a day of reckoning for his evil thing, for his bad work; his 
life-work has lost in quality, in measure by it, and his reward will most unmistakably 
be curtailed—it will be so much the less for that idling of his master’s time, that soul- 
less work, that grudge in his heart to his master (for upon such things as these shall 
judgment be passed, by such things shall destiny be affected). But if, on the other 
hand, a servant, even in the humblest position, grasps his opportunity, and seeks to be 
regulated in his work by the will of God, and cherishes good will to his master, then, 
in encouragement (as before in principle), he is made independent of such a variable 
element as a good or a bad master, his getting his rights or his not getting his rights: 
he can feel that he has to do with a Master with whom there is no inequality, and who 
will see to it that whatsoever good thing he doeth, what he does unobserved or what he 
does under the menaces of his fellow-workmen, shall be rewarded. 

11. Dury oF Masters. 1. Positive statement of duty. “And, ye masters, do the 
same things unto them.” Though they stand differently in the relationship (servant 
to master and master to servant), they are to do the same things, the regulative 
principles being the same. (1) Jn relation to work. As the Christian servant is to 
.be regulated by “the will of God” in the work rendered, so the Christian master is 
to be regulated by the will of God in the work required. There is that which (in the 
Divine balances) is fair between them. It cannot be got at by selfishness on the one 
side and selfishness on the other, which is often made a trial of strength. If harmony 
is to be attained, it can only be by both, with Christian disinterestedness, agreeing to 
bring themselves (in what is required and what is rendered) to the Divine standard. 
(2) In relution to servant. As there is to be “ good will” toward the master, so there 
is to be good will toward the servant. The master may not find the servant what he 
would like him to be. He may have to reprove him for eye-service or for careless 
service under his eye. But he is always to have good will toward him, as placed under 
him by Christ. He is to show his good will by seeking to make him comfortable in his 
position. Especially is he to use his influence with him on behalf of his higher well- 
being. In the name of Christ, then, let good will be met by good will. Education 
alone is ineffectual. It has sometimes been found that, with the spread of education, 
there has been an embittering of the relations between masters and servants. It is 
wrong, however (as not a few do), to blame education for this. It may be said that, if 
these relations cannot stand educative influences, then they are not what they should 
be. And the conclusion to be drawn is, not that we are to dispense with education, 
but that those relations can only be thoroughly maintained by reasonableness and 
genuine good feeling on both sides. And Christians are not to give up the problem in 
despair, but ought to be prepared to demonstrate to the werld that it is possible, on 
Christian principles, for masters and servants to work together in harmony. 2. Fault to 
be avoided. “And forbear threatening.” ‘The too familiar threatening” is the idea 
conveyed in the Greek. It was the ready resource of persons possessed of irresponsible 
power. Slaves were made to work under fear of the lash. And, though masters have 
not so much in their power now, yet the power that they have (there is generally an 
advantage in their circumstances compared with their servants) they are not to abuse. 
It is those who are deficient in the right management of their servants, in reasonable 
dealing, especially in that.good will which is so necessary to management, that take 
to the clumsy, coarse method of threatening. Power must sometimes be put into 
execution against servants; but to hold threats over their heads, to treat them with 
clamour, with insult, or with something worse, is not worthy of the Christian master. 
ὃ. Word of warnimg. ‘Knowing that both their Master and yours is in heaven.” 
Christ is represented as the Master of the slave. There was a wrong involved (apart 
from any harsh treatment he might receive) in the very fact of his being a slave. He 
is represented as the Master of the slave-holder, too, 1.6. of the man who was so unen- 
lightened as to hold slaves. As the Master of them both, he would see to things in 
the end being righted between them. The Christian master still is to be influenced 
to do what is just and proper by his servants by the consideration that Christ ia the 


en. νι. 1—24.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 281 


Master of his servants as well as his Master. And in the righting that is to take place, 
for every advantage that the master has taken of his servant, for every harsh speech 
and threatening word he has used toward him, he will suffer everlasting loss, “And 
there is no respect of persons with him ” (¢.e. with Christ), There is a real distinction 
between master and servant, proprietor and tenant. What is adventitious may gather 
round it, but the essential thing is that Christ has not ordained equality here, but has 
placed his authority in some, and has subjected others, and has thus given rise to mutual 
obligations and trial and the formation of character in connection with these obligations. 
But though a real distinction, it is not to be carried beyond what there is really in it. 
After all, it is only to last through the present earthly economy. It is destined to be 
obliterated with other time-distinctions. And meantime Christ does not respect a 
person less because he is a servant, or more because he is a master. He has an equal 
interest in them as both included within the sweep of his work, as having taken him 
as their Saviour and Master. He has an equal interest in them in the relationship in 
which they stand to each other. And if they do their part equally well, one in the 
position of servant and the other in the position of master, then he will see to it that 
they will be equally rewarded.—R. F. 


Vers. 10—20.—Panoply of God. Conclusion of Epistle. “Finally, be strong in 
the Lord, and in the strength of his might.” In drawing the Epistle to a close, the 
apostle falls back on a form of expression he had used in the first chapter. There he 
showed that he had a high admiration of “the strength of his [the Father's] might 
which he wrought in Christ,” and which was proved by Chirst being raised from the 
state of the dead “far above all rule, and authority, and power, and dominion.” Here 
his admiration is (with little variation) of the strength of his (the Lord’s) might. He 
views that as being at the command of all who are in Christ, and his injunction is that, 
as it is at their command, it should actually be communicated to them to make them 
strong, and indeed invulnerable, as the Lord’s servants should be. He now puts his 
exhortation under the special aspect of the panoply for the Christian conflict which is 
presented at length. “Put on the whole armour of God.” 

I, NEED FOR THE PANOPLY or Gop. “That ye may be able to stand against the 
wiles of the devil.” ‘The wiles of the devil” points to the fact that our adversary does 
not work by open methods. He does not rest his cause on its absolute reasonableness, 
Rather is he conscious of its indefensibleness in reason, conscious too of his being 
conquered by Christ; and hence he has recourse to ways of making men believe that 
they have reason on their side, when they are really under the delusion of error. We 
do not have things put before us in their true character. There are illusory views 
of life which are presented to us. ‘here are fallacies with which we are plied, in our 
reading, in our intercourse with men, or from our own hearts, the danger of which is 
that they chime in with our natural inclinations. What are these but the wiles of the 
devil? And there lies the need for our being armed as warriors, at every point, with 
the armour of God. 

II. PARENTHETIOAL CONFIRMATION OF THE NEED. 1. Negatively. ‘For our wrestling 

‘is not against flesh and blood.” Wrestling serves to call up the idea of close personal 
encounter, but otherwise, in accordance with the context, we are to think, not of the 
mere wrestler, but of armed warrior against armed warrior. ‘“ When Greek meets 
Greek, then comes the tug of war.” In the contests, from which the apostolic language 
is taken, there was a ceitain equality between the combatants. It was man confronted 
witb his own flesh and blood, and be might hope, in the life-and-death struggle in 
which he engaged, to come off victorious. But such equal conditions do not exist 
in the spiritual warfare in which we engage. We are not confronted with beings like 
ourselves; it is not our own flesh and blood that we are pitted against. 2. Positively. 
“But against the principalities, against the powers, against the world-rulers of this 
darkness, against the spiritual hosts of wickedness in the heavenly places.” To show 
the need for being properly armed, the apostle gives a bold description of the foes with 
which we have to contend. As to their rank, they are powerful chieftains (prin- 
cipalities and powers). As to their domain, it is “this darkness,” which is world-wide. 
As to their essence, they are not encumbered with clay, but are spirits. As to their 
number, they are hosts, vast multitudes. As to their character, they are wicked, their 


282 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, fon. νι, 1--ϑᾷ 


inveterate disposition is to seek to work our ruin. As to their haunt, as it was before 
hinted at (rather than dogmatically taught) as ‘ .e air, 80 here it is the heavenly or 
super-terrestrial places. The general effect of the description is that, men ourselves, we 
are unequally matched in having to fight against superhuman powers, 

JI], FURTHER RECOMMENDATION OF THE PANOPLY. “ Wherefore take up the whole 
armour of God, that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day, and, having done all, 
to stand.” The evil day is not to be viewed as a special season of temptation. It 
may be more or less so, but it is always the day of temptation with us. We are 
assaulted even when we are engaged with holy things. We are assaulted by those 
formidable enemies of ours who are ever busy. We must, therefore, take up the whole 
armour of God, that we may be able to withstand the assaults made on us, and, having 
done all things pertaining to the conflict, to stand (and not to be left prostrate on the 
field). 

ἊΣ ‘THE PARTS OF THE PANOPLY. 1. The girdle. “Stand therefore, having girded 
your loins with truth.” In preparing for the conflict the first thing the warrior had to 
do was to gird up his loose flowing robe, that his energies might not be scattered, but 
collected into a unity. The girdle which binds the energies of the Christian combatant 
is truth. About the end of the eleventh century, great multitudes, known as Crusaders, 
girded themselves to go and deliver the holy sepulchre from the possession of the Saracens. 
Τὸ was not the girdle of truth which bound them; for God never meant them to spend 
their energies in that form. And it was.not an object which kept them from flagrant 
irregularities in the pursuit of it. The object which the Christian combatant isto have 
before him is not to have mere romance, but truth, binding truth, in it. That truth 
may be said to be connected with Christ’s tomb, but not in a mere realistic way. It 
is imperatively demanded, now that Christ has conquered on the cross, and that con- 
quest has been attested by an empty tomb, that in his Name souls everywhere should 
be delivered. And the Christian combatant does not gird himself to get possession of 
some sacred place or of some sacred relic, but to help men who are in the present 
guilt and thraldom of sin toward their deliverance. 2. The breastplate. ‘ And having 
put on the breastplate of righteousness.” The idea in righteousness is that of a right 
relation to the Law of God. Righteousness worn as a plate over the heart is to be 
understood rather as the mind conscious of right. The Christian combatant is to be 
jealous over himself with a godly jealousy. He is to have nothing to do with 
insincerity, but is to study reality. He is not to have selfish motives, but is to be 
thoroughly disinterested. He is not to have feelings of grudging malice, but is to be just 
and compassionate. He is to be especially fired witha desire to glorify God. The man 
who is conscious of this may be said to have righteousness as a breastplate, 3. T'he 
sandals. ‘‘ And having shod your feet with the preparation of the gospel of peace.” 
The Christian combatant, having girded himself in the cause of truth, and being con- 
scious of no unworthy feeling, is next to put on the gospel sandals. It is that by 
which he is enabled to carry the good message. For that also belongs to the work of 
the battle-field, He puts on his shoes for the holy war. But in that war he is not 
always closing with his advorsary. There are times when he has to follow up an 
advantage. Nay, his great business may be said to be to get his message delivered, to 
cry aloud so that Satan’s captives may hear. The message which he bas to deliver is 
a message of peace. He fights, not for fighting’s sake, but that the times of peace may 
be ushered in. And as he thinks of his message, and enters into the spirit of it, his 
sandals become promptitude, alacrity (according to the idea here); he becomes swift- 
footed ‘and speeds on with his message. 4. The shield. ‘* Withal taking up the shield 
of faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the evil one.” As 
the Christian warrior ruus swift-footed with his message of peace, there are fiery darts 
thrown at him. When any one is eminent in the Christian conflict, Satan is likely to 
raise up against him traducers, Those who do not believe in disinterestedness are 
sure to make out that he is serving himself, Those who do not believe in earnestness 
in religion are sure to circulate evil reports of him. [10 is worse when, in the very 
intensity of his spiritual feeling, he is laid open to temptations from his lusts. Or it 
may be that his very success lays him open to the temptation of spiritual pride. So 
it was when he who had been victorious in many a spiritual conflict was tempted (it is 
said that Satan provoked him) to number the people. And the dart thrown at him 


on, vi. 1--24.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 283 


took effect, and was fiery enough in its consequences, What the Christian combatant 
is to do, when he is thus assailed, is not certainly to under-estimate the force that is 
brought against him, but it is also by faith rightly to estimate the force that is placed 
at his service, What can he do against the principalities and powers and the fiery 
darts they send out for his destruction? If he look to himself, he can do nothing. 
But he looks away to the power which placed Christ above all the principalities and 
powers, and he places it as a shield between him and the fiery darts, and in it their fire 
is quenched, their force is lost. 5. The helmet. “ And take the helmet of salvation.” The 
helmet is not, as in 1 Thess. v. 8, the hope of salvation, but salvation itself, 1.6. salvation 
enjoyed. The Christian has an important piece of defensive armout in the assurance 
of salvation. The Lord rebuked Satan, and encouraged Joshua the high priest (Zech. 
iii, 2), by pointing to him as one of his saved ones. When one can think of grace going 
out toward him in the changing of his position to all eternity, he can feel triumphant ; 
he has salvation as a helmet on his head. 6. The sword. ‘And the sword of the 
Spirit, which is the Word of God.” The Bible is the sword of the Spirit. Furnished 
it is by the Spirit; for it was under the inspiration of the Spirit that the Word was 
written. And, as the Spirit inspired men to write it, so it is only he who can enable 
men to make a right use of it. ΤῸ this we may apply the words of the hymn— 


“God is his own interpreter, 
And he will make it plain.” 


ln the temptation of our Lord, what Satan did was to misrepresent the character of the 
Father, to put a gloss upon Scripture. And what our Lord, in meeting the tempta- 
tion, did was to confront him with the pure truth, and the truth opposed to his decep- 
tions. And he was so skilful in the use of this sword that he could fix upon tho 
particular Scripture that suited the occasion. And the Christian combatant, too, must 
not only see the truth, but the truth for the occasion, the truth that slays his doubts, 
that exposes the fallacies with which Satan would compass his destruction. And he 
must be able to do this in connection with some sure, incisive word of Scripture, That 
is the offensive weapon, the weapon which carries the war against the adversary. This 
Christian combatant who has been described is what every Christian is bound to be. 
The Church militant is to have, in every one of its members, a combatant. And the 
apostle lays stress upon every one taking the whole armour (and not merely some of its 
parts). No one, for instance, is a worthy combatant who feels no responsibility in the 
carrying of the gospel message. If we would have the strength our Captain would see 
in us, we must use all the pieces of the Christian armour. 

V. THAT WHICH ACCOMPANIES THE USE OF THE CHRISTIAN armouR. 1. Prayer. 
“With all prayer and supplication, praying at all seasons in the Spirit.” We are 
not to think of “all prayer” as a separate weapon. We are rather to think of it 
as that which conditions the right use of the whole armour. Without prayer we 
cannot gird ourselves for the conflict, but are cumbered as with loose robes. With- 
out prayer we cannot have that purificatiun of motives, that rectification of life, 
which the conflict demands. Without prayer we cannot have swift-footedness in 
carrying the gospel. Without prayer we shall not have faith to ward off the enemy’s 
darts. Without prayer we shall not be vble to lift our head in the assurance of 
our salvation. Without prayer we shall be unskilful in the use of the Word. Con- 
stant use and prayer, then—that will keep the helmet from being dulled, the sword 
from being rusty. But: (1) Prayer must not be mere repetition. ‘“ And in praying,” 
says our Lord, “use not vain repetitions, as the Gentiles du.” If we are bent on 
having our request from God, it will come up again and again, and under new aspects. 
Prayer is using arguments with God, and, as our mind works on our need, we shall ever 
be discovering new grounds on which to press our request. So, while we are to have 
prayer for ourselves and prayer for others (supplication), it is to ve all prayer and 
supplication, ἐ.6. to say, it is to have that variety which comes from an abundance 
of life, from active thought and feeling, and not that sameness which comes from 
lifelessness, (2) Prayer must not be irregular, The apostle teaches that it is to be 
connected with all seasons (to vitalize them, to redeem them from unprofitableness). 
Tt is true that we are not always in a mood for praying ; but let us keep the appointed 
season. Prayer is one of the means by which we are to get into the right mood 


284 {THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, [cH. νι. 1—24, 


if we keep to our plan from a sense of duty (though our feelings are cold), and when 
the time comes round fall on our knees before God, then may we expect liberation from 
our unspiritual moods, (8) Prayer must not be from self. “ Praying in the Spirit,” it 
is said here, and there is the same association in Jude 20. Prayer is dependence, and 
we have the influences of the Spirit on which to depend in prayer. We can only pray 
aright, under the impulse of the Spirit, when the Spirit indeed makes intercession for 
us, And, therefore, we should look to the Spirit to put the right desires within us 
and to give us right words, 2, With petitions for ourselves we are to blend petitions 
for others. “And watching thereunto in all perseverance and supplication.” The 
apostle is here carrying forward his thought into a special channel. While we are to 
take heed to be persevering in praying for ourselves, we are to be especially persevering 
in praying for others, And the ground of that may be that our prayers are apt to be 
characterized by selfishness. We may go on praying for ourselves; but we too soon 
give over praying for others. We unwarrantabiy (and to our own detriment) contract 
the circle of prayer. (1) Circle of supplication. “For all the saints.” That is not 
the outmost circle; for it is said in 1 Tim. ii. 1, “for all men.” But the apostle is here 
presenting the matter under a special aspect. It is this, that the combatant is to 
remember his fellow-combatants. Every combatant has his peculiar difficulties, his 
weak points. But, if he feels the struggle to be hard for himself, that should put him 
in sympathy with all others, to whom (in their own way) it is hard too, And he 
should manifest that sympathy ty Seseeching God to make their armour bright, to 
hold them up, to give them to win the day, wherever they are appointed to fight. 
(2) Special member of that circle, “And on my behalf.” (a) Special prayer he wishes 
them to offer for him. “That utterance may be given unto me in opening my mouth, 
to make known with boldness the mystery of the gospel.” That is to say, boldness 
of utterance, whencver he was called upon to open his mouth in preaching the gospel. 
This was the great accomplishment of the apostle, that he could preach the gospel. 
And he here discovers the secret of it. He put it clearly before his own mind, and got 
others interested in his object, so that they helped him by their prayers. (b) Special 
reason for the prayer. “ For which I am an ambassador in chains; that in it I may 
speak boldly, as I ought to speak.” Reuson of his office. He girded himself to save 
souls. He kept strict watch over his heart. He was swift-footed in proclaiming the 
message of peace, And as he sped from place to place, the fiery darts were thrown at 
him. Satan stirred up the Jews against him; men said that he was mad. But he 
interposed the shield of faith; he held up his head in the assurance of pardon, And 
he used the sword of the Spirit against many a heresy which threatened the peace and 
prosperity of the Church. It was of great consequence that there should be preserved 
to such an ambassador the courage of his office. Reason of his position. He was at 
the time in chains. He was in a condition, therefore, when his courage would be 
specially assailed. John the Baptist, in the gloom of his dungeon, gave way to doubts 
of Christ’s mission. The apostle’s liberty was not so much restricted, That the 
liberty he had might be well used by him, that he might speak boldly as he ought to 
speak, he would have them make that the subject of their prayers for him.—R. F. 


Vers. 21—24.— Affairs of the apostle. 1. Why he does not enter on them. “But 
that ye also may know my affairs, how I do, Tychicus . . . shall make known to you 
all things.” He knew that they would be anxious to have some account of his affairs. 
He would have given them a written account but for the fact that Tychicus, the bearer 
of his letter to them, would be able to give them (and others too, it is implied) a more 
detailed account by word of mouth, We have already remarked on the absence of the 
personal in this catholic Epistle. The one exception is the introduction of the name 
of Tychicus, and it is introduced to account for the absence of details about himself. 
In the Epistle to the Colossians, along with the same reference to ‘l'ychicus, there are 
numerous salutations. It favours the hypothesis of this being a circular letter (intended 
for a circle of which Ephesus was the centre), that none are conjoined with the apostle 
in sending salutations (the apostle alone may have been known to all the Churches), 
and none are singled out as special objects for salutation (a3 in the one Church of 
Colossxz), 2. Qualifications of Tychicus. “The beloved brother and faithful minister 
in the " In Acta xx. 4 he is classed as an Asiatic, If he did not, then, belong te 


ert, σι. 1--2 1 ἢ THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, 285 


the same city (Trophimus associated with him was an Ephesian), he belonged to the 
same province, as those to whom he conveyed the letter. Of more importance than his 
country was his Christian character, for which the apostle vouches. He limits his 
consideration to the Christian sphere (where Christ appoints and animates), and, within 
that sphere, Tychicus was both a beloved brother and faithful minister. He had those 
qualities of heart which attached men to him, an important element in a mission. He 
had also tiose qualitics of conscience which, as they made him fit to be entrusted with 
the gospel, also made him fit for the special service required of him. 8, Definite statemen 
of the object of his mission. ‘“ Whom I have sent unto you for this very purpose, that 
ye may know our state, and that he may comfort your hearts.” A servant of the 
Churck, he was, in the first instance; but he was sent by Paul on this special errand. 
He was not only to communicate information to them regarding Paul, but also 
regarding Paul’s companions in Rome. Through what he communicated, he would 
comfort their hearts. For the precise bearing of this we are left to conjecture. He 
micht be able to tell them that the health of Paul and of such a fellow-prisoner as 
Aristarchus was not suffering from their confinement. He might be able to report that 
not only Paul, but all of them, were remaining steadfast in the faith of Christ. He 
might be able to announce some increased liberty in the preaching of the gospel. He 
might especially be able (with communicated apostolic fervour) to report the preaching 
of Paul, and himself to present the gospel as the means of comfort. 

DovusLE BENEDICTION. 1. First benediction. ‘Peace be to the brethren, and love 
with faith, from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.” The source from which 
blessing is invoked is (as at the beginning of the Epistle) God the Father and the Lord 
Jesus Christ. There is given both the First Cause and the Second Cause. It belongs to 
God the Father (to whom can it more belong than to him?) to bless his children. 
Christ is the Second Cause, by whom God made the worlds, by whom also he redeemed 
and blesses his people. He is, therefore, also invoked as the Source of blessing. (1) 
First blessing. ‘Peace be to the brethren.” We are to understand “ peace” here, as at 
the beginning of the Epistle, in the sense of freedom from unrest, as being under the 
loving care of God. It may mean freedom from persecution, if that is lovingly arranged 
by God. It may also mean freedom from internal dissensions, if God sees fit to grant 
that. There is a limitation in the scope of the blessing compared with the language 
of the following benediction. We are not to understand it as peace to the whole 
Church of Christ, but rather peace to the brethren to whom, in turn, the Epistle was to 
be sent round. (2) Second blessing. ‘“ And love with faith.” The apostle (as he has 
done throughout) presupposes faith, but not as a fixed quantity. Rather does he 
invoke it in its higher degrees, and, at the same time, invoke love as its concomitant. 
Let love not lag behind, but let it keep pace with faith. If we turn believingly to 
God as our Father and Christ as our Saviour, we should also turn affectionately to the 

-brethren. Let there be love (in all its beauty) to manifest the reality and activity of 
our faith. 2. Second benediction. ‘Grace be with all them that love our Lord Jesus 
Christ in uncorruptness.” The blessing. “Grace.” This is to be understood as in 
other places. Let there be the outflowing of the Divine compassion. Let there be 
every fitting manifestation of the Divine favour. The scope of the blessing. As to its 
form, it is catholic. It excludes selfishness and denominational jealousies, and takes in 
the whole circle which Christ acknowledges. As to matter, thereare two things pointed 
to. (1) The grand characteristic of the Christian is love to the Lord Jesus Christ. 
The Christian is one who (appealed to by the Saviour) can say with Peter, “ Tord, thou 
knowest all things; thou knowest that I love thee.” Such an affection as God has put 
into the nature of the child, of the parent, such (in its personal character, in its tender- 
ness, in its strength) is to be our affection to Christ. Such a virtuons affection (as 
distinguished from natural affection) as we have toward the brethren, such, purified and 
heightened, is to be our affection toward the Master. The ground of virtuous affection 
is moral goodness, and especially one form of it, viz. holy benevolence. We love a man 
who, besides being conscientious, is filled with universal good will. So we love Christ 
because (with all dutifulness) he is the perfection of all unselfishness and benevolence 
toward men. In estimating his character (as an object for our love) we must take into 
account Ais rank in the universe, viz. that he was the Son of God. Ifa king and one 
ef his subjects were both voluntarily to go into slavery for the purpose cf redeeming 


226 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. fou. νι, 1—24, 


their country, the sacrifice would be regarded as greater on the part of the king than 
on the part of his subject. There may be the same patriotism; but there is something 
to be put down to the rank. So all that Christ was and did is enhanced in proportior 
to the height from which he descended. It was not simply love to man in a human 
position, but love that made infinite descent to burn in the human soul of Christ. We 
must also take into account the public capacity in which he acted. He was not ren- 
dering such help as we personally may render to one another. But he was the Christ, 
the appointed Representative of all mankind. He had all our interests on his hands, 
His character comes out in the whole of his life. He evinced a universal benevolence : 
“ Him that cometh unto me I will in no wise cast out.” He was called the Friend of 
sinners. He loved men apart from their outward surroundings and natural capacities ; 
he loved them as sinners in need of salvation. Especially does his character come out 
at the last. He went (in suffering the desert of sin) under that which is called the 
hiding of the Father’s countenance. And it was not only dauntless trust in God, but 
. unquenchable love to men, that maintained him there. He went down to the lowest 
depths for us (in experience the most terrible), that he might carry us with him to the 
heights. (2) An indispensable element ts pointed to in our love to Christ. “ In uncorrupt- 
ness.” There is a spurious love to Christ, which is founded on his sufferings without 
reference to their spiritual meaning. “I wept when the waters went over his soul.” 
Such love, as it is not well founded, so also is it transient. The closing climactic 
thought in this great catholic Epistle is that our love to Christ is to have an immor- 
tality, an incorruptibility As there was a deathless principle in his love to us, so there 
is to be a deathless principle in our love to him. It will have of this, according as it 
is founded on the real excellence of Christ. The purer and clearer our conception of 
his transcendent benevolence and beneficence, the more will our love have of undying 
and ever-unfolding beauty.—R. F. 


Vers. 1—4.—Children and their parents. “Children, obey your parents in the 
Lord: for this is right. Honour thy father and mother; which is the first command- 
ment with promise; that it may be well with thee, and thou mayest live long on the 
earth, And, ye fathers, provoke not your children to wrath: but bring them up in 
the nurture and admonition of the Lord.” In the preceding paragraph the apostle had 
treated of the relative duties of husbands and wives; here he directs attention to the 
relative duties of parents and children. 

1. THE puUTYy oF cHILDREN. The words lead us to consider the nature and reason of 
the obligation which children owe to their parents. 1. The nature. The duty is: (1) 
“Obedience.” “Children, obey your parents.” This duty has its limitation, When, 
for example, the command is impracticable, it is not binding. When the parent makes 
demands surpassing the child’s capacity, he is a tyrant, and the child is free from 
the obligation. Or when the command is morally wrong, when it clashes with the 
rights of conscience and the claims of God, obedience to it is no duty, but would be a 
sin. The duty is obedience rendered in a Christian spirit. ‘‘In the Lord.” Any 
conduct towards parents, mankind in general, or to the great God, that is not inspired 
with love to Christ, has no virtue in it. All acts to be acceptable to God must_be dene 
in the name and spirit of his blessed Son. (2) “Honour.” ‘ Honour thy father and 
mother.” That is, reverence them. This implies, of course, that they are honour- 
worthy. It is, alas! often the duty of children to abhor and despise the character of 
their parents, because of its falsehood, intemperance, profligacy, and crime. Paul 
supposes parents to be what their relation to their children and God demands—pure, 
generous, and noble. Such parents are to be honoured. Not to honour them is to 
dishonour God. 2. The reason. What is the reason for this obedience and reverence ? 

1) Because it is right. ‘For this is right.” Nature teaches the rectitude of it 
here is implanted in every child’s mind the feeling that he is bound .to obey and 
reverence his parents. This feeling of obligation in some form or other is universal. 
The Bible teaches the rectitude of it. It was engraven by the finger of God on the 
tables of stone ; it was inculcated in the teaching and exemplified in the life of Jesus 
Christ. (2) Because it is expedient. “‘Ihat it may be well with. thee, and thou 
mayest live inte on the earth.” A happy and a long lifedepends upon it. Children who 
are regardless of their filial duties will be regardless of all others, and rendered hable 


cH. vi. 1—24.] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, 287 


to fall into those habits of depravity which will render their life a misery, and cut 
short their days on the earth, \ 

II. Taz pury or parents. The duty of parents is here set forth in two forms, 
negatively and positively. 1. Negatively. ‘Ye fathers, provoke not your children to 
wrath.” The temper of a child is of transcendent moment; itis that which determines 
his character and destiny. To act upon that temper in its opening years so as to fret 
and sour it is to do an incalculable mischief. Against this evil it is the duty of parents 
strenuously to guard. Petty interferences, trivial prohibitions, incessant chidings, and 
an irritable spirit, are the things in parental conduct which “ provoke children to wrath.” 
2. Positively. “But bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord.” Train 
their faculties, bring out their latent powers, teach them to think with accuracy, to 
love with purity, to act with adroitness and promptitude. Do this by admonishing 
them “in the Lord.” Let the lessons of instruction and warning be drawn from the 
existence, the life, the character, and the teachings of the Lord. The child’s faculties 
cannot be developed apart from God. Secular education is a contradiction in terms’; it 
is as great a solecism as a sunless vegetation, Let parents look well to the minds of 
their children. The farmer who neglects the culture of his fields will soon have his 
acres overrun with thorns and briars and noxious weeds; and the parent who neglects 
the culture of his child will soon discover evils far more hideous and disastrous, 

The following from the quaint pen of smart old Fuller will be read with interest aud 
profit on the subject :—* The good parent. He showeth them, in his own practice, what 
to’ follow and imitate; and, in others, what to shun and avoid. For though ‘the 
words of the wise be as nails fastened by the masters of the assemblies’ (Eccles. xii. 11), 
yet, sure their examples are the hammer to drive them in, to take the deeper hold. A 
father that whipped his son for swearing, and swore himself whilst he whipped him, 
did more harm by his example than good by his correction. He doth not welcome and 
embrace the first essays of sin in his children, Weeds are counted herbs in the begin- 
ning of spring: nettles are put in pottage, and salads are made of eldern buds, Thus 
fond fathers like the oaths and wanton talk of their little children, and please them- 
selves to hear them displease God. But our wise parent both instructs his children in 
piety and with correction blasts the first buds of profaneness in them. He that will 
not use the rod on his child, his child shall be used as a rodon him. He allows his 
children maintenance according to their quality. Otherwise it will make them base, 
acquaint them with bad company and shocking tricks; and it makes them surfeit the 
sooner when they come to their estates. It is observed of camels, that having travelled 
lung without water through sandy deserts, ¢mplentur, cum bibendi est occasio, et in 
preteritum et in futurum (‘when they find an opportunity they fill themselves both 
for the past and the future’); and so these thirsty heirs’ soak it when they come to 
their means, who, whilst their fathers were living might not touch the top of their 
money, and think they shall never feel the bottom of it when they are dead. In 
choosing a profession, he is directed by his child’s disposition, whose inclination is the 
strongest indenture to bind him toa trade. But when they set Abel to till the ground, 
and send Cain to keep sheep ; Jacob to hunt, and Esau to live in tents; drive some to 
school, and others from it; they commit a violence on nature, and it will thrive 
accordingly. Yet he humours not his child when he makes an unworthy choice beneath 
himself, or rather for ease than use, pleasure than profit. If his son proves wild, he 
doth not cast him off so far but he marks the place where he lights. With the mother 
of Moses, he doth not suffer his son so to sink or swim but he leaves one to stand afar 
off to watch what will become of him (Exod. ii. 4). He is careful, while quenched his 
luxury, not withal to. put out his life; the rather, because their souls who have broken 
and run out in their youth have proved the more healthful for it afterwards, He 
moves him to marriage rather by argument drawn from his good than his own authority. 
It is a style too princely for a parent herein to ‘ will and command;’ but, sure, he may 
will and desire. Affections, like the conscicnce, are rather to be led than drawn; and 
it is to be feared, they that marry where they do not love, will love where they do not 
marry. He doth not give away his loaf to his children and then come to them for a 
piece of bread. He holds the reins (though loosely) in his own hands; and keeps, to 
reward duty and punish undutifulness. Yet, on good occasion, for his children’s 
advancement, he will depart from part of his means, Base ‘s their nature who will not 


288 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. (on. vr. 1—24, 


have their branches lopped till their body be felled ; and will let go none of their goods, 
as if it presaged their speedy death; whereas it doth not follow that he that puts off 
his cloak must presently go to bed. On his death-bed he bequeaths his blessing to all - 
his children, Nor rejoiceth he so much to leave them great portions as honestly 
obtained. Only money well and lawfully gotten is good and lawful money. And if 
he leaves his children young, he principally nominates God to be their guardian ; and, 
next to him, is careful to appoint provident overseers. The good child, Hereverenceth 
ths person of his parent, the old, poor, and ‘froward. As his parent bore with him 
when a child, he bears with his parent if twice a child; nor doth his dignity above him 
cancel his duty unto him. When Sir Thomas More was Lord Chancellor of England, 
and Sir John his father one of the judges of the King’s Bench, he would in Westminster 
Hall beg his blessing of him on his knees. He observes his lawful commands, and 
practiseth his precepts with all obedience. I cannot, therefore, excuse St. Barbara from 
undutifulness, and ‘occasioning her own death. The matter this: her father, being 
8 pagan, commanded his workmen, building his house, to make two windows in a room. 
Barbara, knowing her father’s pleasure, in his absence enjoined them to make three, 
that, seeing them, she might the better contemplate the mystery of the Holy Trinity. 
Methinks two windows might as well have raised her meditations, and the light arising 
from both would as properly have minded her of the Holy Spirit proceeding from the 
Father and the Son. Her father, enraged at his return, thus came to the knowledge of 
her religion, and accused her to the magistrate, which cost her her life, Having 
* practised, then, himself, he entails his parents’ precepts on his posterity. Therefore 
such instructions are by Solomon (Prov. i. 9) compared to frontlets and chains (not to 
a suit of clothes, which serves but one, and quickly wears out, or out of fashion), which 
have in them a real lasting worth, and are bequeathed as legacies to another age, The 
same counsels observed, are chains to grace, which, neglected, prove halters to strangle 
undutiful children. He is a stork to his parent, and feeds him in his old age. Not 
only if his father hath been a pelican, but though he hath been an ostrich unto him, 
and neglected him in his youth. He confines him not a long way off to a short pension, 
forfeited if he comes in his presence, but shows piety at home, and learns as St. Paul 
saith (1 Tim. v. 4) to requite his parent. And yet thedebt(I mean only the principal, 
not counting the interest) cannot fully be paid. And therefore he compounds with his 
father, to accept in good worth his utmost endeavour. Such a child God commonly 
rewards with long life in this world. If he chance to die young, yet he lives long that 
lives well; and time misspent is not lived, but lost. Besides, God is better than his 
promise, if he takes him a long lease, and gives him a freehold of better value. As for 
disobedient children: if preserved from the gallows, they are reserved for the rack, to 
be tortured by their own posterity. One complained that never father had so undutiful 
a son as he had. ‘ Yes,’ said his son, with less grace than truth, ‘my grandfather had.’ 
I conclude this subject with the example of a pagan’s, which will shame most Christians. 
Pomponius Atticus, making the funeral oration at the death of his mother, did protest 
that, living with her three score and seven years, he was never reconciled to her, se 
nuncquam matre in gratiam rediisse, because there never happened betwixt them the 
least jar which needed reconciliation.”—D. T. 


Vers. 5—9.—Servants and their masters. “Servants,” etc. There are two thoughts 
underlying these verses. 1. The existence of social distinctions amongst men. There 
are masters and servants, rulers and subjects. These distinctions are no accidental 
phases of society, they grow out of the constitution of things. Diversity in the tempera- 
ments, tastes, capacities, and circumstances of men give rise to masters and servants. 
2. The one spirit which is to govern men of all distinctions. The rich and the poor, the 
sovereign and his subject, the master and the servant, are under an obligation to be 
animated by the same moral spirit, and controlled by the same moral consideration. 
“ All in all things should do the will of God from the heart.” 

I. THE puTy or ΒΕΒΥΑΝΊΒ. The duty of servants, of course, is obedience. “Be 
obedient to them that are your masters.” But the obedience is here characterizcd. 
1. It is obedience in bodily matters. ‘ According to the flesh.” Their service is limited 
to secular concerns, things that have reference to the material and temporal interests of 
their masters. They were to give their muscles, and their limbs, and their contriving 


cH. vi. 1—24.] THE ἘΣΊΒΤΙ TO THE EPHESIANS. 289 


faculties, but not their souls. ‘Consciences and souls were made to be the Lord’s alone,” 
2. It is obedience honestly rendered. “ With fear and trembling, in singleness of your 
heart”—“not with eye-service.” These expressions mean that there should be no 
duplicity, no double-dealing, but downright honesty in everything. A servant is. bound 
to be honest towards his employer. He has no right to be lazy or wasteful. He has 
contracted to give, on certain stipulated conditions, his energies and time to promote 
the secular interests of his master. 3. It is obedience inspired with the religious spirit. 
They are to regard themselves in everything as the servants of Christ, and are bound to 
do the “ will of God from the heart.” In everything the authority of Christ, must be 
held as supreme. Whatsoever is done in word or deed should be done all to the glory 
of God. 4, It is obedience which, if truly rendered, will be rewarded of God. “ Knowing 
that whatsoever good thing any man doeth, the same shall he receive of the Lord, 
whether he be bond or free.” The faithful servant may feel that the wages he receives 
from his earthly master are unjustly inadequate. Yet the great Master will award 
to him at last an ample compensation. Whatsoever yood thing he has done, however 
trivial, shall meet its reward at last. The good thing must be rewarded. Goodness 
carries evermore its own reward. 

11. Tue puty oF mMasrers. The way in which masters should exercise their 
authority is here indicated. 1. They are to exercise it religiously. “Ye masters, do 
the same things unto them.” “The same things,” as we have said, do not mean the 
same work, but the same spiritual attributes. Servants are to be honest and respect 
the will of God in all; the masters are here bound to do “ the same things.” Both are 
to be under the domination of the same moral spirit. 2. They are to exercise it 
magnanimously. “ Forbearing threatening.” Though the servant may hy accident, or, 
what is worse, by intent, by omission, or by commission, try severely the temper of bis 
master, his master should forbear threatening. He should show his right to be a 
master by governing his own soul. The man who takes fire at every offence, whose 
eyes flash with rage, and lips mutter threats, is too little a creature to be a master. 
He has no licence from Heaven to rule either children, servants, or citizens, who is not 
magnanimous in soul, 3. They are to exercise it responsibly. “Knowing that your 
Master also is in heaven.” ‘They are amenable to God for the way in which they use 
their authority. ‘The master has the same Lord as the servant, and they must stand 
at last together at the great tribunal. To that Master all social distinctions vanish 
in the presence of moral character. “Neither is there respect of persons with 
him.”—D. T. 


Vers. 10—20.—Soul-militancy. “Finally, my brethren, be strong in the Lord,” ete, 
The subject of these words is sowl-militancy, and they bring under our notice the soul’s 
foes, the soul’s strength, the soul’s weapons, and the soul’s religiousness, 

I, THe souu’s Fors. “We wrestle not against flesh and blood.” The passave 
teaches the following things in relation to the antagonists of souls:—l. They are 
spiritual personalities. They are spiritual, not “flesh and blood.” They exist apart 
from matter—apart from all animal incarnations. They are personalities. We cannct 
accept the interpretation of those who regard Paul as speaking here only of evil 
principles. If lanyuage means anything, personal agents are here indicated. A prioré 
reasoning renders the existence of such beings probable; human experience and the 
Bible place their existence beyond all reasonable doubt. 2. They are wicked personalities. 
“ Spiritual wickedness,” or, as the margin has it, “‘ wicked spirits.” They are out of sym- 
pathy with God; they are in bitter and practical hostility to all that is Divine, benevo- 
lent, and happy. 3. They are diverse personalities. They differ in their make and 
their rank; they are not all of the same nature and measure of faculty, nor of the same 
rank in the universe. There are “ principalities,” “rulers,” and “powers” amongst 
them. Some, as compared to others, may be as wasps to vultures, as mosquitoes to 
dragons.. 4. They are organized principalities. ‘They are under one head, here called 
the “devil.” ‘That ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil.” There 
is one gigantic intellect that manages and marshals the whole: he who seduced our 
first parents, he with whvm Christ battled in the wilderness—the Satan of God, the 
Apollyon of man, These hosts of evil spirits are not left to themselves; they are 
welded together by one master intellect. “Devil with devil damned firm concord 

EPHESIANS, u 


NA 


290 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. (cu. νι. 1—24, 


hold.” They are managed by force and fraud, all of them. The passage suggesta that 
under his control they act: (1) Craftily. Hence the expression, the “ wiles of the 
devil.” All his movements are cunningly methodized, for such is the meaning of the 
word “wiles.” These evil spirits attack us in ambush; they steal upon us slyly and 
atealthily. (2) In darkness, “The rulers of the darkness of this world.” Where do 
they reign? Where ignorance spreads her gloom: in the cold region of atheism where 
the mental energies are benumbed, and in the tropic realm of superstition where the 
soul is stirred into an agony of fear and scarcd with the horrid forms of its own 
creations. Amidst the gloomy recesses of ignorance they rear their throne; through 
the districts of intellectual darkness they prowl about in search of their prey. They 
reign where depravity beclouds the heart, where passion is stronger than principle, the 
senses than the soul, the love of the world than the love of God; whether that be 
amidst the districts of heathenism or civilized life, in the marts of business, the temples 
of devotion, or the flowery scenes of gaiety aud pleasure. They eushrine themselves 
amidst the benighted chambers of an impure imagination, they haunt the atmosphere 
of pollution, impregnate it with their spirit, causing it to stimulate the unrighteous 
zeal of the selfish, to fire the passions of the carnal, and to swell the vanity of the 
ambitious and the proud. They reign where. sorrow and suffering darken all. They 
delight in misery. The wretchedness of the indigent, the sighs of the distressed, the 
groans of the oppressed, and the agonies of the dying gratify their malignant natures, 

11. THe βου! strenets. “Tiually, my brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in 
the power of his might.” The soul requires tremendous strength to grapple successfully 
with these mighty spirits of evil. What is the strength required? It is nothing less 
than Divine. It is to be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. But what 
kind of Divine strength is required, for strength of all kind is from the Lord? Is it 
muscular? No. Samson, with his herculean physical force, fell beneath these spirits ; 
au evil genius touched him, and the giant fellas a child. Is it mental? No. Men 
of the greatest intellect and of the loftiest genius have not been able to stand fora 
moment before these spirits. It is not by this ‘might or this power” that souls can 
stand before these infernal hosts, It is moral strength. 1. The strength of faith in the 
Absolute. Faith in that which changes not, which is true to man as man, which is 
independent of times and circumstances—faith in the Everlasting. With this faith 
men participate in the omnipotence of God, work wonders, and dare the universe. Men, 
through this faith, have “subdued kingdoms,” etc. 2. The strength of love for the 
supremely good. Love, when it is fastened even upon the frail and the imperfect, gives 
strength to the soul—strength to nerve a mother for the most trying services, strength 
to brace a patriot for the thunders of the battle. But when centred upon the eternally 
Good, its strength is increased a thousandfold; it gives the soul a power that “ never 
faileth,” a power that “ endureth all things.” 8. An invincible attachment to the right. 
‘lo “be strong in the Lord” is to be strong in sympathy with the right. It is to prefer 
the right with hell to the wrong with heaven. It is this moral strength alone that 
will enable us to “stand against the wiles of the devil,” and to battle successfully with 
the host of wickedness. ‘This strength makes a man more than a conqueror, enables 
him to glory in tribulation and shout triumphantly in the agonies of death. 

ΠῚ, ᾿ῊΞ βου} wearons. ‘The panoply is here described. It consists of two 
parts—the defensive and the offensive implements, 1. The defensive implements. 
What is the defensive? ‘“ Truth.” This is the girdle which belts the loins witk 
strength, and binds all the other parts of the panoply together so as to protect all the 
vital parts. “ Righteousness.” ‘I'his is the “ breastplate.” The man who lacks integrity 
can offer no successful defence to the foe; the dishonest man is vulnerable at every 
point. “The gospel of peace.” This, like the boot of the old Roman conqueror, makes 
the soldier firm in his step and terrible in the echo of his tread. “Faith.” This is 
the “shield,” protecting the whole body. Faith, not in creeds, but in Christ, is the 
true shield of moral soldiership. ‘“Salvation”—that is, the hope of salvation. This is 
the “helmet.” As the helmet guarded the head of the Roman soldier, the hope of 
salvation protects the sou). Let despair come, and the head of the soul is wounded 
and the whole system endangered. 2. The offensive. What is the offensive? ‘The 
sword of the Spirit.” The true soul has not only to stand its gronnd, to maintain ite 
position, to keep its territory, but to advance, to extend its boundaries, to prosecute an 


cu. vi. 1—24,] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 291 


{nvasion ; it is to conquer all other souls to Christ, and the weapon is the “ Word of 
God.” This is the sword by which the Christian soldier has to cut his way from soul 
to soul through the whole world: “For the Word of God is quick and powerfal, and 
sharper than any two-edged sword,” etc. (Heb. iv. 12), God’s Word is the truth that 
slays error, the love that slays selfishness, the right that slays the wrong, the happiness 
that slays the misery of the world. ᾿ 
IV. THe βουὴ BEticiousness. Religiousness, viz. a conscious dependence on God, 
lies at the foundation of all true soul-militancy. A man can do nothing rightly or 
successfully in spiritual soldiership who is not religious in the very spirit of his being. 
Religiousness is the only soil in which man’s spiritual faculties can grow into heroic 
vigour. In materialism they wither; in mere intellectualism they are only skeletonic 
at best; in religiousness they are like the tree planted by the rivers of water,—their roots 
are in the Everlasting, they drink into them the very life of God. Religi#usness, in one 
word, is the source that supplies the muscle and the instinct that gives the skill in true 
moral warfare. It teaches our “hands to war and our fingers to fight.” This religious- 
ness is here described by the apostle in these words, “ Praying always with all prayer 
and supplication in the Spirit, and watching thereunto with all perseverance and 
supplication for all saints,” etc. These words are so true to the original and so obvious 
in their significance that they call for no minute examination. They show us how 
this religiousness in the soul of the true spiritual soldier is to express itsclf; and it is 
to do so: 1. In prayer. “ Praying always with all prayer,” or, as Ellicott has rendered 
it, “with all prayer and supplication praying always in the Spirit.” The words teach 
us: (1) That the prayer is to be comprehensive. “ With all prayer and supplication.” 
All kinds of prayer, expressed and ejaculatory, private and social. Prayer is not 
so much a service as a spirit, not so much an act asa sentiment. Hence we are com- 
ΤΠ manded to “ pray without ceasing.” Consciousness of dependence on God, which is the 
very essence of prayer, should run as a living current through the whole of our life. 
Our whole life should be an unbroken litany. (2) That the prayer is to be Divine. “In 
the Spirit.” That is, under the influence of the Divine Spirit, who is to make inter- 
cessions for us with groanings that cannot be uttered. There is no true prayer that 
is not dictated by this Spirit. Man’s great care should be to lay his soul open to the 
Divine, If a man would have his body crave healthily for food, he must drink in as 
much as possible the fresh air of God; and if he would have his soul crave for spiritual 
food, he must breathe into his spiritual nature the breath of the Divine. (3) That the 
rayer is to be watchful. “And watching thereunto.” The soul has its moral moods. 
t has seasons favourable for culture, weathers for launching out on the deep. Its 
duty is to watch for these moods—watch the motions of the Divine Spirit upon the 
heart. Watch, as Elijah did on Carmel, for promising signs in the heavens, (4) That 
the prayer should be persevering. ‘‘ With all perseverance.” We are to be instant in 
prayer. Our Saviour taught the duty of importunate prayer in the parable of the 
“unjust judge.” Importunity is needed, not to influence the Eternal to mercy, but to 
prepare our hearts rightly to receive his gifts. 2. In prayer for the good im general. 
“ὁ For all saints.” The apostle would not have them merely to pray for themselves. 
He who prays exclusively for himself never prays at all. His prayers are but the 
breath of selfishness. Paul required them to pray for “all saints”—saints of every 
intellectual grade, of every social position, of every ecclesiastical sect, of every theo- 
logical school, of every kingdom and every tribe. Why for all saints? Because all 
saints are members of the grand army battling against the common foe—against the 
‘principalities of evil,” ete. The more force, courage, skill, each member of.an army 
possesses, the better for the cause, the more likely the victory in whose advantages all 
participate. ‘I'he battle of Christianity is a common battle—a battle against error, 
wrong, and depravity everywhere. All saints are engaged in it, and they should be 
prayed for. 8. In prayer for gospel ministers in particular, “And for me, that 
utterance may be given unto me.” Why does Paul wish them to pray for him? [8 it 
that he might be liberated from prison? No. He was now, he tells us, an “ ambassador 
in bonds.” The clanking chains of the prison hung heavily on him, and one would not 
have wondered if his first request had been to the Ephesians to pray for his bodily 
deliverance. But this he does not. He is too absorbed in the cause of Christ and 
universal happiness for this. What he prayed for was that he might be enabled 


292 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESTANS. (ou. γι. 1—24. 


properly and successfully to preach the gospel. “That I may open my mouth boldly, 
to make known the mystery of the gospel,” that is, the gospel that was once a mystery. 
‘The preaching of the gospel was God’s grand instrument for restoring the world to 
intelligence, dignity, and happiness, and because of that, he desired to do it in the most 
effective way. ‘lhere are several remarkable things in these words. (1) Paul was an 
ambassador from heaven—God’s messenger sent to proclaim restoration to lost humanity. 
The grandest commission this. (2) God’s ambassador from heaven tn bonds. Wonderful 
that the great King, whose word could have shivered Rome into atoms, should have 
allowed his ambassador to have been in chains. But so it is; and we shall have an 
explanation ere long. (3) God’s ambassador from heaven in bonds, losing all idea of 
Ais own personal sufferings, in the desire to help his race. Though a prisoner at Rome, 
he was permitted to preach (Acts xxviii. 30,31). And as a prisoner he wanted to 
discharge that high mission in the most effective way. For that he prays. A true 
gospel minister has a right to ask the prayers of Christians for him particularly, Like 
a general in the army, he has the most responsible position, the most arduous task. 
Failure in him may turn the tide of battle in favour of the foe. Prayer, then, is 8 
necessary qualification of spiritual soldiership. The victory cannot be won without it. 


“ Restraining prayer, we cease to fight; 
Prayer makes the Christian’s armour bright; 
And Satan trembles when he sees 
The weakest saint upon his knees.” 


Even the great Commander of all the legions of the good recognized the mighty power 
of prayer during his struggles on this earth. ‘‘Thinkest thou that I cannot now pray to 
my Father, and he shall presently give me more than twelve legions of angels?” As if 
he had said, ‘‘ With one breath cf prayer I could bring the mighty battalions of eternity 
to my aid.”—D. Τὶ 


Vers, 21—24.—Types of transcendent virtues. “ But that ye also may know,” οἷο. 
In these verses we have three types of transcendent virtues—a type of elevated friend- 
ship, a type of spiritual benevolence, and a type of Christian catholicity. 

. A TYPE OF ELEVATED FRIENDSHIP. Taul here does two things which show the 
purity and the worth of his friendship. 1. Introduces a noble mun to his friends, Some 
are very anxious to keep their friends to themselves, and, if possible, to monopolize 
their thoughts and their hearts;.and some, if they introduce a friend at all, only 
those of an inferior type. Paul introduces Tychicus, “a beloved brother and faithful 
minister.” You cannot confer a greater benefit on your friends than to commend to 
their confidence a noble man; the gift of such a man to them is more valuable than 
lordly estates or mighty kingdoms. 2, He introduces a noble man to their friendship 
entirely for their own advantage, There are those who introduce men to their friends 
for the sake of getting something for them; but not so in this case. Paul does not 
ask them to do anything for Tychicus; nor does he ask them to send back through 
Tychicus any favour to him, He sends Tychicus in order to serve them in two ways, 
(1) To satisfy their anxieties as friends. They would naturally be anxious to know 
something concerning the “ affairs” of the man who lived and laboured in their city 
for three years, and around whose neck their fathers fell in tears when he bade them 
adieu. They would like to know how this their father in Christ fared now a prisoner 
in Rome. To satisfy the natural craving of their hearts, he now sends Tychicus; he 
would tell them all. I should like to have seen Tychicus deliver this letter, and te 
have heard the thousand eager questions, (2) To promote their happiness as Christians. 
“ And that he might comfort your hearts.” Paul knew well the trials to which the 
Church at Ephesus was exposed, both from Jews and pagans. He knew they wanted 
comfort, The letter he sent abounded with comforting thoughts, and he knew that 
pring brother like Tychicus would skilfully and efficaciously apply the healing balm. 

ere is— 

Tl. A TYPE OF SPIRITUAL BENEVOLENCE. Paul’s heart goes out in well-wishing, 
And what did he wish for his brethren at Ephesus? No secondary favours, but the 
highest blessings from God the Father and his blessed Son, 1. Divine peace. “ Peace 
be to the brethren.” Mark where tle peace comes from—“ From God the Father and 


cH, VI, 1—24,] THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 298 


the Lord Jesus Christ." There is a peace that does not come from that source—a peace 
that comes from the devil, ἃ moral stagnation of soul, something like the stillness 
of that murky atmosphere that nurses and forbodes the thunder, the lightning, and the 
hurricane which spread devastation over sea and land. The peace of God is: (1) 
Peace of an approving conscience. (2) Peace of conscious security. (3) Peace of 
vecordant affections. (4) Peace of harmonious activities, 2. A conjunction of love and 
faith. “ Love with faith.’ There is a love and also a faith that are not of Heaven. 
Divine love and faith are always united in a good man. Divine faith “ works by 
love,” works by love as the labourer works by the sun. These are the blessings spiritual 
benevolence desires for men, and they are in truth the germs of all good. Give me 
these, and I want no more, Out of them my Paradise will bloom ; ‘they are the nebulw 
which will one day encircle me with the brightest of heavens. Give the race these, 
and soon all crimes, sufferings, discords, miscries, will cease. 

Til. A ΤΥΡΕ or CHRISTIAN oaTHOLICITY. “Grace be with all them that love our 
Lord Jesus ”—love him purely, love him in reality, love him as he ought to be loved. 
Wherever they are; in whatever land, of whatever tribe or kingdom, happiness to them. 
The language of modern sects is—Grace be to all them that are Baptists, Methodists, 
Independents, Episcopalians, etc. The language of the true Christian catholicity is 
—‘ Grace be to all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ,” of all creeds or no creed, 
Churches or no Church. 

Conciusion. Here end our reflections on this wonderful Epistle. Our walk through 
this section of the great garden of truth, whose aromas have refreshed, whose beauty 
has charmed, and whose objects have challenged our thoughts and excited our devout 
admiration, is now ended. Should others follow our footsteps with keener eyes and 
finer senses, more apt to discover the beautiful and the good, they will be able to 
discover for themselves, and reveal to others, much more than we have done. When 
we began our walk we were afraid that we should meet some of those grim Calvinian 
dogmas which certain theologians assured us were there, but we never met their shadow, 
There are no theological weeds and thistles here. All is free and fresh as nature, as 
fitted to the human soul as light to the eye and breath to the lungs.—D. T. 


Vers. 1—4.— Children and parents. Christianity purifies and elevates family life. 
It is supremely natural, orderly, and reasonable in the treatment of domestic affairs. 
We meet with frequent allusions to families and households in the New Testament. 
The order and health of the home are clearly recognized as of primary importance. 
This is seen in the treatment of parental relations, 

1. THE DUTIES OF CHILDREN TO THEIR PARENTS. 1. The duties. (1) Obedience. A 
condition of subjection is necessary and right for childhood, Children must be taught 
to reverence an authority above them and to yield their will toa higher will. Thus 
the first principle of what, in after life, must be the fundamental relation to God, is 
instilled. Children should obey, for the very sake of obedience, orders for which at 
present they see no reason, and from which they can foresee no good results. But there 
is a limit to obedience, ‘Obey your parents in the Lord.” When parents command 
what is plainly contrary to the will of Christ, disobedience becomes a duty. (2) Honour. 
It is not enough to obey in act. Love and reverence should be found in the heart 
of children. It is most injurious for children to lose reverence for their parents, They 
are themselves degraded when this is the case. 2. The grounds on which these duties to 
parents are enforced. (1) It is right. This comes first. It is an appeal to conscience, 
No obedience or honour can be of worth when only low, selfish motives prompt the 
performance of filial duty. (2) It is profitable. In the long run the principle that 
underlies the ancient promise of the fifth commandment is abundantly exemplified. 
amily life is the root of social order. When this is corrupt that will be upset. Good 
domestic habits are the safeguards of the best kind of conservatism. The most frightful 
revolutions are those that begin at the family hearth. 

IL THE DUTIES OF PARENTS TO CHILDREN. The family relation is reciprocal, and 
80 are the duties of parents and children. It is most unreasonable to expect the 
children to discharge their share of domestic duty if parents, who have so much larger 
knowledge and experience and whose example is the most powerful instructor of their 
ehildren, fail in theirs. To stern Roman fathers the Christian view of parental duty 


204 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, [on. γι. 1—24. 


was novel. Even now it is too little regarded. 1. The negative duty. “ Provoke not 
your children to wrath.” While strictly enforcing necessary commands, parents should 
be most careful not to lay on the shoulders of their children unnecessary burdens. 
Obedience is hard enough un:er the best of circumstances. Especially is it desirable 
not to provoke childish irritation by hasty, harsh manners when a wiser, kinder method 
might be more efficacious in securing obedience and respect. 2. The positive duty. 
“Nurture them in the chastening and admonition of the Lord.” The parent is the 
spiritual guardian of his childres. He cannot delegate to another the responsibility 
that God will some day call him to account for. In caring for their children’s health, 
happiness, and worldly prospects, etc., parents are often least anxious about the most 
essential point, the spiritual welfare of their family, Let it be remembered that the 
first requisite in training children for Christ is that the parents should be themselves his 
disciples—W. F. A. 


Vers. 5—9.— Servants and masters. The early preachers of the. gospel were wise in 
not provoking futile and fatal attempts at a social revolution by denouncing slavery. 
Nevertheless, they laid the foundation of that revolution and secured its peaceable and 
bloodless accomplishment. Slavery could not permanently survive the establishment 
‘of the principle of Christian brotherhood. Meanwhile under the then existing circum- 
stances Christianity taught certain necessary duties of slaves and masters, the essential 
ideas of which apply to so much of the present state of society as is at all analogous to 
that of the first century. 

1. THe puTIEs oF SERVANTS. 1, The duties. (1) Obedience.. The position of 
service, whether forced as in slavery or freely accepted as among us, implies obedience. 
Indeed, where the condition of service is voluntarily entered upon for the sake of 
adequate payment the duty is so much the stronger. The disobedient servant commits 
a double sin; he is unfaithful to his engagement, and he is robbing his master of 
unearned wages. (2) Singleness of heart. Half-hearted service is semi-disobedience. 
(3) No eye-service. How common is this degrading and dishonest habit in all walks of 
life, from that of the maid who is idle when her mistress is away, to that of the states- 
man who works for what will win the applause of the multitude to the neglect of the 
real welfare of the nation, or the preacher who preaches popular sermons to catch the 
ear of the congregation and hides unpopular truths that men much need to hear! 
(4) Serving the Lord. We are all to serve Christ in our daily work. This censecrates 
the most menial task. 2. The reward. Gross injustice characterized the old-world 
treatment of slaves, and tempted to disloyal service. This injustice will not be seen at 
the great reckoning. The slave will be as fairly judged as his master. The lowliest 
work will win as high a reward as the most pretentious if the motive is equally good. 
Here is an inducenient to faithfulness in little things. 

Il. THE DuTIEs or MasTERS. It was hard to teach a slave-holder his duty. Yet 
it is fair to observe that in many households the rigour of servitude was much softenei, 
and kinder and more humane relations maintained than those that sometimes charac- 
terize our modern commercial connection of workman and employer, relations out 
of which all humanity seems to have vanished. It is interesting to see that in the 
New Testament a hired servant is considered to be worse off than a household slave 
(e.g. Luke xv. 17). 1. The duties. (1) Fairness. ‘Do the same things unto them.” 
The duties are reciprocal. Masters have no right to expect more devotion to their 
interests from their servants than they show to their servants’ interests. (2) Kindness, 
“ Forbear threatening.” It is cowardly to use the power of the purse, as old masters 
used the whip, to gain an unfuir advantage over a servant. In the end sympathy and 
genial friendliness will secure the best service. 2. The motives. (1) Servants and 
masters have onc common Master. Both are alike servants of Christ ; both must give 
account to him of their stewardship. (2) Christ will judge without respect of persons. 
The advantages of social superiority are but temporary. They will be of no use at 
Christ’s judgment.—W. F. A. 


Ver. 10.—Divine strength. As the Epistle draws to a close, St. Paul gives emphasis 
to the requisition of Divine strength by singling it out for a final word of exhortation. 
Tbe doctrinal principles of the earlicr chaptcrs lead up to the practica} duties of 


on. v1. 1—24.)} THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 295 


the later, and these several duties to the need of Divine strength wherewith to discharve 
them in face of the assaults of evil. 

1. CuristIANs ARE EXHORTED TO BE sTRONG. Spiritual strength is decision of 
character and force of will. Religion centres in our will and character. Unless there is 
strength, fixity, determination, and energy, then all our elaborate thinking and all our 
beautiful sentiments are worthless. 1. Clear belief in the gospel is not sufficient. We 
may believe intellectually, but if we are too weak to act according to our belief that 
counts for nothing. 2. l'eelings of love to Christ are vain if they do not inspire us to 
faithful service and sacrifice. 3. Passive reliance on Christ will not avail us unless we 
have also the active faith that puts forth spiritual strength in obedience to his will. 
We are not only to flee to the refuge in Christ. We are to go forth to battle in the 
open field. And then we are not only to be endued with Divine armour, but first to 
be made strong ourselves. First comes the exhortation to be strong, and only second 
that to arm in the Divine panoply. It is only the strong man who can wear this 
armour. 4. It is our duty to be strong, Weakness is not merely a calamity to be 
bewailed. It is asin to be repented of. It leads to our falling into temptation and 
our failing in duty. 

II. SprrirvaL sTRENeTH 18 A DIVINE INSPIRATION, We cannot be strong by merely 
willing to be so, A wish will not convert the feeble body of the invalid into the 
robust frame of a healthy man, nor will a wish give to the weak soul fixity of 
character and energy of will. The body must gain strength through nourishing diet, 
bracing air, exercise, etc. So spiritual strength arises from feeding upon Christ in faith 
and prayer. 1. There is might in Christ. He is the Lion of the house of Judah. 
2. Christ puts forth that might. The strength is the might in exercise. The oak is 
strong, but passive, and therefore it can do nothing for us. The horse, though less 
strong, puts forth his power in action, and so works for us. Christ’s great might is 
not a mere latent force. It flows out in energy. 3. This strength is ours by our 
union with Christ. “Be strong in the Lord.” We must, therefore, be in Christ in 
order that we may have this strength, and the more close our union to Christ becomes 
the more vigorously shall we be supplied with his strength_—W. Ε΄, A. 


Ver. 12.— The foe. The Christian life is a warfare. In order to wage this successfully 
we must understand the nature of the foes we have to contend with, because the 
weapons and armour will have to be selected according to the character of the attack 
that is made upon us. 

L Tue NATURE OF THE FOE. 1. Negatively considered. (1) Not material. Tmagina- 
tion has given the tempter a material form, eg. in the legends of St. Anthony, because 
it is so much easier to grapple with the most fearful enemy that can be seen and 
touched than with an invisible, intangible foe. But our foe is not of flesh and blood. 
The subjugation of the physical world is easy compared with the task of conquering 
this invisible enemy. (2) Not human. It is hard enough to think of the obstructive 
and tempting influence of bad men. But we have something worse to resist. We are 
attacked by an unearthly army. The black tide of hellish sin surges against the shores 
of our human world and bespatters us with its withering spray. 2. Positively con- 
sidered, (1) Spiritual. The fact that the word “immaterial” has come to mean 
“unimportant,” is a striking proof of our earthly-mindedness. The spiritual world 
is the most real world. These spiritual foes are the most truly existing enemies we 
can ever meet, Our experience of them is in spiritual attacks, ie. in temptations. 
(2) Dominant. They are “ world-rulers,” they are in “heavenly” (or high) places. 
When St. Paul wrote this Epistle evil was uppermost in the world. Is it not also supreme 
in many regions now? We have to oust the forces that hold the field and to storm 
the citadel. 

II. THE CHARACTER OF THE WARFARE. Mediwval armour is useless before rifle- 
bullets, Old castle walls are no protection against modern artillery. Nor will modern 
cannon drive back noxious gases. Sennacherib’s hosts were powerless before that 
invisible angel of God, the pestilence. So the foe in the Christian warfare determines 
the character of the armour and weapons and the tactics to be pursued, 1. Negatively, 
(1) Physical force will not serve us. Samson’s strength is of no avail against tempta- 
tion. Money, material resources, scientific skill, are useless, This is the age of steam, 


296 THE EPISTLE TO 'THE ΡΗ ΙΑ ΝΆ, (oH. vi. 1—21. 


steel, and electricity. But such things give us no help in subduing greed, lust, and self- 
will (2) Human influence is vain. Arguments, threats, and promises; influences of 
authority and of sympathy; appeals to the reason, the feelings, and the conscience ;— 
these methods that affect our fellow-men do not touch the awful foes we have to contend 
against. 2. Positively. (1) Spiritual armour and weapons are needed, ¢.e, truth, 
righteousness, the preparation of the gospel of peace, faith, salvation, the Word of God, 
prayer (vers. 14—18). (2) These must be obtained from God. They constitute “ the 
whole armour of God:” There is nothing in the armoury of human resources, physical 
or intellectual, that is-adequate for meeting the dread spiritual foes of our warfare. 
The Christian warrior must be a man of Divine strength girded about by Divine 
graces,—W,. Ἐν A. 


Vers. 13—17.—The whole armour of God. 1. CurisTIANS NEED TO BE ARMEL. 
Aldershot cannot dispense with Woolwich. The army must be equipped before it can 
take the field. The knight must don his coat of mail and draw his sword if he is to 
make any use of his martial skill and prowess. So the Church must be prepared for 
the great conflict with unbelief, worldliness, and immorality. The individual Christian 
must be armed to meet temptation and to winatriumph. Many a sanguine young 
Christian soldier has fallen shamefully through rushing rashly into the fray without 
due preparation. 

11. THE REQUISITE ARMOUR MUST BE Diving. “Armour of God.” 1. Provided 
by God. We cannot forge our own armour. Our own resolutions, like home-made 
weapons, will be sure to betray some weakness and clumsiness. ‘I'he Christian armour 
consists of God-given graces. The pilgrim had his armour given him at the house 
“ Beautiful.” 2. God-like. A steel breastplate is no protection against a poison-cup, 
The character of our defences must be spiritual and holy, like the character of God, in 
order that we may be able to withstand great spiritual foes, 

III, Ir 18 NECESSARY TO SECURE A COMPLETE SUIT OF ARMOUR. “The whole armour.” 
We are assailable in every part of our nature. It is useless to be only half-armed, for the 
subtle tempter is sure to aim his dart at the most vulnerable spot. We are all inclined 
to make much of favourite graces and to fortify ourselves against certain selected sins. 
Where we think ourselves most secure we are likely to be most open to attack.” It 
will not be sufficient to be sound on all points but one. Achilles was said to be 
vulnerable only on the heel. But that was enough. His one weak place was fatal to 
him, God knows both the variety of foes we have to face and the different suscepti- 
bilities of our own constitution, and has provided complete armour accordingly. 

IV. Toe CHRISTIAN ARMOUR IS VARIOUS IN KIND. 1, Defensive. (1) We have first 
to be braced and girded by a firm grasp of the eternal verities of the faith. Looseness 
of conviction is a fatal source of weakness. Truth being the girdle we are not to 
embrace it, but it is to encircle us, ὅ.6. we not to be satisfied with holding the truth, 
we must let the truth hold us. (2) Our heart must be protected by righteousness, 
An evil conscience, with sin unrepented, unforgiven, and unamended, is fatal to future 
firmness, (3) We must be active in spreadiug the gospel of peace. (4) Where we 
have not sufficient resisting power in our own persons let us trust the defending grace 
of God. Then if tle breastplate of righteousness is thin, the shield of faith held before 
it may still protect us. (5) Salvation in part secured, in whole promised, will help us 
to hold our head erect in calm confidence. 2. Offensive. We have not only to stand 
the shock of the enemy’s blows; we have to return them. The necessary weapons 
are supplied from the Divine armoury. (1) The Word of God. This is the sword 
of the Spirit, because God’s Spirit inspired it and now gives it edge and penetrating 
power. Christ uscd this sword in his temptation. We resist evil by dwelling on 
Divine truths. (2) Prayer. In the garden Christ prayed and Peter slept; in the 
house of Caiaphas Christ was faithful and Peter fell—W.F. A. 


Vers, 18—20.—True prayer. The arming and fighting referred to in the previous 
verses are to be accompanied with praying. Prayer is as necessary as action, The 
part of Moses on the mount was at least as important as that of Joshua on the plain. 
Consider the character and object of true prayer. 

T, Tas OHARACTER OF TRUE PRAYER, 1. Harnesiness, What a ring of vehement 


cit. γι. 1—24.] THE EpPistLE ΤῸ THE EPHESIANS. 297 


intensity sounds through the apustle’s words! Here is a man who believes in prayer 
and is greatly anxious to secure it. It would be wonderful if some prayers were 
answered. When the prayer does not affect the heart of the suppliant how can it touch 
the heart of God? A half-hearted prayer can bring no blessing from heaven because 
it is too feeble even to reach heaven. 2. Spirituality. We must pray in the Spirit. 
Our own thoughts must be spiritual and we must seek the inspiration of God’s Spirit 
to give light and life to our praying (Rom. viii. 26). 8, Independence of hindering 
circumstances. “ At all seasons.” Prayer is always in season. But we are not always 
inclined to pray. Yet when we least desire to pray prayer is most necessary. 4. 
Watching, in order that our prayers may be apposite to the occasion, that we may 
discern the Divine response, and that we may be roused to renewed earnestness in face 
of the dangers and needs of the times. 5. Karnest prayer will be persevering prayer. 
It need be so, for God sometimes delays his reply to test our faith. 

II. ‘THE oBJECTS OF TRUE PRAYER. 1. On behalf of all saints. We should pray for 
all mankind, but especially for those who are of the household of the faith. Christian 
brotherhood should be seen in prayer. Mutual prayer is the greatest bond of union in 
the Church. 2. For any in trouble. St. Paul, the “ambassador in chains,” seeks the 
prayers of his frieuds. He in Rome can find comfort from the prayers of Christians in 
Asia. It would be well if, instead of condemning our brother when he falls before 
temptation, we would pray for him while he is in it. 3. For the spread of the gospel. 
St. Paul is not so anxious that prayer should be offered for the alleviation of his harsh 
imprisonment and for safe deliverauce from the hands of his foes, as for grace to be 
faithful and bold in his declaration of the mystery of the gospel—a noble, self-forget{ul 
request. If the Church at home believed more in the efficacy of prayer and practised 
it more earnestly, the missionary abroad would be more successful in his work.— W. F. A. 


Ver, 24.—The notes of a true Christian. This benediction differs from the benedic- 
tions with which all other Epistles of St. Paul close in one respect, viz. while on every 
other occasion the second person is used, here the blessing is described in the third 
person. Elsewhere we read, “Grace be to you,” etc. Here and here only we read, 
“Grace be with all them,” etc. This variation is in keeping with the catholic character 
of the whole Epistle, which is much concerned with the unity of the Church. It isa 
rebuke to the narrowness of Christians who care only for the prosperity of their own 
community, and even labour to win adherents from other Christian denominations or 
tegard the prosperity of neighbouring congregations with the jealousy of a tradesman 
for a rival shop-keeper. How miserably low, narrow, worldly and unchrist-like is the 
competitive Christianity of our day! St. Paul prays for a blessing on all true Christians, 
In doing so he describes the essential character of such men: they “love our Lord Jesus 
Christ in uncorruptness.” The question has been so much abused and misunderstvod 
that it is quite as important to point out what is not requisite as what is requisite, 

I, WHAT THINGS ARE NOT REQUISITE IN MEN IN ORDER THAT THEY MAY BE REGARDED AS 
TRUE CuRIsTIANS, 1. Hxternal badges of unity. We need not speak the same shibboleth, 
practise the same external habits, etc. The test is internal. 2. Agreement in theological 
opinion. Men may love the Lord Jesus Christ while they differ profoundly on many 
points of doctrine. 3. Uniformity of ritual, Love may express itself in various 
voices, from the shouting hallelujahs of a crowd of street revivalists to the elaborate 
anthem of a cathedral choir. If the love is there we have all that is essential. 4. Unity 
of Church order. Equal love for Christ may be found in Churches that observe the 
greatest variety of discipline. The proud bigotry of orthodoxy wili have to be greatly 
humbled when many a despised sectary proves his right to a higher place in the 
marriage feast because he has possessed a warmer love for his Lord. 

Il. WHat 18 REQUISITE IN ALL PEOPLE WHO ARE T0 BE REGARDED ΑΒ ΤΕΣ 
Curistians. To “love our Lord Jesus Christ in uncorruptness.” 1, The first essentia! 
is personal attachment to Christ. Our assent to a creed, diligent performance of 
devotional exercises, and connection with a Church fellowship count just for nothing 1! 
we are not in living relation to Christ. What think ye of Jesus? How does your 
soul’s affection regard him? These are the primary questions, 2. This attachment 
is to be one of love. A cold devotion of conscientious but heartless duty will not 
suffice. Happily, Christ does inspire love in his disciples by his wonderful loveableness, 


298 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. (on. σι. 1—24. 


his love to them, his great sacrifice of himself. 3. This love must be uncorrupted. A 
corrupted love is one that is lowered by selfish thoughts. If we only love for what we 
are to receive our love is, of course, worthless, If, therefore, we only turn to Christ in 
selfish anxiety to be delivered from trouble to secure certain benefits, if this be the 
secret of our apparent warmth of devotion, the thing is a mockery. They love in 
uncorruptness who love purely, unreservedly, simply. The idea alsu implies a per- 
manence of devotion. It is net a mere passing emotion, stirred, perhaps by a senti- 
mental hymn, but a deep, strong affection that outlasts time and persists through 
all our varying moods, and shows itself in action, and, when occasion requires. ip 
sacrifiga.—W. F. A. 


HOMILETICAL INDEX 


To 


THE EPISTLE OF 


ST. PAUL TO THE EPHESIANS. 


_—— 
CHAPTER 1. THEME 

THEME pace | Prayer for the Holy Spirit Ke 
Address and Salutation ... ... 8, 36 | Prayer for the Knowledge of God ... 
The Thanksgiving oo) oes 9 | The Connection between the Heart 
Adoption ... aie rr) oe. 9, 14 and the Intellect τὰν 
Redemption sea see ... 9,15 | The Knowledge of God and its Onitleis 
Christ the Head of all... «» 10] The Hope of God’s Calling 
The Seal of the Spirit and the Earnest The Riches of the Glory of God's 

of the Inheritance ay « 10 Inheritance cats 
Prayer for Spiritual Growth «10 | The Power of God in Belvation soy 
Christ Head over all Things for the The Power of the Resurrection ei 

Church — wes «. 10] The Exaltation of Christ ... ae 
The Church the Palisa of Christ .... 11 | Christ’s Headship ΤῊΝ 
The Salutation ... +» 11 | The Salutation of the Saints 
The Blessings of Redemption «» 12] The Electing and Adopting Love of 
The Origin of our Blessings: the God ... vee 

Election of Grace tee ee 18 | The Forgiveness and Taepieabion οὗ 
Redemption through Blood we 1ὅ the Adopted Children 
The Forgiveness of Sins .., we 16 | Paul’s First Prayer for the Hplissians 
The Revelation of the Mystery «. 17 | Ascription of Praise by the Church 
“The ἐν saad of the Fulness of Origination of the Church 

Times ” Ss 18 | Priority in the Purpose of Redemption 
The Summing up in One of all Things Prayer for the Ephesians .. ae 

in Christ sai re «. 19 | The Highest Things in the World μὸν 
The Believer’s Inheritance a 20] The Redemptive Predestination of 
Hope in Christ ove wo» 21] God a Reason for Man’s Exnltant 
The Means of Salvation .s0. oe 21 Gratitude Be 
Faith in Christ ... eee ». 22 | The Redemptive Protiextination of 
The Sealing of the Holy Spirit ... 23 God in its Subjective and Objective 
The Believer’s Earnest of his Divine Aspects a6 a eee 

Inheritance... toe «. 24 | Apostolic Philanthropy ον an 
The Prayers of an Apost!> +. 24 | The Christian Blessings .,, δὸς 


PaGu 


51 
63 


if INDEX. 
THEME Pack 
God’s Idea of Humanity vee = «54 CHAPTER III. 
The Consummation of all Things .. 65 | THEME PAGE 
Sealed ... ΜΗ iy, ὡς BG | God’s Purpose as to the Gentiles ... 108 
Spiritual Prosperity Se we 67 | “ The Unsearchable Riches of Christ” 
Spiritual Knowledge ne oo 58 110, 141 
The Supremacy of Christ ... ... 69 | Prayer for Spiritual Enrichment ... 110 
The Church as the Body and the Ful. “The Prisoner of Jesus Christ” 111, 14¢ 
ness of Christ ... abe se ὅθ᾽) Dispensational Privileges of the Gen< 
tiles ,.. res we 112 
The Apostle’s High Privilege es 114 
The Church the Means of Angelie 
OHAPTER IL Enlightenment we 116 
Spiritual History of Ephesians we 68 | The New Spirit of Αρϑεσαδῆ toGod 116 
Contrast between the Past and the “The Family in Heaven and ia 
Present 69 Earth” τὸς oe 116 
Christ an‘ his Work of Βϑοσποϊταίίου 69 | A Prayer for Spiritual Str rerigth ve 117 
The Christian Temple... 69, 103 | The Indwelling of Christ in Believera 118 
Spiritual Death ... vie Ὡς 70 | Love, the Root and Foundation of 
The Walk of the Dead... ve «C7 Spiritual Knowledge... “19 
Three Fatal Guides in this Walk ... 72. The Comprehension of the Love of 
The True Fountain of Spiritual Death 78 Christ on tee vee 120 
The True Origin of Salvation . 94 | A Great Doxology tes ee 221 
The Believer’s Union with Christ ... 74 | The Death of the Tribal Spirit ... 122 
The Design of the Dispensation of The Christian Brotherhood wee 124 
Mercy ae .. 76 | Paul’s Apostleship to the Gentiles: 
Salvation in its Conipletaneaas : the Introduction .., « 128 
Place of Faith and Works .. 76 | A Prayer on Behalf of the Ephesian 
The Uses of Remembrance wan 4E Christians ἑὰς oes we 19] 
The Religious Position of the Heathen 78 | Doxology ἐὸν δὺς we 188 
Nearness +o God im the Blood of Aspects of the True Gospel Ministry 194 
Christ oe τὴν ων 79 | Intercessory Prayer γον “ὁ. 157 
Christ our Peace... δὲ 80, 102 | Exultant Praise ... eos we 139 
The Proclamation of Ponce ‘awe 81 “ Less than the Least of all Saints”? 141 
Our Access to the Father wae ew. 82] “The Manifold Wisdom of God” .., 142 
The Church a City wee ee 82 | Christian Boldness we wwe 148 
The Church a Family ἊΝ we. 83 | The Universal Fatherhood of God . 144 
The Church a Holy Temple vs 88 | The Great Mystery of the Love of 
The Resurrection and Ascension of Christ oo ooo 144 
the Soul ee 1 = 4 ||. The Real ἘΠ ΤΕ eee wee 145 
Salvation, its Root and ihe Fruit we «= 8 
The Spiritual Temple ses “80 
Association with Christ ... “87 CHAPTER IV. 
Union of Jews and Gentiles in the The Christian Walk τὰ eos 16! 
Christian Church ans 90 | Details of w Walk Worthy of the 
Gospel Reformation Great aidGranious 95 Vocation ἫΝ νος 15 
Gospel Reconciliation—its Subjects, Christ’s Gifts to his Church 155 
Agency, and Results .., 97 | Christ’s Gifts to his Church: ἐμοῖν 
From Death to Life. 1. The Pranens 98 End or Purpose 156 
From Death to Life, 8. The Secret 99 | Contrasted Principles of Gentile and 
Grace and Faith .., eve ve 100 Christian Character ... . 167 
God’s Workmanship “. “. 101 | Rags of the Old Man and Rupes of 
Park Depths rt) “99 eee 101 the New Ἣν we oe 868 


INDEX. τ 
THEME PAGE THEME ᾿ PaGE 
Ethics after Theology os 159 | Asthe Truth isin Jesus ... “« 204 
The Obligations of the Christies Anger “.. 205 
Calling Ἶ 159 | Grieving the Hdly: Spirit of God ee 200 
Graces that promote the Harmony of Charity to the Undeserving eee 200 
the Church 5 159 
The Unity of the Spirit deat the Mode 
of its eas : we 161 CHAPTER V. 
The Sevenfold Unity oes eo 162 | The Walk guitable to the Children of 
Diversity of Gift in Unity of Body ,.. 163 Light: no Fellowship with Sins of 
The Source of all the Gifts oe 164 the Flesh vee 218 
The Variety of the Gifts ss. ee 164 | Walk circumspectly, or abnietly ως BUI 
The Design of the Ministry eo 165 | Duties of Wives and Husbands 214, 255 
The Ministry not a Temporary Insti- “ Tollowers of God” tee eo 215 
tution ... eee ee 165 | The Walk of Love 3 vee 215 
Warnings against Tastabitity. and The Pattern of Christian ene we 210 
Deception eee ee 165 | Warnings against Impurity of all 
The True Method and Conditions of Kinds... see axe ee 217 
Christian Growth wee + 166 | Warning against Covetousness 217 
The Moral Characteristics of Heathen- Warning against Unbecoming Speech 218 
jem ase toe ase +» 167 | Divine Wrath upon Disobedience 218 
In Christ the Transition effected from Separation from Evil τ ὡς BIS 
the Old Man to the New Man ... 168 | The Darkness turned inte Light ... 219 
Warning against Falsehood soe 168 | The Fruit of the Light... we 219 
Restraints upon Anger — ave e« 170 | The Experimental Test of the Lord’s 
Warning against Theft: 8 Plea for Will ... “ “220 
Honest Work ... “0. eo» 170 | Separation and Rebuke μὰ ἬΝ Atti. 
Two Kinds of Speech eos ooo 171 tude toward Works of Darkness .,. 220 
Sin and Ingratitude of Grieving the The Trampet-Call of the Gospel 221 
Spirit of God ... sls ee 172 | The Circumspect Walk... woe 221 
Malicious and Revengeful Feeling ... 172 | The Right Understanding of Duty ... 222 
The Benevolent and JForgiving Warning against Drunkenness ace 222 
Temper eos ove ee 173 | ‘The True Antidote to Drankenness 
The Unity of the Church ... ως 173 228, 252 
Raw Material for Christian Unity ». 175 | The Duties of Wives wea vee 224 
Exhortation eco eee ew 177 | The Duties of Husbands ... .“.. 220 
Exhortation resumed δου ose 184 | he Union between Christ and the 
Vices ... occ eee 186 Church we 226 
Walking Worthy of our Vocation ... 190 | The Love and the Wrath of God 
The Unities of Christixxity 1 Reason enforcing Morality τς 227 
for Union amongst Gayktians 192 | Inspiration, Spirituousand Spiritual... 228 
Redemptive Influence the Gift of What Hasbands and Wives owe to 
Christ νος we 104 Christ .. re vee 229 
Symptoms of Moral Mudoasa . 196 | What to imitate and to Soil vee 281 
The True Method of Studying Chris. Exhortation to exercise Wisdom in 
tianity ‘it 197 Regard to our Manner of Walk 235 
The Abjured and the Βηϊοϊμοᾶ 4 in Relative Duties ... tee vee =240 
Christian Life . ae «» 198 | Covetousness amongst the Worst of 
Walking Worthily “ata: vee 80] Human Crimes... eee οο. 243 
Christian Unity ... ose ee 201 | Christian Life .., τῶν “244 
Measured Grace ... ase +. 202 | Two Worlds of One Race ... 245, 216 
The Universal Experienne of Christ... 203 | Ideal Marriage ... see τῷ 247 
The Fall-Grown Man jive +. 203 | “Imitators of God” 349 


“Ὁ 


iv INDEX. 


THEME PAGE | THEME PAGE 
The Sacrifice of Christ aise ... 250 | The Divine Panoply in its Separate 
Awake! ΠΣ ας de Ok Parts “ite we we 268 
The Value of Τίμιθ.. ia .. 252 | The Duty of Dreyer us .. 269 
Christian Worship ... ae ων 253 | Prayer foran Ambassador in Bonds. 270 
Thanksgiving wee ὃν .. 254 | The Errand of Tychicus to phasis... 270 
Christ’s Treatment of his Church .. 255 | Double Apostolic Blessing ... ὦ 270 
Christian Nurture ... . 271 
CHAPTER VI. The Christian Treatment of Slavery .. 212 
Duties of Children and Parents 261, 274,293 | The Christian Panoply ave 273 
Duties of Servants and Masters 262, 278,294 | Panoply of God. Conclusion οὗ 
The Christian Warfare ‘ies .. 263 |- Epistle... μὴν ων 281. 
“Praying always” ... aca ... 263 | Affairs of the Kpoutle << wx, 384 
Tychicus... avid tite ... 264 | Children and their Parents... wr 256 
The Benediction... ... 264 | Servants and their Masters ... a 288 
The Duties of Children to Parents .. 265 | Soul-Militancy wee “289 
Duties of Parents ... ase ων 265 | Types of Transcendent Virtues as. 3292, 
Duties of Servants ... εἰν ... 266 | Divine Strength .... ss ame BOE 
The Duties of Masters ae .. 267 | The Foe... τ 295 
The Secret of Spiritual Strength ... 267 | The Whole Avmour of Goa ax 5296 
The Divine Panoply; its Necessity True Prayer .. 296 
and Design ite “3 .. 268 | The Notes ofa Tras Christen we 207 


= S=Se: SSS ESS} 

Se = : == 
ξξεξεσεςς 

ΞΞΕΞΞΕΞΞΞΕ ΞΕ ΞΙ 


ρόδο! 


ἘΞ ἘΞ 
==: Ξ 
=F Ξ 
ΕΣ +3 
τς eases =$ 
ft tiers: 
ἘΕΞ ΕΣ τε τι 
EERE: ΩΣ 
ἘΞ: Ξ Seger 
EEEEE? =F ERESE = 3 
Peet BESS: 
ἘΞΕΕΙΕΕ ig ssssssi seis fesseacssssssuessessea= 
ἘΞῚ ἘΞΕΞΞΈΞΕΞΕΣΞ ἘΞ ἘΕΕΕΈΞΕ: ἐξες 
Ξ:::Ξ ΞΞΞΞ ΞΕΞΞῈΞ ΞΕ ΞΕ ΞΕ ΞΕ ΞΕ Ξ ΞΕΞΓΞ Ξ ΞΕ ΞΕ ἘΞΕΞ' 
ee fees 3 Ξ ἘΞΕΣΞΕΣΞΞΕΞΕΣ Sas 
<3 == = ΞΞΞ ΞΕΣΞΞ: = 
ἘΞΞΞ Ξ ΞΕΞΞΞΞΞΕΙ 
ἘΞΕΞ ἘΕΞΈΣ ΞΕ ἘΈ ες Fs PEEEESSEER IES 
ΞΕΞΈ ἘΞΞΞ BEES SRR SS SIS SSs 
33 Sere ἘΈΞΕΙ: Stree ἘΞΞ 
ἘΞ raed peesey 325 apts 
ἘΞ ἘΣ ΈΣ τς ἜΞΞΞ 
Ξ Hae ἜΞΞΈΞΞΕΞΕΕΣ gee: 
PESTS Eer: ἘΞ ΞΕΣΞΈΞΕΕΕΙ ER EEE 
Ξ ἘΞΕΈΞΕΕΣ: ἘΓΕΕΣΕΞΕΣ ΕΘ ΤΕΣ ΕΒΈΣΕΕΙ 
Ξ = -FELSPESESS; ΞΞ:Ξ 
ἘΞΕΈΣΕΞΕς Sagiiialasegesiagessseg vases assessss 
= ze t Ξ: He ΞῈΞ ΞΞΞΞ 


LERSBESER 


τ 
2 


i 

Hi 

Ἢ 

ἢ 

ΜΉ 
ἘΠΕ 
ree 


it 
ἢ 
δὶ 
+ 
3 


| 
1τ| 


seseectee 


SELGEELISTIESRS SEE, 

ERE GTEEEEE! 

pererriteritt 

+ ad erat r 
SPE LESEE SE ELE ete errs 


SSRRECS ERECT EST 
ΤῊ 


ecesssneces 


bole! 
pas 


Sicstestas 


re 
2 
8865 


Ἢ 
ae 


ae 


δόξει 
bebe 
ΠΡΌΣ 


ren! 


ence: 


feer 


