liliiliiP'.

illi;


ilil


m


tlM


11)1    M'i'*]>t'i  '.'••I'    *''-'

iiliii:


^^--r^^V     "q:-


Dt


S5


INVALUABLE  IN  THE  STUDY.

The  Biblical  Illustrator;

OR

Anecdotes,  Similes,  Emblems,  and  Illustrations,  Expository,  Scientific,
Geographical,  Historical  and  Homiletic.

Gathered  from  a  wide  range  ot  Home  and  Foreign  Literature^
on  the  verses  of  the  Bible,  by  the

Rev.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A.


Royal  Octavo,  Cloth,  each  about  650  pages,  per  Volume,  $2.00.


"No  matter  how  full  his  library  may  be,  nor  how  empty  his
pocket-book,  the  minister  who  sees  this  work  will  want  it." — Observer.

"It  promises  to  be  the  most  useful  cyclopedia  for  ministers  is-
sued as  yet." — Christiati.

"Every  volume  is  profusely  treated  and  explained  verse  by  verse,
with  apposite,  varied  and  suggestive  extracts  from  a  vast  number
of  ancient  and  modern  authors.  The  meaning  of  v.-ords,  the  lessons
deducible  from  the  text,  the  doctrine  it  teaches,  the  duty  it  enjoins,
pithy  remarks  of  commentators  and  other  writers  upon  it,  and  an-
ecdotes with  which  to  enforce  its  teachings  follow  each  verse.  .  .
The  author  has  put  the  condensed  substance  of  many  commentaries
in  one,  giving  the  results  reached  by  many  learned  experts." — Meth-
odist Review.

"There  is  little  or  no  exposition,  properly  so  called,  but  an  abun-
dant citation  of  the  opinions  of  men  called  forth  by  the  Inspired
writers.     In  this  respect  the  book  is  unique." — Christian  Intelligencer.

OLD  TESTAMENT  VOLUMES:

Genesis,  Vol.  1.  Joshua,  Judges  and  Ruth.

Genesis,  Vol.  2.  I.  and  II.  Chronicles,  Ezra,  Ne-

exodus.  hemiah  and  esther.

Leviticus  and  Numbers.  Proverbs.

Deuteronomy.  The  Psalms.    Vol.  1:  1-xxvi.

NEW  TESTAMENT  VOLUMES:

St.  Matthew.  Philippians  and  Colossians.

St.  Mark.  Thessalonians.

St.  Luke,  Vol.  1.  First  Timothy.

St.  Luke,  Vol.  2.  Second   Timothy,   Titus,   and

St.  Luke,    Vol.  3.  Philemon.

St.  John,    Vol.  1.  Hebrews,  Vol.  1.

St.  John,    Vol.  2.  Hebrews,  Vol.  2,

St.  John,    Vol.  3.  James.

Acts,  Vol.  1.  First  Corinthians,  Vol.  1.

Acts,  Vol.  2.  First  Corinthians,  Vol.  2.

Acts,  Vol.  3.  Second  Corinthians.

Romans,  Vol.  1,  First  and  Second  Peter.

Romans,  Vol.  2.  First,  Second  and  Third  John,

Galatians.  and  Jude.

Ephesians.  Revelation.

Index  Volume  to  Entire  New  Testament,  $5.00.

Send  for  our  circular  giving  special  offers.

Fleming  H.  RevcU  Company,

New  York:  Chicago:  Toronto:

158  Fifth  Avenue.       63  Washington  Street.      ay  Richmond  St.  W.


THE


Biblical  Illustrator


OR

Anecdotes,  Similes,  Emblems,  Illustrations;
Expository,  Scientific,  Geographical,  His-
torical, and  Homiletic,  Gathered  from
a  Wide  Range  of  Home  and  Foreign
Literature,    on   the    Verses    of    the    Bible


Rev.  JOSEPH  S.   EXELL,  M.A.


SECOND  riMorHT—riTus

PHILEMON


New  York  Chicago  Toronto

Fleming   H.  Revell    Company

London     and     Edinburgh


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO

TIMOTHY.

Thb  AiTTHoitSHip  Of  THB  EpisTLE. — In  Several  passages  this  Epistle  bears  the
stamp  of  genuineness  as  a  writing  of  St.  Paul's,  notably  at  chaps,  i.  6-18  and  iv.
9-22.  In  particular,  the  opening  thanksgiving  (chap.  i.  3)  is  characteristic  of
Paul,  eight  of  his  ten  other  Epistles  having  a  similar  commencement.  At  the  same
time  this  is  not  such  a  prominent  feature  as  to  lead  to  imitation ;  and,  as  a  matter
of  fact,  it  is  not  found  in  the  two  other  Pastoral  Epistles.  A  strong  proof  of
genuineness  is  afforded  by  the  proper  names  in  the  Epistle.  They  are  twenty-three
in  number,  including  ten  mentioned  elsewhere.  In  connection  with  several  of  these
ten,  remarks  are  made  which  a  forger  would  have  been  very  unlikely  to  invent;  e.g.,
"Demas  forsook  me,  having  loved  this  present  world"  (chap.  iv.  10 ;  cf.  Col.  iv.  14),
is  a  record  more  like  what  we  should  have  expected  to  find  concerning  Mark,  in
view  of  his  former  desertion  of  Paul  (Acts  ziii.  13) ;  whereas  we  find  favourable
mention  of  him  in  this  Epistle  (chap.  iv.  11).  Dalmatia  is  also  a  strange  place  to
have  invented  as  a  destination  for  Titus  (chap.  iv.  10),  considering  that  he  had
been  written  to  so  recently  at  Crete.  A  striking  argument  has  been  derived  from
the  occurrence  of  the  name  Linus  in  chap.  iv.  21.  The  argument  is  based  on  the
fact  that  Linus,  Cletus,  and  Clement  are  the  names  of  the  first  three  bishops  of
the  Church  of  Borne,  preserved  in  her  Eucharistic  Service,  dating  from  the  second
century.  If  the  Epistle  had  been  written  in  the  post-Apostolio  age,  Linus,  it  is
held,  would  have  been  sure  to  receive  a  more  prominent  place  in  the  list  of  saluta<
tions,  and  his  name  would  have  been  accompanied  with  that  of  Cletus,  or  at  all
events  with  that  of  Clement,  as  the  latter  was  beUeved  to  have  been  an  immediate
disciple  of  Paul.     {J,  A.  McClymont,  B,D.)

Object  of  the  Epistle. — It  was  written  from  Rome  shortly  before  the  mart3nrdom
of  the  apostle.  It  was  written  chiefly  to  urge  Timothy  to  come  to  him,  all  his  other
companions  in  the  service  of  Christ  (excepting  Luke)  being  away.  One,  Demas,  had
deserted  him ;  others,  as  Tychicus,  he  had  sent  away.  But,  though  apparently  sent
for  the  purpose  of  urging  Timothy  to  come  to  him  quickly,  it  contains  the  most
precious  exhortation  to  him,  and  through  him  to  all  ministers,  "  to  make  full  proof
of  their  ministry,"  and  this  it  does  in  the  words  of  a  dying  man,  who  is  "  ready
to  be  offered,  and  the  time  of  whose  departure  is  at  hand."  Whatever  special
onslaughts  of  the  evil  one  were  yet  in  store  for  him,  we  have  his  expression  of  faith
that  God  would  carry  him  triumphantly  through  all  (chap.  iv.  18).  {M.  F.  Sadler,
M.A.)

Contents. — This  letter  is  of  a  more  private,  personal,  and  intimate  character:
hence  in  the  superscription  Paul  omits  the  title  apostle.  In  the  body  of  the  letter
(chap.  i.  6-iy.  8)  three  subjects  are  dealt  with :  1.  Timothy's  own  deportment  He  ia
to  Btir  np  the  gilt  which  is  in  him,  and  not  allow  himself  to  be  daunted  by  fear  of


vi        INTBODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.

the  Bofferings  which  the  service  of  Christ  may  bring  upon  him.  Faol  encoarages
him  by  four  considerations :  the  grandeur  of  the  gospel,  his  own  example  and  that
of  the  faithful  Onesiphorus,  and  lastly  by  the  sure  hope  of  the  Christian  (chap.  i.
6-ii.  13).  2.  The  Church.  This  has  been  invaded  by  teaching  to  no  profit,  and
tending  only  to  barren  disputations.  Nevertheless  there  still  remains  a  nucleus  of
true  believers,  bearing  the  Divine  seal  of  hoUness.  Timothy  must  not  be  dis-
couraged, therefore,  but  contend  firmly  and  patiently  for  the  truth.  There  is  even
reason  to  expect  that  in  the  last  times  a  moral  corruption,  like  that  of  the  heathen
world,  may  find  its  way  into  the  Church  itself.  Already  some  Christians  have
become  perverted.  In  order  to  counteract  their  influence,  the  apostle  gives
Timothy  three  oonnsels.  He  is  to  remember  the  example  of  constancy  which  he
had  witnessed  in  Paul  himself  (during  his  first  sojourn  in  Lyoaonia) ;  he  is  to  feed
continually  upon  the  Scriptures  inspired  of  God;  and  to  redouble  his  vigilance
and  activity  in  evangelistic  work  (chap.  ii.  14-iv.  6).  8.  The  apostle  himself.
He  speaks  first  of  his  approaching  martyrdom,  then  he  asks  Timothy  to  come
as  soon  as  possible,  because  all  his  fellow-workers,  except  Luke,  are  absent.
He  urges  that  Mark  should  come  with  him,  and  desires  him  to  bring  also  the  cloak
and  the  books  which  he  (Paul)  had  left  in  Asia  Minor.  Lastly,  he  refers  to  his  first
appearance  before  the  imperial  judgment  seat,  which  gave  him  an  opportunity  of
fully  proclaiming  the  gospel  message,  and  yet  did  not  lead  to  his  condemnation.
In  the  concluding  sentences  he  refers  to,  or  explains  incidentally,  the  absence  of
two  of  his  fellow-workers  (ver.  20).  Then  come  greetings  to  a  few  brethren,  all  d
them  bearing  Boman  names.    (Prof.  F.  Godet.)


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOB.

II.  TIMOTHY.

CHAPTER  I,

Ybbs.  1,  S.  Paul,  an  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ  by  tbe  will  of  God. — The  dignity  of
preachers]: — Preachers  are  to  maintain  the  dignity  of  their  persons.  Beoaase  a  good
name  is  as  precious  ointment,  above  great  riches,  and  more  than  the  choicest  silver
and  gold,  to  be  regarded.  It  will  rejoice  the  heart,  whereas  the  contrary  is  a
carse,  and  to  be  avoided.  Otherwise,  if  ministers  be  ill  reported  of,  their  doctrine
(be  it  never  so  sound  or  sovereign  for  the  soul)  wiU  be  despised,  rejected.
If  the  vessel  be  counted  unsweet,  who  wiU  with  alacrity  taste  of  the  liquor  7
The  Word  will  not  speed  if  the  preacher  be  despised.  And  for  procuring  a
good  report — 1.  Be  diligent  in  the  discharge  of  thy  duty ;  avoid  idleness  in  thy
calling.  2.  Take  heed  thou  be  not  justly  accused  of  that  which  thou  hast
severely  censured  in  others.  3.  Speak  not  evil  of  others,  for  with  what  measure
we  mete  it  shall  be  measured  to  us  again.  Could  we  cover  others'  infirmities,
they  would  do  the  like  for  us.  4.  Seek  the  glory  of  God  in  thy  proceedings,  for  they
who  honour  God  shaU  be  honoured  of  Him,  whereas  they  who  seek  themselves
shall  be  abased.  The  people  also  must  take  heed  how  they  detract  from  the  credit
of  their  pastors.  Nature,  by  a  sacred  instinct,  will  defend  the  head  with  the  loss
of  the  hand.  Why,  the  preacher  is  the  head  of  the  people,  and  therefore  to  be
respected ;  and  it  is  an  old  axiom,  "  Do  My  prophets  no  barm  "  (Psa.  cv.  15).  {J.
Barlow,  D.D.)  Life  shaped  by  the  will  of  Ood: — In  1798  a  child  was  born  at
Bome,  N.T.  His  father  was  a  mechanic.  At  school  he  showed  good  talents,  and
his  father  at  length  consented  that  he  might  attempt  to  get  a  liberal  education.
His  heart  was  set  on  the  law,  but  God  made  him  a  minister,  turned  his  thoughts
towards  the  Holy  Scriptures  as  a  field  of  study,  and  before  he  died  (at  the  age  of
seventy-two  years)  a  million  volumes,  of  which  he  was  the  author,  had  been  sold.
This  is  a  very  brief  sketch  of  the  Eev.  Albert  Barnes.  Now,  did  he  do  all  these
things  of  his  own  power  and  wisdom  ?  Not  at  all.  Hear  his  modest  and  truthful
statement  on  the  subject :  "  I  have  carried  out  none  of  the  purposes  of  my  early
years.  I  have  failed  in  those  things  which  I  had  designed,  and  which  I  hoped  to
accomplish.  I  have  done  what  I  never  purposed  or  expected  to  do.  I  have  known
what  it  was  to  weep  at  discouragements.  I  have  been  led  along  contrary  to  my
early  anticipations.  I  can  now  see,  I  think,  that  while  I  have  been  conscious  of
entire  freedom  in  all  that  I  have  done,  yet  that  my  whole  life  has  been  under
the  absolute  control  of  a  Higher  Power,  and  that  there  has  been  a  will  and  a  plan
in  regard  to  my  life  which  was  not  my  own.  Even  my  most  voluntary  acts,  I  can
see,  have  been  subservient  to  that  higher  plan,  and  what  I  have  done  has  been
done  as  if  I  had  no  agency  in  the  matter."  {J.  Plumer,  D.D.)  According  to  the
promise  of  life. — The  promise  of  life : — The  specific  form  of  the  whole  gospel  is
promise,  which  God  gives  in  the  Word  and  causes  to  be  preached.  The  last
period  of  the  world  is  &e  reign  of  grace  (Eom.  ▼.  21).  Grace  reigns  in  the  Word,
only  as  promise.  Grace  has  nothing  to  do  with  law  and  requisition  of  law,  there-
fore the  word  of  that  grace  can  be  no  other  than  a  word  of  promise.  Hence  voptc
and  inayyikia  form  an  indissoluble  unity  (Bom.  iv.  16).  For  to  this  end  Chnst  is
the  Mediator  of  the  New  Covenant,  that  we  might  receive  the  promise  of  the
eternal  inheritance  (Heb.  ix.  15).    The  promise  of  life  in  Christ-form  is  the  word

1


i  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  «.

of  the  New  Covenant  (ohap.  i.  1).  The  difierence  between  the  gospel  of  the  Old
Covenant  and  that  of  the  New  rests  alone  on  the  transcendently  greater  glory  of  its
promise  (Heb.  viii.  6;  zi.  whole).  That  these  great  and  precious  promises  are
given  to  ns  (2  Pet.  i.  4;  2  Cor.  vii.  1)  establishes  the  position  of  a  Christiaii
man ;  if  he  calls  himself  a  son  and  heir,  he  has  no  other  title  for  this  except  that
of  promise  alone,  purely  of  grace  (Qal.  iv.  28,  iii.  29;  Bom.  iv.  16).  That,
and  how  God  for  His  own  sake  blots  out  our  transgressions,  and  remembers  our
sin  no  more  (Isa.  xliii.  25),  is  the  substance  of  the  word  of  promise  in  the  New
Testament,  and  which  confirms  that  of  the  Old.  {J.  Harlest.)  Promite  and
payment : — Satan  promises  the  best,  but  pays  with  the  worst ;  he  promises  honour
and  pays  with  disgrace ;  he  promises  pleasure  and  pays  with  pain ;  he  promises
profit  and  pays  with  loss ;  he  promises  life  and  pays  with  death.  But  God  pays  aa
He  promises ;  aU  His  payments  are  made  in  pure  gold.  (T.  Brooks.)  Through
death  to  life : — An  unusual  addition  to  the  opening  formula  of  St.  Paul's  letters,

Erobably  rising  out  of  the  sense  that  the  promise  was  near  its  fulfilment,  and  that
e  was  about  to  pass  through  death  to  life.    {E.  H.  Plumptre,  D.D.)        The  un-
toavering  certainty  of  St.  Paul  in  respect  of  his  call  to  apostleship  : — 1.  Its  founda-
tion.   2.  Its  noble  value.    Ministry  in  the  gospel  is  no  function  of  death,  but  a
proclamation  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus.     {Dr.  Van  Oosterzee.)        Which  is  in  CbrlBt
Jesus. — Ministerial  relation  with  Christ : — This  must  teach  us  who  have  any
relation  with  Christ  highly  to  esteem  it  and  greatly  to  rejoice  in  it.    Think  it  no
small  thing  to  be  an  officer  in  His  house,  a  labourer  in  His  vineyard,  and  a  member
of  His  body,  for  this  is  true  nobility,  unconceivable  dignity,  and  the  direct  path  to
eternal  felicity.    Paul,  a  preacher  of  Jesus  Christ,  is  a  name  of  greater  price  and
praise  than  all  human  titles  and  time's  adjuncts  (though  in  their  nature  good)  in
all  the  world.     {J.   Barlow,  D.D.)         To  Timothy,  my  dearly  beloved  son. —
Timothy,  the  pious  youth : — Timothy  is  one  of  the  unblamed  youths  of  the  Bible.
He  ranks  along  with  Abel,  Joseph,  Moses,  Josiah,  and  Daniel.    I.  Timothy's  book.
His  father  was  a  Greek  and  a  heathen ;  but  his  mother,  Eunice,  and  his  grand-
mother, Lois  (who  lived  with  them),  were  Jews  and  believers.    They  did  their
best  for  the  godly  upbringing  of  their  boy ;  and  they  would  be  left  to  do  as  they
liked  in  the  matter.    For  heathen  fathers  gave  more  attention  to  their  young  dogs
and  horses  than  to  their  young  children.     Books  were  then  very  scarce  and  dear,
and  probably  the  Old  Testament  was  the  only  book  in  their  house.    They  used  it
well,  and  found  it  to  be  a  library  in  itself,  and  the  best  children's  treasury.    II.
Timothy's  home.    The  boy  would  be  strongly  tempted  to  follow  his  dashing  heathen
father,  whose  amusements  would  be  such  as  boys  most  delight  in ;  yet  he  sided
with  and  took  after  his  devout  mother  and  grandmother.    That  fact  speaks  volumes
for  him.    I  believe  that  he  gladly  gave  himself  up  to  all  the  best  influences  of  his
home.    Thus  his  mother  was  his  mother  thrice  over,  for  she  gave  life  to  his  mind
and  to  his  soul  as  she  had  given  life  to  his  body.    Obedience  is  only  one  of  the
outward  signs  of  the  true  spirit  of  a  child.    A  girl  once  heard  a  sermon  upon  this
subject.    On  the  way  home,  feeling  uneasy,  she  said,  '•  Mother,  do  I  always  obey
you  ?  "    "  You  know  best  yourself,  my  dear,"  the  mother  replied.    "  Well,  I  never
disobey  you,"  the  girl  continued,  "  I  always  do  what  you  bid  me,  but  I  sometimes
go  slow."    The  Bible  shows  concern  chiefly  about  the  kiud  and  spirit  of  your
obedience.    "Children,  obey  your  parents  in  the  Lord."    The  right  feeling  to
parents  is  so  like  the  right  feeling  to  God  that  people  have  used  one  word  for  both.
The  noblest  characters  are  found  among  those  men  who  in  youth  yielded  most  to  a
mother's  influence.    You  will  find  many  striking  proofs  of  my  view  in  such  books
as  Smiles'  "Self-help"  and  "Character."    The  reason  is  soon  found.    Boys  like
Timothy  unite  in  their  characters  what  is  best  in  man  and  woman.     They  are  rich
in  spirit  beyond  others,  for  Nature  gives  them  manly  strength,  to  which  a  mother's
influence  adds  tenderness  and  sweetness.    A  well-known  writer  has  said,  "  In  my
best  moments  I  find  again  my  mother  in  myself."    Usually  man  is  the  son  of
woman  in  his  best  gifts.     "  A  kiss  from  my  mother,"  said  West,  "  made  me  a
painter."    To  love  your  mother  well,  then,  is  a  hberal  education  of  head  and  heart.
III.  Timothy's  conversion.     Some,  like  Samuel,  cannot  remember  a  time  when
they  did  not  trust  God.    Their  love  to  the  Saviour  is  not  an  after-love,  but  a  first
love.    Others,  like  Timothy,  have  a  well-marked  and  a  well-remembered  conver-
sion.   Paul  calls  him  "my  own  son  in  the  faith,  .  .  .  whom  I  have  begotten  in  the
gospel."    Often  the  successful  preacher  but  reaps  what  the  mother  had  sowed,  and
watered  with  her  prayers,  and  brought  to  the  verge  of  harvest.    Timothy  must
hAY0  been  a  mere  boy  at  the  time  of  his  ooaversion.    For  he  was  quite  young  when


OHAT.  1.]  II.  TIMOTHY.


he  was  ordained,  and  even  when  Paul  wrote  his  Epistle  to  him,  he  was  so  boyish-
looking  tbat  people  might  easily  despise  his  youth.  His  early  conversion  was  one
chief  reason  why  Timothy  did  so  much  good,  and  why  he  still  remains  such  an
inviting  example  of  grace.  It  made  him  like  Newton,  of  whom  Bishop  Burnet
Bays,  that  he  had  the  whitest  soul  he  ever  knew,  and  was  as  a  very  infant  in
purity  of  mind.  Than  youthful  piety  God  has  no  better  gift  for  you  but  heaven.
{James  Wells,  M.A.)  The  useful  to  be  chiefly  instructed: — Such  persons  as
are  likely  to  prove  good  and  excellent  instruments  in  the  Church  are  principally
to  be  instructed  and  encouraged.  We  will  water  that  plant  most,  hedge  about
it,  and  prune  it,  which  is  likeliest  to  bring  forth  much  and  good  fruit ;  the
beast  of  best  hopes  shall  be  put  in  the  rankest  pasture,  the  other  turned  to
run  in  the  common  field  and  barrenest  ground.  (J.  Barlow,  D.D.)  Grace,
mercy,  and  peace  from  God  the  Father  and  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord. — The
universal  need  of  mercy  : — The  salutation  in  the"  three  pastoral  Epistles  introduces
between  the  customary  "  grace  "  and  "  peace  "  the  additional  idea  of  "  mercy."
It  is  a  touching  indication  of  the  apostle's  own  humility,  and  reveals  his  deepening
sense  of  the  need  of  "mercy  "  as  he  drew  near  the  glory  of  the  unveiled  Face.  It
records  the  fact  that  if  in  Ephesus,  Eome,  or  England  there  are  any  children  of
God  who  fancy  they  can  rise  above  an  utterance  of  the  cry,  "God  be  merciful  to
me,"  apostles  and  ministers  of  Christ,  even  in  view  of  the  martyr's  crown,  cannot
forget  their  profound  need  of  Divine  "  mercy."  The  association  of  Christ  Jesus
with  God  the  Father  as  the  common  source  of  "grace,"  "mercy,"  and  "peace"
shows  what  St.  Paul  thought  of  his  Lord.  As  he  commenced  his  Epistle  with  this
blended  petition,  we  are  not  surprised  to  find  that  his  last  recorded  words  were,
"The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with  you."  This  was  the  sum  of  all
blessedness,  and  the  exalted  Lord,  Christ,  was  Himself  the  source  of  it.  (H.  R.
Reynolds,  D.D.)  Salutations  : — Salutations  are  not  for  compliment,  but  piety.
{J.  Barlow,  D.D.)  Conduits  of  grace : — Hear  the  Word,  search  the  Scriptures,
read  good  books,  receive  the  sacraments,  pray,  confer,  for  these  be  as  so  many
conduits  whereby  the  Creator  conveyeth  grace  into  the  soul  of  the  creature.  {Ibid.)
Mercy  and  grace  essential  to  true  peace : — Dream  not,  then,  that  all  is  peace  that
Beems  so ;  for  what  peace  can  a  profane  person  have  within  him  that  wanteth  faith
and  grace?  Nay,  how  ever  he  carry  the  matter,  he  is  at  war  within  himself.  The
wounded  deer  runs  and  skips  and  leaps,  yet  the  arrow  or  bullet  stings,  pains,
torments  at  the  very  heart,  and  before  long  will  cause  a  fall,  a  death.  So,  under  a
cheerful  look,  the  soul  may  be  sorrowful,  and  all  that  laugh  in  the  face  are  not  at
peace  within.  Who,  then,  is  he  that  would  have  true  and  sound  peace  ?  Let  him
strive  for  mercy  and  grace;  for  as  the  shadow  the  body,  heat  the  fire,  these  follow
the  one  the  other.  Many  imagine  they  have  it,  yet  are  foully  deluded,  deceived.  I
deny  not  but  the  wicked  may  have  a  peace  ;  but  it  is  not  worth  the  naming,  for  it
runs  not  from  a  clear  fountain,  it  springs  not  from  a  sweet  root,  and  therefore  one
drop  of  this  we  have  in  hand  is  worth  a  thousand  of  that,  as  a  little  rose-water
a  whole  glassful  of  mud.  It  is  not  constant  neither,  but  often  interrupted;
every  thunderclap  will  cause  such  to  quake,  to  tremble,  and  at  the  last  they  shall
certainly  be  consumed.  Oh  that  men  were  wise  to  gather  grace,  so  should  they
have  peace  at  their  latter  end,  and  in  the  meanwhile  be,  like  Mount  Sion,
unmovable  1  Grant  that  such  may  have  outward  troubles ;  yet  they  shall  have
inward  peace  that  passeth  all  understanding.    {Ibid.)

Ver.  3.  I  thank  God,  whom  I  serve  from  my  forefathers  with  pure  conscience. —

Serving  God : — Fifty  years  ago,  when  a  poor  black  man  of  Jamaica  wishing  to  go  to
Africa  to  tell  the  glad  tidings  of  salvation,  was  told  that,  among  other  difficulties,
he  might  be  a  slave  again,  he  replied,  "  If  I  have  been  a  slave  for  man,  I  can  be  a
slave  for  God."  (Anon.)  *'  I  serve" : — At  the  battle  of  Crecy,  in  1346,  when
King  Edward  III.  of  England  defeated  Philip,  King  of  France,  the  Black  Prince
led  a  portion  of  the  attack.  Thinking  himself  very  hotly  pressed  in  the  midst  of
the  combat,  he  sent  word  to  his  father  to  send  him  some  reinforcements  at  once,
or  he  would  be  flanked  by  the  enemy.  The  king,  who  had  been  watching  the  pro-
gress of  the  fight  from  a  neighbouring  hill-top,  sent  down  word  as  follows  :  '♦  Tell
my  son,  the  Black  Prince,  that  I  am  too  good  a  general  not  to  know  when  he  needs
help,  and  too  kind  a  father  not  to  send  it  when  I  see  the  need  of  doing  so."  The
historian  tells  us  that,  reassured  by  this  promise,  the  Black  Prince  fought  nobly,
and  pat  the  motto  Ich  Dien,  "I  serve,"  upon  his  crest,  which  is  on  the  Prince  of
Wales'*  escutcheon  to  this  day.    (J.  L.  Nye.)       Disinterested  service : — After  the


4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  I.

completion  of  his  great  picture  of  "The  Last  Judgment"  for  the  altar  of  the
Sistine  Chapel  (which  had  occupied  him  eight  years),  Michael  Angelo  devoted  him-
self to  the  perfection  of  St.  Peter's,  of  which  he  planned  and  built  the  dome.  He
refused  all  remuneration  for  his  labours,  saying  he  regarded  his  services  as  being
rendered  to  the  glory  of  God.  (W.  BaxendaU.)  The  spirit  of  true  service : —
My  desire  is  that  God  may  be  pleased  by  me  and  glorified  in  me,  not  only  by  my
praying  and  preachiug  and  almsgiving,  but  even  by  my  eating,  drinking,  and
bleeping,  and  visits,  and  discourses  ;  that  I  may  do  all  in  the  name  of  the  Lord
Jesus,  giving  glory  to  God  by  Him.  Too  often  do  I  take  a  wrong  aim  and  miss  my
mark  ;  but  I  will  tell  you  what  are  the  rules  I  set  myself  and  strictly  impose  upon
myself  from  day  to  day  :  Never  to  lie  down  but  in  the  name  of  God,  not  barely  for
natural  refreshment,  but  that  a  wearied  servant  of  Christ  may  be  recruited  and
fitted  to  serve  Him  better  the  next  day  ;  never  to  rise  up  but  with  this  resolution —
well,  I  will  go  forth  this  day  in  the  name  of  God,  and  will  make  my  religion  my
business,  and  spend  the  day  for  eternity  ;  never  to  enter  upon  my  calling  but  first
thinking  I  will  do  these  things  as  unto  God,  because  He  requireth  these  things  at
my  hands,  in  the  place  and  station  to  which  He  hath  appointed  me ;  never  to  sit
down  to  table  but  resolving  I  will  not  eat  merely  to  please  my  appetite,  but  to
strengthen  myself  for  my  Master's  work  ;  never  to  make  a  visit  but  upon  some  holy
design,  resolving  to  leave  something  of  God  wherever  I  go.  This  is  that  which  I
have  been  for  some  time  learning  and  hard  pressing  after,  and  if  I  strive  not  to
walk  by  these  rules,  let  this  paper  be  a  witness  against  me.     {J.  Alleine.)  True

and  false  service: — It  is  said  of  the  Lacedoemonians,  who  were  a  poor  and  homely
people,  that  they  offered  lean  sacrifices  to  their  gods ;  and  that  the  Athenians,  who
were  a  wise  and  wealthy  people,  offered  fat  and  costly  sacrifices ;  and  yet  in  their
wars  the  former  always  had  the  mastery  of  the  latter.  WTiereupon  they  went  to
the  Oracle  to  know  the  reason  why  those  should  speed  worst  who  gave  most.  The
Oracle  returned  this  answer  to  them  :  "  That  the  Lacedoemonians  were  a  people  who
gave  their  hearts  to  their  gods,  but  that  the  Athenians  only  gave  their  gifts  to  their
gods."  Thus  a  heart  without  a  gift  is  better  than  a  gift  without  a  heart.  {T.
Seeker.)  Deceitful  service: — The  observation  of  Augustine  is  founded  on  too
much  truth :  "  There  is  often  a  vast  difference  between  the  face  of  the  work  and
the  heart  of  the  workman."  (Ibid.)  Strength  required  for  religious  service: —
And  to  serve  God,  is  it  laborious?  We  must  then  be  of  good  courage,  gather
strength,  and  quit  us  like  men.  He  that  hath  a  hard  task  will  proportion  his
power  according  to  the  toiL  The  longer  the  ground  hath  lain  fallow,  the  stronger
must  be  the  team  to  tear  it  asunder ;  and  the  faither  we  take  a  journey,  the  more
pence  must  we  put  in  our  purse  ;  so  the  moie  difficult  this  duty  is,  the  more  must
we  look  about  us,  arm  ourselves,  and  be  prepared  for  the  well  performance  of  it.
And  for  the  better  discharge  thereof  we  must  labour  for  two  things :  the  one  is
knowledge,  the  other  strength.  For  these  are  absolutely  necessary  for  the  doing  of
any  action,  the  one  to  direct  us,  the  other  to  enable  us  in  this  duty.  [J.  BarlotP,
D.D.)  With  pure  conscience. — The  Christian  profession  adorned  by  a  pure  con-
science  : — And  wiU  not  a  pure  conscience  adorn  our  profession,  give  a  comely  glosa
to  our  conversation  ?  Eed,  purple,  and  scarlet  add  no  more  gloss  to  a  piece  of  fine
cloth  than  this  purity  doth  to  the  life  of  a  Christian.  Conscience  : — Conscience
is  the  judgment  which  we  pronounce  on  our  own  conduct  by  putting  ourselves  in
the  place  of  a  bystander.  {Adam  Smith.)  Conscience  has  a  joint  knowledge  of
life ; — Conscience  imparts  a  double  or  joint  knowledge :  one  of  a  Divine  law  or
rule,  and  the  other  of  a  man's  own  action.  (J.  South.)  Conscience  looking  upon
lifg  : — I  am,  I  know,  I  can,  I  will,  I  ought — such  are  the  successive  steps  by  which
we  ascend  to  the  lofty  platform  from  which  conscience  looks  out  upon  human  Ufe.
{W.  T.  Davison, M.A.)  Conscience  a  delicate  creature: — Conscience  is  a  dainty,
delicate  creature,  a  rare  piece  of  workmanship  of  the  Maker.  Keep  it  whole  without
B  crack,  for  if  there  be  but  one  hole  so  that  it  break,  it  will  with  difficulty
mend  again.  (S.  Rutherford.)  Conscience  in  a  Christian : — The  Christian  can
never  &ad  a  "  more  faithful  adviser,  a  more  active  accuser,  a  severer  witness,  a
more  impartial  judge,  a  sweeter  comforter,  or  a  more  inexorable  enemy."  {Bp.
Sanderson.)  Conscience  in  everything  : — Trust  that  man  in  nothing  who  has  not
a  conscience  in  everything.  (Sterne.)  Conscience  makes  saints  : — Conscience
makes  cowards  of  us  ;  but  con&oience  makes  saints  and  heroes  too.  (J.  Lightfoot.)
Conscience  hurt  by  sin: — Hurt  not  your  conscience  with  any  known  sin.  (S.
Rutherford.)  A  good  conscience  independent  of  outside  opinion: — In  the  famous
trial  of  Warren  Eastings  it  was  recorded  that  when  he  was  put  on  his  trial  in  bo


CHAP.  I.]  IL  TIMOTHY.


magnificent  a  manner  in  Westminster  Hall,  after  the  counsel  for  the  prosecution,
Burke,  Sheridan,  and  others  had  delivered  their  eloquent  speeches,  he  began  to
think  he  must  be  the  greatest  criminal  on  the  face  of  the  earth ;  but  he  related
that  when  he  turned  to  his  own  conscience  the  effect  of  all  those  grand  speeches
was  as  nothing.  "  I  felt,"  he  said,  "  that  I  had  done  my  duty,  and  ti  at  they  may
say  what  they  please."  {J.  C.  Ryle,  D.D.)  Integrity  of  conscience: — Hugh
Miller  speaks  of  the  mason  with  whom  he  served  his  apprenticeship  as  one  who
"put  his  conscience  into  every  stone  that  he  laid."  (S.  Smiles.)  Obedience  to
conscience : — Lord  Erskine,  when  at  the  Bar,  was  remarkable  for  the  fearlessness
with  which  he  contended  against  the  Bench.  In  a  contest  he  had  with  Lord  Kenyon
he  explained  tbe  rule  and  conduct  at  the  Bar  in  the  following  terms  :  "  It  was,"
said  he,  "  the  first  command  and  counsel  of  my  youth  always  to  do  what  my  con-
science told  me  to  bejny  duty,  and  leave  the  consequences  to  God.  I  have  hitherto
followed  it,  and  have  no  reason  to  complain  that  any  obedience  to  it  has  been  even
a  temporal  sacrifice ;  I  have  found  it,  on  the  contrary,  the  road  to  prosperity  and
wealth,  and  I  shall  point  it  out  as  such  to  my  children."  {W.  Baxendale.)
Without  ceasing  I  have  remembrance  of  thee  in  my  prayers  night  and  day. —
The  inner  life  of  St.  Paul : — These  unstudied  words  tell  us  something  of  the  inner
life  of  such  an  one  as  St.  Paul,  how  ceaselessly,  unweariedly  he  prayed,  night  as
well  as  day.     {H.  D.  M.  Spence,  M.A.)        St.  Paul's  delight  in  Timothy: — I.  Thb

SIGNS   OF   THE   DELIGHT   AND    SATISFACTION   WHICH   THE   APOSTLE    TOOK   IN    TiMOTHT,    AS

BEOORDED  IN  THE  TEXT.  St.  Paul  prays  for  Timothy  with  satisfaction,  uniting
thanks  with  his  prayers  (ver.  3).  This  proves  what  a  well-grounded  satisfaction
the  apostle  felt  in  Timothy.  The  delight  and  satisfaction  which  the  apostle  took
in  Timothy  are  also  evinced  in  his  strong  desue  to  see  him  (ver.  4).  We  cannot
be  surprised  that  the  apostle  craved  the  presence  of  Timotny.  He  was  now  a
solitary  old  man,  and  a  prisoner.  Of  his  disciples  and  fellow-labourers,  Titus  was
gone  unto  Dalmatia,  Tychicus  he  had  sent  to  Ephesus,  Trophimus  was  sick  at
Miletus,  Mark  was  absent,  and  only  Luke  remained  with  him.  Besides,  ingratitude
and  desertion  had  sorely  tried  his  affectionate  spirit :  Alexander  the  coppersmith
had  done  him  much  evU ;  Demas  had  forsaken  him  and  the  faith  together  ;  and
when  first  brought  up  for  trial  before  the  imperial  tribunal,  none  of  the  disciples
had  stood  by  him  to  cheer  and  secoud  him.  To  Timothy,  therefore,  and  to  the
remembrance  of  his  pious  and  unfailing  affection,  the  apostle  clung  very  closely  ;
and  his  presence  he  desired  as  his  greatest  earthly  solace  and  support.  The  delight
and  satisfaction  which  the  apostle  took  in  Timothy  he  also  testified  by  expressing
his  confidence  in  his  Christian  character,  but  especially  in  his  faith,  the  root  of  all
which  is  Christian  in  the  character  of  any  one  (ver.  5).  St.  Paul  knew  him  well.
During  fourteen  or  fifteen  years  had  this  friendship  endured,  and  many  were  the
trials  to  which  it  had  been  put — trials  of  the  constancy  of  Timothy's  affection,
trials  of  the  integrity  of  his  principles.  But  Paul  had  found  no  decline  in  his
affection,  no  instabiUty  in  his  Christian  principles ;  he  therefore  trusted  him  un-
feignedly.  H.  The  causes  op  that  delight  and  satisfaction.  1.  As  the  great
cause,  the  first  cause,  the  mover  and  originator  of  all  secondary  and  inferior  causes,
St.  Paul  thanks  God  for  the  gifts  and  graces  with  which  He  had  enriched  Timothy.
2.  But  God  works  by  means.  The  means  which  He  employed,  the  causes  to  which
as  to  instruments  we  must  look  in  creating  in  Timothy  such  a  trustworthy  and
reliable  Christian  character,  were  these  three — maternal  piety,  eai'ly  biblical  educa-
tion, and  the  ministry  of  the  apostle.  (H.  J.  Carter  Smith,  M.A.)  The  Christian
near  heaven  praying  for  others: — I  remember  visiting  a  friend  on  his  death-bed,
who,  besides  being  engaged  in  a  life  of  business,  had  devoted  a  great  amount  of
time  and  labour  and  thought  to  the  benefit  of  his  fellow-creatures.  Visiting  him
on  one  occasion,  he  made  to  me  this  remark :  "  I  pray  but  very  little  for  myself
now.  It  seems  to  me  that  the  battle  is  fought  and  the  prize  is  in  view,  and  my
devotions  with  regard  to  myself  are  not  so  much  prayer  as  thanksgiving.  I  praise
God  many  an  hour  during  the  wakeful  night.  But  do  not  suppose  I  do  not  pray.
I  believe  I  pray  more  than  ever  I  did  in  my  life,  because  now  I  have  more  time  to
pray  for  my  fellow-men  and  for  the  nations  of  the  world."  He  went  on  to  describe
how  each  day,  and  certain  parts  of  every  day,  were  devoted  by  him  as  he  lay  there
gradually  sinking  to  his  rest  to  prayer  for  those  in  whom  he  felt  a  special  interest,
and  also  for  those  whom  he  had  never  seen.  A  praying  minister : — The  Rev.  J,
F.  Oberlin  reserved  stated  hours  for  private  prayer,  which  became  known  to  the
people ;  and  it  was  usual  for  carters  and  labourers  returning  from  the  fields  with
talk  and  laughter  to  uncover  their  heads  as  they  passed  beneath  the  walls  of  hia


e  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  I.

h*use.  If  the  children  ran  by  too  noisily,  these  working  people  would  check  them
with  uplifted  finger,  and  say,  "  Hush  1  he  is  praying  for  us."  (Sword  and  Trowel.)
Remembrance  ;— Remembrance  hath  in  it  four  things — apprehension,  reposition,
retention,  and  production.  A  notion  or  thing  is  by  the  external  or  internal  sense
presented  to  the  eye  of  reason  ;  she  perceives  it,  that's  apprehension ;  then  it  ia
committed  unto  memory  as  a  place  of  conservation,  that's  reposition  ;  afterwards
kept  there  in  safety,  that's  retention  ;  and  lastly,  when  occasion  is  given,  it  is  called
out  again,  and  that's  production.  A  man  takes  a  shaft  in  his  hand,  puts  it  in  his
quiver,  retains  it  there  for  a  time,  and,  when  he  would  recreate  himself,  pulls  it
forth  again,  this  is  a  plain  emblem  of  remembrance.  (J.  Barlow,  D.D.)  Friendly
love  outwardly  manifested : — This  argueth  that  the  love  of  many,  as  Lot  said  of
Zoar,  is  but  a  little  one.  So  weak  a  spring  can  have  no  deep  fountain ;  so  small
branches  no  great  virtue  in  the  root ;  and  so  feeble  a  flame  no  abundance  of  fuel ;
for  causes  produce  effects  pioportionable  to  their  internal  power,  do  they  not  ?  Try,
then,  as  the  truth,  so  the  measure  of  thine  own  and  thy  friends'  affection  by  the
outward  effects.  He  that  loves  much  will  declare  it  by  many  prayers  and  sundry
actions.    (Ibid.)

Ver.  4.  Greatly  desiring  to  see  thee. — Things  of  like  nature  desire  union : — Two
flames  will  become  one,  and  two  rivers,  if  they  meet,  willingly  make  but  one  stream.
And  are  not  all  the  faithful  baptized  with  fire,  and  of  the  like  temperature  and
condition  ?  A  faithful  man  affecteth  nothing  above  the  Lord  ;  His  image  is  the
only  object  of  his  love;  and  does  not  every  good  man  in  part  resemble  that,  and
carry  it  about  with  him  ?  Do  not  the  sparkles  of  grace  and  wisdom  appear  in  their
faces  ?  Is  there  not  a  kind  of  Divine  influence  in  their  speeches?  They  in  some
measure  resemble  their  father,  as  dear  children  ;  and  from  the  contrary  ground  the
wicked  are  an  abomination  to  the  just.  They  will  build  up  one  another  in  their
holy  faith,  consult  for  the  good  of  the  Church,  and  tell  one  another  what  the  Lord
hath  done  for  their  soul ;  yea,  the  very  sight  of  a  good  man  in  the  morning,  a
dream  of  him  in  the  night,  will  make  one  walk  with  more  cheerfulness  all  the  day
following.  The  face  of  the  faithful  is  like  the  loadstone,  it  conveyeth  strength  to
many,  and  yet  is  never  the  weaker,  poorer ;  and  as  the  one  is  reputed  a  great  wonder
in  nature,  so  is  the  other  as  great  a  wonder  in  grace.  (J.  Barlow,  D.D.)  The
coming  of  an  absent  friend : — The  chilling  cold  of  winter  makes  the  summer's  sun
more  pleasant ;  so  doth  long  absence  a  friend's  personal  presence.  (Ibid.)  The
faithful  found  in  companies : — And  here  may  the  profane  learn  a  lesson  or  two,  if
they  please,  for  this  is  the  true  cause  why  the  faithful,  like  pigeons,  flock  to  the  house
of  God,  and  are  to  be  found  there  in  troops  and  companies.  Is  not  that  the  congre-
gation of  the  saints,  and  the  royal  exchange,  where  they  all  meet  together  ?  Again,
they  may  see  why  some  sigh  in  soul  and  desire  to  be  loosed.  For  their  best  friends  be
gone  to  heaven  before  them,  and  Christ  is  absent  from  them  (Phil.  iii.  20).  (Ibid.)
Mindful  of  thy  tears. — Tears  : — He  seems  not  merely  to  speak  of  the  former  tears
of  Timothy  shed  at  bidding  Paul  farewell  (for  tears  are  usually  elicited  at  parting,
comp.  Acts  XX.  37),  but  of  his  habitual  tears  under  the  influence  of  pious  feeling.
In  this  respect  also  he  had  him  like-minded  (Phil.  ii.  20)  with  himself.  Tears,  the
flower  of  the  heart,  indicate  either  the  greatest  hypocrisy  or  the  utmost  sincerity. ■•^
(J.  A.  Bengel.)  The  power  of  tears  : — There  is  no  power  that  man  can  wield  so
mighty  as  that  of  genuine  tears.  The  eloquence  of  words  is  powerful,  but  the
eloquence  of  tears  is  far  more  so.  What  manly  heart  has  not  been  often  arrested
by  the  genuine  sobs  of  even  some  poor  child  in  the  streets.  A  child's  tear  in  the
crowded  thoroughfare  has  often  arrested  the  busy  merchant  in  his  hurried  career
Coriolanus,  who  defied  "  all  the  swords  in  Italy  and  her  confederate  states,"  fell
prostrate  before  the  tears  of  his  mother  :  •'  Oh,  my  mother,  thou  hast  saved  Borne,
but  lost  thy  son."  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Tears  described: — Tears  have  been  ^
described  as  the  blood  of  the  wounds  of  the  soul,  the  leaves  of  the  plant  of  sorrow,
the  hail  and  rain  of  life's  winter,  the  safety-valves  of  the  heart  when  too  much
pressure  is  laid  on,  the  vent  of  anguish-showers  blown  up  by  the  tempests  of  the
8oul.

Ver.  6.  When  I  call  to  remembrance  [R.V.,  having  been  reminded  of]  the  nnfeigned
faith  that  is  In  thee. — Unfeigned  faith  : — Some  recorded  circumstance,  some
spoken  words,  some  searching  test,  had  convinced  St.  Paul  that  Timothy  at  the
present  time  was  shedding  no  womanish  tears,  that  his  faith  had  revealed  its
strength  and  reality.    If  put  to  a  severe  strain  there  was  now  no  mistake  about  it.


CHAP.  I.]  II.  TIMOTHY.


His  faith  was  not  a  mask  of  nnbelief,  not  a  mere  epeoies  of  personal  affection  for
the  apostle,  nor  was  it  an  unpractical  faith,  or  one  dependent  on  oircomstanoes.
8t.  Paul  may  once  have  entertained  some  transient  doubt  about  Timothy.  His
fears  may  have  exaggerated  to  himself  the  significance  of  Timothy's  excessive  grief.
The  words  of  despair  wrung  from  his  lips  at  their  parting  may  have  distressed  the
apostle ;  but  now  the  ugly  suspicion  is  suppressed  and  no  longer  haunts  his  nightly
intercession.  (H.  R.  Reynoldt,  D.D.)  Unfeigned  faith  practical : — A  lady  and
gentleman  were  being  shown  over  the  Mint  by  the  Master  of  the  Mint,  who  took
them  from  the  gate  where  the  rough  gold  came  in  until  they  saw  it  going  out  in  the
form  of  coins  to  the  bank  for  distribution  all  over  the  country.  When  they  were
in  the  melting-room,  the  Master  said,  "  Do  you  see  that  pail  of  liquid?"  •'  Yes."
"  If  you  dip  your  hand  into  it  I  will  pour  a  ladleful  of  molten  gold  into  yoor  hand,
and  it  will  roll  off  it  without  hurting  you."  "  Oh !  "  was  the  remark  somewhat
Bceptically  made.  "  Do  you  not  believe  me  ?  "  inquired  the  Master.  ••  Well ;  yes,  I
do,"  replied  the  gentleman.  "  Hold  out  your  hand,  then."  When  he  saw  the  boil-
ing gold  above  his  hand,  ready  to  be  poured  out,  the  gentleman  took  a  step  back,
and,  in  terror,  put  his  hand  behind  his  back.  The  lady,  however,  stooped  down,
dipped  her  hand  into  the  liquid,  and  holding  it  out,  said,  "  Pour  it  into  my  hand."
She  really  believed,  and  could  trust,  but  her  friend  had  not  the  practical  faith  to
enable  him  to  trust.  (J,  Campbell  White.)  Timothy' t  faith : — I.  Thb  peculiab
bxcbUjEnob  fob  which  Timotht  is  HEBE  COMMENDED — "  Unfeigned  faith."  St.
Paul  goes  to  the  root  of  all  that  was  excellent  in  Timothy — namely,  his  faith.  Not
but  that  he  could  at  other  times  dwell  with  pleasure  on  the  fruits  of  that  faith ;
especially  when  speaking  of  him  to  others.  A  beautiful  specimen  we  have  in
Phil.  ii.  19-22.  But  in  writing  to  Timothy  himself,  he  thinks  it  most  profitable
to  insist  upon  the  source  of  that  excellent  character — ^his  faith.    H.  Thb  instbu-

UBNTAIi  CAUSE   TO   WHICH   THB    FAITH    OF    TiMOTHY   IS   HBBE   ASCBIBED — namely,    the

previous  faith  of  his  pious  mother,  Eunice,  and  of  his  grandmother,  Lois.  The  only
effectual  cause  to  which  unfeigned  faith  can  be  ascribed,  is  the  grace  of  Christ  and
His  Spirit.  Nevertheless,  in  conferring  this  precious  gift,  the  Lord  frequently
works  by  instruments  or  means.  The  case  of  these  excellent  women,  then,  may
lead  us  to  observe  the  special  honour  conferred  on  the  weaker  sex,  in  their  being
often  made— 1.  Foremost  in  faith  and  piety.  Man  fell  by  the  woman's  trans-
gression ;  but  it  is  by  the  seed  of  the  woman  that  he  is  redeemed.  The  first  convert
*in  Europe  was  a  woman — Lydia.  Li  every  period  of  the  history  of  the  Church
women  have  been  more  open  to  conviction,  more  simple  believers  in  Christ,  more
devoted  in  their  zeal  for  His  cause,  than  others.  2.  Foremost  in  spiritual  usefulness.
Such  they  were  in  the  case  before  us.  Now  this  remarkable  succession  of  piety,  in
three  generations  of  the  same  family,  was  a  blessing  from  God,  in  honour  of  female
faith — "unfeigned faith."  "Them  that  honour  Me,"  saith  God,  "  I  will  honour."
^J.Jowett,M.A.)  The  worth  of  faith : — All  othergraces  do  stUl  accompany  it.  Where
it  is  they  all  be.  Faith  maybe  compared  to  a  prince  which,  wheresoever  he  pitcheth
his  tents,  hath  many  rich  attendants  (1  Cor.xiii.  ult,),  as  love,  hope,  zeal, patience,  &o.
Faith  expelleth  infideUty  out  of  the  heart,  as  heat  doth  cold,  wind,  smoke,  for  they
be  contrar^.  It  cannot,  nor  will  not,  admit  of  so  bad  a  neighbour ;  it  shoulders
out  all  unprofitable  guests  (Acts  xv.  9 ;  Heb.  iv.  2).  And  besides  this,  faith  makes
our  actions  acceptable  to  God ;  for  without  it  it  is  impossible  to  please  God :  this  is
that  true  fire  wluch  cometh  down  from  heaven  and  seasons  all  our  sacrifices  (Heb.
ii.  6 ;  Bom.  xiv.  ult.).  What,  then,  are  they  worthy  of,  that  neither  respect  it  in  them-
selves nor  others ;  many  have  no  care  to  plant  this  flower  in  the  garden  of  their
hearts  ;  or,  if  they  have  it,  to  preserve  it  from  perishing.  Jonah  mourned  that  his
gourd  withered,  yet  we  grieve  not  if  faith  be  destroyed.  {J.  Barlow,  D.D.)  Faith  the
chief  thing : — The  world  cries,  What's  a  man  without  money  ?  but  I  say,  What's  a
man  without  faith  ?  For  no  faith,  no  soul  quickened ;  heart  purified,  sin  pardoned ;
bond  cancelled,  quittance  received;  or  any  person  justified,  saved.  (Ibid.)  Oet
faith : — I  say  that  to  all,  which  I  do  to  one,  get  faith,  keep  faith,  and  increase  your
faith.  A  mite  of  this  grain  is  worth  a  million  of  gold ;  a  stalk  of  this  faith,  a  standing
tree  of  earthly  fruits ;  a  soul  freighted  and  fiUed  with  this  treasure,  aU  the  coffers  of
silver  in  the  whole  world.  What  can  I  more  say  ?  The  least  true  faith  is  of  more
value  than  large  domains,  stately  buildings,  and  ten  thousand  rivers  of  oil.  If  the
mountains  were  pearl,  the  huge  rocks  precious  stones,  and  the  whole  globe  a
shining  chrysolite ;  yet  faith,  as  much  as  the  least  drop  of  water,  grain  of  sand,  or
smallest  mustard-seed,  is  more  worth  than  all.  This  will  swim  with  his  master  ;
hold  np  his  drooping  head,  and  land  him  safe  at  the  shore,  against  all  winds  and


8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i.

weather,  storms  and  tempests ;  strive  then  for  this  freight ;  for  the  time  and  tide
thereof  aerveth  but  once,  and  not  for  ever.  (Ibid.)  Faith  works  like  efects  in
divers  subjects : — Tlie  grandmother,  the  mother,  and  the  mother's  son,  had  the
same  faith;  and  the  like  fruits  proceeded  from  them,  else  Paul  would  never  have
called  it  unfeigned,  or  said  that  it  dwelt  in  them,  or  given  them  all  three  one  and
the  same  testimony.  All  three  had  faith,  and  unfeigned  faith.  For  the  likeness  of
actions  were  in  them,  and  proceed  from  them,  by  the  which  it  was  called  unfeigned,
and  equally  appropriated  to  each  particular  person.  And  it  is  an  undoubted
position  that  faith  produceth  the  like  effects  in  all  God's  children ;  in  truth,  it
must  be  understood,  not  in  degree.  For  as  faith  increaseth,  the  effects  are  bettered.
Many  lanterns,  with  several  candles,  will  all  give  light ;  but  in  proportion  to  their
adverse  degrees  and  quantities.  Every  piece  hath  his  report,  but  according  to  the
bigness,  and  each  instrument  will  sound,  but  variously  as  they  be  in  proportion,
and  that  for  these  reasons.  Because  faith  differs  not  in  kind,  but  in  degree,  and  like
causes  produce  like  effects.  Every  bell  hath  its  sound,  each  tone  its  weight,  and
several  plants,  their  diverse  influences ;  yet  not  in  the  same  measure,  though  they
may  vary  in  kind.  Again,  faith  is  diffused  into  subjects,  though  several,  yet  they
are  the  same  in  nature  and  consist  of  like  principles.  Fire,  put  into  straw,  wiU
either  smoke  or  burn,  let  the  bundles  be  a  thousand ;  life  in  the  body  will  have
motion,  though  not  in  the  same  degree  and  measure ;  and  reason  in  every  man
acteth,  but  not  so  exquisitely.  The  constitution  may  not  be  ahke,  therefore  a
difference  may  be  in  operation  natural,  and  also  from  the  same  ground,  in  acts
spiritual.  A  dark  horn  in  the  lantern  dims  the  light  somewhat.  (Ibid.)
Unfeigned  faith  manifested : — From  this  point  we  may  learn  how  to  judge  of  the
faith  in  our  times  which  so  many  boast  of ;  they  cry.  Have  not  we  faith  ?  do  not  we
believe  as  well  as  the  best  ?  But  where  be  the  fruits  of  faith  unfeigned  ?  hast  thou
an  humble  and  purging  heart  ?  dost  thou  call  upon  God  at  all  times,  tarry  His
leisure,  and  rely  upon  His  promise?  art  thou  bold  and  resolute  for  good  causes ?
canst  thou  resist  Satan  ?  cleave  to  God,  and  shun  the  appearances  of  evil  ?  will
neither  poverty  oppress  thee  by  despair,  or  prosperity  by  presumption  ?  Why,  it  is
well,  and  we  believe,  that  faith  is  to  be  found  in  thee,  but  if  not,  thou  hast  it  not
rooted  in  thee.  For  the  tree  is  known  by  the  fruit.  Will  not  the  flower  smell  t
the  candle  give  light?  and  the  fire  heat?  and  shall  true  faith  be  without  her
effects  ?  Boast  not  too  much,  lest  thou  deceive  thyself,  taking  the  shadow  for  the
body;  and  that  which  is  not  for  that  which  should  be.  (Ibid.)  Which  dwelt
first  In  thy  grandmother  Lois,  and  thy  mother  Eimlce. — Lois  and  Eunice  : — Origen
conjectured  that  Lois  and  Eunice  were  relatives  of  St.  Paul.  This  is  only  con-
lecture.  There  is  far  more  reason  for  believing  that  they  were  converts  made  by
him  on  his  first  visit  to  Lystra.  In  the  Jewish  communities  of  these  Asiatic  towns
there  were  elect  souls  who  had  begun  to  cherish  larger  hopes  for  humanity.  If
Lois  had  permitted  her  daughter  to  marry  a  Greek,  and  yet  had  retained  her  faith
in  the  promises  made  to  Israel,  and  if  Eunice  had  so  far  yielded  to  her  husband's
views  or  habits  as  to  have  foregone  for  her  only  son  the  sacramental  rite  of
admission  to  the  Jewish  nation,  and  yet,  notwithstanding  this,  had  diligently
instructed  him  in  the  history  and  contents  of  Holy  Scriptures  (chap.  ij^l5).  We
have  a  glimpse  of  light  thrown  upon  the  synagogues  and  homes  of  devout  Israelites
in  Asia  Minor.  (H.  R.  Reynolds,  D.D.)  Lois  is  the  same  with  the  more  familiar
Lais ;  Eunice  is  an  equivalent  of  the  Latin  Victoria.  (H.  D.  M.  Spence,  M.A.)"^
I  The  day  of  Christian  faith : — Christian  faith  in  its  morning  (Timothy),  at  noon.^

(Eunice),  and  at  the  evening  of  life  (Lois).     (Dr.  Van  Oosterzee.)        Celebrated
I  mothers  .--fLike  the  celebrated  mothers  of  Augustine,  of  Chrysostom,  of  Basil,  and
I  of  other  ilTustrious  saints  of  God,  the  life,  sincerity  and  constancy  of  Lois  and
I  Eunice  became  vicariously  a  glorious  heritage  of  the  universal  Church?     (H.  R.
I  Reynolds,  D.D.)        Lessons  : — 1.  The  infidelity  of  the  father  prevents  not  faith  in
the  children.     For  if  it  had,  Eunice  and  Timothy  and  many  more  should  never
have  been  found  faithful  (1  Kings  xiv.  13  ;  1  Cor.  vii.  14).     2.  Succession  of  faith  ia
the  best  succession.     8.  Where  we  see  signs  of  gooduess,  we  are  to  judge  the  best.
4.  When  we  give  others  instruction,  we  are  first  to  possess  them  with  the  per-
suasion of  our  affection.    For  then  they  will  take  it  in  good  part,  and  our  words
will  have  the  deeper  impression.   (J.  Barlow,  D.D.)     Memories  of  a  mother : — Among
the  reminiscences  of  a  great  statesman,  Daniel  Webster,  it  is  related  that  on  one
occasion  a  public  reception  was  given  him  in  Boston.     Thousands  of  his  country's
oitizens  crowded  together  and  paid  him  homage.     Bursts  of  applause  had  been
toondlng  all  day  in  hia  ears.    Elegantly  dressed  ladies  had  thrown  bouquets  of


CHAP.  I.]  U.  TIMOTHY.


the  rarest  flowers  at  his  feet.    Bat  as  he  ascended  the  steps  leading  to  his  mansion,
crowned  with  the  honours  of  the  gala  day,  a  little,  timid  girl  stepped  up  and  placed
a  bunch  of  old-fashioned  garden  pinks  in  his  hand.     At  sight  of  these  old,  familiar
flowers,  and  their  well-remembered  fragrance  filled  the  air,  the  old  memories  were
stirred.    Just  such  pinks  used  to  grow  in  his  mother's  garden  when  he  was  a  child.
Instantly  that  sweet  face  of  the  loved  mother  came  to  his  vision ;  her  tender,  gentle
voice  sounded  once  more  in  his  ears.     So  overcome  was  he  with  the  tide  of  old
memories  that  crowded  into  his  heart  that  he  excused  himself,  and  went  to  his
apartments  alone.    "  Nothing,"  said  he,  "  in  all  my  life  affected  me  like  that  little
incident."    John  Newton  in  his  worst  days  could  never  forget  his  mother,  at  whose
knees  he  had  learned  to  pray,  but  who  was  taken  to  heaven  when  he  was  but  eight
years  old.    ♦'  My  mother's  God,  the  God  of  mercy,  have  mercy  upon  me  1 "  was
often  his  agonising  prayer  in  danger,  and  we  all  know  how  it  was  answered.
{Great  Thoughts.)        Mother's  influence  : — If  we  call  him  great  who  planned  the
Cathedral  of  St.  Peter,  with  all  its  massiveness  and  beauty ;  if  they  call  the  old
masters  great  whose  paintings  hang  on  monastery  and  chapel  walls,  is  not  she  (the
mother)  great  who  is  building  up  characters  for  the  service  of  God,  who  is  painting
on  the  soul  canvas  the  beauty  and  strength  of  Jesus  the  Christ  ?    {A.  E.  KittredgeTi
Christian  mothers: — Give  me  a  generation  of  Christian  mothers  and  I  will  undef^^
take  to  change  the  whole  face  of  society  in  twelve  months.     (Lord  Shaftesbury^
Woman's  influence : — A  missionary  in  Ceylon  writes  as  a  "noticeable  fact"  that
where  Christian  women  are  married  to  heathen  husbands,  generally  the  influence
in  the  household  is  Christian ;  whereas,  when  a  Christian  man  takes  a  heathen
woman  he  usually  loses  his  Christian  character,  and  the  influences  of  the  house-
hold are  on  the  side  of  heathenism.        Parental  example  : — We  may  read  in  the
fable  what  the  mother  crab  said  to  the  daughter:  "Go  forward,  my  daughter,
go  forward."     The  daughter  replied,  "Good  mother,  do  you  show  me  the  way  !  "
Whereupon  the  mother,  crawhng  backward  and  sidling,  as  she  was  wont,  the
daughter  cried  out,  "  So,  mother  I     I  go  just  as  you  do."     (Family  Churchman.)
Mother  and  child ; — Sir  Walter  Scott's  mother  was  a  superior  woman,  and  a  great
lover  of  poetry  and  painting.    Byron's  mother  was  proud,  ill-tempered,  and  violent.
The  mother  of  Napoleon  Buonaparte  was  noted  for  her  beauty  and  energy.    Lord
Bacon's  mother  was  a  woman  of  superior  mind  aud  deep  piety.     The  mother  of
Nero  was  a  murderess.    The  mother  of  Washington  was  pious,  pure,  and  true.    The
mother  of  Matthew  Henry  was  marked  by  her  superior  conversational  powers.   The
mother  of  John  Wesley  was  remarkable  for  her  intelligence,  piety,  and  executive
ability,  so  that  shehas  been  called  the  "Mother  of  Methodism."    It  will  be  observed
that  in  each  of  these  examples  the  child  inherited  the  prominent  traits  of  the  mother.
(J.  L.  Nye.)        Mother's  influence : — "  It  was  at  my  mother's  knees,"  ho  says,  "  that
I  first  learned  to  pray ;  that  I  learned  to  form  a  reverence  for  the  Bible  as  the
inspired  word  of  God ;  that  I  learned  the  peculiarities  of  the  Scottish  religion ;  that
I  learned  my  regard  to  the  principles  of  civil  and  religious  liberty,  which  have  made
me  hate  oppression  and — whether  it  be  a  pope,  or  a  prelate,  or  an  ecclesiastical
demagogue — resist  the  oppressor."     (T.  Gtithrie,  D.D.)        Children  to  be  taught
young  : — First,  for  then  they  will  remember  it  when  they  are  old  (Pro v.  xxiii.  13).
Dye  cloth  in  the  wool,  not  in  the  web,  and  the  colour  will  be  the  better,  the  more
durable.     Secondly,  to  defer  this  duty  is  dangerous,  for  thou  mayst  be  took  from
them.    Who  then  shall  teach  them  after  thy  departure  ?  (2  Kings  ii.  24).    Thirdly,
besides,  what  if  they  come  to  faith  ?    Will  it  not  be  with  the  more  difficulty  ?
Fallow  ground  must  have  the  stronger  team,  great  trees  will  not  easily  bend,  and
a  bad  habit  is  not  easily  left  and  better  come  by.    If  their  memories  be  stuffed  with
vanity  as  a  table-book,  the  old  must  be  washed  out  before  new  can  be  written  in.
Fourthly,  what  shall  I  more  say  ?     God  works  strangely  in  children,  and  rare
things  have  been  found  in  them ;  and  what  a  comfort  will  it  be  for  parents  in  their
life,  to  hear  their  children  speak  of  good  things,  and  at  the  last  day,  when  they  can
Bay  to  Christ,  Here  am  I,  and  the  children  Thou  hast  given  me  I    (J.  Barlow,  D.D.)
The  secret  of  a  good  mother's  influence : — Some  one  asked  a  mother  whose  children
had  turned  out  very  well,  what  was  the  secret  by  which  she  prepared  them  for
usefulness  and  for  the  Christian  life,  and  she  said,  "  This  was  the  secret.     When
in  the  morning  I  washed  my  children,  I  prayed  that  they  might  be  washed  in  the
fountain  of  a  Saviour's  mercy.    When  I  put  on  their  garments,  I  prayed  that
they  might  be  arrayed  in  the  robe  of  a  Saviour's  righteousness.    When  I  gave
them  food,  I  prayed  that  they  might  be  fed  with  manna  from  heaven.     When  I
Btarted  them  on  the  road  to  school  I  prayed  (hat  their  faith  might  be  as  the  shining


10  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  I.

light,  brighter  and  brighter  to  the  perfect  day.  When  I  put  them  to  sleep,  I  prayed
that  they  might  be  enfolded  in  the  Saviour's  arms."  (T.  De  Witt  Talmage.)  Traiti'
ing  the  young : — Rightly  to  train  a  single  youth  ia  a  greater  exploit  than  the  taking
of  Troy.  (Melancthon.)  A  good  grandmother : — "  I  owe  agreat  deal  to  my  grand*
mother,"  said  a  young  man  who  was  courageous  and  true  above  many  in  his
Christian  life.  "  Why,  what  did  she  do  for  you  t  "  "  Oh,  she  just  sat  by  the  fire."
"  Did  she  knit  ?  "  "A  little. "  »  Did  she  talk  to  you  ?  "  "A  little ;  but  grannie
was  not  much  of  a  talker ;  she  did  not  go  in  for  all  that,  you  know ;  but  she  just  sat
and  looked  comfortable,  and  when  we  were  good  she  smiled,  and  when  we  were  wild
in  our  talk  she  smiled  too,  but  if  ever  we  were  mean  she  sighed.  We  aU  loved  her,
and  nobody  did  as  much  for  us,  reaUy,  as  grannie."  {Marianne  Famingham.)
A  godly  household  .-—A  household  that  fears  God  is  another  joy  of  my  life.  I  would
rather  see  it  than  the  finest  landscape.  I  can  understand  why  Sir  Walter  Scott  got
his  seat  put  down  in  his  garden,  within  earshot  of  his  bailiff's  cottage,  that  he  might
always  hear  the  sound  of  the  psalms  at  morning  and  evening  worship.  There  never
was  incense  sweeter  from  morning  or  evening  sacrifice  1  A  home,  where  the  father
and  mother  walk  in  the  narrow  way,  is  pretty  sure  to  find  their  children  accompany-
ing them.  Not  that  God's  gifts  are  hereditary,  but  example  goes  a  great  way,  and
if  the  parent,  who  is  the  highest  on  earth  to  the  child,  live  a  Christian  hfe,  it  is
very  seldom  the  child  will  not  follow  him.  It  depends  on  the  parent.  If  the
mother,  or  father,  or  both,  be  real  Christians,  gentle,  kind,  reverent,  pure,  the
little  ones  grow  accustomed  to  these  graces  and  catch  them  almost  unconsciously.
Suppressed  Uvea  : — A  few  years  ago  a  gentleman  died  in  Germany  whose  name  was
almost  unknown  both  in  Great  Britain  and  on  the  Continent.  A  physician  by  pro-
fession, and  an  inheritor  of  a  title,  he  lived  a  life  of  comparative  seclusion.  He
was  never  in  the  front  at  any  pageant  or  ceremonial  of  any  court.  He  was  never
known  when  treaties  and  alliances  were  made  between  reigning  sovereigns.  In
diplomatic  circles  his  name  was  never  prominently  mentioned.  And  yet  no  man
of  his  time  in  all  Europe  had  more  influence  in  determining  the  destiny  of  nations
than  he.  He  was  the  power  behind  thrones.  He  was  the  intimate  confidant  of
princes.  He  rendered  the  most  important  services  to  England  and  to  Germany.
His  was  one  of  those  "suppressed  lives"  which  are  so  often  lives  of  commanding
power.  It  was  a  suppressed  Ufe,  expressed  in  kings,  parliaments,  and  statesmen.
Such  lives  are  to  be  found  in  literary  circles.  It  is  often  a  matter  of  infinite
surprise  that  such  marvels  of  erudition  and  widest  compass  of  reading  in  the  domain
of  metaphysics,  philosophy,  theology,  and  ecclesiastical  history,  can  be  produced
by  a  single  man  in  the  compass  of  so  short  a  life  as  is  given  the  world  by  many  a
Grerman  writer.  But  the  secret  is,  that  behind  the  life  of  the  author,  who  may
receive  all  the  praise  of  the  public,  are  scores  of  suppressed  lives.  These  are  the
men  of  culture  and  training  who  are  doing  the  toiling  drudgery,  wading  through
volumes,  finding  and  verifying  quotations.  It  is  well  known  that  in  the  business
world  these  suppressed  lives  play  a  most  important  part.  Many  an  employer  is
dependent  upon  the  labours  of  faithful  men,  unknown  to  the  world,  who  have
mastered  all  the  intricacies  of  a  complex  business,  and  upon  whom  they  implicitly
depend  for  advice  in  its  management.  St.  Paul,  after  his  somewhat  depressing
visit  to  Athens,  found  a  home  in  the  humble  abode  of  Aquila  and  Prisoilla,  in  the
busy,  sensual  city  of  Corinth.  In  the  house  of  this  lowly  artisan  he  found  rest,
refreshment,  and  strength.  Working  with  him  side  by  side,  in  the  plebeian  craft
of  tent-making,  the  great  apostle  to  the  Gentiles  derived  new  zeal  and  energy  for
his  great  work  from  the  life  and  conversation  of  this  faithful  disciple  of  Jesus
Christ.  In  the  same  home  the  eloquent  Alexandrian,  ApoUos,  found  shelter  and
instruction.  In  his  life,  fuU  of  eloquent  thought  and  speech,  and  still  more
eloquent  deeds,  their  suppressed  lives  found  a  brilliant  and  glorious  expression.
These  two  lives  may  justly  stand  for  the  lives  of  the  great  multitude  of  teachers  in
the  Sunday  Schools  and  other  schools  of  our  land.  Suppressed  lives  mostly  they
are.  Comparatively  unrecognised  is  the  infiuence  these  teachers  are  exerting  upon
the  destinies  of  the  miUions  of  children  intrusted  to  their  care.  In  St.  Paul's  words
to  Timothy,  as  quoted  in  the  text,  we  have  the  recognition  of  the  power  of
suppressed  lives  in  the  charmed  circle  of  the  home.  An  ampler  life  has  been
opened  to  woman  than  heretofore  in  our  day.  The  most  thoroughgoing  infidel
cannot  deny  that  Christianity  above  all  other  systems  guards  and  glorifies  the
home ;  that  it  has  given  to  the  wife  and  the  mother  the  unique  and  the  peerless
position  they  bold  in  the  countries  where  the  highest  civilisation  is  enjoyed.  This
Bible  before  me  loves  to  honour  the  home.    Who  can  estimate  the  influence  of  the


CHir.  I.]  11.  TIMOTHY.  11

suppressed  lives  in  these  homes  ?  In  that  obscure  country  rectory  at  Epworth  lived
the  mother  of  the  Wesley s.  The  husband  was  a  dreamy,  poetical,  unpractical  man.
The  household  quiver  was  full  and  running  over  with  children.  She  was  the
teacher  of  them  all.  John  Wesley  was  taught  by  her  the  alphabet  for  the  twentieth
time,  that,  in  her  own  language,  "  the  nineteenth  might  not  be  in  vain."  She  kept
np  vnih  the  classical  studies  of  her  boys  until  they  went  away  from  home  to  school
and  college.  She  managed  her  large  family  with  the  economy  eztoUed  by  "  Poor
Richard,"  with  •'  the  discipline  of  West  Point,"  and  yet  in  the  loving  spirit  of  the
home  at  Bethany.  She  was  the  constant  counsellor  of  her  once  seemingly  stupid
but  now  most  gifted  son  John,  and  the  earnest  defender  if  not  initiator  of  the  greatest
ecclesiastical  movement  of  our  day — the  coming  to  the  front  in  every  Christian
enterprise  of  the  laymen  of  the  Church.  She  stood  in  her  old  age  by  the  side  of
that  son  when,  as  the  foremost  religious  leader  of  the  centuries,  he  preached  on
Kensington  common  the  memorable  sermon  to  twenty  thousand  persons,  and  "  the
slain  of  the  Lord  "  lay  in  windrows  before  him.  The  grey-haired,  bent,  and  silent
mother  was  speaking  in  the  burning  words  and  ringing  tones  of  the  great  reformer.
The  mother  of  Washington  lived  and  triumphed  in  the  matchless  deeds  of  the
father  of  his  country.    {S.  Fallows.)

Ver.  6.  Stir  up  the  gift  of  God  which  is  In  thee  by  the  putting  on  of  my
hands. — The  graces  of  God's  Spirit  are  of  a  fiery  quality  : — And  here  we  must  aU
learn  a  double  lesson.  First,  to  get  this  fire  ;  and  next,  to  keep  it  from  quenching.
This  is  that  one  thing  necessary ;  and  how  should  we  rejoice  if  it  be  already  kindled  1
For  without  it  we  are  blind,  corrupt,  cold,  yea,  stark  dead.  We  must  make  our  hearts
the  hearth  to  uphold  it,  and  our  hands  the  tongs  to  build  it ;  it  must  lodge  with
us  daily,  send  out  flame  from  us,  and  our  lamps  must  be  continually  burning ;  then
shall  we  glorify  our  God,  give  light  to  others,  walk  safely,  as  walled  about  with  a
defence  of  fire,  in  this  pilgrimage  ;  and  the  Lord,  at  length,  shall  send  us  fiery
chariots  to  carry  us  to  heaven,  where  our  lamps  shall  burn  day  and  night,  and  shine
as  the  Sim  in  the  clear  firmament  for  ever  and  ever.  (J.  Barlow,  D.D.)  The  gifts  of  God
are  to  be  stirred  up  within  v^  : — For  if  they  be  not,  will  they  not  perish  ?  Have  you
not  heard  that  they  are  of  a  fiery  quality,  and  therefore  subject,  without  stirring,
blowing,  to  decay  and  be  extinguished  ?  The  things  that  put  out  the  fire  of  the
spirit  in  us,  are — first,  evil  cogitations ;  as  smoke  weakeneth  the  eye,  cold  frosts  nip
the  tender  bud,  and  stinking  smells  damp  and  dull  the  purest  spirits,  so  do  bad
thoughts  disturb,  impoverish,  and  enfeeble  the  gifts  of  God  that  be  in  us.  [Secondly,
corrupt  speech  ;  that  troubleth  the  fountain,  and  stoppeth  the  spirit's  spring ;  it
shakes  the  young  plants  of  grace,  as  the  boisterous  winds  do  the  late  grafted  scions :
this  will  cause  the  new  man  to  die  before  his  time,  and  the  best  fruits  he  beareth
to  become  blasted.  Thirdly,  wicked  works ;  they  raze  the  foundation,  and,  like
the  boar  of  the  wood,  root  up  all ;  when  these  break  forth  into  action,  then  falls
grace  suddenly  into,  a  consumption  ;  for  they  do  not  only  wither  the  branches  and
change  the  complexion,  but  also  kill  the  body,  devour  the  juice  of  life,  and  destroy
the  constitution.  Fourthly,  loud  company ;  this  doth  press  down  and  keep  under
the  gifts  of  God,  that  they  cannot  shoot  up  and  spring ;  as  water  to  fire,  green  wood
to  dry,  this  quencheth  all ;  one  grain  of  this  leaven  leaveneth  the  whole  lump.  Let
the  Israelites  live  among  the  Egyptians,  though  they  hate  the  men,  yet  they  will
learn  their  manners ;  and  Peter  will  grow  cold  if  he  warm  his  fingers  at  Caiaphas'
fixe.  Fifthly,  the  prosperity  of  the  wicked  ;  that  will  buffet  the  soul,  wound
the  very  spirit,  and  make  grace  to  look  pale  and  wan.  How  have  the  faithful
fainted  to  see  this,  and  the  strongest  foot  of  faith  reeled,  staggered  I  This  mud
hath  made  the  men  of  God  almost  to  turn  out  of  the  way.  Sixthly,  and  finally,
the  pampering  of  the  flesh.  It  will  impoverish  the  spirit,  and  make  it  look  lank
and  lean.  If  the  one  be  cherished,  the  other  will  be  staired  When  one  of  these
buckets  is  ascending  the  other  is  descending.  Paul  knew  it  well,  therefore  would
beat  down  his  body,  and  keep  it  in  subjection.  These  be  the  greatest  impediments
that  hinder  the  gifts  of  grace  from  stirring,  growing.  {Ibid.)  Private  helps  to  stir
up  grace: — First,  reading  either  the  Scriptures  or  other  holy  writings.  This
being  done  in  a  corner  will  refresh  the  spirit.  It  is  like  food  to  the  fainting  passenger.
Secondly,  meditation.  He  that  sits  long  by  the  fire  shall  have  his  body  to  grow
hot,  and  his  cold  spirits  to  become  active,  nimble.  Let  this  be  done  thoroughly,
and  it  will  make  grace  to  stretch  itself  beyond  its  ordinary  wont,  and  the  Christian
to  be  rapt  out  of  himself.  Thirdly,  prayer.  Who  ever  in  his  secret  chamber  went
to  God  by  earnest  prayer  but  he  was  ravished  in  mind,  and  in  the  strength  of  thai


12  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [chap.  I.

action  spent  all  that  day  without  weariness  ?  God  giveth  the  greatest  gifts  in
secret ;  and,  like  man,  revealeth  Himself  apart.  Yea,  private  prayer  doth  both  stir
up  and  increase  grace  mightily  ;  and  as  secret  meals  make  a  fat  body,  so  doth
that  a  well-liking  mind.  Fourth'y,  observation,  and  that  of  the  daily  acts  of
God's  providence.  Fifthly,  exampks  :  not  the  worst,  but  the  most  excellent.  Set
before  thine  eyes  the  cloud  of  witnesses,  that  have  far  outstripped  thee.  Think
what  a  shame  it  is  for  thee  to  come  so  far  behind  them.  Will  not  a  comely  suite
make  some  leap  into  the  fashion  ?  Sixthly,  resolution  ;  which  must  consist  in
propounding  to  ourselves  a  higher  pitch  of  perfection.  He  that  would  shoot  or
leap  further  than  before  will  cast  his  eye  and  aim  beyond  the  mark.  But  if  all
these  will  not  stir  up  this  fire,  then  consider  what  a  loss  it  is  to  be  a  dwarf  and
bankrupt  in  this  grace.  How  God  may  forsake  us,  an  evil  spirit  possess  us,  and
Satan  seek  about  to  apprehend  us,  as  the  Philistines  did  Samson  ;  so  shall  we
pluck  up  our  spirits,  stir  up  our  strength,  rise  out  of  this  lethargy,  and  fly
for  our  lives.  (Ibid.)  The  ordinances  of  God  are  not  without  profit,  if  rightly
practised:— It  is  not  a  trade,  but  the  well  using  of  it ;  not  a  farm,  but  the  well
husbandry  of  it,  that  will  enrich  the  one  and  the  other.  Wherefore,  be
steadfast,  immoveable,  and  abundant  in  the  work  of  the  Lord,  knowing  that
your  labour  is  not  in  vain  in  the  Lord.  {Ibid.)  Increase  of  grace: — First,
there  may  be  an  increase  of  grace  in  the  best  Christians.  For  Timotbeus  was
an  excellent  man  before  this  time ;  and  were  not  his  gifts  now  augmented  ?
Secondly,  that  a  minister  hath  need  of  more  grace  than  a  common  Christian.
This  is  the  reason  his  gifts  were  increased.  Thirdly,  that  the  more  worthy
calling  God  sets  us  in,  the  greater  portion  of  His  spirit  will  He  pour  upon
us.  He  did  so  by  Timothy.  Fourthly,  that  preachers  may  (above  others)  depend
upon  God  for  a  blessing.  For,  are  they  not  consecrated  with  great  care  and
solemnity  ?  enriched  with  extraordinary  gifts  and  graces  ?  Think  on  this,  0  ye
men  of  God,  and  in  contempt  of  the  world  let  the  honour  of  your  calling,  and  hope
of  good  success  in  the  faithful  execution,  comfort  your  souls,  and  breed  an  un-
daunted resolution  in  you.  (Ibid.)  St.  Paul's  concern  about  St.  Timothy: — The
letter  is  a  striking  but  thoroughly  natural  mixture  of  gloom  and  brightness.  .  .
The  thought  which  specially  oppresses  (the  apostle)  is  "  anxiety  about  all  the
Churches  " — and  about  Timothy  himself.  Dark  days  are  coming.  False  doctrine
will  be  openly  preached  and  will  not  lack  hearers ;  and  utterly  un-Christian  conduct
and  conversation  will  become  grievously  prevalent.  And,  while  the  godly  are
persecuted,  evil  men  will  wax  worse  and  worse.  This  sad  state  of  things  has  already
begun ;  and  the  apostle  seems  to  fear  that  his  beloved  disciple  is  not  altogether
unaffected  by  it.  Separation  from  St.  Paul  or  the  difficulties  of  his  position  may
have  told  on  his  over-sensitive  temperament,  and  have  caused  him  to  be  remiss  in
his  work,  through  indulgence  in  futile  despondency.  The  words  of  the  text  strike
the  dominant  chord  of  the  Epistle  and  reveal  to  us  the  motive  that  prompts  it.
The  apostle  puts  Timothy  in  rememberance  "  that  he  stir  up  the  gift  of  God  which
is  in  him."  Agaiu  and  again  he  insists  ou  this  and  similar  counsels  (see  vers.  8, 14,
ii.  3,  15,  iii.  14).  And  then,  as  the  letter  draws  to  a  close,  he  speaks  in  still  more
Bolemn  tones  of  warning  (chap.  iv.  1, 2,  5).  Evidently  the  apostle  is  anxious  lest  even
the  rich  gifts  with  which  Timothy  is  endowed  should  be  allowed  to  rust  through  want
of  use.  Timidity  and  weakness  may  prove  fatal  to  him  and  his  work,  in  spite  of
the  spiritual  advantages  which  he  has  enjoyed.  The  apostle's  anxiety  about  the
future  of  the  Churches  is  interwoven  with  anxiety  about  the  present  and  future
conduct  of  his  beloved  delegate  and  successor.     (A,  Plummer,  D.D.)  Grounds  of

St.  Paul's  apjx'al  to  St.  Timothy  : — In  encouraging  Timothy  to  stir  up  the  gift  that
is  in  him,  and  not  suffer  himself  to  be  ashamed  of  the  ignominy,  or  afraid  of  the
hardships,  which  the  service  of  Christ  entails,  the  apostle  puts  before  him  five
considerations.  There  are  the  beautiful  traditions  of  his  family,  which  are  now  in
his  keeping.  There  is  the  sublime  character  of  the  gospel  which  has  been  entrusted
to  him.  There  is  the  teaching  of  St.  Paul  himself,  who  has  so  often  given  him  a
"  pattern  of  sound  words "  and  a  pattern  of  steadfast  endurance.  There  is  the
example  of  Onesiphorus  with  his  courageous  devotion.  And  there  is  the  sure  hope
of  "  the  salvation  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  with  eternal  glory."  Any  one  of
these  might  suSice  to  influence  him  :  Timothy  cannot  be  proof  against  them
all.  (Ibid.)  Watching  the  heart  fiame :  —The  Greek  word  rendered  "  stir
up"  literally  means  to  kindle  up,  to  fan  into  flame.  We  know  that  St.  Paul
frequently  uses  for  his  illustrations  of  Christian  life  scenes  well  known  among  the
Greek  heathen  nations  of  the  Old  World,  such  as  the  Greek  athletic  games.    Is  it


OHAP.  I.]  11.  TIMOTHY.  '  13

not  possible  (the  suggestion  is  Wordsworth's)  that  the  apostle  while  here  charging
Timothy  to  take  care  that  the  sacred  fire  of  the  Holy  Ghost  did  not  languish  in  his
heart,  while  urging  him  to  watch  the  flame,  to  keep  it  burning  brightly,  to  fan  the
flame  if  burning  dimly — is  it  not  possible  that  St.  Paul  had  in  mind  the  solemn
words  of  the  Eoman  law,  "  Let  them  watch  the  eternal  flame  of  the  public
hearth"?  (Cicero,  De  Legibus  xi.  8).  The  failure  of  the  flame  was  regarded  as  an
omen  of  dire  misfortune,  and  the  watchers,  if  they  neglected  the  duty,  were
punished  with  the  severest  penalties.  {H.  D.  M.  Spence,  M.A.)  A  neglected  gift
enkindled  : — Dr.  Paley's  great  talents  were  first  called  into  vigorous  exercise  under
the  following  circumstances  : — "  I  spent  the  first  two  years  of  my  undergraduate-
ship,"  said  he,  "  happily,  but  unprofitably.  I  was  constantly  in  society,  where  we
were  not  immoral,  but  idle  and  rather  expensive.  At  the  commencement  of  my
third  year,  however,  after  having  left  the  usual  party  at  rather  a  late  hour  in  the
evening,  I  was  awakened  at  five  in  the  morning  by  one  of  my  companions,  who
stood  at  my  bedside,  and  said,  '  Paley,  I  have  been  thinking  what  a  fool  you  are.
I  could  do  nothing,  probably,  were  I  to  try,  and  can  afford  the  life  I  lead ;  you
could  do  everything,  and  cannot  afford  it.  I  have  had  no  sleep  during  the  whole
night  on  account  of  these  reflections,  and  am  now  come  solemnly  to  inform  you,
that  if  you  persist  in  your  indolence,  I  must  renounce  your  society.'  I  was  so
struck,"  Dr.  Paley  continued,  "with  the  visit  and  the  visitor,  that  I  lay  in  bed
great  part  of  the  day  and  formed  my  plan.  I  ordered  my  bed-maker  to  prepare  my
fire  every  evening,  in  order  that  it  might  be  hghted  by  myself.  I  arose  at  five  ;
read  during  the  whole  of  the  day,  except  during  such  hours  as  chapel  and  hall
required,  allotting  to  each  portion  of  time  its  peculiar  branch  of  study ;  and  just
before  the  closing  of  gates  (nine  o'clock)  I  went  to  a  neighbouring  coffee-house,
where  I  constantly  regaled  upon  a  mutton-chop  and  a  dose  of  milk-punch.  And
thus  on  taking  my  bachelor's  degree,  I  became  senior  wrangler."  {Life  of  Paley.)
Individual  gifts : — What  if  God  should  command  the  flowers  to  appear  before
Him,  and  the  sunflower  should  come  bending  low  with  shame  because  it  was  not  a
violet,  and  the  violet  should  come  striving  to  lift  itself  up  to  be  like  a  sunflower,
and  the  lily  should  seek  to  gain  the  bloom  of  the  rose,  and  the  rose  the  whiteness
of  the  lily ;  and  so,  each  one  disdaining  itself,  should  seek  to  grow  into  the  likeness
of  the  other  ?  God  would  say,  "  Stop  foohsh  flowers  I  I  gave  you  your  own
forms  and  hues,  and  odours,  and  I  wish  you  to  bring  what  you  have  received.  O
sunflower,  come  as  a  sunflower ;  and  you  sweet  violet,  come  as  a  violet ;  let  the  rose
bring  the  rose's  bloom,  and  the  hly  the  lily's  whiteness."  Perceiving  their  folly,
and  ceasing  to  long  for  what  they  had  not,  violet  and  rose,  lily  and  geranium,
mignonette  and  anemone,  and  aU  the  floral  train  would  come,  each  in  its  own
loveliness,  to  send  up  its  fragrance  as  incense,  and  all  wreathe  themselves  in  a
garland  of  b'  auty  about  the  throne  of  God.  (If.  W.  Beecher.)  Self-education : —
Every  man  has  two  educations — that  which  is  given  to  him,  and  that  which  he
gives  himself.  Of  the  two  kinds,  the  latter  is  by  far  the  most  valuable.  Indeed,
all  that  is  most  worthy  in  a  man,  he  must  work  out  and  conquer  for  himself.  It  is
this  that  constitutes  our  real  and  best  nourishment.  What  we  are  merely  taught
seldom  nourishes  the  mind  like  that  which  we  teach  ourselves.  (4.  Tynman.)  The
stirred  up  will : — I.  It  seems  worth  our  while  to  remind  ourselves  that  the  source
of  all  holy  or  vicious  conduct  is  a  virtuous  or  a  depraved  Will.  II.  Next,  in  the
review  of  our  daily  practice,  it  may  be  regarded  as  certain  that  we  are  wauting  in
our  use  of  the  most  ordinary  helps  to  a  holy  life,  if  we  are  infrequent  and
lEREGUiiAR  IN  PRATER,  AND  IN  OUR  STUDY  OP  THE  BiBLB.  III.  The  present  may
further  be  a  very  fitting  season  for  a  strict  examination  of  ourselves  with

REFERENCE     TO     ALL     THOSE    SEEMINGLY  INDIFFERENT   HABITS,    ON   WHICH    (aS    a    VCry

little  attention  shows)  the  vigour  of  our  spiritual  life  mainly  depends.  It  is
a  point  often  overlooked  by  thoughtless  persons,  that  a  slow  and  undecided
manner — habits  of  procrastination — sloth — want  of  punctuality  and  method —
that  these  things,  and  the  hke  of  these,  are  fatal  to  the  operations  of  the  best-
regulated  wiU.      (J.  W.  Burgon,  M.A.)        The  Christian  exhorted  to  stir  up  the  gift        ^

of  God  that  is  in  him : — We  must  infer  from  this  language  that  Timothy  had
become  somewhat  remiss  since  the  departure  of  St.  Paul,  and  needed  a  word  of
admonition  and  rebuke.  But  we  must  remember  also,  in  justice  to  Timothy,  that
his  position  in  Ephesus  was  an  unusually  trying  one  for  a  man  of  his  age.  He  had
been  left  in  the  city  for  the  purpose  of  checking  the  outgrowth  of  heresy  and
licentiousness  which  had  just  begun  to  manifest  itself.  His  ordinary  duties  were
anxious  and  heavy  :  he  had  to  role  presbyters,  most  of  whom  were  older  thui


14  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oai».  i,

himself ;  to  assign  to  each  a  stipend  in  proportion  to  his  work ;  to  reoeiTO  and
decide  on  charges  that  might  be  brought  against  them  ;  to  regulate  the  almsgiving
and  the  sisterhoods  of  the  Church,  and  to  ordain  the  presbyters  and  deacons.  But,
in  addition  to  all  this,  there  were  leaders  of  rival  sects  in  the  city — HymensuB,
Philetus,  and  Alexander — men,  probably,  of  considerable  intellectual  power,  and
certainly  wielding  great  influence  in  the  Christian  community,  who  would  exert
themselves  to  oppose  and  to  iiwart  the  youthful  bishop,  and  who  would  find  in  the
absence  of  St.  Paul  their  best  opportunity  of  doing  so  with  effect  and  success.
Now  Timothy,  as  it  appears,  was  a  man  of  a  gentle  and  sensitive  temperament.
Lacking  in  the  sterner  fibre  of  character,  he  shrank  from  opposition  and  conflict.
But  although  no  mistake  was  made,  as  the  sequel  proved,  the  weaker  nature  of
Timothy  required  on  occasions  the  support  and  stimulus  which  the  robust  mind  of
the  great  apostle  of  the  Gentiles  was  calculated  to  afford.  One  such  occasion  we
have  before  us  now.  There  came  a  visible  slackening  in  the  energy  and  vigour
with  which  the  youthful  disciple  held  the  reins  of  ecclesiastical  government.
St.  Paul  heard  of  this  declension,  and  immediately  spoke.  The  old  man,  ready  to
be  offered,  standing  just  on  the  confines  of  martyrdom,  and  just  within  reach  of  his
crown,  might  well  speak  to  hiB  yomiger  associate.  And  very  touching  are  his  words.
The  first  thought  on  which  we  shall  enlarge  will  be  this— that  there  is  a  "  gift  of
God  "  abiding  in  every  one  who  names  the  name  of  Christ,  and  that  this  gift  is
"  a  spirit  of  power,  and  of  love,  and  of  a  sound  mind."  The  second  thought
will  be  tiiis — that  the  gift  in  question  may  be  permitted,  through  carelessness
and  neglect,  to  fall  into  decay;  and  that  when  this  is  the  case,  measures
must  immediately  be  taken  to  "  stir  up  the  gift " — to  impart  to  it,  by  the  use
of  saitable  means,  the  vitality  and  vigour  which  it  seems  to  have  lost.  I.  Now,
according  to  St.  Paul,  a  Chbistian  is  one  in  whom  the  Spirit  of  God — the  personal
Spirit,  God  the  Holy  Ghost — has  taken  up  His  abode,  and  become,  as  it  webe,  a
BBsmENT  AND  INMATE.  What  coustitutes  a  temple  is  the  inhabitation  of  Deity.  It
is  just  BO  with  ourselves.  Excellence  of  character  and  beauty  of  disposition  are  not
things  to  be  despised,  but  they  only  constitute  the  empty  habitation;  and  the  man
is  not  a  Christian  unless  the  Spirit  of  God  is  dwelling  within  him.  But,  again,
according  to  St.  Paul,  the  Spirit  of  God  does  not  supply  to  us  the  place  of  our
spirit ;  but  leaving  the  man  in  his  completeness,  pervades,  animates,  directs,  that
part  of  his  nature  by  which  he  holds  communion  with  the  Divine.  This  gift  of
God  ••which  is  in  us"  is  in  the  direction  of  "power,  and  of  love,  and  of  a  sound
mind."  What  does  he  mean  ?  He  means  this.  The  ofQce  of  God  the  Holy  Ghost
is  to  take  of  the  things  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  to  "  show  "  them  to  the  true
disciple.  In  other  words,  the  Holy  Ghost  imparts  to  the  soul  a  right  understanding,
a  correct  perception  of  Christian  truth,  and  enables  us  to  realise  our  own  personal
concern  and  interest  in  the  things  that  are  explained.  H.  The  apostle  tells  us  that
THIS  GiTT  or  God  within  us  may  be  allowed  to  wane — may  require  to  be  "  stirred  up. "
Yes ;  interest  abates ;  novelty  ceases  to  be  novelty  ;  variety  is  sought  for  ;  the  first
flush  of  early  love  passes  away ;  the  impulse  which  set  us  a-going  is  expended;  duties
become  wearisome ;  regularity  is  monotonous.  And  are  we  always  aware  of  the
process  that  is  going  on  within  us  ?  Not  always.  We  attribute  it  to  others — to
canses  that  are  outside  ourselves.  I  have  frequently  visited  consumptive  patients.
The  poor  feUow,  with  his  wasted  frame,  and  hectic  flush,  and  racking  cough,  tells
yoo  that  he  is  a  little  worse  to-day — a  little  feebler ;  but  then  he  knows  how  to
account  for  it — he  sat  inadvertently  in  a  draught  yesterday.  On  the  occasion  of
your  next  visit  he  is  worse  ;  but  then — he  took  something  at  one  of  his  meals  which
disagreed  with  him.  The  next  time  he  is  still  worse  ;  but  he  sat  up  too  late — he
overstayed  his  usual  hour  of  retiring  to  rest.  He  has  always  a  reason  to  assign
that  is  not  the  real,  the  right,  the  true  one.  You,  watching  him  pityingly,  can
give  a  better  account  of  the  matter.  You  know  that  the  bodily  frame  is  decaying, —
that  death  is  stretching  on  with  rapid  strides  to  claim  his  victim.  So  with  the
symptoms  of  spiritual  declension.  The  man  has  one  excuse  or  another  to  account
for  his  decaying  interest,  for  his  waning  spirituality,  for  his  neglect  of  Bible  study,
for  his  less  frequent  attendance  at  the  house  of  God  or  at  the  table  of  the  Lord.
"  Business  has  increased  " ;  "  his  health  is  not  what  it  used  to  be  "  ;  "  the  preach-
ing is  not  Bo  interesting  as  it  once  was."  Well,  that  is  hit  account  of  the  matter,
as  the  poor  consumptive  patient  has  his  account  of  the  matter.  You,  looking  on,
know  that  the  chill  torpor  of  worldliness  has  seized  upon  the  soul,  and  is  threatening
to  bring  it  into  the  icy  stillness  of  spiritual  death.  I  fear  we  are  all  of  us
•object  to  the  waning  of  the  life  within  us.  Let  us  be  on  our  guard,  then.    The


CHA».  I.]  IL  TIMOTHY.  IS

"gift  of  God"  maybe  in  us  still ;  but  it  may  need  "  stirring  up."  {0.  Calthrop,  M.A.)
Our  gifts,  and  how  to  me  them  : — I  suppose  that  Timothy  was  a  somewhat  retiring
youth,  and  that  from  the  gentleness  of  his  nature  he  needed  to  be  exhorted  to  the
exercise  of  the  bolder  virtueeu  His  was  a  choice  spirit,  and  therefore  it  was
desirable  to  see  it  strong,  brave  and  energetic.  No  one  would  wish  to  arouse  a  bad
man,  for,  like  a  viper,  he  is  all  the  worse  for  being  awake  ;  but  in  proportion  to  the
excellence  of  the  character  is  the  desirability  of  its  being  full  of  force.  There  are
many  kinds  of  gifts.  All  Christians  have  some  gift.  Some  have  gifts  without  them
rather  than  within  them — gifts,  for  instance,  of  worldly  position,  estate,  and
substance.  These  ought  to  be  well  used.  But  we  must  go  at  once  to  the  point  in
hand ; — "  the  gift  that  is  in  you,"  we  have  now  to  speak  of.  I.  First,  then,  what
GIFT  IB  THERE  IN  US?  In  some  there  are  gifts  of  mind,  which  are  accompanied
with  gifts  of  utterance.  The  stones  in  the  street  might  surely  cry  out  against  some
religious  professors  who  make  the  Houses  of  Parliament,  the  council-chamber,  the
courts  of  justice,  the  Athenaeum,  or  the  Mechanics'  hall  ring  with  their  voices,  and
yet  preach  not  Jesus — who  can  argue  points  of  politics  and  the  like,  but  not  speak
a  word  for  Christ — eloquent  for  the  world,  but  dumb  for  Jesus.  If  you  have  tbe
gift  of  the  pen,  are  you  using  it  for  Christ  as  you  ought  ?  I  want  to  stir  up  the
gift  that  is  in  you.  Letters  have  often  been  blessed  to  conversions ;  are  you
accustomed  to  write  with  that  view  ?  Another  form  of  gift  that  belongs  to  us  is
influence.  What  an  influence  the  parent  has.  Many  of  the  elder  members
of  the  Church  have  another  gift — namely,  experience.  Certainly,  experience
cannot  be  purchased,  nor  taught ;  it  is  given  us  of  the  Lord  who  teacheth
us  to  profit.  It  is  a  peculiar  treasure  each  man  wins  for  himself  as  he  is  led
through  the  wilderness.  May  you  be  of  such  a  sort  as  a  certain  clergyman  I
heard  of  the  other  day.  I  asked  a  poor  woman  "  What  sort  of  man  is  he  ?  "
She  said,  "  He  is  such  a  sort  of  man,  sir,  that  if  he  comes  to  see  you  you  know
he  has  been  there."  I  understood  what  she  meant :  he  left  behind  him  some
godly  saying,  weighty  advice,  holy  consolation,  or  devout  reflection,  which  she
could  remember  after  he  had  left  her  cottage  door.  Another  gift  which  many  have
is  the  gift  of  prayer — of  prayer  with  power,  in  private  foi  the  Church  and  with
sinners.  There  is  another  gift  which  is  a  very  admirable  one.  It  is  the  gift  of  con-
versation, not  a  readiness  for  chit-chat  and  gossip — (he  who  has  that  wretched
propensity  may  bury  it  in  the  earth  and  never  dig  it  up  again) — but  the  gift  of
leading  conversation,  of  being  what  George  Herbert  called  the  "  master-gunner  "  ;
when  we  have  that,  we  should  most  conscientiously  use  it  for  God.  II.  And  this
brings  us,  secondly,  to  the  consideration  of — how  we  are  to  stir  up  our  gifts.
1.  First,  we  should  do  it  by  examination  to  see  what  gifts  we  really  have.  There
should  be  an  overhauling  of  all  our  stores  to  see  what  we  have  of  capital  entrusted
to  our  stewardship.  2.  The  next  mode  of  stirring  up  our  gift  is  to  consider  to  what
use  we  could  put  the  talents  we  possess.  To  what  use  could  I  put  my  talents  in  my
family  ?  3.  But,  next,  stir  it  up  not  merely  by  consideration  and  examination,  but
by  actually  using  it.  4.  And  then,  in  addition  to  using  our  gift,  every  one  of  us
should  try  to  improve  it.  5.  And  then  pray  over  your  gifts  :  that  is  a  blessed  way
of  stirring  them  up — to  go  before  God,  and  spread  out  your  responsibilities  before
Him.  III.  Whv  is  it  that  we  should  stir  up  the  gift  that  is  in  us?  1.  We
should  stir  up  the  gift  that  is  in  us,  because  aU  we  shall  do  when  we  have  stirred
ourselves  to  the  utmost,  and  when  the  Spirit  of  God  has  strengthened  us  to  the
highest  degree,  will  still  fall  far  short  of  what  our  dear  Lord  and  Master  deserves
at  our  hands.  2.  Another  reason  is  that  these  are  stirring  times.  If  we  are  not
stirring  everybody  else  is.  3.  And  then,  again,  we  must  stir  up  our  gift  because  it
needs  starring.  The  gifts  and  graces  of  Christian  men  are  like  a  coal  fire  which
frequently  requires  stirring  as  well  as  feeding  with  fuel.  4.  If  we  will  but  stir  our-
selves, or  rather,  if  God's  Holy  Spirit  will  but  stir  us,  we,  as  a  church,  may  expect
very  great  things.  (G.  H.  Spurgeon.)  A  missionary  sermon  : — Our  gift,  and  the
Divine  claim  on  it : — What  is  in  us  or  in  our  possession  through  the  Divine  benevo-
lence? And  what  is  the  call  made  upon  us  in  Divine  providence  and  by  the
Divine  Spirit,  for  the  exercise  of  that  gift,  in  order  to  the  enlightenment  and
salvation  of  our  fellow-men  ?  I.  The  ethnic  ob  race  gift.  No  people  can
have  enjoyed  a  larger  gift  in  this  regard  than  our  own.  "  God  hath  not  so
dealt  with  any  nation."  See  how  this  island-race  is  spreading  over  the  earth!
God  has  said  to  this  nation,  "  Stir  up  the  gift  which  is  in  thee — in  thee  by
the  slow  deposit  of  My  providence,  by  the  sowings  of  centuries— stir  up  that
gift,  and  aee  it  for  the  world's  good."    II.   There  is  also  the  familt  gift.


16  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i.

All  men  receive  from  their  ancestors  something  which  goes  into  and  becomes
part  of  themselves,  and  this  something  has  in  it  both  help  and  hindrance.
But  to  us,  to  most  of  this  Christian  assembly,  the  balance  is  largely  on  the  side  of
help.  It  might  Lave  failed;  for  faith  is  not  something  mechanical,  nor  is  it
essentially  and  of  necessity  transmitted  with  the  natural  life.  It  might  have  failed,
but  it  has  not — "And  I  am  persuaded  that  in  thee  also."  "First  in  thy  grand-
mother." Young  men  and  maidens  are  apt  to  smile  at  the  name  of  "grandmother."
But  the  Scriptures  glorify  old  age.  So  do  the  great  poets.  Seventy  years  ago  some
one  lived,  and  loved,  and  was  wedded,  and  listened  to  the  music  of  her  children's
feet,  from  whom  you  have  inheritance.  Something  lived  in  her  which  lives  in  you.
"  Stir  up  the  gift  which  is  in  thee."  Let  the  good  thoughts  of  that  far-off  time
live  again.  Let  the  tears  then  shed  be  a  present  tenderness  in  your  breast.  Let
all  the  love  of  the  old  time  have  fulfilment  and  transmission,  so  that  your  children
and  your  children's  children  may  arise  to  call  you  blessed.  In  this  life  you  are  not
atoms,  units,  severed  personalities  ;  but  branches,  links,  conductors ;  receiving  and
giving,  reaping  and  sowing,  reaching  back  to  the  Eden  behind  jou,  and  forward  to
the  day  of  God  that  is  coming.  III.  Theke  is  to  each  one  a  gift  from  God
DISTINCTLY  PEESONAL.  There  is  something  given  to  each,  inhering  in  his  own
nature  alone,  not  diffused,  not  shared  by  others,  not  flowing  through  his  life  from
lives  behind  to  lives  before — something  that  begins  and  ends  with  himself.  It  is
himself — the  inner  real  self  which  presides  over  all  outer  relations  of  hereditary
and  historical  kind.  Stir  up  this  gift  of  immortal  life  that  is  in  thee  by  the  creating
Spirit,  by  the  personal  inbreathing  of  God.  Be  thyself.  When  a  man  is  born,
God  gives  him  power  to  be  something  for  his  fellow-creatures  and  his  God.  That
something  may  be  like  treasure  "  hid  in  a  field,"  but  never  found.  We  know  how
certain  great  men  have  lived  ;  how  they  became  great  by  developing  the  inward
energy.  How  then  can  a  man  truly  and  in  the  highest  sense  stir  up  his  personal
gift  ?  Attila  the  Hun,  "  the  scourge  of  God,"  had  from  God  the  gift  which  ha
developed,  so  that  his  life  became  like  a  stream  of  scorching  fire.  Napoleon  had
all  that  was  masterly  in  his  spirit  from  the  God  who  made  him ;  but  the  apostle
would  not  have  allowed  that  he  stirred  up  his  gift  aright.  And  now,  society  is
vibrating  through  and  through  with  the  action  of  various  human  gifts  ;  statesmen
striving  against  each  other,  and  serving  their  country  in  the  strife ;  pmlific  wiiters,
working  up  to  the  full  bent  of  their  genius  ;  merchants,  making  a  very  science  of
their  commerce,  and  reaping  ample  harvest  of  the  same.  But  beyond  the  stir  and
strife  lies  the  question  of  spiritual  motive,  aim,  tendency.  From  what  fountain
springs  all  this  activity?  To  what  goal  is  it  tending?  IV.  The  Christian
GIFT.  It  is  expressed  in  such  a  word  as  this :  "  For  me  to  live  is  Christ,
and  to  die  is  gain."  Or  this :  "  I  am  crucified  with  Christ :  nevertheless
I  live;  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me."  Or  this:  "If  any  man  be  in
Christ  he  is  a  new  creatnre :  old  things  are  passed  away,  and  all  things  are
become  new."  And :  "If  any  man  have  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  he  is
none  of  His."  Full  religious  development  must  take  the  form  of  Christian
consecration.  How  much  a  man — any  one  of  you  young  men — might  do,  would,  I
believe,  be  a  discovery  even  to  yourself.  Now  and  again  God  gives  us  to  see  this,
to  see  how  much  one  can  do,  not  by  great  original  powers,  not  by  the  help  of
favouring  circumstances,  but  just  by  consecration,  by  stirring  up  the  gilt — it  may
be  a  gift  composed  of  many  gifts,  a  general  capacity  of  service.  What  in  you  is  its
measure  ?  How  far  will  it  reach  ?  How  long  will  it  last  ?  How  much  will  it
achieve  ?  I  cannot  tell ;  no  more  can  you,  until  you  try.  Timothy  the  lad  in
Lystra  knows  nothing  of  Timothy  the  bishop  of  Ephesus.  We  all  go  on  to  meet,
and  as  we  go  we  make,  our  future  selves.  {A.  Raleigh,  D.D.)  Cliristian  enthu-
siasm : — What  Timothy  seems  to  have  wanted  most  was  fire.  St.  Paul  could  have
no  doubt  as  to  his  gifts,  nor  of  the  fidelity  with  which  he  would  use  them.  But  the
work  and  the  times  demanded  something  more  than  talent  and  conscientiousness  ;
they  required  enthusiasm.  Hence  the  apostle  urges  his  friend  to  "  stir  up  the  gift
that  was  in  him,"  or,  as  his  words  might  be  better  rendered,  "kindle  the  gift  that
is  in  thee  into  flame."  For  the  want  of  this  enthusiasm  men  of  splendid  parts
prove  splendid  failures,  and,  although  otherwise  qualified  to  fill  the  highest  places
and  to  lead  the  grandest  enterprises,  are  never  heard  of,  from  sheer  inability  to
push  their  way.  But  our  subject  is  not  enthusiasm  in  general,  but  Christian
enthusiasm  in  particular ;  and  our  text,  with  its  context,  supplies  us  with  some
useful  hints  respecting  its  subject,  its  nature,  and  its  motive.  I.  Its  subject.  To
be  enthusiastic  it  is  obvious  that  we  must  have  something  to  be  enthusiastic  aboutj


CHAP.  I.]  II.  TIMOTHY,  17

and  Bometbiog  worthy  of  our  enthusiasm.  The  enthusiasm  of  the  Christian  worker,
like  that  of  the  poet,  may  be  "  fine  frenzy,"  but,  like  the  poet's,  again,  it  is  not
aimless  frenzy.  It  gathers  round  a  definite  object,  which  has  sufficient  force  of
attraction  to  draw  towards  it  the  whole  interest  and  strength  of  the  man  over  whom
it  throws  its  spell.  In  Timothy's  case  this  subject  was  a  gift  for  the  office  of  bishop
and  evangelist.  Notice,  then,  that  this  capacity  is — 1.  •*  The  gift  of  God."  We
take  the  greatest  pride  in  the  products  of  our  independent  genius  and  industry,  or
in  the  purchases  of  our  wealth.  But  here  we  have,  as  the  bestowment  of  a  generous
benefactor,  what  all  our  money  could  not  buy,  and  what  all  our  skill  could  not
fabricate.  We  serve  God  just  because  God  has  given  us  the  ability  to  serve  Him.
In  Christian  work,  therefore,  boasting  is  shameful,  and  vanity  ridiculous.  2.  A
constitutional  gift.  God  has  invested  UB  with  two  classes  of  gifts — gifts  external
and  gifts  internal — gifts  which  go  to  make  up  what  a  man  has ;  gifts  which  consti-
tute him  what  he  is.  Our  capacity  for  Divine  service  is  one  of  the  latter  class.  It
is  "  in  "  us.  It  is  a  soul  faculty.  It  entered  into  the  original  plan  of  our  being.
Further,  this  capacity — 3.  Assumes  different  forms.  It  is  a  common  gift,  but  the
idiosyncrasies  of  the  individuals  to  whom  it  is  given  invest  it,  in  each  case,  with  a
peculiar  shape.  Thus  painting  and  architecture,  music  and  science,  philosophy  and
poetry,  statesmanship  and  wealth;  that  subtle  thing  called  influence,  and  that
drea^ul  thing  called  war,  that  prosaic  thing  called  trade,  and  that  humble  thing
called  home,  have  each  and  all  been  pressed  into  the  service  of  illustrating  our  text.
And  80  Eaffaelle  in  the  Cartoons,  Wren  in  St.  Paul's,  Handel  in  the  "  Messiah,"
Newton  in  the  "  Principia,"  Bacon  in  the  *»  Novum  Organum,"  Milton  in  the
"Paradise  Lost,"  Wilberforce  in  his  Parliamentary  achievements,  Peabody  in  his
munificent  benefactions,  Shaftesbury  in  the  example  he  set  before  society,  GordoK
in  the  heroism  with  which  he  defended  Khartoum,  Moore  in  his  work  in  the  London
warehouse,  Susannah  Wesley  in  hers  in  the  Epworth  rectory,  and  others  in  what
they  have  done  in  the  house,  in  the  shop,  or  in  the  field,  aU  seem  to  say,  "  There,
that  is  what  I  mean  by  the  gift  that  is  in  me."  And  that  we  should  ascertain  what
our  special  talent  is,  and  in  what  our  capacity  should  be  employed,  is  of  the  utmost
importance  for  many  reasons.  How  often  do  we  hear  the  remark  applied  to  some
social  failure — and  true  it  is — "  he  has  missed  his  calling."  A  man  who  might  have
made  something  out  in  a  walk  in  Ufe  for  which  he  was  suitably  endowed,  makes  nothing
out,  because  he  has  chosen  one  for  which  he  is  totally  unqualified.  Once  more,  this
capacity — 4.  Is  intended  for  and  must  find  employment  in  the  service  of  the  Church.
St.  Paul's  injunction  carries  with  it  the  broad  principle  just  laid  down,  but  we  must
remember  that  the  apostle  had  in  view  the  interests  of  Christ's  Church,  and  urged
Timothy  to  promote  those  interests  in  the  way  for  which  he  was  Divinely  qualified.
II.  Its  nature.  We  have  the  gift ;  with  what  shall  we  kindle  it  ?  1.  Like  the
capacity  it  has  to  kindle  into  flame.  Christian  enthusiasm  is  the  gift  of  God.  No
man  ever  purchased  it ;  no  man  ever  created  it.  It  is  not  from  beneath  and  human,
it  is  from  above  and  Divine ;  "  God  hath  given  us  the  spirit  ...  of  power,  of  love,
and  of  a  sound  mind."  And  that  a  Divine  person  should  provide  the  materials  for
the  kindling  of  a  Divine  gift  arises  out  of  the  necessities  of  the  case.  Like  pro-
duces like,  and  fire  kindles  fire.  You  have  in  your  grates  blocks  of  a  cold  black
mineral,  the  last  things  in  the  world,  as  far  as  appearances  go,  from  which  yon
would  expect  light  and  heat.  But  you  know  that  fire  lies  imprisoned  and  slumber-
ing there.  And  you  know,  also,  that  neither  the  most  careful  arrangement  of  the
coals,  nor  the  most  vigorous  use  of  the  fire  irons,  will  be  of  the  least  service  in
awakening  the  element  and  setting  it  free.  What  you  do,  however,  is  to  apply
a  light,  and  then  the  cold  black  mineral  becomes  fervent  and  radiant  heat.
Eighteen  hundred  years  ago  a  few  weak  and  unlettered  peasants  formed  all  that
there  was  of  the  Christian  Church.  Who  would  have  given  them  credit
for  a  world-converting  capacity  ?  But  within  them  lay  dormant  the  Divine  gift.
They  formed  no  elaborate  organisation ;  they  made  no  violent  stir.  They  simply
waited  and  prayed  ;  and  by  and  by  fire  from  without  met  its  counterpart  vrithin.
The  Holy  Ghost  fell  upon  them,  made  them  enthusiasts  for  CLrist,  and  thus
enabled  them  to  kindle  their  gift  into  flame.  2.  Christian  enthusiasm  is  not  "  the
spirit  of  fear."  This  is  obvious.  Until  that  spirit  is  laid  there  can  be  no  enthu-
siasm. It  can  only  be  conqiiered  by  the  Divine  Spirit,  who,  as  He  subdues  the
craven  or  the  diffident  temper,  will  make  us  instinct  with  that  Christian  enthusiasm
which  is — (1)  The  spirit  of  power.  And  being  this,  it  is  distinguished  from  excite-
ment, which  is  the  spirit  of  weakness.  The  two  may,  indeed,  be  confounded  for  a
time,  just  as  a  meteor  may,  at  first,  be  mistaken  for  a  star.    No ;  Christian  entha-

2


18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  i.

siasm  is  not  a  transient  spasm  of  ezoitement ;  it  is  power,  and  that  means  stabilitj,
persistence,  inexhaustible  resources,  unwearied  and  inextinguishable  force.  The
spirit  of  power,  however,  although  the  first  and  basal  element  in  Christian  enthu-
siasm, is  not  the  only  one.  For  power,  by  itself,  will  make  a  man  not  an  enthusiast,
but  a  fanatic.  Fanaticism  is  by  no  means  weakness,  it  is  force,  often  of  the  most
vigorous  kind,  but  force  without  regulation  and  control.  Christian  enthusiasm  is,
therefore — (2)  The  spirit  of  love.  We  all  know  the  mighty  part  that  love  has
sustained  in  the  purest  human  enthusiasms.  Love  of  children  ;  for  what  heroisms
has  that  not  qualified  the  weakest  of  mothers  ?  Love  of  country ;  what  flames  has
that  not  kindled  in  the  most  phlegmatic  of  citizens?  Love  of  man;  for  what
endurance  and  what  eSort  has  that  not  nerved  some  of  the  feeblest  of  our  race  ?
Analyse  any  given  case  of  noble  enthusiasm,  and  you  will  find  the  very  life  of  it  to
be  love ;  either  the  love  which  manifests  itself  in  devotion  to  a  person,  or  the  love
which  finds  expression  in  consecration  to  a  cause.  Li  Christian  enthusiasm  both
of  these  loves  find  play,  for  it  is  first  devotion  to  a  person.  Christian  love  is  love
to  God,  and  if  I  love  God  I  must  cling  to  Him.  But  Christian  enthusiasm  is  also —
(3)  The  spirit  of  a  sound  mind — a  fact  that  is  most  frequently  overlooked.  Hence,
by  many,  it  is  regarded  as  a  symptom  of  goodness  of  heart,  possibly,  but  certainly
of  weakness  of  head.  In  the  world  the  enthusiast  is  not  a  mad  speculator  or  simple
dreauer ;  he  is  the  man  who,  by  the  sagacity  with  which  he  lays  his  plans,  the
common  sense  lines  on  which  he  works  them,  the  alertness  with  which  he  seizes
every  opportunity,  and  the  tenacity  with  which  he  retains  his  hold  on  every
advantage,  builds  up  a  colossal  business  and  amasses  a  vast  fortune.  And  we
refuse  to  recognise  as  a  Christian  enthusiast  the  man  who,  by  his  wild  vagaries
neutrahses  the  good  of  which  he  might  have  been  otherwise  capable,  or  the  man
whose  sanguine  temperament  is  imposed  upon  by  impossible  ideals.  We  claim  for
Christian  enthusiasm  rational  as  well  as  emotional  qualities.  It  demands  the
consecration  of  the  intellect  at  its  freshest  and  its  best,  that  it  may  help  the
body  to  render  *'  a  reasonable  service."  And  what  is  this  sound-mindedness  ?  It
is  the  self-control  which  conserves  its  energies,  the  patience  which  bides  its  time,
the  discernment  which  perceives  that  its  time  has  come  ;  it  is  the  knowledge  that
understands  its  work,  the  judgment  that  determines  where  the  work  can  be  best
done,  the  wisdom  that  suggests  how  to  do  it  in  the  best  way  ;  it  is  the  prudence
which  prepares  for  difficulties,  the  resolution  which  faces  them,  the  tact  which
threads  its  way  through  them,  or  turns  them  to  its  own  account.  In  one  word,  it
is  the  mind  in  full  health,  in  the  health  which  consists  of  the  wholeness,  vigour,
and  harmonious  activity  of  aU  the  rational  faculties ;  the  intellect  filled  with  the
Holy  Spirit  of  God.  III.  Its  motives.  We  have  the  gift ;  by  what  considerations
are  we  urged  and  encouraged  to  kindle  it  ?  1.  Timothy  was  reminded  of  his
responsibihty  in  the  very  terms  of  our  text.  2.  Timothy  was  reminded  of  his
ancestral  traditions.  Men  of  noble  lineage  are  supposed  to  have  stronger  motives
to  do  nobly  than  those  of  meaner  origin.  They  have  a  family  as  well  as  a  personal
reputation  to  sustain.  3,  Timothy  was  reminded  of  his  share  in  the  great  salva-
tion. That  we  might  kindle  our  gift,  God,  if  I  may  so  say,  kindled  His.  4.
Lastly,  Timothy  was  reminded  that  he  had  been  honoured  with  a  Divine  call  to
Birr  up  his  gift.  He  was  "  called  with  a  holy  calhng."  There  was  nothing  meri-
torious in  him,  as  the  apostle  is  careful  to  remind  him,  to  occasion  this  call.  It
was  of  God's  grace,  and  God,  who  had  entrusted  him  with  the  gift,  now  laid  formal
claim  to  the  use  of  His  own.  (J.  W.  Burn.)  An  ordination  sermon : —
They  that  think  that  every  Christian  may  be  a  preacher,  and  that  the  ministry,
considered  as  a  distinct  calling  or  employ,  is  nothing  but  usurpation,  and
some  ambitious  men's  affecting  a  superiority  over  their  brethren,  like  the
cynic  of  old  trampling  upon  Plato's  cloak,  make  themselves  guilty  of  greater
pride  than  that  which  they  pretend  to  condemn.  The  church  is  called  a
building,  and  we  know  that  every  flint  or  pebble  is  not  fit  to  be  a  foundation  or
corner-stone,  much  less  to  be  set  into  the  ephod,  and  there  to  shine  in  oracles  and
responses.  It  is  called  a  body  too,  and  this  hath  various  members,  and  these  various
offices,  which  cannot  be  all  eyes  and  overseers ;  if  they  were,  where  would  be  the
hearing  ?  An  ecclesiastical  jurisdiction  lodged  in  Timothy,  an  overseer  constituted
and  appointed  by  St.  Paul,  even  by  the  laying  on  of  his  bands,  whereof  he  puts
him  in  mind  in  the  text,  and  of  the  gift  that  was  bestowed  upon  him  by  that
imposition  of  hands,  and  of  his  duty  to  exercise  it.  And  here,  before  I  enter  upon
the  apufitle's  exhortation,  or  the  duty  contained  in  it,  I  cannot  but  take  notice  of
the  softness  and  gentleness  of  his  address,  "  I  put  thee  in  remembrance."    Frao-


CHAP.  1.]  II.  TIMOTHY.  19

tioal  discoorses  and  salutary  admonitions  to  men  of  learning  and  good  education
are  a  refreshing  of  their  memories  rather  than  teaching  or  illuminating  their
understandings.  Discourses  of  this  nature  may  put  you  in  remembrance  of  a  duty,
which  multiplicity  of  business  would  not  suffer  you  to  think  of,  or  contemplations
of  other  matters  tempted  you  to  overlook.     I.  What  the  gift  is  which  was  im

TiMOTHT,   AND   MAT   STILL   BE    SOPPOSED  TO   BE    IN  ALL  THOSE   WHOM  GOD   CALLS  TO  THE

SAME  OFTiCE.  I  shall  particularisc  the  gift  communicated  to  Timothy ;  and  if  we
take  St.  Paul  for  our  guide,  we  shall  find  this  gift  was  a  Divine  power  vouchsafed
to  this  man  of  God,  which  enabled  and  disposed  him  to  teach,  and  live,  and  act,
and  do,  answerable  to  the  duties  incumbent  upon  him,  as  a  governor  of  the  house
of  God.  The  apostle  in  the  following  verse  calls  it  the  spirit  of  power,  of  love,
and  of  a  sound  mind ;  the  spirit  of  Christian  fortitude,  of  charity,  and  of  sedate-
ness  and  tranquillity  of  temper.  1.  The  spirit  of  fortitude,  which  consists  in  being
undaunted  at  danger,  fearless  of  the  frowns  of  men  while  we  do  no  more  than  our
duty,  and  a  steady  freedom  to  vindicate  the  truth  of  the  gospel  and  the  honour  of
Christ  Jesus,  whatever  may  be  the  effect  or  consequence  of  it.  2.  The  spirit  of
love.  It  was  not  without  very  great  reason  that  our  Saviour  asked  St.  Peter
thrice,  "  Lovest  thou  Me  ?  "  and  "  Lovest  thou  Me  more  than  these  ?  "  3.  The
spirit  of  a  sound  mind.  This  seems  to  be  a  temper  able  to  curb  the  passions,
inordinate  lusts,  desires,  and  perturbations  of  the  mind,  an  admirable  spirit !  To
know  when  to  be  angry,  and  when  to  be  calm  ;  when  to  be  severe,  and  when  to  be
moderate  and  gentle.  The  mind  is  then  sound  when  it  keeps  the  lower  faculties
in  good  order,  and  it  is  an  argument  of  wisdom  to  judge  of  things  without  heats,
or  prejudice,  or  prospect  of  self-interest,  and  to  keep  the  wild  desires  of  corrupted
nature  in  awe,  and  to  do  things  with  prudence  and  moderation.    II.  How  this  gift

WAS  ANCIENTLY  AND  IS  STILL  BESTOWED  AND  COMMUNICATED.    By  the  putting  OU  of   my

hands,  saith  St.  Paul ;  and  in  1  Tim.  iv.  14  he  adds,  by  the  laying  on  of  the
hands  of  the  presbytery,  i.e.,  of  the  whole  apostolical  college,  or  the  greater  part  of
the  apostles,  who  it  is  like  were  present  upon  the  place.  This  rite  or  ceremony  of
imposition  of  hands  on  a  person  designed  for  Church  ofSces  and  the  service  of  the
tabernacle,  Isidore  and  others  derive  from  Isaac's  blessing  his  son  Jacob,  which  they
suppose  was  done  by  the  Patriarch's  laying  his  hands  upon  Jacob's  head ;  from
Jacob's  laying  his  hands  on  his  grandchildren  and  blessing  them ;  from  Moses's
laying  his  hand  on  Joshua,  and  communicating  part  of  his  spirit  to  him.  The
ancient  Bomans  used  to  lay  their  hands  upon  their  slaves  when  they  made  them
free  ;  and  Numa  Pompilius  had  hands  laid  on  him  when  he  was  made  High  Pontiff  ;
but  it  is  probable  that  even  these  fetched  it  from  the  Jews.  The  Christian  Churches,
who  retained  what  was  good  and  praiseworthy  among  the  Jews,  seeing  nothing  in
this  rite  but  what  was  grave,  and  decent,  and  solemn,  and  serious,  adopted  it  into  their
service.  In  sacrificing  beasts  to  the  honour  of  God  the  priest  laid  his  hands  on  the
victim's  head,  to  show  he  dedicated  it  to  God,  and  from  common,  separated  it  to  a
holy  use,  and  dismissed  it  from  the  service  of  men  into  that  of  the  most  high  God ;
all  which  significations  did  wonderfully  well  agree  with  the  end  of  the  ministerial
function  under  the  gospel,  and  therefore  the  Christians  had  no  reason  to  reject  this
useful  and  decent  custom.  This  imposition  of  hands  was  no  physical  cause  of  con-
veying the  Holy  Ghost,  but  an  external  assurance,  that  as  surely  as  the  hands
were  laid  on  the  head  of  the  person  ordained,  so  surely  would  the  spirit  of  power,  of
love,  and  of  a  sound  mind,  light  upon  his  soul  if  he  did  not  obstruct  it  by  wilful
departing  from  the  living  God.  That  this  rite  hath  lasted  in  the  Church  from  the
apostles'  time  unto  this  day  is  what  the  concurrent  testimonies  of  all  ages  witness.

III.    How   THIS   GIFT   IS   TO   BE   STIBBED  DP,  AND   WHAT   IS   THE    BEST  AND  MOST   PEOPER

WAY  TO  DO  IT.  In  the  original  it  is  avaZ,(Dnvgiiiv,  which  is  as  much  as  stirring  up
the  fire,  or  blowing  the  coals,  and  making  the  fire  burn  that  lies  mingled  with  the
ashes.  So  that  the  Spirit  of  God  conferred  upon  sacred  persons  by  the  imposition
of  hands  is  lodged  in  the  soul,  as  the  treasure  in  the  gospel  was  hid  in  the  field,
which  required  digging  and  searching  to  make  it  useful.  It  is  like  gold  in  the  ore,
which  requires  melting,  and  cleansing,  and  purifying  ;  like  a  stock  of  money  which
requires  improvement  by  trading ;  like  seed  sown  in  the  ground,  which  requires
watering  and  other  labour  and  industry  to  make  it  come  forth,  and  grow,  and  spread,
and  yield  fruit,  and  strengthen  man's  heart.  This  stirring  up  of  the  gift  of  God
respects  either  the  means  that  are  to  be  used,  or  the  duty  itself.  The  means  hinted
in  this  and  the  preceding  Epistle  are  chiefly  three — prayer,  reading,  meditating.
1.  Prayer.  Who  can  live  without  it  ?  Who  can  act  or  do  anything  of  moment
without  the  assistance  of  this  spiritual  engine  ?    Nature  teaches  mankind  to  begin


20  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i.

their  works  of  concernment  with  God ;  grace  therefore  must  be  supposed  to  press
this  duty  infinitely  more,  on  you  particularly,  the  heirs  of  Timothy's  ofiBce,  in  order
to  this  stirring  up  the  gift  of  God  that  is  in  you,  by  the  imposition  of  hands.
God  that  gives  you  talents  intends  not  that  you  should  bury  them  in  the  earth,  or
lay  them  up  in  a  napkin,  but  occupy  and  traffic  with  them,  and  be  gainers  by  them  ;
and  to  do  this  His  help  is  necessary,  who  gives  strength  to  the  weak  and  power  to
the  feeble ;  and  this  help  is  not  to  be  had  without  importunate  cries  and  solicita-
tions. These  prayers  must  have  fire ;  it  is  their  fervour  that  unlocks  the  secret
cabinet  of  the  Almighty.  2.  Beading.  This  the  apostle  expressly  recommends  to
Timothy  (1  Tim.  iv.  13)  in  order  to  his  stirring  up  the  gift  of  God.  Beading  what  ?
No  doubt  the  Holy  Scripture,  and  therefore  our  Church  proscribes,  delivering  a
Bible  into  the  hands  of  the  person  upon  whom  episcopal  hands  are  laid.  The  great
examples  you  meet  with  here,  the  industry  of  Moses,  the  zeal  of  Elijah,  the  fervour  of
St.  Paul,  the  vigour  of  St.  Stephen,  the  courage  of  St.  Peter,  the  assiduity  of  ApoUos,
the  sincerity  of  Barnabas,  what  are  these  but  so  many  motives  to  stir  up  the  gift  of  God
that  is  in  you  ?  Add  to  all  this  the  glorious,  the  precious,  the  large,  the  sweet,  the
wonderful  promises,  promises  of  Christ's  assistance,  promises  of  comfort,  of  support,  of
eternal  life  and  glory,  which  will  animate  and  enliven,  and  prompt  you  to  blow  up  the
fire  of  the  sanctuary  and  the  coal  of  the  altar,  that  it  may  consume  the  dross  and  tin,
not  only  that  which  cleaves  to  your  own  souls,  but  that  also  which  sticks  to  others,  that
see  and  hear. you,  and  converse  with  you.  3.  Meditating.  This  is  also  urged  among
the  means,  not  to  neglect  the  gift  of  God,  "  Meditate  upon  these  things,  give  thyself
wholly  to  them  "  (1  Tim.  iv.  15).  The  bare  reading  will  make  no  great  impression.
Meditation  digests  and  rouses  the  soul  from  her  slumber.  This  quickens  the  facul-
ties, sets  all  the  wheels  a-going,  incites  to  labour,  prompts  to  induRtry,  and  moves  and
even  compels  us  to  imitate  the  great  examples  set  down  in  the  Word  of  God,  and  to
follow  their  faith,  and  wisdom,  and  hope,  and  love,  and  charity.  But  in  what  doth
the  stirring  up  of  the  gift  of  God  consist  ?  Chiefly  in  these  three  particulars.  1.
Feeding  the  flock  of  God  which  is  among  you,  taking  the  oversight  thereof,  not  by
constraint,  but  willingly,  not  for  filthy  lucre,  but  of  a  ready  mind,  neither  as  being
lords  over  God's  heritage,  but  being  examples  to  the  flock.  Ye  are  the  captains,
the  generals  in  Christ's  army,  while  you  bear  the  heat  and  burden  of  the  day,
detract  no  labour,  spare  no  pains,  live  like  faithful  stewards  of  the  mystery  of  God,
vindicate  your  Master's  honour,  act  like  persons  who  have  renounced  the  hidden
things  of  dishonesty,  and  by  manifestation  of  the  truth  commend  yourselves  to  every
man's  conscience  in  the  sight  of  God ;  you  make  good  the  glorious  titles  and  the
names  which  are  given  you,  such  as  angels,  and  stars,  and  lights  of  the  world,
and  the  salt  of  the  earth,  and  a  city  set  on  a  hill,  &c.  2.  Labouring  and  making
it  your  business  to  reform  abuses.  3.  Enduring  hardness  as  good  soldiers  of
Jesus  Christ,  a  duty  very  warmly  recommended  to  Timothy  (chap.  ii.  3).  In
discharging  your  duty  faithfully,  you  must  expect  obloquy,  and  slanders,  and  re-
proaches, and  other  inconveniences.  (A.  Horneck,  D.D.)  The  latent  spiritual
force  in  man: — I.  That  there  is  in  man  some  spibitoal  force  which  is  in  a
BPECiAi.  SENSE  "THE  GIFT  OF  GoD."  Indeed,  our  very  existence,  with  all  its
physical  and  mental  attributes,  is  His  gift.  But  this  spiritual  force  is  something
special,  and  it  may  be  said  to  comprehend  at  least  three  elements.  1.  The
sentiment  of  religious  worship.  2.  The  sentiment  of  moral  obUgation.  He  has
an  inbred  feeling  that  there  is  an  authority  over  him  to  which  he  owes
allegiance,  that  there  are  laws  which  he  should  recognise  and  obey.  3.  The
sentiment  of  social  love.  The  social  love  is  something  more  than  gregarious-
ness,  than  mere  animal  sympathy,  which  seem  to  belong  to  all  sentient  life.
It  is  benevolence,  a  well-wishing  for  the  race.  Indeed,  our  life,  with  all  its
attributes,  is  His  gift,  but  this  spiritual  force  is  especially  so.  It  is  bestowed  upon
man  only ;  it  is  something  greater  than  intellect,  imagination,  genius.  These  it
works  as  its  instruments.  It  is  in  truth  the  substratum  of  his  moral  being,  the
former  of  his  character,  the  controller  of  his  destiny.     II.  That  the  dboent  duty

OF   MAN   IB   TO   ROUSE   THIS   SPIBITDAL   FORCE   INTO   BIGHT   ACTION.      To  "  stir  Up  "  intO

right  action  this  spiritual  force  is  every  man's  paramount  self-obligation.  He  has
to  rouse  up  into  right  action  the  spiritual  power  that  lies  within  him  and  which  ia
God's  greatest  gift.  The  command  implies — 1.  That  man  has  the  power  to  do  so.
Every  righteous  obligation  implies  the  existence  of  adequate  power  of  obedience.
But  how  can  man  do  it?  (1)  How  can  he  "  stir  up  "  the  sentiment  of  worship  into
healthy  action  ?  By  devout  meditations  on  the  moral  excellencies  of  the  one  true
and  living  God.    (2)  How  can  he  "stir  up"  the  sentiment  of  obligation?    By


OBAP.  I.]  II.  TIMOTHY.  21

contemplating  the  Divine  will,  which  is  the  supreme  law  of  life.    (3)  How  can  he
" stir  up  "  into  right  action  the  sentiment  of  holy  love?    By  a  devout  study  of  the
claims  and  needs  of  his  feUow  men.     In  this  way  every  man  can  "  stir  up  "  this
spiritual  force,  the  gift  of  God  that  is  within  him.     2.  On  doing  this  depends  his
true  dignity  and  bliss.     Man  can  only  become  great  by  the  right  use  of  his  great
powers,  by  bringing  out  into  right  action  all  the  great  forces  of  his  spiritual  nature.
The  man  who  has  not  thus  risen,  has  only  risen  as  the  stone  has  risen  which  has
been  hurled  up  into  air,  it  must  come  down  to  the  earth  again.    But  he  who  rises
by  developing  the  spiritual  forces  of  his  nature,  ascends  heavenward,  as  the  eagle
that  guides  itself  up  from  earth  to  heaven  through  clouds  and  sunshine.    Con-
clusion :  Man  attend  to  thyself,  not  selfishly,  and  occasionally,  but  generously  and
constantly.     There  is  an  exhaustless  field  lying  within  thee  fraught  with  countless
germs  of  life  and  power.     Throughout  nature  there  are  latent  forces — fire  mighty
enough  to  burn  up  the  universe  sleeps  in  every  atom  of  dust  and  drop  of  water.
Powers  sleep  in  the  acorn  sufficient  to  cover  continents  with  majestic  forests,  and
there  is  a  spiritual  force  within  us,  rightly  directed,  that  will  build  us  into  angels
and  lift  us  to  the  highest  heavens  of  being.    Let  us,  therefore,  "  stir  up  "  this
spiritual  force,  this  "  gift  of  God"  within  us.     (David  Thomas,  D.D.)        Latent
spiritual  power : — What  is  the  course  of  the  development  of  this  spiritual  gift,  or,
better,  this  gift  of  the  Spirit  ?    What  is  the  manifestation  and  unfolding  of  this
new  energy  of  God  in  the  highest  branch  of  man's  nature  ?    It  is  quiet  and  gentle
as  all  God's  operations  are  in  the  hearts  that  yield  to  Him ;  only  an  earthquake
does  it  become  when  opposed  by  rocky  natures,  a  desolating  whirlwind  among  the
stubborn  oaks  and  cedars.    It  unfolds  in  willing  hearts  as  seed  in  congenial  soil,
always  with  a  promise  of  more  and  more  ;  the  blade,  the  ear,  the  full  corn  in  the
ear ;  the  full  corn  in  the  ear  multiplied  thirty,  sixty,  an  hundredfold,  and  each  corn
the  promise  and  potency  by  a  similar  method  of  a  hundred  more.     See  how  it
increases.     A  young  convert  begins  in  an  unobtrusive  way  to  speak  to  a  few  wild
boys  whom  he  gathers  together,  one  and  another  of  whom  become  Christians  ;  the
number  grows,  and  with  growth  of  responsibility  the  convert  receives  increase  of
power.    The  class  becomes  a  congregation ;   the  few  trembling,  kind  words  he
managed  to  speak  at  first  become  the  powerful  address  ;  the  boys  are  joined  by  men
and  women  ;  the  address  becomes  a  sermon.     That  may  be  one  way  in  which  the
gift  of  God  may  be  developed  and  displayed.     It  is  only  one.     For  I  hold  the  gift
of  the  Spirit,  which  comes  at  conversion,  to  be  also  a  gift  for  service.    It  is  the
same  grace  working  through  us  to  produce  in  other  hearts  precisely  the  fruits  He
has  produced  in  us — repentance  through  our  repentance,  faith  through  our  faith,
love  through  our  love,  hope  through  our  hope.     The  regenerated  soul  brings  forth
graces  after  their  kind,  just  as  the  earth  grass,  and  herb,  and  tree,  yielding  fruit
whose  seed  is  in  itself,  after  its  kind.    But  if  all  require  His  presence  and  help,
none  so  manifestly  require  them  as  the  minister  who  has  to  feed  the  flock  of  God.
His  nature  ought  to  lie  open  to  Divine  influence  at  every  point,  and  every  call  of
his  ministry  should  be  a  call  to  try  and  prove  what  the  Spirit  of  Christ  which  is  in
him  can  accomplish  for  him  and  through  him.  He  sometimes  finds  out  the  vastness
of   his  supernatural   resources  through  being  made  painfully  conscious  of  the
inadequacy  of  his  natural  powers  for  the  work  to  be  done.    He  sees  the  truth  dimly,
and  therefore  seeks  for  the  light  of  the  Spirit  to  be  shed  upon  it  and  irradiate  it.
And  here  I  would  say  that  I  am  free  to  admit,  as  has  been  always  held  by  those  who
intelligently  believe  that  the  God  who  created  our  natural  powers  is  the  same  as
He  who  sanctifies  them  and  works  through  them,  "that  the  greater  the  gifts  by
nature  and  cultivation,  the  greater  the  number  of  points  at  which  the  Holy  Spirit
may  move  us,  and  that  Divine  power  is  conditioned  by  human  receptivity."     The
gift  of  the  Spirit  to  Timothy  was  the  same  as  to  Paul ;  and  yet  since  Timothy's
measure  was  not  as  capacious  as  Paul's,  and,  perhaps,  because  he  did  not  so
diligently  stir  up  his  gift  as  Paul,  his  life,  beautiful  and  useful  though  it  was,  lacked
the  luxuriant  fruitfulness  of  Paul's.     The  condition  of  our  doing  our  best  is  that
we  allow  God  to  do  the  best  He  can  through  us.   And  be  our  other  gifts  few  or  many,
brilliant  or  humble,  the  reason  for  stirring  up  the  flame  of  the  great  gift  is  just  the
same  in  all  cases.    For  you  would  not  have  your  poor  gift  without  the  fire  that  can
make  even  it  glow  with  fervour,  as  I  have  often  seen  the  lips  of  poor,  illiterate,
feeble-minded  men  burn  with  rapture  which  gave  beauty  and  charm  to  all  they  said.
And  you  would  not  have  your  finer  gifts,  if  you  possess  such,  bereft  of  that  energy
which  is  a  touch  of  omnipotence,  nor  left  without  that  inspiration  which  is  a  pulse
of  the  heart  of  infinite  love.  No  one  can  tell  the  wealth  of  his  gift  in  the  possession


n  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chi».  i.

of  the  Spirit  of  God.  Let  us  put  ourselves  in  remembrance  that  we  may  stir  np  the
gift  of  God.  Let  us  remember  the  day  of  our  first  submission,  and  how  it  ought  to
have  implied  a  life-long  submission,  a  continual  yielding  up  of  self  and  self-will.
Let  us  remember  the  day  of  our  consecration,  the  hopes  which  then  gleamed  in  oar
heaven,  the  vows  which  then  trembled  on  our  lips.  If  the  promise  of  these  times
has  been  blasted  or  dimmed,  let  us  seek  the  renewing  of  our  hearts  by  the  Spirit
which  dwelleth  in  us.  If  the  promise  has  been  fulfilled,  or  even  more  than
fulfilled,  still  let  us  honour  the  Spirit  by  whom  we  have  been  kept,  sanctified,  and
used.  (<7.  P.  Oledstone.)  Ordination : — The  poet  Keble  said  on  one  occasion  that
he  wished  he  could  attend  an  ordination  service  every  year  of  his  life,  that  he  might
be  reminded  of  first  principles.  The  Nemesis  of  neglected  gifts : — There  is  a  terrible
penalty  attached  to  the  neglect  of  the  higher  faculties,  whether  intellectual  or  moral ;
a  pensJty  which  works  surely  and  unerringly  by  a  natural  law.  We  all  of  us  have
imagination,  intellect,  will.  These  wonderful  powers  must  have  an  object,  must
have  employment.  If  we  do  not  give  them  their  true  object,  viz.,  the  glory  of  God,
they  will  find  an  object  for  themselves.  Instead  of  soaring  upwards  on  the  wings
supplied  by  the  glories  of  creation  and  the  mercies  of  redemption,  they  will  sink
downwards  into  the  mire.  They  will  fasten  upon  the  fiesh  ;  and  in  an  atmosphere
poisoned  by  debasing  associations  they  will  become  debased  also.  Instead  of  raising
the  man  who  possesses  them  into  that  higher  life,  which  is  a  foretaste  of  heaven,
they  win  harry  him  downwards  with  the  accumulated  pressure  of  an  undisciplined
intellect,  a  polluted  imagination,  and  a  lawless  will.  That  which  should  have  been
for  wealth  becomes  an  occasion  of  falling.  Angels  of  light  become  angels  of  dark-
ness. And  powers  which  ought  to  be  as  priests,  consecrating  the  whole  of  our
nature  to  God,  become  as  demons,  shameless  and  ruthless  in  devoting  us  to  the  evil
one.  .  .  .  God's  royal  gifts  of  intellect  and  wiU  cannot  be  flung  away,  cannot  be
left  unused,  cannot  be  extinguished.  For  good  or  for  evil  they  are  ours ;  and  they
are  deathless.  But,  though  they  cannot  be  destroyed,  they  can  be  neglected .  They
can  be  buried  in  the  earth  till  they  breed  worms  and  stink.  They  can  be  allowed
to  ran  riot,  antil  they  becume  as  wild  beasts,  and  turn  again  and  rend  us.  Or,  in
the  spirit  of  power,  of  love  and  of  discipline,  they  may  be  chastened  by  lofty  exer-
cise  and  sanctified  to  heavenly  uses,  till  they  become  more  and  more  fit  to  be  the
equipment  of  one,  who  is  for  ever  to  stand  ' '  before  the  throne  of  God,  and  praise
Him  day  and  night  in  His  temple."    {A,  Plummer,  D.D.)

Yer.  7.  For  God  hath  not  given  us  the  spirit  of  fear,  but  of  power,  and  of  lore,
and  of  a  sound  mind. — Energy  within  right  limits : — The  first  characteristic  stands
opposed  to  faint-heartedness :  the  two  otiier  qualities  are  added,  apparently,  by
the  apostle,  so  that  it  may  be  distinctly  manifest  that  he  recommends  no  wild,
rough  exhibitions  of  force,  but  only  such  as  were  confined  within  legal  limits.
The  ayani)  renders  us  capable  for  the  offering  of  the  greatest  sacrifice  for  the  cause
of  the  Lord ;  tbe  aw^poviayioQ  is  that  Christian  self-control  which  imparts  power
to  a  wise  bearing  in  action,  and  in  all  things  knows  how  to  keep  within  true
bounds.  {Dr.  Van  Oosterzee.)  Self-control : — A  sound  mind,  rather  self-control,
which  keeps  "  a  constant  rein  on  all  the  passions  and  desires  "  (Trench),  and
would  thus  keep  in  check  timidity  and  undue  despondency.  Some  take  '♦  sound
mind  "  to  signify  here  "correction  "  of  others,  Church  discipline,  a  meaning  which
the  word  will  bear,  but  which  is  out  of  harmony  with  the  other  two  elements  of  the
special  gift  here  enumerated,  both  of  which  are  personal  graces,  not  official  powers.
{Speaker^  Commentary.)  Self-mastery: — The  Spirit  of  God,  by  supplying  as
with  power  and  love,  launches  within  us  forces  which  are  capable,  if  they  are  not
well  adjusted,  of  producing  either  arrogance  or  laxity ;  and  which  need,  therefore,
the  central  controlling  energy  of  true  self-mastery  to  harmonise  them  and  save
them  from  mutual  destruction.  We  do  not  desiderate  a  neutral,  colourless  result,
but  a  higher  perfection,  one  in  which  both  these  forces  have  full  play.  [H.  R.
Reynolds,  D.D.)  The  spirit  of  discipline  : — If  it  be  asked  whether  the  discipline
be  that  which  Timothy  is  to  enforce  in  ruUng  others,  or  that  which  he  is  to  practice
in  schooling  himself,  we  may  answer  "  Both."  The  termination  of  the  word  which
is  here  used  {auxppoviffnoc)  seems  to  require  a  transitive  meaning  ;  and  slackness  in
correcting  others  may  easily  have  been  one  of  the  ways  in  which  the  despondency
of  Timothy  showed  itself.  On  the  other  hand  the  whole  context  here  speaks  of
Timothy's  treatment  of  himself.  To  take  a  more  lively  interest  in  the  conduct  of
others  would  be  discipline  for  himself  and  for  them  also.  There  may  be  as  much
pride  as  humility  in  indulging  the  thought  that  the  lives  of  other  people  are  so


«EAP.  I.]  71.  TIMOTHY.  '  23

utterly  bad  that  it  is  quite  out  of  the  power  of  such  persons  as  ourselves  to  effect  a
reformation.  This  is  a  subtle  way  of  shirking  responsibility.  Strong  in  the  spirit
of  power,  glowing  with  the  spirit  of  love,  we  can  turn  the  faults  of  others,  together
with  all  the  troubles  which  may  befall  us  in  this  Ufe  into  instruments  of  discipline.
{A.   Plummer,    D.D.)  Christian  courage: — These    words,    though   originally

addressed  to  a  bishop,  and  with  reference  to  the  ministerial  office,  yet  need  not  be
limited  in  their  application.  For  of  all  who  are  duly  baptized  into  the  faith  of  the
Lord  Jesus,  it  is  unquestionably  required  that  they  manfully  fight  under  His  banner
•gainst  sin,  the  world,  and  the  devil,  and  continue  His  faithful  soldiers  and  servants
onto  their  lives'  end ;  wherein  is  implied,  to  say  the  least,  that  we  strive  earnestly
and  habitually  to  get  rid  of  all  mean  cowardly  fears,  and  go  on  in  the  path  marked
oat  for  us  by  our  Heavenly  Guide,  with  all  energy  of  conduct,  and  charity  of  heart,
with  such  caution,  too,  and  self-possession,  as  become  persons  who  know  what  they
are  about.  "  First  of  all,"  says  St.  Paul,  "  God  has  not  given  us  the  spirit  of
cowardice  " — for  that  is  the  proper  meaning  of  the  word,  which  in  the  original  is
not  the  same  with  that  which  is  generally  translated  "fear,"  but  quite  different.  It
is  used  also,  in  a  few  other  places,  in  the  New  Testament ;  as,  e.g.  (St.  Mark  iv.  40),
when,  after  repeated  demonstrations  of  the  Almighty  power  and  infinite  compassion
of  the  holy  Jesus,  His  disciples  ,were  still  weak  and  wavering,  and  alarmed  at
apparent  danger,  His  gentle  yet  solemn  rebuke  was,  "  Why  are  ye  so  fearful
[cowardly]  ?  how  is  it  that  ye  have  no  faith  ?  "  Whence  we  learn  that  this  spirit
of  cowardice  is  so  inconsistent  with  the  character,  as  even  to  prove  a  want  of  faith,
BO  far  as  it  influences  the  heart.  Again,  on  another  occasion  (John  ziv.  27),  when
our  blessed  Lord  was  encouraging  and  cheering  the  fainting  spirits  of  His  disciples,
perplexed  and  alarmed  at  the  prospect  of  His  leaving  them :  "  Let  not  your  heart
be  troubled,"  said  He  to  them ;  "  neither  let  it  be  afraid  "  (cowardly). — "  Ye  believe
in  God,  believe  also  in  Me."  And  again,  in  the  description  of  those  who  shall  be
judged  liable  to  the  second  death,  the  first-mentioned  are  (in  our  translation
"  fearful,"  but  originally)  the  cowardly,  and  then  next,  the  unbelieving  (Rev.  xxi.
8).  These  are  all  the  places  where  the  word  is  used  in  the  New  Testament.  The
spirit  of  cowardice,  then,  is  opposed  to  the  spirit  of  faith.  But,  says  the  inspired
apostle,  God  hath  not  given  us — us  Christians — this  spirit  of  cowardice — this  base
unworthy  disposition  is  not  from  Him,  nor  among  the  fruits  of  His  blessed  Spirit.
Bather  we  are  taught  to  expect  from  that  heavenly  source  a  spirit  most  opposite  to
that  of  cowardice — a  spirit  of  energy,  charity,  prudence ;  enabling  us  to  proceed
and  go  forward  in  our  Christian  course  under  every  circumstance,  to  serve  the  Lord
without  distraction,  to  oppose  men's  errors  without  enmity  to  their  persons,  to  walk
warily  as  in  days  of  danger  and  perplexity.  That  the  word  here  translated
*•  power  "  has  this  meaning,  viz.,  of  inspired  energy  and  courage,  we  may  know  as
from  other  passages  in  the  New  Testament,  so  from  these  two.  In  Acts  vi.  it  is
said  of  the  holy  martyr — "Stephen,  full  of  faith  and  power" — as  far  as  possible
from  any  distrust  or  apprehension  as  to  the  holy  cause  of  the  gospel  which  he  had
undertaken.  And  in  the  Eevelation  of  St.  John,  the  Divine  message  to  the
Bishop  of  the  Philadelphian  Church,  was,  "  Thou  hast  a  little  strength,  and
hast  kept  My  word,  and  hast  not  denied  My  name ; "  a  little  strength,  energy,
or  power — as  not  having  like  some  others,  altogether  fallen  away  through
indolence,  or  faint-hearted  cowardly  fear.  Hence,  we  infer,  that  the  spirit
by  which  the  faithful  Christian  is  actuated  is  one  of  energy,  resolution,  and
Bteady  perseverance;  and  inferring  this,  we  are  bound  to  put  it  closely  to  our
consciences,  as  follows : — Whether  our  life  is  one  of  diligence  and  activity,  and
this  dihgence  and  activity,  not  limited  to  this  world,  but  actually  in  the  cause
and  service  of  Almighty  God.  Whether  we  avoid,  as  much  as  possible,  mixing  in
idle  company,  reading  vain  and  trifling  books,  or  other  publications,  indulging  in
useless,  idle,  unprofitable  thoughts.  Whether  we  try  to  know,  and  feel,  the  value
of  our  precious,  irreparable  time.  Whether  we  endeavour,  from  day  to  day,  in  that
state  of  life  to  which  it  has  pleased  God  to  call  us,  to  do  our  duty — i.e.,  what  in
God's  sight  is  expected  of  us;  for  very  often  much  less  will  satisfy  the  world,  and
our  own  easy  consciences.  Whether  we  pray  habitually,  to  be  enabled  to  axjcom-
plish  these  our  respective  duties  with  resolution,  steadiness,  and  perseverance;
neither  alarmed  by  danger,  if  it  should  happen,  nor  moved  by  scorn  and  contempt ;
but  expecting  such  trials  as  part  of  God's  discipline,  to  bring  our  hearts  into  a  fit
state  for  our  admission  into  the  everlasting  habitations.  We  may  further  observe
that  the  mean  spirit  of  cowardice  is  always  found  in  effect  (in  whatever  way  it  is
to  be  accounted  for),  a  great  hindrance  to  the  growth  of  true  charity,  love  for  God


24  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  j,

and  man.  "  The  fear  of  man  bringeth  a  snare  " — even  so  great  a  snare  as  to  with-
draw the  heart  from  loving  and  trusting  Almighty  God.  Cowardice  is  a  selfish
feeling,  makes  men  think  only  of  themselves,  their  own  present  interests  and  com-
forts— a  state  of  mind  quite  repulsive  of  true  charity  and  love.  Hence  (says  St.
Paul),  "  God  gives  not  His  servants  the  spirit  of  cowardice,  but  of  power,  and  also
of  love,"  leads  them  both  to  be  zealous  and  earnest  in  fulfilling  their  high  duties,
and  at  the  same  time  tempers  their  zeal  with  meekness  and  love.  If  we  would  then
know,  whether  we  are  such  in  heart  and  life  as  Christians  ought  to  be,  we  must  ask
ourselves,  not  merely  whether  we  are  earnest  in  our  religion,  but  also  whether  "  all
our  things  are  done  with  charity,"  love  to  God  and  man.  Again,  you  will  observe
that  St.  Paul  intimates  to  us  in  the  passage  now  considered,  that  it  is  not  enough
for  the  Christian  to  be  zealous  in  his  duty,  even  though  his  zeal  be  tempered  and
guided  by  love ;  unless  also  he  be  cautious  and  on  his  guard,  so  as  in  every
emergency  to  retain  his  presence  of  mind,  and  always  (as  every  person  should  who
has  any  important  matter  in  hand)  to  know  what  he  is  about.  This,  I  say,  is  the
spirit  and  disposition  which  as  Cbristians  we  are  still  to  labour  and  pray  for,  nor
shall  we  seek  it  in  vain — for  to  His  faithful  servants  God  gives,  not  only  the
spirit  of  power,  and  of  love,  but  also  of  a  sound  mind ;  whilst  by  His  grace
He  enables  them  to  be  harmless  as  doves,  He  would  have  them  also  wise  as
serpents,  ever  on  their  guard ;  on  their  guard,  i.e.,  not  so  much  against  their  earthly
as  their  spiritual  foes.  {Plain  Sermons  by  Contributors  to  "  Tracts  for  the  Times.")
The  threefold  gift : — Our  text  presents  to  our  view  a  striking  contrast  between  that
which  constitutes  the  religion  of  a  worldling,  and  that  which  constitutes  the  religion
of  a  Christian.  The  religion  of  a  worldling  is  a  religion  of  slavish  fear,  but  the
religion  of  a  Christian  consists  of  a  threefold  gift,  as  specified  in  the  language  of
my  text.  If  you  go  to  Pagan  lands  you  will  find  all  the  Pagan  tribes  in  possession
of  a  religion  of  slavish  fear  ;  they  fear  their  priests,  and  therefore  they  bow  down  to
them  as  if  they  were  a  superior  race  of  beings  to  themselves.  They  fear  the  devil,
and,  therefore,  they  worship  him  lest  he  should  do  them  hurt,  for  theirs  is  a  religion
of  slavish  fear  altogether.  There  are  three  words,  or  three  features,  of  our  subject,
so  distinctly  marked  that  I  want  your  attention  to  them  separately.  •'  God  hath
given  us  the  spirit  of  power  " — there  is  efficiency.  "  God  hath  given  us  the  spirit
of  love " — there  is  attraction.  "  God  hath  given  us  the  spirit  of  a  sound  mind" —
that  is  a  treasure  in  our  vessels  of  infinite  value.  I.  "  God  hath  given  us  the  spirit  of
POWER."  I  would  have  every  person  who  is  moved  with  the  idea  that  God  sends  him
to  preach,  "  tarry  at  Jerusalem,  until  he  has  been  endued  with  power  from  on  high."
II.  Now  a  word  or  two  about  the  attraction  in  the  "  spirit  of  love.  "  You  will
recollect  reading  that  all  the  law  is  said  by  our  blessed  Lawgiver  to  be  couched  in
this  one  word,  "  love  "  ;  and  sure  I  am  that  ail  the  gospel  is  couched  in  it,  for  "  God  is
love."  Hence  it  is  the  grand  principle  insisted  on  all  through  the  New  Testament.
U  III.  Now  glance  at  the  treasure  in  possession  in  earthen  vessels,  called  a  sound  mind.
It  is  one  of  the  rarest  things  in  existence — a  sound  mind.  I  can  meet  with  puerile
minds,  I  can  meet  with  frantic  minds,  I  can  meet  with  enthusiastic  minds,  I  can
meet  with  fickle  and  varying  minds,  not  a  few,  and  some  of  these  bad  and  sad
qualities  even  among  Christians  ;  I  lament  over  them.  A  sound  mind — what  is  it  ?
There  is  not  a  child  of  Adam  that  possesses  it  until  he  gets  it  from  above  ;  it  must
be  inspired.  I  grant  that  there  are  many  men  who  have  souud  minds  in  temporal
things  ;  sound  minds  to  judge  rightly  and  consistently  of  worldl.v  matters,  so  as
seldom  to  make  a  mistake  in  matters  of  business  ;  a  Round  mind  to  rule  their  house
properly,  to  manage  things  with  keenness  and  propriety,  and  with  success ;  but,
mark,  I  make  a  distinction  between  a  sound  mind,  as  the  gift  of  God  in  a  spiritual
point  of  view,  and  a  sound  mind  as  existing  in  nature.  A  sound  mind,  as  existing
in  nature,  only  regards  natural  things,  and  can  rise  no  bigher  than  its  own  level.
I  never  knew  a  man  of  sound  mind  in  spiritual  things,  until  the  Holy  Ghost
inspired  it.  {Jos.  Irons.)  Christianity  :  what  it  is  not  and  what  it  is : — I,  What
GENUINE  Christianity  is  not.  It  is  not  a  "  spirit  of  fear."  The  spirit  of  fear  is
that  of  a  criminal  and  a  slave.  It  haunts  the  minds  of  the  guilty,  and  is  only  a
prelude  to  those  awful  feelings  which  harrow  up  the  soul  that  dies  in  a  state  of
final  impenitence.  Such  is  not  the  spirit  by  which  Christians  are  actuated.  The
great  end  for  which  our  Saviour  came  into  the  world  was  to  deliver  men  from  their
awful  situation  of  exposure  to  the  Divine  wrath,  and  the  fear  consequent  upon  a
knowledge  of  this  state.  But  how  are  we  to  reconcile  this  passage  with  others,  in
which  the  spirit  of  fear  is  highly  spoken  of  ?  Such  as,  "  Blessed  is  the  man  that
feareth  always  " ;  "I  will  put  My  fear  in  their  hearts,''  Ac.    They  are  to  be  recou-


CHAP.  I.]  II,  TIMOTHY.


ciled  in  this  way.  That  spirit  of  fear  which  is  not  given  to  the  people  of  God  is  a
fear  arising  from  a  sense  of  guilt,  a  conviction  that  God  is  their  enemy.  But  that
fear  which  is  implanted  in  the  hearts  of  His  people  is  a  filial  fear — a  holy  jealousy,
lest  by  sin  they  should  provoke  the  Lord  to  anger.  11.  What  is  the  nature  of
GENUINE  Christianity?  1.  Genuine  Christianity  is  powerful  and  efiicacious.
"  God  hath  given  us  the  spirit  of  power."  In  1  Cor.  iv.  20  this  apostle  says,  "  The
kingdom  of  God  is  not  in  word,  but  in  power  " — it  is  not  in  anything  external,  but
in  the  experience  of  all  the  powerful  effects  of  the  gospel.  The  gospel  is  powerful
to  the  salvation  of  all  that  believe.  2,  Genuine  Christianity  is  benevolent  and  kind.
"  God  hath  given  us  the  spirit  of  love."  This  enters  most  essentially  into  the
system  of  Divine  truth,  and  also  into  the  experience  of  every  child  of  God.  This
spirit  is  not  natural  to  man.  Whatever  obtains  the  name  of  love  is  only  a  selfish
principle.  But  by  grace  it  is  overcome,  and  a  contrary  spirit  is  bestowed.  "  We
love  Him,  because  He  first  loved  us."  Where  this  love  is  felt  in  the  heart,  it  is
impossible  but  a  reciprocal  feeling  of  love  to  God  must  spring  up  within  us.  And
not  only  love  to  God,  but  to  all  that  bear  His  image — our  brethren  in  Christ.  But
the  love  of  the  Christian  is  not  confined  to  his  brethren  in  the  Lord ;  it  extends  to
all  mankind.  3.  Genuine  Christianity  is  in  the  highest  degree  rational,  and  pecu-
liarly suited  to  the  exigencies  and  circumstances  of  mankind.  When  a  sinner  is
called  out  of  darkness  into  light,  he  often  becomes  an  object  of  derision  ;  he  is
represented  as  an  enthusiast,  and  beside  himself.  This  was  the  case  with  Paul ;
but  with  respect  and  justice  he  repelled  the  charge  ;  and  this  every  child  of  God
may  do;  for  He  has  conferred  upon  him  "  the  spirit  of  a  sound  mind."  What  is
enthusiasm  ?  It  is  the  power  given  to  the  mind  by  some  subUme  conceptions  which
have  broken  in  upon  it.  We  praise  this  in  many  things — we  praise  it  in  the  artist ;
and  one  once  said,  when  fault  was  found  with  him  for  having  employed  so  much  of
his  time,  "  Art  is  a  jealous  thing,  and  requires  the  whole  man."  And  is  not  eternity,
is  not  religion  a  jealous  thing  ?  Does  it  not  require  the  whole  man  ?  That  the
Christian  is  acting  a  most  rational  part  is  evident,  if  we  consider  what  are  the
principles  by  which  the  prudent  men  of  the  world  are  guided  ;  they  are  the  same  as
those  by  which  the  Christian  is  guided,  only  changing  the  motives  and  the  ends.
These  are  indemnity  for  the  past,  enjoyment  of  the  present,  security  and  provision
for  the  future.  {J.  Henderson,  D.D.)  The  spiritual  endowvient  of  the  Chrisliun
Church: — I.    The  Church  of  Christ  is  endowed  with  the  spirit  of  courage.

I.  In  being  a  disciple  at  all  courage  was  demanded.  2.  In  proclaiming  the  gospel
of  God  courage  was  manifested.     3.  In  enduring  hardness  courage  was  developed.

II.  The  Church  of  Christ  is  endowed  with  the  spirit  of  power.  1.  Tije
power  of  holy  utterance  is  a  spiritual  gift.  2.  The  power  of  Christian  legislation  is
a  spiritual  gift.     3.  The  power  of  righteous  resolute  volition  is  a  spiritual  gift.

III.  The  Church  of  Christ  is  endowed  with  the  spirit  of  love.  1.  Love  of
kindred  is  a  spiritual  gift  of  the  Inspirer.  2.  Love  of  country — patriotism — is  a
Divine  spiritual  gift.  3.  The  love  of  Christ  and  of  God  is  an  endowment  of  the
Spirit  of  God.  IV.  The  Church  of  Christ  is  endowed  with  the  spirit  of
SOUNDNESS  of  MIND  OR  OF  HEALTH.  1.  The  Capacity  and  consequent  appetite  for
knowledge  are  spiritual  endowments.  2.  The  energy  of  habitual  holy  action  is  a
spiritual  endowment.  3.  The  restoring  power  of  a  righteous  life  is  a  spiritual
endowment.  (W.  R.  Percival.)  The  great  purpose  of  Christianity  : — Why  was
Christianity  given?  Why  did  Christ  seal  it  with  His  blood?  Why  is  it  to  be
preached  ?  What  is  the  great  happiness  it  confers  ?  I  read  the  answer  to  them
in  the  text.  There  I  learn  the  great  good  which  God  confers  through  Jesu^;
Christ.  "  He  hath  given  us,  not  the  spirit  of  fear,  but  of  power  and  of  love  and
of  a  sound  mind."  The  glory  of  Christianity  is,  the  pure  and  lofty  action  which
it  communicates  to  the  human  mind.  It  does  not  breathe  a  timid,  abject  spirit.  If
it  did,  it  would  deserve  no  praise.  It  gives  power,  energy,  courage,  constancy  to
the  will;  love,  disinterestedness,  enlarged  affection  to  the  heart;  soundness,  clear-
ness, and  vigour  to  the  understanding.  It  rescues  him  who  receives  it  from  sin,
from  the  sway  of  the  passions  ;  gives  him  the  full  and  free  use  of  his  best  powers ;
brings  out  and  brightens  the  Divine  image  in  which  he  was  created ;  and  in  this
way  not  only  bestows  the  promise,  but  the  beginning  of  heaven.  This  is  the
excellence  of  Christianity.  In  reading  the  New  Testament  I  everywhere  learn  that
Christ  lived,  taught,  died,  and  rose  again,  to  exert  a  purifying  and  ennobling
influence  on  the  human  character ;  to  make  us  victorious  over  sin,  over  ourselves,
over  peril  and  pain ;  to  join  us  to  God  by  filial  love,  and  above  all,  by  likeness  of
nature,  by  participation  of  His  Spirit.    This  is  plainly  laid  down  in  the  New  Testa-


36  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (0H1».  I.

ment  as  the  sapreme  end  of  Christ.  In  the  prophecies  concerning  Him  in  the  Old
Testament,  no  characteriBtio  is  so  frequently  named  as  that  He  should  spread  the
knowledge  of  the  true  God.  Now  I  ask,  what  constitutes  the  importance  of  such  a
revelation?  Why  has  the  Creator  sent  His  Son  to  make  Himself  known?  I
answer,  God  is  most  worthy  to  be  known,  because  He  is  the  most  quickening,  puri-
fying, and  ennobling  object  for  the  mind ;  and  His  great  purpose  in  revealing  Him-
self is,  that  He  may  exalt  and  perfect  human  nature.  God,  as  He  is  manifested
by  Christ,  is  another  name  for  intellectual  and  moral  excellence ;  and  in  the  know-
ledge of  Him  our  intellectual  and  moral  powers  find  their  element,  nutriment,
strength,  expansion,  and  happiness.  To  know  God  is  to  attain  to  the  sublimest
conception  in  the  universe.  To  love  God  is  to  bind  oneself  to  a  Being  who  ia
fitted,  as  no  other  being  is,  to  penetrate  and  move  our  whole  hearts ;  in  loving
whom  we  exalt  ourselves ;  in  loving  whom  we  love  the  great,  the  good,  the
beautiful,  and  the  infinite ;  and  under  whose  influence  the  soul  unfolds  itself  as  a
perennial  plant  under  the  cherishing  sun.  This  constitutes  the  chief  glory  of
religion.  It  ennobles  the  souh  In  this  its  unrivalled  dignity  and  happiness  con-
sist. I  fear  that  the  world  at  large  think  religion  a  very  different  thing  from  what
has  been  now  set  forth.  Too  many  think  it  a  depressing,  rather  than  an  elevating
service,  that  it  breaks  rather  than  ennobles  the  spirit,  that  it  teaches  us  to  cower
before  an  almighty  and  irresistible  being ;  and  I  must  confess  that  religion,  as  it
has  been  generally  taught,  is  anything  but  an  elevating  principle.  It  has  been  used
to  scare  the  child  and  appal  the  adult.  The  main  ground  of  the  obligation  of
being  religious,  I  fear,  is  not  understood  among  the  multitude  of  Christians.  Ask
them,  why  they  must  know  and  worship  God?  and,  I  fear,  that  were  the  heart  to
speak,  the  answer  would  be,  because  He  can  do  with  us  what  He  will,  and  conse-
quently our  first  concern  is  to  secure  His  favour.  Beligion  is  a  calculation  of
interest,  a  means  of  safety.  God  is  worshipped  too  often  on  the  same  principle
on  which  flattering  and  personal  attentions  are  lavished  on  human  superiors,  and
the  worshipper  cares  not  how  abjectly  he  bows,  if  he  may  win  to  his  side  the  power
which  he  cannot  resist.  I  look  with  deep  sorrow  on  this  common  perversion  of  the
highest  principle  of  the  soul,  I  have  endeavoured  to  show  the  great  purpose  of  the
Christian  doctrine  respecting  God,  or  in  what  its  importance  and  glory  consist.
Had  I  time,  I  might  show  that  every  other  doctrine  of  our  religion  has  the  same
end.  I  might  particularly  show  how  wonderfully  fitted  are  the  character,  example,
Ufe,  death,  resurrection,  and  all  the  offices  of  Christ  to  cleanse  the  mind  from
moral  evil,  to  quicken,  soften,  elevate,  and  transform  it  into  the  Divine  image ;  and
I  might  show  that  these  are  the  influences  which  true  faith  derives  from  Him  and
through  which  He  works  out  our  salvation.  Let  me  only  say  that  I  see  everywhere
in  Christianity  this  great  design  of  liberating  and  raising  the  human  mind.  (W.  E.
Channing,  D.D.)  A  Whit- Sunday  Sermon: — Many  readers  of  this  passage,  I
doubt  not,  place  the  emphasis  on  the  word  us.  They  suppose  St.  Paul  to  say,  '•  An
ordinary  man,  who  occupied  the  position  which  you  occupy,  the  overseer  of  a
society  which  is  composed  of  various  and  contradictory  elements,  in  which  strange
doctrines  are  appearing,  which  is  exposed  to  all  the  influences  of  a  commercial
and  corrupt  city,  would  fear  and  tremble.  It  is  your  privilege  to  be  as  free  from
fightings  and  terrors  as  I,  your  spiritual  father,  am."  What  encouragement,  then,
could  he  give  to  Timothy  ?  Precisely  that  which  he  had  found  necessary  in  his
own  case,  precisely  that  to  which  he  had  been  driven  by  the  experience  he  haa
described  to  us.  His  spirit  might  be  palsied  with  fear  ;  but  there  was  a  Spirit  near
him  and  with  him  which  was  not  a  spirit  of  fear,  to  which  he  could  turn  as  the
Deliverer  from  fear,  the  Restorer  of  energy,  the  Quickener  of  hope.  That  Spirit
had  been  given  not  to  him  (Paul),  but  to  the  Family  of  which  he  was  a  member ; —
if  in  any  special  sense  to  him,  to  him  only  because  he  was  a  servant  of  that  Family,
because  he  needed  powers  that  were  not  his  own,  to  make  his  ministries  for  it
effectual.  I.  I  suppose  we  have  all  felt  tempted,  at  times,  to  use  language  which  is
just  the  reverse  of  the  apostle's.  We  have  read  in  records  of  the  past — we  have
known  on  a  larger  or  smaller  scale  among  our  contemporaries — such  instances  of
strange  panic  and  cowardice,  of  counsel  and  heart  failing  just  when  the  need  for
them  was  the  greatest,  that  we  have  been  ready  to  exclaim,  "  Surely  there  is  some-
thing Divine  in  this  I  We  cannot  attribute  such  a  loss  of  nerve  and  energy  to  the
pressure  of  outward  circumstances ;  these  often  evoke  the  greatest  courage  when
they  are  most  appalling.  We  cannot  attribute  it  merely  to  a  natural  want  of
courage ;  those  same  men,  or  bodies  of  men,  at  other  crises,  showed  that  they  were
capable  of  manly  effort.    Their  fear  is  surely  supernatural.    God  haa  given  them


CHAP.  I.]  II.  TIMOTHY.  27

this  spirit  of  fear."  Such  a  mode  of  speaking  is  not  nncommon ;  it  is  not  without
strong  excuse.  Bat  I  think  also  that  our  consciences  will  tell  us  that  we  pervert
such  passages  of  Scripture  if  we  set  them  in  opposition  to  the  doctrine  of  St.  Paul
in  the  one  now  before  us.  We  need  not  study  the  records  of  the  past,  or  the  actions
of  our  fellow-men,  to  learn  what  the  spirit  of  fear  or  cowardice  is.  Each  has,  per-
haps, known  something  of  that  cowardice  which  springs  from  self-distrust,  from  the
apprehension  of  lions  in  his  path,  from  doubtfulness,  which  of  several  paths  he
should  choose,  from  the  foretaste  of  coming  evils.  II.  The  Spirit  of  God  is  said  to
be  a  Spirit  of  Poweb.  Consider  the  different  kinds  of  power  before  which  men
bow,  and  those  which  they  covet  most  to  exercise.  There  is  none  more  familiar
or  more  wonderful  than  that  of  the  orator.  There  is  another  power  mixed  fre-
quently with  this,  but  yet  different  in  its  direction  and  its  nature,  which  also  can  be
limited  to  no  country,  or  circumstances,  or  stage  of  cultivation.  The  physician,  the
healer,  is  welcomed  in  all  lands  by  different  titles,  but  always  for  this  reason,  that
he  can  in  some  way  act  on  the  life  of  men,  can  oppose  the  powers  that  are  threaten-
ing life.  In  some  regions  his  functions  are  hardly  distinguished  from  those  of  the
priest,  because  he  too  is  conversant  about  life  and  death,  a  life  or  death  that  may
continue  when  the  resources  of  the  ordinary  physician  are  exhausted.  The  most
simple,  naked  exhibition  of  human  power  is  in  that  royal  Will,  which  obtains
supremacy  by  claiming  it — which  compels  individuals  and  nations,  they  know  not
how,  to  own  that  it  is  meant  to  rule  them,  and  that  they  must  needs  obey.  That
such  a  force  as  this  exists,  it  is  as  idle  to  deny  as  to  deny  the  force  of  sea  or  wind.
We  are  certain  that  the  most  settled,  organised  tyranny  is  still  a  rebellion,  and
must  end  as  rebellions  end.  What  is  the  warrant  for  this  conviction?  Whit-
Sunday  says  it  is  this,  that  the  highest  power,  the  all-ruling  Will,  was  manifested  in
One  who  took  upon  Him  the  form  of  a  Servant.  It  says  that  His  noblest  gift  to
men  is  His  own  Spirit  of  Power.  It  says  that  to  that  Spirit  all  spirits  must  at  last
bow ;  that  any  wUl  which  is  mere  arbitrary  wiU — which  does  not  seek  to  deliver
and  to  raise  those  whom  it  rules — must  be  broken  in  pieces ;  that  the  only  effectual
power  will  be  proved  at  last  to  be  that  which  can  give  up  itself.  HI.  If  the  world
was  to  be  instructed  that  aU  power  of  speech,  of  imparting  life  and  wisdom  to  men,
of  governing  societies,  is  of  God,  and  is  His  gift  to  His  creatures,  certainly  no
teachers  could  be  so  suitable  as  those  Galileans.  And  yet  I  know  not  whether  there
was  not  something  even  more  wonderful  in  the  selection  of  these  men  to  show  that
all  Love  is  of  God  ;  that  His  Spirit  is  the  author  of  whatever  love  men  are  able  to
exhibit  in  acts  or  to  feel  within.  For  as  Jews  they  had  learnt  to  despise  and  hate
all  the  uncircumcised ;  as  Galileans  they  must  often  have  been  jealous  of  that  more
favoured  part  of  their  own  race,  which  looked  down  upon  them.  They  had  been
chosen,  indeed,  by  a  Teacher  who  bore  all  their  narrowness  and  ignorance ;  who
educated  them  by  a  careful  and  gracious  discipline  for  the  work  to  which  He  had
destined  them.  Their  affection  had  been  drawn  out  towards  Him ;  that  affection
had  been  a  bond  to  each  other,  though  interrupted  by  continual  desires  in  each  of
them  to  be  the  chief  in  His  kingdom.  But  their  affection  had  been  tried,  and  had
broken  down.  It  had  failed  towards  the  Master;  what  strength  could  there  be  in  it
towards  any  of  their  fellows  ?  If  love  was  their  own,  or  had  its  springs  in  them,  it
most  be  utterly  dried  up.  Then  reflect  how  it  burst  forth,  how  it  poured  itself  out
first  upon  Jews,  who  scorned  them  ;  next  upon  Gentiles,  whom  it  had  been  part  of
their  religion  to  scorn  ;  to  see  what  it  could  endure.  So  they  were  trained  to  under-
stand that  there  must  be  about  them  and  with  them  a  Spirit  of  ever-living,  long-
suffering  love,  the  heights  and  depths  of  which  they  could  never  measure — of  which
they  could  only  say.  It  is  the  Spirit  of  Him  who  died  upon  the  Cross,  and  who  in
that  death  manifested  the  very  nature  of  His  eternal  Father  and  His  purposes  to
men.  What  is  the  original  falsehood  of  all  who  speak  of  their  love  to  God  and
man  ?  This :  they  take  credit  to  themselves  for  a  love  which  is  moving  them  to
noble  thoughts  and  good  deeds,  but  which  has  another  source  than  their  hearts ;
which  is  Divine,  not  earthly  ;  universal,  not  partial.  IV.  Finally,  this  Spirit  is  said
to  be  the  Spirit  of  a  sound  mind.  You  cannot  make  any  estimate  or  guess  of  the
wildnesB  and  madness  into  which  man  may  be  led.  And  therefore  you  cannot  pro-
vide the  remedy  for  this  wildness  and  madness,  or  any  adequate  protection  against
it.  Do  you  think  you  know  of  some  adequate  remedy  or  protection  ?  Perhaps  you
will  say  it  lies  in  the  Church.  May  not  this  be,  after  all,  the  one  security  against
these  excesses?  May  not  the  Spirit  of  God  keep  better  watch  over  those  minds
which  He  has  taken  into  His  guardianship,  than  you  can  keep?  A  Spirit  who
knows  how  all  are  tempted — who  knows  what  temptation  is  strongest  for  each — who


28  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i.

is  seekiiig  to  nnite  them  in  a  common  fellowship — who  is  guiding  them  to  the  same
haven — who  will  suffer  none  who  would  act  rightly  to  be  without  the  necessary
aids  to  action,  none  that  would  seek  truth  to  be  lost  in  falsehood ;  who  wiU
continually  assist  the  desire  to  do  right  in  those  who  are  conscious  of  the  inclina-
tion to  wrong — who  will  for  ever  kindle  afresh  the  zeal  for  truth  in  those
who  feel  that  they  are  beginning  to  acquiesce  in  plausible  lies?  To  tell
men  that  such  a  guiding  Spirit  of  Power,  of  Love,  of  a  Sound  Mind,  has  been  given
them,  and  is  with  them — this  is  not  dangerous,  but  safe.  {F,  D.  Maurice,  M.A.)
On  soundness  of  mind  in  religion : — The  expression,  sobriety,  or  Boundnese  of
mind,  is  used  in  the  Scriptures  in  various  senses.  Sometimes  it  is  opposed  to
madness  ;  as  where  the  demoniac  was  found  sitting  at  the  feet  of  Jesus,  clothed
And  in  his  right  mind.  Madness  disposes  men  to  act  irregularly,  furiously,  and
extravagantly.  Soundness  of  mind,  therefore,  implies  recollection,  calmness,  and
discretion,  the  guidance  and  control  of  reason.  In  other  places,  soundness  of
mind  is  opposed  to  levity  and  impropriety,  as  where  women  are  required  to  adorn
themselves  in  modest  apparel,  with  sobriety  ;  or  to  intemperance  and  sensuality,
as  where  young  men  are  exhorted  to  be  sober  minded,  and,  denying  ungodliness
and  worldly  lusts,  to  live  soberly.  Sometimes  it  is  contrasted  with  pride  and  self-
conceit  :  thus  the  apostle  forbids  the  Bomans  to  think  extravagantly  of  themselves,
instead  of  thinking  soberly,  as  they  ought  to  do.  In  my  text  the  same  expression
is  used  in  a  more  general  and  comprehensive  sense.  The  general  characteristic  of
all  unsoundness  of  mind  may  be  said  to  be  false  perceptions.  He  whose  mind  is
in  this  state  dares  not  see  things  as  they  really  are ;  they  appear  to  him  extrava-
gantly magnified  or  diminished,  distorted,  or  confounded  with  different  objects.  A
Boand  mind,  on  the  contrary,  forms  a  just  view  of  the  subjects  presented  to  it ;  it
estimates  correctly  the  relative  valae  and  importance  of  different  subjects,  and  is
not  governed  by  prejudice,  caprice,  or  idle  imaginations.  I.  Soundness  of  mind
is  opposed  to  cbedulity.  Credulity  arises  from  a  misapprehension  of  the  nature
and  value  of  evidence.  The  credulous  man  believes  on  insufficient  authority.  He
does  not  perceive  the  proportion  which  different  kinds  of  evidence  bear  to  each
other.  How  many  in  the  Church  at  this  day  receive  the  doctrines  of  Christianity,
not  on  account  of  the  evidence  by  which  they  are  supported,  nor  because  they  are
plainly  delivered  in  Scripture,  but  because  this  or  that  particular  man  has  held
them !  A  man  of  sound  mind  will  not  indeed  despise  human  authority,  and,  in
the  spirit  of  innovation,  doubt  a  tenet  because  it  has  been  generally  maintained ;
but  he  will  be  very  careful  to  found  his  faith  upon  the  truth  of  Scripture  rather
than  upon  the  opinions  of  men.  II.  Soundness  of  mind  is  opposed  to  supeestition.
A  person  in  the  dark  sees  nothing  distinctly,  and  is  therefore  very  apt  to  form  con-
fused and  erroneous  ideas  of  every  object  around  him,  his  imagination  giving  to
them  what  form  and  colonr  it  pleases.  Such  is  the  situation  of  a  superstitious
man  with  respect  to  all  objects  of  a  spiritual  or  religious  kind — he  sees  nothing  in
its  proper  form  and  proportion.  A  frequent  and  dangerous  superstition  is  that
which  lays  an  undue  stress  on  mere  external  religious  observances.  A  man,  there-
fore, of  a  sound  mind,  while  he  attributes  to  forms  and  ceremonies  their  true
value,  will  not  substitute  them  for  more  substantial  good.  He  will  manifest  the
soundness  of  his  mind  by  preferring  the  substance  to  the  form,  and  by  endeavour-
ing to  possess  the  spirit  of  religion  rather  than  the  mere  shadow  of  it.  III.
Soundness  of  mind  is  opposed  to  enthusiasm.  Enthusiasm  consists  in  unwar-
ranted ideas  of  the  nature  of  the  relation  between  us  and  our  Creator.  A  man  of
Bound  mind  will  cherish  no  extravagant  notions  of  Divine  communications.  An
enthusiast  entertains  lofty  notions  of  himself,  and  degrading  conceptions  of  the
Deity ;  he  conceives  that  the  course  of  nature  is  to  be  regulated  with  a  view  to  his
interest.  The  ordinary  rules,  even  of  morality,  must  yield  to  his  convenience.
He  and  his  immediate  connections  have  a  peculiar  dispensation :  they  are  the
particular  favourites  of  God,  and  all  things  are  to  minister  to  their  exclusive
good.  IV.  Soundness  of  mind  is  opposed  to  scepticism  or  iNFiDEiiiTT.  I  am
well  aware  that  infidels  arrogate  to  themselves  the  distinction  of  being  the  only
sound  reasoners,  and  charge  believers  with  credulity  and  superficial  views.  Bat
(he  charge  may  justly  be  retorted  on  themselves :  they  do  not  possess  a  somid
mind ;  for  the  body  of  evidence  by  which  Christianity  is  established  is  incomparably
superior  to  that  by  which  any  historical  fact,  or  any  other  tenets  whatever,  have
been  supported.  V.  Soundness  of  mind  is  opposed  to  insensibilitt,  or  indifference
TO  THK  OBBAT  OBjBOTS  OF  BELioioN.  If  you  saw  a  man  bartering  his  estate  for  a
phn^^iflh  toy,  or  labouring  to  accomplish   some   object   in   its   nature  evidentlj


CHAP.  I.]  IL  TIMOTHY,  2t

unattainable,  or  using  the  greatest  exertions  and  the  most  powerful  means  to  effect
some  frivolous  or  contemptible  purpose;  or,  on  the  other  hand,  struggling  to
accomplish  some  end  really  important  by  means  wholly  inadequate,  you  would
say,  without  hesitation,  that  such  a  man  had  not  a  sound  mind.  The  great  doc-
trines which  religion  teaches  must  be  either  false,  or  doubtful,  or  true.  That  they
are  false  can  never  be  positively  proved.  "  Surely,"  says  Pascal,  '•  in  a  doubtful
point  of  this  most  tremendous  consequence,  it  is  the  duty  of  every  rational  person
to  endeavour,  if  possible,  to  obtain  a  solution  of  his  doubts,  and  to  remain  no
longer  in  suspense  about  a  question  of  such  immense  consequence,  in  comparison
of  which  all  the  sorrows  or  happiness  of  this  life  will  not  bear  so  much  as  a  single
moment's  comparison.  Yet  we  see  persons,  professing,  too,  to  be  wise,  and  raised
above  the  vulgar  herd,  who  not  only  doubt  upon  these  points,  but  appear  to  be  easy
and  composed,  nay,  declare  their  doubts  with  perfect  indifference,  and  perhaps
gratify  their  vanity  in  professing  them.  What  words  can  be  found  to  fix  a  name
for  such  unaccountable  folly  ?  Yet  you  see  the  same  persons  quite  other  men  in
all  other  respects.  They  fear  the  smallest  inconveniences :  they  see  them  if  they
approach,  and  feel  them  if  they  arrive.  They  pass  whole  days  and  nights  in
chagrin  and  despair  for  the  loss  of  their  property,  or  for  some  imaginary  blemish
in  their  honour ;  and  yet  these  very  same  persons  suppose  they  may  lose  all  by
death,  and  remain  without  disquiet  or  emotion.  This  wonderful  insensibility  with
respect  to  things  of  the  most  fatal  consequence,  and  that,  too,  in  a  heart  so  nicely
sensible  of  the  meanest  trifles,  is  an  astonishing  prodigy,  an  unintelligible  enchant-
ment, a  supernatural  blindness  and  infatuation."  Ton  believe  the  Scriptures;  you
believe  that  there  is  a  future  life,  in  comparison  of  which  this  is  a  mere  point ;  sit
down  and  contemplate  the  duration  of  it.  Yet,  O  strange  absurdity  I  we  see  every-
thing reversed :  persons  not  at  all  interested  about  these  fleeting  moments,  on
account  of  their  relation  to  eternity,  but  very  anxious  about  them  in  themselves  I
The  Bible  informs  us  of  our  danger,  and  must  be  our  only  guide  how  to  escape  it.
Here,  then,  is  folly  and  unsoundness  of  mind  in  the  highest  degree,  that  men  will
not  search  the  Scriptures  and  be  guided  by  the  Word  of  God.  (J.  Venn,  M.A.)
Power  in  the  Christian : — And  here  is  condemned  those,  both  preachers  and  people,
who  have  it  not  themselves,  neither  can  endure  it  in  others.  We  commend  the
deep-mouthed  hound,  the  shrill  sound  of  the  trumpet,  the  loud  report  of  the  piece ;
yet  cannot  away  with,  care  not  for  the  spirit  of  power  and  resolution  in  a  Christian.
Is  not  power  appropriated  to  God  ?  Did  not  Clurist  speak  with  authority  and  power,
and  not  as  the  Scribes  ?  For  can  a  soldier  be  too  strong  ?  a  traveller  over- well
limbed  ?  then  may  a  Christian  be  too  well  fenced,  armed.  Must  he  not  wrestle
with  principalities  and  powers  ?  combat  with  the  sons  of  Anak  ?  tread  upon  the
lion  and  the  ape  ?  And  who  can  tell  what  weight  may  be  put  on.his  shoulders  for
time  to  come?  Will  we  not  provander  our  beast  for  a  long  journey?  rig  our  ships
for  a  rough  passage  ?  build  them  strong  for  a  long  voyage  ?  bend  our  staff  before
we  leap  ?  And  shall  we  never  fortify  the  inner  man,  repair  the  battered  bark  of
our  souls,  nor  try  the  truth  of  that  stilt  which  must  help  us  to  heaven  f  Where-
fore, gather  spiritual  greatness,  strive  for  this  strength,  and  purchase  this  power  by
all  means  possible,  and  that  thou  mayest  do  these  things.  {J.  Barlow,  D.D.)
Sinful  fear  of  God : — One  of  our  poets  gives  a  grim  picture  of  a  traveller  on  a  lone*
some  road,  who  has  caught  a  glimpse  of  a  frightful  shape  close  behind  him —

"  And  having  once  turned  round  walks  on,
And  turns  no  more  his  head."

The  dreadful  thing  is  there  on  his  very  heels,  its  breath  hot  on  his  cheek ;  he  feelt
it  though  he  does  not  see,  but  he  dare  not  face  round  to  it ;  he  puts  a  strong  com-
Dulsion  on  himself,  and,  with  rigidly  fixed  face,  strides  on  his  way,  a  sickening
horror  busy  with  his  heart.  An  awful  image  that,  but  a  true  one  with  regard  to
what  many  men  do  with  their  thoughts  of  God  1  They  know  that  that  thought  is
there,  close  behind  them.  They  feel  sometimes  as  if  its  hand  were  just  coming
out  to  be  laid  on  their  shoulders,  and  to  stop  them.  And  they  will  not  turn  their
heads  to  see  the  Face  that  should  be  the  love,  the  blessedness,  the  life  of  their
spirits,  but  is — because  they  love  it  not — the  terror  and  freezing  dread  of  their
souls.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  A  sound  mind : — Dr.  Arnold,  of  Rugby,  gives,  in
one  of  his  letters,  an  account  of  a  saintly  sister.  For  twenty  years,  through  some
disease,  she  was  confined  to  a  kind  of  crib ;  never  once  could  she  change  her
position  for  all  that  time.    "  And  yet,"  said  Dr.  Arnold,  and  I  think  his  words  arc


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat,  v

very  beautiful,  "  I  never  saw  a  more  perfect  instance  of  the  power  of  love  and  of  a
Bound  mind.  Intense  love,  almost  to  annihilation  of  selfishness  ;  a  duly  martyr-
dom for  twenty  years,  during  which  she  adhered  to  her  early-formed  resolution  of
never  talking  about  herself ;  thoughtful  about  the  very  pins  and  ribbons  of  my
wife's  dress,  about  the  making  of  a  doll's  cap  for  a  child,  but  of  herself — save  as
regarded  her  improvement  in  all  goodness — wholly  thoughtless ;  enjoying  every-
thing lovely,  graceful,  beautiful,  high-minded,  whether  in  God's  works  or  man's,
with  tiie  keenest  relish :  inheriting  the  earth  to  the  fulness  of  the  promise  ;  and
preserved  through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death  from  all  fear  of  impatience,
and  from  every  cloud  of  impaired  reason  which  might  mar  the  beauty  of  Christ's
glorious  work.  May  God  grant  that  I  might  come  within  one  hundred  degrees  of
her  place  in  glory  1 "  Such  a  life  was  true  and  beautiful.  But  the  radiance  of
Buch  a  light  never  cheered  this  world  by  chance.  A  sunny  patience,  a  bright-
hearted  stlf-forgetf ulness,  a  sweet  and  winning  interest  in  the  little  things  of  family
intercourse,  the  Divine  lustre  of  a  Christian  peace,  are  not  fortuitous  weeds  care-
lessly flowering  out  of  the  life-garden.  It  is  the  internal  which  makes  the  external.
It  is  the  force  residing  in  the  atoms  which  shapes  the  pyramid.  It  is  the  beautiful
Boul  which  forms  the  crystal  of  the  beautiful  Ufe  without.  Latent  power  in

churches : — It  is  impossible  to  over  estimate,  or  rather  to  estimate,  the  power  that
lies  latent  in  our  churches.  We  talk  of  the  power  that  was  latent  in  steam — latent
till  Watt  evoked  its  spirit  from  the  waters,  and  set  the  giant  to  turn  the  iron  arms
of  machinery.  We  talk  of  the  power  that  was  latent  in  the  skies  till  science
climbed  their  heights,  and,  seizing  the  spirit  of  the  thunder,  chained  it  to  our
surface,  abolishing  distance,  outstripping  the  wings  of  time,  and  flashing  our
thoughts  across  rolUng  seas  to  distant  continents.  Yet  what  are  these  to  the  moral
power  that  lies  asleep  in  the  congregations  of  our  country  and  of  the  Christian
world?     (T.  Guthrie,  D.D.)  True  fearlessness : — When  young  Nelson  came

home  from  a  birds'-nesting  expedition,  his  aunt  chided  him  for  being  out  so  far
into  the  night,  and  remarked,  "I  wonder  fear  did  not  make  you  oome  home."
"Fear,"  said  Nelson,  ••  I  don't  know  him."  Fit  speech  for  a  believer  when  work-
ing for  God.  "Fear?  I  do  not  know  it!  What  does  it  mean?"  The  Lord  is
on  our  side  ?  Whom  shall  we  fear  ?  "  If  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us  t  "
{C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Unwarrantable  fearlessness  : — When  William  Bufus  heard  of
a  rebellion  at  Le  Mans,  he  flung  himself,  at  the  news  of  it,  into  the  first  boat,  and
crossed  the  channel  in  the  teeth  of  a  storm.  When  his  followers  remonstrated  with
him,hecontemptuously  replied,  "Kings  never  drown."  {H.  O.Mackey.)  Christian
courage: — Some  of  the  Indian  chiefs  having  become  the  open  enemies  of  the
gospel,  Mr.  Elliot — sometimes  called  the  Apostle  of  the  American  Indians — when
in  the  wilderness,  without  the  company  of  any  other  Englishman,  was  at  various
times  treated  in  a  threatening  and  barbarous  manner  by  some  of  those  men ;  yet
his  Almighty  Protector  inspired  him  with  such  resolution,  that  he  said,  "  I  am
about  the  work  of  the  great  God,  and  my  God  is  with  me ;  so  that  I  fear  neither
yon  nor  all  the  sachims  [or  chiefs]  in  the  country.  I  vdll  go  on,  and  do  yon  touch
me  il  yon  dare."    They  heard  him  and  shrank  away.     {W.  Baxendale.)  Intel-

lectual virtues : — 1.  Intelligence,  which  is  that  act  of  reason  whereby  we  under-
stand every  particular  concerning  everything.  2.  Science,  which  is  that  act  of
reason  whereby  we  know  all  truth  in  all  things.  3.  Sapience,  which  is  that  act  of
reason  whereby  we  understand  and  perceive  what  will  follow  from  everything.
4.  Prudence,  which  is  that  act  of  reason  whereby  we  observe  the  fittest  oppor-
tunities for  the  effecting  of  all  things.  5.  Art  or  skill,  which  is  that  act  of  reason
whereby  we  know  how  to  efifect  everything  most  skilfully.  {J.  Barlow,  D.D.)
A  sound  mind  not  eaxily  attained : — We  may  perceive  that  sound  minds  are  not
easily  oome  by,  whatsoever  the  world  may  judge.  Some  think  themselves  wise
with  a  little  wit,  as  others  do  themselves  rich  with  no  great  wealth.  {Ibid.)
Power,  love,  and  a  sound  mind  are  of  absolute  necessity  for  a  resolute  Christian,
preacher,  or  private  person : — For  power  without  love  can  work,  but  will  not.  Love
without  power  would  work,  but  cannot.  And  power  and  love  can  and  will,  but  a
Bound  mind  is  requisite  to  guide  both.     (Ibid.)  Contagion  of  fear  : — Speaking

of  his  experiences  in  battle,  a  soldier-writer  says,  "  How  infectious  fear  is  ;  how  it
grows  when  yielded  to ;  and  how,  when  once  you  begin  to  run,  it  soon  seems
impossible  to  run  fast  enough  ;  whereas,  if  you  can  manage  to  stand  your  ground,
the  alarm  lessens,  and  sometimes  disappears."  {H.  0.  Mackey.)  Needless  fear : —
A  lady  was  wakened  up  one  morning  by  a  strange  noise  of  pecking  at  the  window,
and  when  she  got  up  she  saw  a  butterfly  flying  backwards  and  forwards  inside  the


CHAP.  I.]  U.  TIMOTHY,  81

window  in  a  great  fright,  because  ootaide  there  was  a  sparrow  pecking  at  the  glass,
wanting  to  reach  the  butterfly.  The  butterfly  did  not  see  the  glass,  but  it  saw  the
sparrow,  and  evidently  expected  every  moment  to  be  caught.  Neither  did  the
sparrow  see  the  glass,  though  it  saw  the  butterfly,  and  made  sure  of  catching  it.
Yet  all  the  while  the  butterfly,  because  of  that  thin,  invisible  sheet  of  glass,  was
actually  as  safe  as  if  it  had  been  miles  away  from  the  sparrow."  It  is  when  we
forget  our  Protector  that  our  hearts  fail  us.  Elisha's  servant  was  in  great  fear
when  he  awoke  in  the  morning  and  saw  the  city  of  Dothan  eucompassed  with  horses
and  chariots  and  a  great  host ;  but  when  his  eyes  were  opened  at  the  prayer  of  the
prophet,  his  fears  vanished,  for  he  beheld  the  mountains  full  of  horses  and  chariots
of  lire.  "  Thou  wilt  keep  him  in  perfect  peace  whose  mind  is  stayed  on  Thee,
because  he  trusteth  in  Thee."  "The  Lord  shall  preserve  thy  going  out  and  thy
coming  in  from  this  time  forth  and  for  evermore."  (Jas.  Inglis.)  Love  casting
out  fear : — The  love  of  God  casts  out  all  other  fear !  Every  affection  makes  him
who  cherishes  it  in  some  degree  braver  than  he  would  have  been  without  it.  It  is
not  degrading  to  this  subject  to  remind  you  of  what  we  see  away  far  down  in  the
scale  of  living  beings.  Look  at  that  strange  maternal  instinct  that  in  the  lowest
animals  out  of  weakness  makes  them  strong,  and  causes  them  to  forget  all  terror
of  the  most  terrible  at  the  bidding  of  the  mighty  and  conquering  affection.  Look
at  the  same  thing  on  the  higher  level  of  our  own  human  life.  It  is  not  self-
reliance  that  makes  the  hero.  It  is  having  the  heart  filled  with  passionate  enthu-
siasm born  of  love  for  some  person  or  for  some  thing.  Love  is  gentle,  but  it  is
omnipotent,  victor  over  all.  It  is  the  true  hero,  and  martyr  if  need  be,  in  the
human  heart  I  And  when  we  rise  to  the  highest  form  of  it — namely,  the  love  which
is  fixed  upon  God — oh  !  how  that  should,  and  if  it  be  right,  will,  strengthen  and
brace,  and  make  every  man  in  whom  it  dwells  frank,  fearless,  careless  of  personal
consequences.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Power  of  love : — Some  time  ago  a  poor
feUow,  who  had  been  in  penal  servitude  many  years,  came  back  to  Manchester.
He  called  on  an  old  friend,  a  teacher  of  a  ragged  school,  and  in  course  of  conversa-
tion said,  "  Can  you  tell  me  where  Mr.  Wright  lives  ?  "  The  teacher  replied,  "  Did
you  know  Mr.  Wright?"  The  man  answered  "Yes;  after  I  was  sent  to  prison  I
was  hardened ;  I  cursed  God,  and  the  judge  and  jury ;  I  cursed  myself,  and  I  cursed
the  prison ;  and  in  my  rage  I  tried  to  commit  suicide ;  but  that  day  Mr.  Wright
came  into  my  cell,  and  knelt  down  and  prayed  for  me.  I  would  not  kneel  at  first ;
but  when  I  saw  the  old  gentleman  kneel  down,  and  saw  his  tears  trickUng  down
his  cheeks,  I  could  not  help  myself,  and  I  also  knelt  down  and  prayed ;  and  that
day  I  gave  God  my  heart.  When  I  came  out  of  prison,  I  made  up  my  mind  to
seek  him  and  thank  him  for  his  kindness  to  me."  The  teacher  said,  "Ah,  my
friend,  Mr.  Wright  has  been  dead  a  long  time."  The  converted  thief  exclaimed,
"  Dead  1  Mr.  Wright  dead  1 "  The  teacher  said,  "  Yes,  he  is  dead ;  but  the  same
Spirit  which  prompted  him  to  kneel  down  in  your  cell  is  in  a  Person  whom  I  know,
who  can  bless  you  in  every  time  of  need."  He  exclaimed,  "Please  tell  me  his
name?  "    The  teacher  said,  "  His  name  is  Jesus  Christ."    (W.  Birch.)

Ver.  8.  Be  not  thou  therefore  ashamed  of  the  testimony  of  our  Lord,  nor  of  me
His  prisoner. — Not  ashamed  of  Christianity : — It  was  natural  and  right  that  an  old
warrior  whose  armour  was  worn  with  use  should  charge  the  young  soldier  to  bear
himself  bravely  in  the  war.  Cowardice  is  bad  always,  whether  in  the  physical
heroisms  of  the  battle-field,  or  the  moral  heroisms  of  common  duty.  We  are
cautioned  against  being  ashamed  1  And  shame  is  the  child  of  doubt  as  well  as  the
child  of  fear  I  I.  We  should  not  be  ashamed  of  a  testimony  fob  Cheist,  because
Christianity  gives  the  tbue  beading  of  our  mokal  nature.  What  are  we  ?
Apart  from  Christ,  the  world  is  just  as  much  divided  in  its  philosophical  schools  on
this  question  as  ever  it  was.  The  Utilitarian  moralists  enthrone  the  selfish
instinct,  and  make  the  foundation  of  morals  mere  utility,  or  the  greatest  happiness
piinciple;  they  test  the  morality  of  actions  by  their  consequences,  as  if  it  were
possible  to  trace  them  through  all  their  sequences  to  their  ultimate  results,  as
if  a  man  could  thus  judge,  unless  all  the  future  ages  were  before  him.  But  in
setting  up  this  standard,  with  one  sharp  and  almost  contemptuous  sweep,  they  cut
away  the  entire  moral  nature  of  man.  Conscience  has  no  place  in  their  creed.
"My  own  belief,"  says  Mr.  Mill,  "is  that  the  moral  feelings  are  not  innate,  but
acquired."  Surely  a  fearful  reading  of  human  nature !  "  Let  us  make  man  in  our
image "  becomes  only  a  morbid  dream  of  some  early  dramatist  of  creation  (
How  this  theory  of  human  nature  would,  if  adopted,  ultimately  affect  society  may


32  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  I.

perhaps  best  be  understood  by  another  sentence  of  Stuart  Mill — "  The  proper  limii
to  self-indulgence  is  that  one  shall  neither  hurt  himself  nor  hurt  others."  Imagine
this,  a  man  is  not  to  consult  conscience,  or  the  sense  of  right  and  wrong,  he  is
neither  to  be  cheered  by  conscience  nor  to  be  scourged  by  remorse,  but  is  suffered
to  take  his  stand  amongst  his  fellow-beings,  as  a  mere  conscience-less,  calculating
machine,  weighing  not  the  moral  wrong,  but  the  outward  harmfulness  of  self-
indulgence.  If  I  turn  from  the  school  of  Buckle  and  Mill  to  the  modern  scientific
school,  if  captivated  by  the  discoveries  of  modern  science,  I  sit  as  a  disciple  at  the
feet  of  Huxley  or  Darwin,  my  power  to  realise  any  lofty  conception  even  of  this
present  life  is  gone  1  I  feel  like  a  man  who  has  saved  his  purse  and  lost  his  gold,
or  who  has  kept  safely  the  golden  frame  but  lost  the  portrait  it  contained.  Let  us
look  at  their  position  1  We  are  declared  to  be  the  last  and  noblest  form  of  a  long
series  of  developments ;  we  trace  these  back  to  the  elementary  types  of  life.  It  may
constitute  a  theory  of  physical  nature,  it  cannot  constitute  a  theory  of  human
nature.  It  has  no  explanation  whatever  of  the  past  of  our  race.  Yes,  the  gospel
makes  us  feel  the  grandeur  of  life  as  life ;  its  rewards  here  are  moral,  its  punish-
ments the  same.  Instead  of  bidding  us  to  think  alone  on  consequences,  it  reminds
us  that  God  searcheth  the  heart.  Its  garland  of  victory  is  the  well  done  of
conscience,  its  scourge  of  woe  is  the  agony  of  remorse.    II.  We  should  not  bb

ASHAMED  OF  ChBISTIANITY,  BECAUSE   IT  GIVES   THE   TRUE   READING   OF   MAN's  EELIGI0U8

NATURE,  Man  must  worship.  We  all  admit  that.  History  proves  it.  A  nation
without  its  altars  is  as  undiscoverable  as  a  firmament  without  its  stars !  But
what  says  Paul  to  Timothy  ? — "  This  is  a  faithful  saying,  and  worthy  of  all
acceptation,  that  Christ  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners,"  "  This  charge
I  commit  unto  thee,  son  Timothy."  Yes !  Yes  I  this  was  the  message  I  Christ
the  Saviour  of  men  1  This  it  is  that  comes  home  to  the  heart  and  conscience
of  humanity  everywhere.  This  is  the  great  message  we  preach  in  the  face  of  all
modern  endeavours  to  give  the  gospel  only  a  place  in  the  religions  of  the  world.
Yes !  how  that  meets  the  soul-needs  of  man  I  Conscience  is  at  rest  beneath  that
cross  where  Christ  the  Lamb  of  God  taketh  away  the  sins  of  the  world.  Pardon,
virtue,  self-denial,  sacrifice,  peace,  hope,  joy,  love,  these  are  the  growths  of  the
Christian  life — these  blossom  on  no  other  tree  but  the  Tree  of  Life.     III.  We

SHOULD  NOT   BE   ASHAMED   OF   CHRISTIANITY,    BECAUSE  IT  GIVES   THE    TRUE   READING   OF

man's  human  LIFE.  Whatever  the  old  theologies  may  have  said,  human  life  is
divine.  I  mean  by  that,  that  the  world  into  which  we  are  born  finds  place  and
play  for  all  our  varied  human  faculties.  It  is  manifest  that  man's  nature  is  a
mistake,  and  the  world  a  mistake,  if  a  man  is  to  move  on  in  a  region  of  Asceticism,
or  a  transcendental  region  of  Mysticism.  Take  this  life  1  I  say  this  is  a  beautiful
world  to  hve  in.  It  is  a  world  of  colour  !  It  is  a  world  of  sound !  It  is  a  world  of
mystery  1  It  is  a  world  of  enterprise  !  It  is  a  world  of  motion  I  It  is  a  world  of
taste  I  It  is  a  world,  in  fact,  full  of  manifestations  of  adaptation  to  the  being  to  be
placed  upon  it  by  God.  Now,  if  it  were  worldliness  to  touch  all  these  things,  then
we  are  tempted  to  worldliness  every  hour,  every  moment,  and  the  world  is  a  cruel
enchantress,  that  meets  us  at  every  step.  Surely  you  know  well  that  this  is  not
worldliness,  that  Christ  did  not  teach  us  it  was  worldliness.  Man's  nature  too
would  be  a  mistake.  He  has  not  only  eyes  to  lift  to  heaven  and  knees  to  bend  to
earth,  he  has  hands  to  toil  with,  a  home  to  care  for,  a  country  to  serve,  and  a  whole
round  of  earthly  duties  to  discharge.  Still  it  is  a  charge  brought  against  Chris-
tianity that  it  is  indifferent  to  human  culture  and  affection.  Now,  I  do  admit  this,
that  a  man's  personal  relation  to  God  is  the  first  question  which  the  gospel
of  Christ  deals  with :  he  is  to  be  brought  nigh  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  to  be
a  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  to  rejoice  in  a  spiritual  sonship.  But  it  is  also  true
that  all  other  duties  and  relationships  are  lifted  into  higher  spheres,  and  ruled
by  higher  motives.  Christianity  is  not  responsible  for  the  perversion  of  ascetics,
nor  is  it  responsible  for  the  abuse  of  worldlings.  The  Christians  of  Apostolic  times
must  keep  themselves  unspotted  from  the  world,  not  by  avoiding  the  very  pos-
sibility of  its  stains,  but  by  a  life  in  God  which  preserves  them  from  the  power  of
evil.  And  so  must  we  :  the  difficulties  of  the  case  are  the  difficulties  of  moral  life.
Christianity  consecrates  the  life  of  the  family,  the  life  of  the  city,  the  life  of  the
state,  rv.  We  should  not  be  ashamed  of  a  testimony  for  Christ,  fob  Chris-
tianity GIVES  A  TRUE  BEADING  OF  LIFE,  IN  Christ  Himself.  Christ  is  not  only  a
Teacher;  Christ  is  not  only  a  Saviour;  though  He  is  both  these.  Christ  is
Christian  hfe  1  He  is  His  own  religion  alive  and  in  action  1  When  we  study
Christianity,  we  not  only  study  the  Evangels  and  the  Epistles ;  we  study  Christ


OBir.  L]  XL  TIMOTHY,  '  81

Christ's  life  is  the  ideal  of  all  Christian  life  I  As  such  I  ask  yoa  to  mark  its
practical  side ;  its  human  side ;  its  relation  to  all  the  interests,  physical,  social,  and
divine  of  the  world  CbriBt  came  to  ransom  and  to  save.  Christ's  hours  of  prayer
occupied  mach  of  His  earthly  life,  but  He  was  not  one-sided  in  His  life.  How
active  He  was — "  He  went  about  doing  good,"  How  reasonable  He  was — He
reasoned  with  the  Jews  out  of  their  Scriptures.  How  home-loving  He  was — He
abode  at  the  house  of  Martha,  and  her  sister  Mary.  How  life's  cheerful  pleasures
found  Him  a  sharer  in  them — His  first  miracle  was  wrought  at  the  marriage  feast
of  Cana  in  Galilee.  How  social  He  was — He  dined  at  the  house  of  the  Pharisee.
How  actively  compassionate  He  was — "He  healed  all  their  sick."  How  wonderfully
He  carried  the  golden  thread  of  the  heavenly  through  the  warp  and  woof  of  the
earthly  life.  Oh  1  it  is  something  beautiful  indeed  to  possess  that  life.  In  all  your
experiences  of  emotion,  awe,  reverence,  tenderness,  it  is  not  enough  to  feel  the
thrill  of  mere  sensation.  As  Christ  was  consecrated  to  His  Father,  so  must  we  be
to  Him  I  V.  Wb  seoxtld  not  be  ashamed  ov  thb  testimony  of  Chbist,  fob
Chbistianitt  seolected  wbonos  ottb  nature.  All  truth  neglected  wrongs  onr
nature  I  I  mean  scientific  truth,  as  well  as  religious  truth.  If  I  believe  the  world
goes  round,  and  if  to  propitiate  priests,  or  to  provide  for  some  supposed  protection
of  the  Church's  creed,  I  say  the  world  does  not  go  round,  I  wrong  my  mind.  It
I  reject  religious  truth,  I  wrong  my  mind  in  the  worst  sense;  I  wrong  my  conscience
and  my  heart.  That  man  is  to  be  pitied  who  bears  about  with  him  the  murdered
body  of  truth  I  There  are  such  men,  they  know  the  gospel,  they  need  no  further
commendations  of  it  to  the  conscience  and  the  heart.  I  say  Divine  demonstration
has  been  made  to  the  faculty  of  judgment,  and  to  the  faculty  of  feeling.  And  yet
as  the  apostle  says,  "  They  know  not  the  truth."  They  perpetuate  that  hideous
immorality  of  bartering  their  souls  for  ease,  pleasure,  and  sin  1  "  Verily  he  that
knew  his  Lord's  will  and  did  it  not,  shall  be  beaten  with  many  stripes."    VI.  Wa

8B0XnJ>    HOT    BB    ASHAMED    OF  A  TESTIMONT    FOB    ChBIST,   BECAUSE    ChBISTIANITT    IN

ALL  THESE  SCENES  STANDS  ALONE.  Its  positiou  is  uniquo  1  This  OUB  thing  wa
know,  that  a  Saviour  such  as  I  have  been  speaking  of,  is  none  other  but  Christ.
If  there  is,  and  we  are  to  be  confronted  with  some  new  Saviour,  it  is  time  that  tho
criticisms  of  the  day  gave  us  a  new  Christ.  We  exhaust  other  Bubjeots,  but  we
never  exhaust  Christ  I  With  admiring  and  adoring  homage  we  take  onr  stand
behind  the  Cross,  and  say  to  a  world  that  wants  a  Saviour — "  Behold  the  Lamb  of
God  that  taketh  away  the  sins  of  the  world."  "Produce  your  cause,"  says  th«
Most  High  to  all  who  would  now  declare  His  Anointed  One  I  "  Beside  Me,  there
is  no  Saviour  1 "  {W.  M.  Statham,  M.A.)  Power  of  personal  testimony : — Mr.  Black<
wood  was  the  means  of  my  conversion  twenty-four  years  ago.  And  what  was
it  that  laid  hold  of  me?  I  was  then  as  worldly  a  young  man  as  any  in  London,
but  I  went  to  hear  him  speak  at  Streatham,  having  given  a  promise  to  do  so  to  the
young  lady  who  was  afterwards  my  wife,  and  is  now  in  heaven.  The  sermon  did
not  produce  much  impression  upon  me,  but  afterwards  Mr.  Blackwood  walked  up
to  me,  and  put  his  hand  on  my  shoulder,  and  in  his  own  loving  way  said :  "  Dear
friend,  I  do  not  think  that  I  have  seen  you  at  this  meeting  before.  Are  yon  a
Christian  ?  I  know  Christ ;  I  have  proved  Him ;  do  you  know  Him  ? "  I  had
to  say,  "  No,  I  do  not."  What  the  sermon  did  not  do  that  testimony  did,  and
I  had  no  peace  until  I  found  the  Saviour  two  days  afterwards.  Twenty-four  years
have  passed  since  then ;  eighteen  of  them  I  have  spent  amongst  the  poor  of  the
East  of  London,  and  I  am  more  persuaded  than  ever  that  what  tiie  Church  of  Jesus
Christ  needs  is  not  mere  oratory,  mere  eloquence,  mere  wealth,  but  men  who  not
only  bear  Christ's  name,  but  come  right  out  for  Him,  so  that  no  one  in  their  senses
can  doubt  their  being  children  of  God.  {A.  O.  Brown.)  Cowardice  rebuked  :—
Thirty  years  ago,  more  or  less,  there  was  a  boy  in  Scotland  who  would  go  to  sea.
His  name  was  James,  and  his  father  was  a  respected  citizen  of  a  good  town  six
miles  from  the  sea.  On  James's  first  voyage  to  Calcutta  he  kept  up  the  habit
of  praying  in  the  forecastle  before  turning  in  to  his  hammock,  for  he  had  been
accustomed  to  do  so  regularly  at  home.  Nobody  said  anything  to  him  on  the
matter,  but  Bob  Shearer,  an  able  seamen,  watched  him.  In  Calcutta  some  of  the
seamen  left  the  ship,  and  others  were  engaged  in  their  place  to  work  the  ship  home.
One  of  these  was  a  "  rough,"  whose  name  was  Bobert.  Hence  he  was  called
English  Bob,  and  Shearer  was  c^ed  Scotch  Bob.  One  night,  soon  after  the
homeward  voyage  began,  James  was  on  his  knees,  when  the  eye  of  English  Bob
happened  to  fall  on  him.  "  I  declare,"  he  cried,  with  an  oath,  "  here's  a  younker
praying.    Did  you  ever  ?  **    And  thereupon  he  flung  a  heavy  shoe  at  his  head  witil

8


84  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [chap.  t.

excellent  aim.  Before  James  had  time  to  rise  Scotch  Bob  had  the  coward  by  the
throat  and  told  him  to  come  upstairs  and  settle  with  him  at  once.  The  result  was
that  English  Bob  got  soundly  and  wholesomely  thrashed.  That  night  James  went
into  his  hammock  without  praying.  But  he  had  not  time  to  fall  asleep  before
Scotch  Bob  came  and  pitched  him  out.  "  What  do  you  mean,  you  young  coward?
Say  your  prayers  like  a  man  I  Do  you  think  I'm  going  to  fight  for  you  and
be  disgraced  in  this  way  ?  "  And  so  James  never  again  failed  to  kneel  before  he
slept,  and  feels  to  this  day  that  his  being  ashamed  of  his  Father  in  heaven  and  of
the  Saviour  who  died  for  him  was  well  rebuked  by  the  friendly  courage  of  Bob
Shearer.  Long  after,  when  his  name  had  a  title  before  it,  and  he  was  at  the  head
of  his  profession,  James  had  pleasure  in  finding  Bob  Shearer's  mother,  and  bringing
her  to  visit  the  mother  who  had  taught  him  to  pray.  This  story  is  related  by
James  himelf.  True  friendship  : — Let  me  ask  you  a  question.  "  What  would
you  take  for  the  greatest  proof  of  downright  friendship  a  man  could  show  you  ?  "
"  That  is  too  hard  a  question  to  answer  all  at  once."  •'  Well,  I  may  be  wrong,  but
the  deepest  outcome  of  friendship  seems  to  me,  on  the  part  of  the  superior  at  least,
the  permission,  or  better  still,  the  call,  to  share  in  his  sufferings."  {Geo.  Mat'
donald.)  Definition  of  a  friend: — What  is  a  friend  but  one  whom  I  can  trust;
one  who,  in  sorrow's  hour,  will  mingle  his  tears  with  mine ;  one  on  whose  support
I  can  reckon  when  my  back  is  at  the  wall  1  (T.  Guthrie,  D.D.)  According  to
the  power  of  God. — What  power  of  God  ?  has  been  asked.  Not  according  to  the
power  we  get  from  God,  but  according  to  the  power  which  God  has  displayed
towards  us  in  our  calling  and  in  our  marvellous  salvation.  In  other  words,  God
with  great  power  has  succoured  us  ;  surely  we  may  be  confident  that  He  will  never
leave  us,  never  desert  us ;  but  in  the  hours  of  our  sorest  trouble  incurred  for  Him
will  keep  ub  and  will  bring  us  safely  through  it.    {H.  D.  M.  Spence,  M.A.)

Ver.  9.  Who  hath  saved  us,  and  called  us  with  an  holy  calling. — The  people  of
God  effectually  called  in  time  : — I.  We  may,  in  the  first  place,  inquire  wherein  this

HEAVENLT  AND   HOLY  CALLING  IS,   OB   WHAT   SUCH  ABB   EEPBESENTBD   IN   SCRIPTUBB  AS

CALLED  TO.  1.  They  are  called,  in  the  first  place,  it  is  said,  "  out  of  darkness  into
marvellous  light."  2.  And  then  they  are  said,  again,  to  be  "called  to  the  obtaining
of  the  glory  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  But  then  they  are  called  to  the  knowledge  of
Jesus  as  *'  the  way  "  to  eternal  life,  and  to  simple  and  humble  faith  in  Him,  and
to  see  such  glory  in  Him  as  shall  lead  them  to  find  Him  to  be  to  them  everything
they  can  need,  and  possessed  of  everything  they  can  receive  and  enjoy  here  and  for
ever.  H.  But  then  how  is  this  accomplished  ?  We  say,  by  the  Spirit ;  it  is  the
Spirit's  work.  But  then  He  condescends  to  work  by  means,  though  He  can  work
without  means  or  by  means,  as  He  pleases.  Generally  speaking,  the  means  is  the
Word  of  God,  applied  by  His  own  almighty  power  and  influence  to  the  soul.
in.  But  then  how  are  we  to  trace  this  ?  The  text  teaches  us  to  trace  it,  not  to
anything  in  the  creature,  or  any  thing  that  distinguishes  those  who  partake  of  that
heavenly  calling  from  those  who  never  partake  of  it,  but  to  the  sovereign  and  rich
and  distinguishing  grace  of  the  great  Jehovah.  "  Not  according  to  our  works,  but
according  to  His  own  purpose  and  grace  which  was  given  us  "  long  before  we  were
born  or  had  any  existence,  "given  us  in  Christ  Jesus"  our  spiritual  Head,  "given
us  in  Him  before  the  world  began."  You  will  find  this  great  change  described  by
emblems,  which  imply  altogether  the  incapacity  of  man  to  accomplish  it,  and  imply
that  he  can  have  nothing  in  him  to  deserve  it  or  merit  it.  It  is  called,  you  know,
in  one  place,  a  resurrection — what  none  but  God  can  possibly  accomplish.  (IF.
Wilkinson,  B.A.)  Effectual  calling,  with  its  fruits : — I.  The  nature  and  extent
OF  the  gospel-call.  1.  We  read  in  Scripture  of  an  universal  or  general  call,
directed  to  all  that  live  under  the  gospel.  The  invitation  runs  in  the  most  compre-
hensive terms,  that  none  may  think  themselves  excluded.  Salvation  by  faith  in
Christ  was  first  proposed  to  the  Jews,  but  upon  their  peremptory  refusal  it  was
offered  without  distinction  to  the  Gentiles,  who  received  it  gladly ;  from  which  time
the  partition-wall  has  been  broken  down,  and  in  every  nation,  they  that  fear  God
and  work  righteousness  may  be  accepted  of  Him.  But  here,  it  must  be  carefully
observed,  the  gospel-call  is  of  a  moral  nature,  and  addressed  to  our  reasonable
powers.  The  blessed  Jesus  does  not  force  men  into  His  service  by  offering  violence
to  their  understanding  and  will;  but  convinces  the  former  by  setting  the
important  truths  of  religion  before  it  in  a  just  and  amiable  light ;  and  influences
the  latter  by  motives  and  arguments  proper  to  dispose  it  to  act  agreeable  to  such
oonviotiou.    If  men  complain  their  powers  are  broken,  and  that  of  themselves  they


OHA*.  t]  11.  TIMOTHY.  3S

cannot  comply  with  the  calls  of  God  in  His  Word,  He  has  directed  them  where  to
seek  for  necessary  assistance,  and  has  exalted  His  Son  Jesus  to  give  repentance,
as  well  as  remission  of  sins.  So  that  if  men  finally  refuse  the  gospel  salvation,  it
will  appear  to  have  been  owing  more  to  a  want  of  will  than  of  power.  2.  Besides
this  general  call  of  the  gospel,  there  is  a  more  particular  and  personal  call,  when
the  Holy  Spirit  shines  into  the  mind  with  such  irresistible  light  as  convinces  the
judgment,  awakens  the  conscience,  and  engages  the  will  to  a  compliance  with  every
part  of  its  duty.  U.  We  are  to  inquire  into  the  Author  of  effectual  calling,
which  my  text  says  is  God.  If  ministers  had  the  tongues  of  angels,  they  could  not
of  themselves  prevail  with  sinners  to  believe  and  obey  the  gospel.  By  the  repre-
sentation the  Scripture  gives  of  the  deplorable  condition  of  fallen  man,  it  is  further
evident  that  his  effectual  calling  must  be  from  God ;  for  it  says,  that  his  under-
standing  is  darkened,  and  "  alienated  from  the  life  of  God."  That  his  will  and
affections  are  under  invincible  prejudices  against  virtue  and  goodness,  and  strongly
biassed  to  sin  and  folly  ;  nay,  that  he  is  a  slave  to  the  devil,  and  carried  captive  by
him  at  his  pleasure.  Is  it  not  reasonable  to  conclude  the  necessity  of  a  Divine
agency,  in  order  to  accomplish  the  mighty  change  ?  Besides,  effectual  calling  is
compared  in  Scripture  to  those  wonderful  works  that  are  peculiar  to  God  Himself.
It  is  called  a  New  Creation,  and  a  resurrection  from  the  dead ;  nay,  'tis  compared
to  the  mighty  power  of  God,  which  was  wrought  in  Christ  when  He  was  raised  from
the  dead  (Eph.  i.  19).  IH.  We  are  now  to  consider  the  properties  bt  which  this
CALL  OF  the  Spirit  is  described.  1.  It  is  secret,  God  does  not  call  sinners  with  an
audible  voice,  but  by  secret  and  powerful  impressions  upon  their  souls.  2.  It  is  a
personal  call ;  ministers  draw  the  bow  at  a  venture,  but  the  Spirit  of  God  directs
the  arrow  to  the  breast,  where  it  is  to  enter.  3.  Effectual  calling  is  under  the
direction  of  the  sovereign  will  and  pleasure  of  God,  as  to  the  time,  and  manner,
and  means  of  it.  Some  are  called  into  the  vineyard  at  the  third  hour ;  others  at
the  sixth,  and  others  not  till  the  eleventh  hour.  The  manner  of  God's  calling  men
into  the  kingdom  of  grace  is  no  less  various.  The  like  variety  may  be  observed  in
the  means  of  effectual  calling.  Some  have  been  awakened  by  a  sermon,  others  by
a  remarkable  providence.  Some  by  reading  the  Holy  Scriptures,  or  books  of
devotion;  and  others  by  religious  conversation,  meditation  and  prayers.  4.
Effectual  calling  is  without  any  regard  to  our  works :  so  says  the  apostle  in  the
text,  ••  He  has  called  us  not  according  to  our  works."  5.  The  effectual  calling  of
the  Holy  Spirit  is  always  successful.  IV.  We  are  to  consider  the  fruits  and  con-
sequences OF  EFFECTUAL  CALLING.  Bcforc  their  conversion  they  were  in  a  state  of
darkness,  slavery,  corruption  and  death ;  now  they  are  delivered  from  all  this
misery,  and  made  partakers  of  the  privileges  of  the  children  of  God.  But  the
more  immediate  consequences  of  effectual  calling  may  be  comprehended  under
these  three  particulars.  1.  The  first  is,  regeneration,  or  the  new  nature.  2.
Sanctification  by  the  Holy  Spirit  is  another  consequence  of  effectual  calling.  3.  A
certain  prophet  of  salvation.  (D.  Neal.)  Effectual  calling  : — I.  I  am  to  show
WHAT  the  effectual  CALL  IN  THE  GENERAL  IS.  An  effectual  Call  is  opposed  to  an
ineffectual  one.  An  effectual  call  is  the  call  that  gains  its  real  intent ;  tbat  is  to
say,  when  the  party  called  comes  when  called.  To  apply  this  to  our  purpose,  all
that  hear  the  gospel  are  called;  but,  1.  To  some  of  them  it  is  ineffectual,  and  these
are  the  most  part  of  gospel-hearers,  "For  many  be  called,  but  few  chosen"
(Matt.  XX.  16).  They  are  called,  invited ;  but  it  is  but  the  singing  of  a  song  to  a
deaf  man  that  is  not  moved  with  it  (Prov.  i.  24).  2.  To  others  it  is  effectual,  and
these  are  but  few  (Matt.  xx.  16).  II.  I  come  now  to  show  who  they  are  that  are
thus  effectually  called.  The  text  tells  us  that  this  effectual  call  is  according
to  God's  purpose  and  free  grace  in  Christ.  1.  It  is  men,  and  not  fallen  angels,
that  are  called.  2.  It  is  some  men,  and  not  others,  that  are  called  effectually,  and
these  naturally  in  as  bad  and  sinful  a  condition  as  others  (Eph.  ii.  12).  3.  It  is  for
the  most  part  those  who  have  the  least  advantages  as  to  their  outward  condition  in
the  world  (1  Cor.  i.  26-28).  III.  I  proceed  to  show  whence  and  whither  they  ark
CALLED  WHO  ARE  EFFECTUALLY  CALLED.  1.  Called  out  of  the  world  that  lieth  in
wickedness  (1  John  v.  19).  And  hence  the  Church  has  its  name  in  the  prophetical
and  apostolical  writings,  Ekklesia  ;  i.e.,  a  company  called  out  from  among  others,
a  gathered  congregation.  2.  Called  unto  Jesus  Christ,  and  through  Him  to  the
blessed  society  of  another  world.  IV.  I  proceed  to  show  what  makes  the  call
effectual  to  some,  when  it  is  not  so  to  others.  Negatively.  1.  It  is  neither  the
piety,  parts,  nor  seriousness  of  those  who  are  employed  to  carry  the  gospel-call
to  Biimers  (1  Cor.  iii.  7).     2.  Neither  is  it  one  that  uses  his  own  free  will  better


Se  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohaf.  u

than  another  does  (Bom.  ix.  6).  Positively.  We  may  Bay  in  this  case,  "  Not  by
might,  nor  by  power,  but  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord."  V.  It  mat  be  asked,  What
MEOESsiTT  18  THERE  FOB  THEiB  BEiNO  THUS  CALLED  ?  The  necessity  of  it  is  manifest
to  all  that  know  their  natural  case.  1.  They  are  far  off  (Eph.  ii.  13),  far  from  God,
and  Christ,  and  all  good  (Eph.  ii.  12).  Hence  the  call  is,  "Draw  nigh  to  God."
2.  They  are  hard  and  fast  asleep,  and  they  need  this  call,  "  Awake,  thou  that
Bleepest,  and  arise  from  the  dead,  and  Christ  shall  give  thee  light "  (Eph.  v.  14).

5.  If  they  were  awakened  they  know  not  where  to  go  to  (Acts  ii.  37).  4.  If  they
did  not  faiow  where  to  go  to,  they  are  not  willing  to  go  thither  (John  v.  40).  5.  Lf
they  are  willing  to  go  to  Christ,  yet  being  awakened,  they  dare  not  venture,
guilt  so  stares  them  in  the  face,  *•  Thou  saidst.  There  is  no  hope "  (Jer.  ii.  25).

6.  If  they  durst  come,  yet  they  cannot  come,  unless  they  be  drawn  (John  vi.  44j.

VI.    I     SHALL     HOBB    PABTICOLABL1     EXPLAIN     THE     NATDRB     OF     EFFECTUAL     CALLING.

It  is  the  work  of  the  Lord's  Spirit.  1.  On  the  understanding.  (1)  An  iUumi>
nation  of  the  soul  from  Mount  Sinai.  (2)  An  illumination  of  the  soul  from
Mount  Zion.  2.  On  the  will  of  the  sinner.  This  faculty  of  the  soul  needs  also  a
•aving  work  of  the  Spirit  thereon,  being  fearfully  depraved  in  the  state  of  nature
(Bom.  viii.  7).  Now,  the  Spirit's  work  on  the  will  is,  the  renewing  of  it  (Ezek.
xxxvi.  26).  (T*  Boston,  D.D.)  Salvation  altogether  by  grace  : — It  is  somewhat
remarkable — at  least  it  may  seem  so  to  persons  who  are  not  accustomed  to  think
vpon  the  subject — that  the  apostle,  in  order  to  excite  Timothy  to  boldness,  to  keep
bun  constant  in  the  faith,  reminds  him  of  the  great  doctrine  that  the  grace  of  God
reigns  in  the  salvation  of  men.  I.  Very  carefully  let  us  consideb  the  doctbinb
TAUGHT  BY  THE  APOSTLE  IN  THIS  TEXT.  1.  The  apostlc  in  Stating  his  doctrine  in  the
following  words,  "  Who  hath  saved  us,  and  called  us  with  an  holy  calling,  not
according  to  our  works,  but  according  to  his  own  purpose  and  grace,  which  was
given  08  in  Christ  Jesus  before  the  world  began,"  declares  God  to  be  the  Author  of
■alvation — "  Who  hath  saved  us  and  called  us."  The  whole  tenor  of  the  verse  is
towards  a  strong  affirmation  of  Jonah's  doctrine,  "  that  salvation  is  of  the  Lord."
To  say  that  we  save  ourselves  is  to  utter  a  manifest  absurdity.  We  are  called  in
Scripture  "  a  temple  " — a  holy  temple  in  the  Lord.  But  shall  any  one  assert  that
tiie  stones  of  the  edifice  were  their  own  architect  ?  No :  we  believe  that  God  the
Father  was  the  architect,  sketched  the  plan,  supplied  the  materials,  and  will  com-
plete the  work.  Shall  it  also  be  said  that  those  who  are  redeemed  redeemed  them-
lelves?  that  slaves  of  Satan  break  their  own  fetters?  Then  why  was  a  Redeemer
■eeded  at  all  ?  Do  you  believe  that  the  sheep  of  God,  whom  He  has  taken  from
between  the  jaws  of  the  lion,  could  have  rescued  themselves  7  Can  the  dead  make
themselves  alive  7  2.  We  next  remark  that  grace  is  in  this  verse  rendered  con-
qiionons  when  we  see  that  God  pursues  a  singular  method — "  Who  hath  saved  us  and
ealled  us."    The  peculiarity  of  the  manner  lies  in  three  things — first,  in  the  com-

{leteness  of  it.  The  apostle  uses  the  perfect  tense  and  says,  "who  hath  saved  us."
lehevers  in  Christ  Jesus  are  saved.  This  completeness  is  one  peculiarity — we  most
mark  another.  I  want  you  to  notice  the  order  as  well  as  the  completeness  :  "  who
bath  saved  os  and  called  us.  What  1  saved  us  before  He  called  us  ?  Tes,  so  the
text  says.  But  is  a  man  saved  before  he  is  called  by  grace?  Not  in  his  own
experience,  not  as  far  as  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  goes,  but  he  is  saved  in  God's

turpose,  in  Christ's  redemption,  and  in  his  relationship  to  his  covenant  Head ;  and
e  is  saved,  moreover,  in  this  respect,  that  the  work  of  his  salvation  is  done,  and  he
bas  only  to  receive  it  as  a  finished  work.  In  the  olden  times  of  imprisonment  for
debt,  it  would  have  been  quite  correct  for  you  to  step  into  the  cell  of  a  debtor  and
lay  to  him,  I  have  freed  you,  if  you  had  paid  his  debts  and  obtained  an  order  for
bis  discharge.  Well,  but  he  is  still  in  prison.  Yes ;  but  you  really  liberated  him
■0  soon  as  yoo  paid  his  debts.  3.  When  a  speaker  desires  to  strengthen  his
point  and  to  make  himself  clear,  he  generally  puts  in  a  negative  as  to  the  other
tide.  So  the  apostle  adds  a  negative:  "Not  according  to  our  works."  The
world's  great  preaching  is,  "  Do  as  well  as  you  can,  live  a  moral  life,  and  God
will  save  yoo."  The  gospel  preaching  is  this  :  "  Thou  art  a  lost  sinner,  and  thoa
•anst  deserve  nothing  of  God  but  His  displeasure  ;  if  thou  art  to  be  saved,  it  must
be  by  an  act  of  sovereign  grace."  4.  My  text  is  even  more  explicit  yet,  for  the
eternal  purpose  is  mentioned.  The  next  thing  the  apostle  says  is  this :  "  Who  hath
Mved  OS,  and  called  os  with  an  holy  calling,  not  according  to  our  works  but
■eoording  to  His  own  purpose."  Mark  that  word — "  according  to  His  own  purpose."
So  yoo  not  see  how  all  the  merit  and  the  power  of  the  creature  are  shot  out  here,
Vb«D  yoo  are  saved,  not  aocording  to  your  purpose  or  merit,  but  "  according  to  Hi$


OMJit.  1.]  II.  TIMOTHY.  87

ovn  purpose"?  6.  Bat  then  the  text,  lest  we  shonld  make  any  mistake,  adds,
"  accordiog  to  His  own  purpose  and  grace."  The  purpose  is  not  founded  on  foreseen
merit,  but  upon  grace  alone.  It  is  grace,  all  grace,  nothing  but  grace  from  first  to
last.  6.  Again,  in  order  to  shut  out  everything  like  boasting,  the  whole  is  spoken
of  as  a  gift.  Do  notice  that,  "  purpose  and  grace  which  He  gave  us  " — not  "  which
He  sold  us,"  "  offered  us,"  but  "  which  He  gave  us."  7.  But  the  gift  is  bestowed
through  s  medium  which  glorifies  Christ.  It  is  written,  "  which  was  given  as  in
Christ  Jesus."  We  ask  to  have  mercy  from  the  well-head  of  grace,  but  we  ask
not  even  to  make  the  bucket  in  which  it  is  to  be  brought  to  us ;  Christ  is  to  be
the  sacred  vessel  in  which  the  grace  of  God  is  to  be  presented  to  our  thirsty  lips.
8.  Yet  further,  a  period  is  mentioned  and  added — •'  before  the  world  began."  Those
last  words  seem  to  me  for  ever  to  lay  prostrate  all  idea  of  anything  of  our  merits  in
saving  ourselves,  because  it  is  here  witnessed  that  God  gave  us  grace  "  before  the
world  began."  Where  were  you  then?  What  hand  had  you  in  it  "before  the
world  began"?  II.  Show  thb  uses  of  this  doctbine.  I  would  that  free  grace
were  more  preached,  because  it  gives  men  something  to  believe  with  confidence.
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  God's  plan  for  man's  salvation: — I.  The  origin  of  oub
SALVATION.  Three  facts  claim  our  notice.  1.  It  is  with  God.  The  last  clause  of
the  preceding  verse  shows  to  whom  the  pronoun  "  who  "  refers — "  According  to  the
power  of  God."  It  is  God  the  Father  to  whom  the  apostle  alludes.  The  Bible
everywhere  preserves  the  distinction  betwten  the  origin  and  the  means  of  our
salvation.  The  last  it  invariably  ascribes  to  God  the  Son :  the  first  it  as  invariably
•scribes  to  God  the  Father.  In  Ephesians  ii.  4-7  we  have  a  striking  instance  of
this.  In  ver.  5,  it  is  "with  Christ " ;  ver.  6,  "by  Christ" ;  ver.  7,  "  through  Christ."
Bat  all  these  expressions  are  introduced  by  the  statement  in  ver.  4,  "  But  God,  who
is  rich  in  mercy,  for  His  great  love  wherewith  He  loved  us,"  <fec.  And  so,  in  the  text,
the  apostle  says  it  is  "  in  Christ  Jesus  "  ;  but  it  originates  so  entirely  with  God  the
Father,  that  He  is  said  to  have  "  saved  us."  This  Scripture  distinction  does  away
with  the  only  apparently  plausible  objection  that  has  been  raised  against  the  atone-
ment of  Christ— viz.,  that  it  represents  the  Father  as  anwiUing  to  save  sinners,  or
as  needing  to  be  appeased.  The  eternal  Father,  and  the  suffering  Son,  are  united  in
one  ascription  of  praise.  In  all  our  doctrinal  statements,  and  in  all  our  expressions
of  praise,  let  us  give  honour  to  both.  2.  It  is  in  His  own  purpose  and  grace .  The  idea
of  a  purpose  resulting  from  grace  alone  is  prominent  here.  Our  salvation  not  only
originates  with  God,  but  in  His  gracious  purpose  alone.  (1)  It  is  not  the  result  of
necessity.  Even  acts  of  grace  are  sometimes  necessary.  The  pablic  voice  demands
them — the  interests  of  the  empire  require  them — the  weakness  of  the  government
renders  them  expedient.  Nay,  the  claims  of  justice  itself  may  be  satisfied,  and
grace  steps  forward.  No  voice  in  heaven — on  earth — in  hell — could  have  de-
manded salvation  for  guilty  men.  Believer,  your  damnation  would  not  have
tarnished  His  glory.     Your  salvation  originated  in  His  own  purpose  and  grace.

$2)  It  was  not  from  the  impulse  of  others.  A  generous  heart  is  sometimes  sluggish.
t  needs  to  be  excited.  One  word  from  another  has  often  stirred  to  benevolent
action.  Our  merciful  God  needed  no  stimulus.  It  was  not  the  offer  of  Jesas  to  die
for  as  which  roused  Him  to  save  us — it  only  met  His  own  gracious  desire.  No
pleading  of  angels  or  of  men  impelled  Him.  His  loving  heart  did  not  wait  for
either.  A  few  years  ago  a  vessel  was  wrecked  on  the  coast  at  Scarborough.  It  was
in  the  night.  The  signals  of  distress  aroused  the  crew  of  the  lifeboat ;  the  men
were  on  the  cliff,  looking  out  and  pitying ;  but  the  danger  was  so  great  that  they
stirred  not.  As  soon  as  it  was  light  crowds  gathered  on  the  spot.  One  voice  was
heard.  It  was  the  voice  of  a  stranger.  Pointing  to  the  wreck,  it  appealed  to  the
lifeboat's  crew.  It  reached  the  hearts  of  the  men.  The  boat  was  launched  and
manned.  Soon  it  returned,  bearing  the  saved  ones  to  the  shore.  About  the  same
time  another  vnreck  occurred  on  the  same  coast.  It  was  the  dead  of  night.  ▲
daaghter  and  her  father  were  sleeping  in  the  lighthouse.  The  signal  of  distress
awoke  the  young  woman.  She  saw  the  peril.  No  voice  was  near  to  stir  her  to  the
deed  of  mercy.  She  aroused  her  father.  Solitary  and  unstimulated  they  entered
the  boat — the  wreck  was  reached — the  wrecked  ones  were  borne  back  in  safety.
Both  deeds  were  noble;  but  you  see  the  difference.  The  impulse  from  another
stirred  the  crew  of  the  Ufeboat.  No  impulse  was  needed  to  stir  the  heart  of  Grace
Darling.  All  illustrations  must  fail  us ;  but  we  are  speaking  of  Hiin  who  needed
no  impulse — waited  for  none — but  acted  at  once  from  His  own  gracious  purpose.
(8)  It  was  not  by  the  counsel  of  others.  The  phrase  "  His  own  purpose  "  here  is
•zpreseive.    The  generous  heart  is  sometimes  perplexed.   It  needs  no  atimalus,  bat


88  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohaf.  t.

it  needs  counsel.  Difficulties  stand  in  the  way  of  following  out  its  own  promptings.
Its  language  often  is — "Oh  !  tell  me  what  I  can  do  to  save  him."  How  gratefully
it  welcomes  the  happy  thought  which  removes  all  its  perplexities.  David's  heart
yearned  towards  Absalom,  but  his  kingly  office  stood  in  the  way  of  indulging  a
fatber'8  wishes.  How  welcome  were  the  counsels  of  the  woman  of  Tekoah,  when
she  threw  herself  in  his  way  to  plead  for  the  guilty  one.  But  God  was  His  own
counsellor  in  man's  salvation.  He  had  no  counsellor  in  creation — no  architect —
He  was  His  own.  He  has  no  counsellor  in  providence.  He  needs  no  minister  to
advise,  or  privy  council  to  deliberate — He  is  His  own.  It  was  yet  more  true  as  to
man's  salvation.  It  is  "  the  mystery  of  His  will,  according  to  His  good  pleasure,
which  He  hath  pursued  in  Himself  "  (Eph.  i.  9).  He  had  no  counsellor.  No  one
can  divide  the  honour  with  Him.  3.  It  is  not  according  to  our  works.  The  apostle
here  intends  to  put  good  works  in  their  right  place ;  not  to  set  them  aside.  By
"good  works"  he  invariably  means  not  charities  alone,  however  benevolent — nor
prayers  alone,  however  devout :  he  includes  the  whole  works  of  a  holy  life.  The
daughter  of  Jairus  was  raised  by  Jesus.  Think  you  not  that,  as  the  thrill  o£
returning  life  passed  through  her  veins,  her  first  emotion  would  be  that  of  love  to
Him  who  had  rescued  her  from  the  grave,  and  that  ever  after  she  would  be  anxioua
to  show  it  by  every  act  which  gratitude  prompted  ?  But  Jesus  raised  her  from  Hia
own  gracious  purpose.  Her  subsequent  acts  were  the  effect,  not  the  cause.  II.  Thh
MEANS  OB  METHOD  OF  OUR  SALVATION.  Thrcc  facts  dcscrve  attention.  1.  It  is  in
Christ.  Paul  teaches  this  :  It  is  "according  to  His  own  purpose  and  grace"  ;  but
he  adds,  "  which  was  given  us  in  Christ  Jesus."  No  views  of  God's  purposes  are
right,  then,  which  separate  them  from  Christ  Jesus.  God  has  revealed  no  purpose
except  in  Him.  His  very  mercy,  full  as  it  is,  knows  no  channel  except  through
Him.  Most  men  are  ready  to  be  saved — nay,  wish  it.  The  hard  lesson  for  some
to  learn  is,  salvation  by  Christ.  Strange  that  it  should  be  so.  The  method  which
most  honours  God  is  the  most  suited  to  us.  2.  It  is  by  God's  calling.  3.  This
calling  is  holy.  The  Apostle  Paul  has  clearly  explained  his  own  meaning  (2  Thess.
ii.  13, 14).  We  pause  not  now  to  reason  with  those  who  would  make  it  a  salvation
to  sin,  and  not  from  sin.  The  text  points  higher  than  this.  It  is  not  enough  to
say  that  we  are  saved  in  the  way  of  holiness  :  our  very  calling  is  holy — holy  in  ita
design,  and  holy  in  its  spirit.  It  breathes  spiritual  purity,  as  well  as  life  into  the
Boul — a  portion  of  the  pure  atmosphere  of  heaven  itself.  There  is  no  calling  by
God  which  is  not  a  holy  calling.  He  stamps  His  own  image  as  His  own  mark  upon
every  soul  He  calls  and  saves.  There  are  three  classes  to  whom  we  wish  especially
to  apply  these  statements.  (1)  To  those  inquiring  after  the  way  to  salvation.
Inquirer ;  we  compared  our  text  to  a  miniature  map  of  the  way  of  salvation.  Take
care  that  you  foUow  it.  John  Bunyan's  "Pilgrim "  found  his  way  out  of  the  City
of  Destruction  easily  enough  when  alarmed.  But  his  own  mistakes,  and  the
misleadings  of  others,  led  him  into  many  perils.  Nor  was  it  until  Evangelist  met
him  the  second  time,  and  set  him  right,  that  he  found  the  wicket  gate,  and  the  only
way  to  the  Celestial  City.  Take  this  verse  with  you  at  the  beginning  of  your
journey.  Study  it  well.  It  will  preserve  you  from  serious  perils  to  your  salvation.
(2)  To  those  who  object  to  God's  plan  of  salvation.  Our  reference  now  is  to  those
who  object  on  the  ground  of  its  supposed  tendency.  It  is  thought  by  some  that  •
salvation  so  arranged  will  check  a  holy  life.  If  rightly  viewed,  it  stimulates  to  it.
If  holiness  be  not  always  the  result  of  the  doctrine,  the  cause  of  failure  is  not  in
the  truth,  but  in  the  heart  on  which  it  falls.  When  the  soft  fertilising  shower  has
fallen  on  your  garden,  old  flowers  give  fresh  signs  of  life,  and  new  flowers  begin  to
open  their  buds.  Nay,  the  seed  hitherto  buried,  but  invisible  appears.  And  yet  in
one  part  of  the  garden  you  look,  aiid  although  the  same  pure  rain  has  fallen  upon
it,  and  the  same  seed  lies  buried  beneath  it,  no  flowers  appears.  The  cause  is  not
with  the  rain,  but  the  soil.  It  was  the  doctrine  of  salvation  by  grace  which  trans-
formed the  frivolous  dissipated  young  soldier  of  Corfu  into  the  consistent,  holy,
religious  hero  of  the  Crimea — Captain  Hedley  Vicars.  3.  To  those  who  despise  or
neglect  this  salvation.  Does  its  simple  easy  method  offend  you  ?  How  is  this  ?
The  accomplishment  of  great  ends  by  the  simplest  means  is  usually  regarded  as
the  greatest  achievement  of  wisdom.  This  plan  is  the  result  of  Divine  wisdom
alone.  No  other  wisdom  could  have  devised  it.  {Samuel  Luke.)  A  holy  calling : —
St.  Peter  (1  Pet.  i.  15)  gives  the  full  force  of  this  epithet :  "As  He  which  hath
called  you  is  holy,  so  be  ye  holy  in  all  manner  of  conversation."  {Speaker't
Commentary.)  God's  call: — The  voice  of   Divine  grace   prevaiUng  upon  the

will.     This  is  the  ruling  meaning  of  "  call,"  "  calling,"  &c.,  in  the  Epistles  ;  while


•HAP.  1.]  II.  TIMOTHY.  89

In  the  Gospels  it  means  no  more,  necessarily,  than  the  audible  invitations  of  the  gospel
(see,  e.g..  Matt.  xxii.  14^.  (If.  C.  G.  Moule,  M.A.)  A  holy  calling  :—l.  For  the
eanses  of  it  are  holy;  Ctod,  Christ,  the  Spirit,  and  the  Word  are  all  said  to  be  holy.
And  the  ministers,  for  the  most  part,  are  holy,  ^ho  be  instruments  in  this  action.
2.  And  in  regard  of  the  end  too,  and  the  subjects  from  which  we  are  called,  and  to
Trhich  we  be  called,  it  is  a  holy  calling.  For  first.  We  are  called  from  darkness  to
light.  Secondly,  From  uncleanness  to  holiness.  Thirdly,  From  wicked  men  and
devils,  to  the  communion  of  saints  and  angels.  Fourthly,  We  are  called  from  earth
that  is  polluted,  unto  heaven  the  holy  mountain  of  the  Lord.  3.  In  the  last  place,
this  is  to  teach  such  as  are  called  on  this  manner  to  walk  worthy  of  their  calling.
Is  it  a  holy  calling  ?  live  thou  holily.  Shall  a  prince  plod  in  the  mire,  defile  hia
olothes,  and  pollute  his  person,  by  the  base  oflBices  of  poor  subjects  ?  How  unseemly
then  is  it  for  these  holy  brethren.  {J.  Barlow,  D.D.)  Christianity  a  holy
religion : — To  a  young  infidel  who  was  scoffing  at  Christianity  because  of  the
misconduct  of  its  professors,  the  late  Dr.  Mason  said,  "  Did  you  ever  know  an
Qproar  to  be  made  because  an  infidel  went  astray  from  the  paths  of  morality  ?  "
Tbe  infidel  admitted  that  he  had  not.  •'  Then  don't  you  see,"  said  Dr.  Mason,  "that,
by  expecting  the  professors  of  Christianity  to  be  holy,  you  admit  it  to  be  a  holy
religion,  and  thus  pay  it  the  highest  compliment  in  your  power?  "  The  young  man
was  silent.  Grace  does  not  lightly  esteem : — There  is  sometimes  the  thought  that
grace  implies  God's  passing  by  sin.  But  no — quite  the  contrary ;  grace  supposes
sin  to  be  so  horribly  bad  a  thing,  that  God  cannot  tolerate  it.  Were  it  in  the  power
of  man,  after  being  unrighteous  and  evil,  to  patch  up  his  ways,  and  mend  himself
80  as  to  stand  before  God,  there  would  then  be  no  need  of  grace.  The  very  fact  of
the  Lord's  being  gracious  shows  sin  to  be  so  evil  a  thing,  that  man,  being  a  sinner,
his  state  is  utterly  ruined  and  hopeless,  and  nothing  but  free  grace  will  do  for  him —
can  meet  his  need.  {Anon.)  Salvation  by  grace : — The  late  Eev.  C.  J.  Latrobe
visited  a  certain  nobleman  in  Ireland  who  devoted  considerable  sums  to  charitable
purposes ;  and,  among  other  benevolent  acts,  had  erected  an  elegant  church  at  his  own
expense.  The  nobleman,  with  great  pleasure,  showed  Mr.  Latrobe  his  estate,  pointed
him  to  the  church,  and  said,  "  Now,  sir,  do  you  not  think  that  will  va^'tit  heaven  ?  "
Mr.  Latrobe  paused  for  a  moment,  and  said,  ••  Pray,  my  lord,  what  may  your
estate  be  worth  a  year  ?  "  "I  imagine,"  said  the  nobleman,  "  about  thirteen  or
fourteen  thousand  pounds."  •*  .ijid  do  yon  think,  my  lord,"  answered  the
minister,  "  that  God  would  sell  heaven,  even  for  thirteen  or  fourteen  thousand
pounds?"  Grace  and  free  will: — Mrs.  Eomaine  was  once  in  company  with  a
clergyman  at  Tiverton,  who  spoke  with  no  little  zeal  against  what  he  called
"  irresistible  grace,"  alleging  that  "  such  grace  would  be  quite  incompatible  with
free  will."  "  Not  at  all  so,"  answered  Mrs.  Bomaine ;  ••  grace  operates  efifectually,
yet  not  ooeroively.  The  wills  of  God's  people  are  drawn  to  Him  and  Divine  things,
just  as  your  will  would  be  drawn  to  a  bishopric,  if  you  had  the  offer  of  it."
{W.  Baxendale.)  The  iovereign  grace  of  God : — Henry  IV.,  King  of  France,  was
in  every  point  of  view  a  great  man.  It  is  said  that  on  an  anniversary  of  his  birth-
day he  made  the  following  reflection :  "  I  was  born  on  this  day,  and  no  doubt,
taking  the  world  through,  thousands  were  born  on  the  same  day  with  me,  yet  out
of  all  those  thousands  I  am  probably  che  only  one  whom  God  hath  made  a  king.
How  peculiarly  am  I  favoured  by  the  bounty  of  His  providence  1  "  But  a  Christian,
refieoting  on  his  second  birth,  may,  with  greater  reason,  adore  the  free  and
sovereign  grace  of  God.

Yer.  10.  But  Is  now  made  manifest  by  the  appearing  of  onr  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,
who  hath  abolished  deatb. — The  appearing : — ^Remarkable  as  the  only  passage  in
the  New  Testament  in  which  the  word  kTrt^aveia  (=  manifestation)  is  applied  to  the
incarnation  of  our  Lord.      (JB.  H.  Plumptre,  D.D.)  The  simple  act  of  the

Incarnation  by  no  means  covers  the  "  appearing."  The  "  appearing  "  (Epiphany)
here  includes  not  only  the  birth,  but  the  whole  manifestation  of  Clirist  on  earth,
including  the  Passion  and  the  Resurrection.  (H.  D.  M.  Spmce,  M.A.)  Living  in
the  days  of  Christ's  appearing : — Seeing  that  the  davs  wherein  we  live  are  better
than  the  days  of  old,  we  must  thrive,  and  be  better  also.  The  more  choice  diet  we
feed  on,  the  fatter  and  fairer  should  we  be ;  the  clearer  light,  the  cleaner  must  we
keep  ourselves  from  pollution,  contamination.  When  trees  are  removed  to  a  mors
fertile  soil,  do  we  not  expect  that  they  should  spread  further,  and  be  more  fruitful
than  before  ?  when  cattle  are  put  into  a  better  pasture  will  we  not  look  for  better
growth,  more  labour  at  then-  bauds  r    Shall  not  we  then  grow  strong,  work  mightily


4U  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oHAP.  I.

in  the  Lord's  Tineyard,  and  resolutely  ran  the  ways  of  His  commands  ?  Is  not  onr
light  brighter,  our  spiritual  food  better,  and  our  journey  shorter?  then  why  is
there  not  some  equal  proportion?  These  things  must  be  thought  upon,  made
use  of,  or  else  our  account  one  day  will  be  the  greater,  the  heavier ;  for  unto  whom
much  is  given,  shall  much  be  required.  They  who  have  greater  means  for  grace
than  others,  must  strive  to  be  more  gracious  than  others,  or  look  for  the  more
heavier  reckoning.  Our  fathers  were  led  in  the  night,  the  moon  was  their  con-
ductor ;  we  are  now  in  the  day,  when  as  the  sun  guideth  us,  shall  we  not  then  go
faster,  farther,  with  less  fear,  and  more  resolution,  greater  boldness?  Bat  alas!
who  taketh  knowledge  of  tbese  things  maketh  the  true  use  thereof?  We  have  the
sun  shining,  yet  sleep ;  or  if  awake,  we  cry,  want  we  not  light  ?  I  say  no  more,
but  with  that  our  idleness  cause  not  the  Lord  to  remove  our  candlestick.  (J.  Bar-
low, D.D.)  Who  hath  abolished  death. — Death  abolished : — The  article  is  used
here  emphatically  and  designedly.  The  article  is  often  used  to  express  a  thing  in
the  abstract.  Death,  not  merely  in  some  particular  instance,  but  in  all  its  aspects
and  bearings,  and  in  its  very  essence,  being  and  idea  is  abolished.  {Ja$.  Bryce,
LL.  D. )  Death  of  none  effect : — Christ  Jesus  is  not  only  a  living  embodiment  of
the  Eternal  purpose  and  love  of  the  Father,  but  He  is  also  declared  to  be  the
Saviour  who  made  death  of  none  effect,  abolished  or  rendered  inoperative  that  death
which  is  the  universal  curse  of  man,  which  "  has  passed  through  upon  all  men "
(Bom.  V.  12),  and  is  grimly  symbolised  to  UB  in  the  dissolution  of  the  body.  The
Lord  declared  that  those  who  lived  and  believed  in  Him  should  never  die.  St.
John  could  never  have  recorded  tbese  words  of  the  Master  (John  xi.  26)  when  a
whole  generation  of  Christians,  including  all  the  apostles,  with  the  exception  of
himself,  had  passed  away  and  come  under  the  tyrannous  sway  of  the  last  enemy,
unless  he  had  supposed  the  words  to  imply  something  far  more  and  other  than  the
death  of  the  body.  Wiesinger,  Huther,  Ellicott,  and  others  are  right  in  understanding
by  the  word  thanatos,  "  death,"  the  entire  antithesis  to  zoe  or  "  life."  Surely  it  is
the  entire  principle  of  decay,  corruption,  and  separation  from  God  instituted  by  sin.
It  includes  all  the  animosity  that  a  living,  self-conscious  being  feels  against  God  for
bringing  him  into  a  dying  world,  all  the  resistance  to  and  departure  from  His
supreme  will.  It  is  this  otherwise  irremediable  curse,  and  painful  looking  for  of
condign  punishment,  this  moral  death  and  dissolution,  which  Christ  has  disarmed
and  rendered  inoperative.  {H.  R.  Reynolds,  D.D.)  Death  abolished: — Every-
body can  feel  the  fitness  of  saying  that  sin  and  death  are  two  of  the  greatest  enemies
of  the  human  race.  Expressive  and  appropriate  is  the  habit  we  derive  from
Scripture  of  speaking  of  them  as  persons,  hostile  powers,  who  make  war  on  as.
Between  the  two  there  is  a  terrible  alliance.  They  are  in  league  against  us ;  and
though,  if  we  are  even  victorious  over  them,  we  are  told  that  death  will  be  the  last
to  be  destroyed,  yet  sin  was  the  first,  and  sin  is  the  greatest.  Not  that,  except  for
Bin,  these  material  bodies  would  be  immortal.  Eventual  dissolution  and  decay  into
their  elements  belong  to  their  constitution,  as  much  as  to  that  of  vegetables  in
autumn.  "We  all  do  fade  as  a  leaf."  "AU  flesh  is  as  grass."  But  though  dis-
solution seems  a  characteristic  of  human  bodies,  the  doubt  and  terror  which  accom-
pany death  are  due  to  sin,  which  has  estranged  us  from  our  Maker,  whom,  in  con-
sequence, we  have  ceased  to  think  of  as  our  Father.  Thus  the  sting  of  death  is  sin.
The  voyage  across  the  Atlantic  is  one  thing  to  the  slave,  hurried  by  a  captor,  he
knows  not  whither,  and  quite  another  to  the  traveller  returning  home.  These,
then,  are  the  two  greatest  evils  which  afflict  humanity ;  and,  now,  is  there  any
remedy  for  them — any  deliverer  from  them  ?  Christianity  professes  to  bring  a
remedy, — to  announce  a  Deliverer  both  from  sin  and  death.  Hence,  its  message  is
called  the  gospel — the  good  news.  "  The  Son  of  man  was  manifested,  to  destroy
the  works  of  the  devil  " ;  and  ••  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  hath  abolished  death."
I.  Death  made  of  none  effect.  Such  is  the  meaning  of  "abolished."  Not  to  do
away  with  altogether,  but  to  render  imperfect,  and  in  that  sense  to  destroy.  The
entire  destruction  spoken  of  in  the  fifteenth  chapter  of  the  First  of  Corinthians  will
come  later.  Christianity  has  made  no  difference  in  regard  to  the  dissolution  and
decay  which  befall  all  mortal  bodies.  It  is  still  true  that  "  all  flesh  is  as  grass."
Its  language,  however,  is  not  "  Death  shall  never  again  strike  down  a  human  being,
or  make  a  happy  home  a  house  of  mourning,"  but  "  0  death,  where  is  thy  sting  7
0  grave,  where  is  thy  victory  ?  "  "  Blessed  are  the  dead  who  die  in  the  Lord."
"  To  die  is  gain."  So  death  is  made  of  none  effect.  II.  Jesus  Cbbist,  odb  Savioub
raoM  DBiTH.  We  may  well  ask,  "  By  what  rare  enchantment  can  the  king  of  terrors
be  transformed  thus  into  an  angel  of  light  7  "    Who  "  can  make  a  dying  bed  seem


CHAT,  x.]  II.  TIMOTHY.  41

soft  as  downy  pillows  are  ?  "  Even  He  who  said  to  a  sister  weeping  at  a  brother's
grave,  "  I  am  the  Eesurrection  and  the  Life  :  whosoever  liveth,  and  beheveth  in  Me
shall  never  die  1  "  "  To  depart  is  to  be  with  Christ,  which  is  far  better."  But  how
BO?  Was  He  not  the  man  Christ  Jesus  ?  And  did  He  not  Himself  die  in  anguish  ?
And  was  He  not  BQmself  laid  in  the  tomb  ?  Truly,  if  He  was  no  more  than  man,
our  Christian  hope  of  immortality  is  a  baseless  imposture.  But  the  good  news  from
God  is  that  Jesus  Christ  was  more ;  that  He  is  the  Lord  of  life,  the  King  imrnortal
and  eternal,  who  wrapped  Himself  awhile  in  perishable  human  clay,  but  whom  it
was  not  possible  that  death  should  hold.  And  the  reason  of  His  coming  is  thus
expressed  in  Scripture :  "  Forasmuch  as  the  children  are  partakers  of  flesh  and
blood,  He  also  Himself  likewise  took  part  of  the  same,  that  through  death
He  might  destroy  him  that  had  the  power  of  death."  HI.  Theough  death
He  abolished  death.  By  Himself  passing  down  into  the  dark  valley,  into  the  silent
tomb,  He  disarmed  the  grave  of  its  terrors.  And  as  we  saw  "that  death  and
sin  are  closely  allied, — death  the  wages  of  sin,  and  sin  the  sting  of  death, —
they  are  allied  in  regard  to  our  deliverance  from  them.  Our  Saviour
from  the  one,  is  our  Saviour  from  the  other.  IV.  Life  and  incobbuption
BBOUOHT  to  light.  A  great  shadow  was  spread  over  the  world,  and  it  lay  the
deepest  over  human  life.  Now,  the  great  light,  which  the  people  who  sat  in  dark-
ness have  seen  in  Christ,  brings  to  view  the  novel  and  glorious  fact  of  life  associated
with  immortality,  or  incorruptibility.  (T.  M.  Herbert,  M.A.)  Death  abolished:
— He  must  have  had  strong  faith  who,  writing  amidst  the  signs  of  death  ever  near
him  in  a  populous  city,  could  write,  Jesus  Christ  hath  abohshed  death.  He  felt
within  him  the  inspiration  of  an  immortal  hfe ;  and  it  gave  a  new  character  to  all
things  around  him.  Li  his  prison  in  Bome,  heaven  was  his  home.  Adhering  to  a
religion  whose  first  preachers  were  martyrs,  he  saw  no  death  in  martyrdom.
Having  finisbed  his  course,  and  ready  to  be  offered  up,  his  time  of  departure — not
of  death — was  at  hand.  Let  us  meditate  upon  this  great  subject,  and  see  if  we  can
understand  the  apostle.  There  is  one  doctrine  of  Christianity  to  which  our  hearts
have  not  done  justice,  because  our  faith  has  not  felt  its  power ;  that  doctrine  is,  that
"  Jesus  Christ  has  abolished  death."  I.  The  fact — "  Jesus  Christ  hath  abolished
death."  1.  If  you  observe  the  connection,  you  will  see  this  was  the  consequence  of
an  everlasting  purpose  of  grace.  See  the  preceding  verse.  This  glorious  truth  is
not  a  thought  of  yesterday,  not  a  thought  that  entered  the  mind  of  God  on  occasion
of  the  faU  of  man,  but  a  purpose  made  before  man  fell,  before  the  world  began.
And  this  everlasting  purpose  is  the  firm  and  immutable  rock  on  which  rests  the
whole  fabric  of  our  salvation.  I  know  some  persons  are  afraid  to  think  of  an  ever-
lasting purpose,  an  immutable  decree  of  God,  as  if  it  were  an  awful,  an  unapproach-
able mystery.  It  is,  indeed,  awful,  as  is  every  attribute  of  Him  who  dwells  in  Ught
inaccessible,  but  it  need  not  be  terrible.  Observe  the  words  :  "  according  to  His
own  purpose  and  grace."  The  purpose  and  the  grace  are  intimately  associated.
The  grace  is  as  old  as  the  purpose.  Both  are  from  everlasting.  The  purpose  flows
out  of  the  grace,  for  the  grace  is  the  nature  of  the  eternal  God  from  which  His  pur-
pose flows,  and  must  be  gracious  like  Himself.  What  is  there  to  fear  in  a  purpose
of  grace  7  Would  you  not  be  comforted  in  the  trials  of  life,  if  you  found  in  every
emergency  that  your  earthly  father  had  made  ample  provision  by  a  kind  purpose
before  you  were  born  ?  If  for  your  infancy  comforts  were  provided  at  his  expense
by  a  mother's  care ;  and  if  you  found  a  fund  set  apart  to  pay  the  expense  of  your
good  education,  should  any  casuality  deprive  you  of  his  immediate  care  ;  and  when
you  came  of  age  you  found  a  sum  insured  at  your  birth  to  enable  you  to  commence
business  with  respectability  and  good  success ;  and  everywhere  else,  as  parental
forethought  and  love  could  foresee,  a  purpose  appeared  in  a  present  supply  of  your
wants  ; — would  not  aU  this  be  an  assurance  and  perpetual  memorial  of  your  father's
good  will  ?  would  it  not  endear  him  the  more  to  your  heart  ?  and  would  you  not
cherish  the  memory  of  him  who  with  so  much  forethought  had  provided  for  you
with  affectionate  and  loving  regard  ?  Just  so  with  the  gracious  purpose  of  God.
2.  But  the  fact  of  the  abolition  of  death,  connected  with  an  everlasting  purpose,
was  manifested  in  time  by  the  appearing  of  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  But  how  was
it  manifested  ?  Wherein  did  Christ  appear  to  abolish  death  ?  When  did  He  ac-
complish this  gracious  purpose  ?  We  naturally  look  for  the  answer  to  His  own
death.  Was  that  not  really  death  t  Was  it  a  departure  rather  than  a  death  ?  Did
He  ever  say  with  regard  to  Himself  that  death  was  abolished  ?  Did  He  meet  death
as  ii  He  had  already  destroyed  him  that  had  the  power  of  death,  that  is,  the  devil  ?
Qo  to  Calvary  and  observe.    What  signs  are  there  but  true  signs  of  death?    He


43  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHA».  i.

died,  He  tasted  death.  Bat,  then,  in  dying  He  abolished  death  for  all  believers.
It  is  as  if  He  absorbed  all  the  venom  of  the  sting  of  death  into  His  own  soul  and
left  none  to  distress  the  souls  of  His  people  ;  so  that  death,  so  dreadful  to  Him,  is
to  them  without  a  curse,  without  a  sting,  and  but  a  shadow.  Scripture  has  found
for  it  a  new  nanie,  a  name  of  pleasant  association,  and  calls  it  sleep  (1  Thess.
iv.  14).  In  saying  Jesus  really  endured  the  pains  of  death,  I  refer  not  chiefly
to  the  extreme  bodily  sufferings  which  He  endured,  but  to  the  mental  conflict  and
agony  which  to  Him  were  the  bitterness  and  curse  of  death.  Christ  hath  abolished
death,  as  every  spirit  in  heaven  feels  with  dehght ;  and  if  we  know  it  not  now,  we
shall  know  it  hereafter  with  rapturous  delight.  But  must  we  wait  till  we  reach  the
blissful  life  of  heaven  before  we  can  say  in  the  fulness  of  a  joyful  heart,  "  Our
Saviour  Jesus  Christ  hath  abolished  death  "  ?  Well,  I  fear  we  must — at  least,  many
of  us.  Our  faith  seems  as  if  it  could  not  grasp  and  feel  this  great  text.  We  are
but  sorry  Christians  if  thus  we  pass  our  lives  grovelling  in  clay,  in  bondage  through
fear  of  death.  Worlclliug  1  you  are  right  in  fearing  death,  for  it  will  strip  you  of
all  your  beloved  and  prized  possessions.  Unpardoned  sinner !  you  are  right  in
fearing  death,  for  to  you  it  will  be  the  dreadful  doom  and  beginning  of  endless  woe.
Lover  of  pleasure  I  you  are  right  in  your  fear,  for  it  will  turn  your  pleasure  into
pain,  remorse,  consternation,  anguish.  Worshipper  of  Mammon !  you  are  right,
for  it  will  take  away  your  gods,  and  what  have  jou  left?  But  Christians,  are  we
not  ashamed  of  ourselves  ?  Christians,  unworthy  of  the  name,  are  you  afraid  of
death  ?  Do  you  not  believe  that  Christ  hath  abolished  it  ?  Yes,  you  believe  it  as  a
fact ;  at  least,  you  say  so,  and  you  think  so.  But  do  you  know  it  as  an  experience
— a  truth  of  the  heart  as  well  as  of  the  creed — a  truth  in  which  you  rejoice  as  the
conquest  of  the  last  enemy  ?  II.  The  expebiemcb  that  oub  Savioob  Jkscs
Chbist  hath  abolished  death.  Paul  rose  out  of  these  earthly  shadows,
awoke  from  these  carnal  dreams ;  saw  the  world,  not  as  we  see  it,  a  substantial
form,  but  as  an  evening  cloud  whose  tints  were  fading,  as  a  flickering  flame  whose
glory  was  passing  away.  New  light  from  the  excellent  glory  came  around  him
and  gave  new  colour  and  character  to  all  things  about  him.  His  prison  was
fading,  and  he  scarcely  saw  it  in  the  surrounding  glory ;  his  chain  was  melting  off
his  hand  and  he  scarcely  felt  it,  for  the  day  of  his  great  deliverance  was  rising.
Cesar's  tribunal,  its  attendants,  pomp,  licturs,  sergeants,  soldiers,  executioners,
'what  were  they  all  in  the  full  hght  of  the  great  salvation  all  around  him  ?  They
were  virtually  abolished  too.  Heaven  was  near,  he  could  hear  its  sweet  music
Eternal  hfe  was  within  him,  he  could  feel  its  power.  Immortahty  was  brought  to
light,  he  could  see  it  and  rejoice  in  it.  There  was  no  more  death,  to  obscure  that
light  of  unfading  glory.  They  could  not  kill  him,  could  not  dts-ioy  that  which  he
had  learned  to  call  himself,  and  which  felt  and  knew  everything  in  its  relation  not
to  time  but  to  eternity.  And  there  have  been  many  others  like  him.  (R.  Halley,
D.D.)  Christ  abolishing  death : — "  All  men,"  says  St.  Paul,  *'  are  all  their  life-
time, through  fear  of  death,  subject  to  bondage."  And  every  one,  who  has  at  all
watched  his  own  mind,  knows  that  this  is  true.  The  very  heathen,  as  our  mission-
aries teach,  tell  us  how  death  is  known  and  feared,  and  looked  forward  to,  with
fearful  expectation,  as  the  great  and  universal  enemy.  Thus  the  fear  of  death  is
felt  by  all  men,  and  is  the  fly  in  every  pot  of  ointment,  that,  once  found  there,
spoils  and  mars  it :  it  is  the  sword  hung  overhead,  whose  keen  point  and  sharp
edge  glitter  ominously  and  threateningly  in  the  light  of  every  banquet ;  it  is  the
hollow  skull,  with  its  eyeless  sockets  and  its  melancholy  emptiness,  that  spoils
every  marble  monument.  I.  Men  always  did  and  still  do  all  they  can  to  keep
OFF  the  unwelcome  THOUGHT.  The  Greek  and  Boman,  as  they  bound  their  heads
with  the  wreath  of  roses,  and  stretched  their  limbs  on  the  soft  moss  under  the  green
arbutus,  and  drank  off  their  goblets  of  wine,  tried  to  forget  that  all  this  would  soon
be  over,  and  that  there  would  come  one  day  the  last  disease.  But  it  always  was
vain,  and  always  will  be,  to  attempt  to  quench  the  thought,  though  it  may  be  staved
off ;  the  wine  and  flowers  and  song  cannot  last  for  ever.    II.  But  what  is  it  that

THUS  HAKES   DEATH  AN  OBJECT  OF  UNIVERSAL  APPREHENSION   AND  DREAD  7      Is  it  alwayS

the  act  of  death  ?  is  the  mere  dying  always  a  dreadful  thing  ?  No !  it  is  sin  ;  it  is
the  sense  of  accountability,  and  the  solemn  expectation  of  the  account  we  have  to
render;  it  is  "  the  fearful  expectation  and  looking-for  of  judgment":  it  is  these
which  make  death  dreadful  and  dreaded,  so  that,  "  through  fear  of  death  men  have
been  suhject  to  bondage."  III.  Our  text  says  that  Christ  "  hath  abolished  death."
Is,  then,  death  dead  ?  That  cannot  be.  I  see  Christians  die  as  well  as  other  men.
But  the  sting  of  death  is  drawn ;  for  sin  is  taken  away.    Death,  therefore,  is  uok


OBAP.  I.]  n.  TIMOTHY.  48

the  sammoner  of  God's  court  of  trial,  bnt  the  asher  to  call  him  into  God's  glorioas
presence-chamber.  The  Christian  does  not  die  when  his  body  and  his  soal  are  for
a  time  divided.  He  has  in  his  spirit,  that  is,  in  himself,  bis  truest  self,  a  life  which
is  eternal ;  from  the  moment  he  believes  and  trusts  in  Christ,  from  that  moment
**  he  hath  eternal  life."  IV.  But,  is  it  only  the  Cheistun  to  whom  death  is  thus
ABOLISHED  ?  "  The  fathers,  where  are  they  ?  "  Did  life  and  immortality  begin  with
Christ  r  Were  Christians  the  first  to  share  and  to  enjoy  them  ?  Bighteous  Abel,
when  he  fell  by  a  brother's  hand,  and  his  fainting  soul  departed  from  his  mangled
body,  took  possession  of  the  paradise  of  Crod.  Noah  and  Abraham,  Isaac  and
Jacob,  David  and  Hezekiah,  the  glorious  company  of  the  prophets,  the  whole  line
of  penitent  believers — however  unknown  to  men,  yet  known  to  God— inherited  at
death  the  same  life  that  the  Christian  now  inherits.  But  they  did  not  know,  sis  we
know,  the  life  and  immortality  which  they  received.  Life  and  immortality  existed
'  AS  surely  then,  as  now;  bat  they  then  were  "in  the  dark."  The  light  had  not
risen  :  it  was  night  with  them  ;  and  only  the  stars  threw  a  trembling  light  on  the
things  beyond  the  grave.  The  heathen  had,  indeed,  their  Elysian  fields  ;  but  thai
shadowy  world  was  only  a  reproduction  of  the  most  pleasing  portions  of  this  present
life,  where,  as  the  Indian  hopes  to  use  his  bow  and  arrows  to  hunt  the  shadowy
deer,  as  the  Chinese  hopes  to  employ  the  ghost  of  his  loved  paper  money  in  that
spectral  world,  so  the  heathens  of  Greece  and  Borne  saw  their  heroes  engrossed  in
the  employments  and  amusements  of  this  world — throwing  the  quoit,  or  driving  the
chariot,  or  reposing  on  beds  of  roses,  in  those  fields  of  their  own  creation.  And
the  views  of  the  pious  Jews  and  patriarchs  were  dim  and  obscure.  "  A  land  of
darkness,  as  darkness  itself,  and  of  the  shadow  of  death,  without  any  order,  and
where  the  light  is  as  darkness  "  (Job.  x.  22 ;  Isa.  zxzviii.  10, 11 ;  Psa.  Izxxviii.  4,  5).
(IP.  W.  Champneys,  M.A.)  The  death  of  death : — I.  The  evil  in  question — It  is
death.  We  should  suppose  that  this  subject  was  very  familiar  to  the  thoughts  of
men,  were  we  to  judge  from  the  importance  and  frequency  of  the  event.  But,  alasl
nothing  is  so  httle  thought  of.  Let  us  examine  what  Nature  teaches  us  concerning
death  ;  and  then  go  to  the  Scripture  for  additional  information.  1.  Suppose  then
there  had  been  no  revelatjon  from  God — what  does  Nature  teach  us  concerning
death?  (1)  It  sees  plainly  enough  that  it  is  a  cessation  of  our  being.  The  lungs
no  longer  heave ;  the  pulse  ceases  to  beat ;  the  blood  pauses  and  congeals ;  the  eye
closes ;  the  tongue  is  silent ;  and  the  hand  forgets  her  cunning.  We  are  laid  in
the  grave,  where  worms  feed  upon  us.  (2)  It  also  teaches  us  the  universality  of
death.  ^3)  Nature  teaches  us  that  death  is  unavoidable.  (4)  Nature  sees  also  that
death  is  irreparable.  It  cannot  produce  a  single  specimen  of  posthumous  life.  (5)
We  may  also  learn  from  it  that  death  is  uncertain  in  its  circumstances  ;  and  that
no  man  knows  the  place,  the  time,  the  manner,  in  which  he  shall  expire.  If  it  be
objected  that  the  generaUty  of  the  heathen  have  had  some  other  views  of  death
than  those  which  we  have  conceded,  and  had  even  notions  of  an  existence  beyond
the  grave — let  it  be  observed,  that  the  world  always  had  a  revelation  from  God ;  and
that  when  mankind  dispersed  from  the  family  of  Noah,  they  carried  the  discoveries
along  with  them  ;  but  as  they  were  left  to  tradition,  they  became  more  and  more
obscure  ;  yet  they  yielded  hints  which  led  to  reflections  that  otherwise  would  have
never  occurred.  And  if  wise  men,  especially  from  these  remains  of  an  original
revelation,  were  led  into  some  speculations  bordering  upon  truth,  it  should  be
remembered  that  in  a  case  like  this,  as  Paley  observes,  nothing  more  is  known  than
is  proved :  opinion  is  not  knowledge ;  nor  conjecture  principle.  2.  But  how  much
more  does  the  Scripture  teach  1  Here  we  learn — (1)  Its  true  nature.  To  the  eye  of
sense  death  appears  annihilation ;  but  to  the  eye  of  faith  it  is  dissolution.  (2)  Its
true  consequences.  Yery  little  of  death  falls  under  the  observation  of  the  senses ;
the  most  awful  and  interesting  part  is  beyond  their  reach.  It  is  the  state  of  the
soul ;  it  is  the  apprehension  of  it  by  devils  or  angels ;  it  is  the  transmission  of  it  to
heaven  or  hell.  (3)  Its  true  cause.  The  Scripture  shows  us  that  man  was  not
created  mortal ;  and  that  mortality  is  not  the  necessary  consequence  of  our  original
constitution;  but  is  the  penal  effect  of  transgression.  (4)  The  true  remedy.
What  I  Is  there  a  remedy  for  death  ?  Who  said  to  His  hearers,  "  If  a  man  keep
My  sayings,  he  shall  never  see  death}"  ?  He  hath  abolished  death.  But  let  us —
IL  Consider  this  Destetiction — for  does  not  death  continue  his  ravages  ?  Does
he  not  fall  upon  the  people  of  God  themselves  ?  Where  then  is  the  proof  of  this
abolition  ?  It  is  undeniable  that  Christians  themselves  are  subject  to  the  stroke  of
death,  as  well  as  others.  1.  He  abolishes  death,  spiritually ;  that  is,  in  the  souls
of  His  people.    To  all  these,  without  exception,  it  may  be  said,  in  the  words  of


44  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i.

Paul  to  the  Ephesians,  •'  You  hath  He  quickened  who  were  dead  in  trespasses  and
Bins."  2.  He  abolished  death  by  His  miracles  while  He  was  on  earth.  3.  He
abolished  death  in  His  own  person.  His  own  rising  from  the  dead  is  very  dis-
tinguishable from  all  the  former  instances  of  resurrection.  The  ruler's  daughter,
the  widow's  son,  Lazarus,  and  the  saints  in  Jerusalem,  were  raised  by  the  power  of
another  ;  but  He  rose  by  His  own  power.  They  rose  as  private  individuals :  but  He
as  the  head  and  representative  of  His  people  :  and  because  He  lives,  they  shall  live
also.  4.  He  abolished  death  penally.  Thus  He  has  destroyed  death  as  to  its  sting.
He  has  not  abohshed  going  home,  and  falling  asleep,  and  departing  ;  but  He  has
abolished  death.  This  leads  us  to  observe,  that  He  has — 5.  Abolished  death  com-
paratively :  I  mean  as  to  its  terror.  This  is  not  the  same  with  the  foregoing
particular.  That  regards  all  the  people  of  God,  and  extends  even  to  those  who  die
under  a  cloud  of  darkness,  and  a  load  of  depression  ;  it  belongs  to  a  Cowper,  who
died  in  despair,  as  well  as  to  a  Hervey,  who  said,  "  Lord,  now  lettest  thou  Thy
servant  depart  in  peace,  according  to  Thy  word  ;  for  mine  eyes  have  seen  Thy
salvation."  All  believers  die  safely ;  there  is  no  curse  for  them  after  death,  or  in
death.  In  this  sense,  their  end  is  peace  ;  peace  in  the  result,  if  not  in  the  passage.
But  their  end  is  generally  peace  in  experience  as  well  as  in  result.  There  are,  how-
ever, cases  of  constitutional  infirmity  that  may  not  only  exclude  joy,  but  even  hope.
Sometimes  the  nature  of  the  disorder  is  such  as  to  hinder  sensibility,  or  expression.
Sometimes,  too,  God  may  allow  the  continuance  of  fear,  even  in  those  He  loves,  as
a  rebuke  for  loose  or  irregular  walking ;  and  as  a  warning  to  others.  6.  He  will  do
this  absolutely.  He  will  abolish  the  very  state :  "  He  must  reign  till  He  hath  put
all  enemies  under  His  feet.  The  last  enemy  that  shall  be  destroyed  is  death."  {W'.
Jay.)  Death  abolished  : — I.  That  we  may  feel  the  true  impression  of  this  Divine
declaration,  it  will  be  necessary  first  to  show  what  it  is  not  intended  to  teach.
The  state  of  fact,  no  less  than  the  express  averments  of  Holy  Writ,  forbid  us  to
entertain  the  thought,  that  the  appearing  of  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  has  arrested
the  progress  of  that  law  of  mortality  which  followed  in  the  train  of  disobedience.
Our  present  relations  are  formed  but  to  be  dissolved ;  death,  like  a  canker  worm,
preys  at  the  root  of  all  our  comforts.  We  "  have  here  no  continuing  city  " ;  and
Boon  "  the  place  that  now  knows  us  shall  know  us  no  more  for  ever."  Philosophy
may  attempt  to  solve  this  mysterious  problem ;  may  tell  us  that  mortality  is  a  law
of  our  nature ;  may  point  us  to  the  analogies  of  creation  around  us.  But  with-
draw from  our  view  the  inspired  record  which  connects  death  with  Adam's  sin,  and
■which  exhibits  it  in  the  light  of  a  penalty  entailed  upon  transgression,  and  philo-
sophy has  no  satisfactory  reason  to  assign  for  a  catastrophe  so  overwhelming  and
80  universal.  It  may,  indeed,  afSrm  the  state  of  fact,  and  argue  from  thence  that
it  is  the  nature  of  man  that  he  should  die  ;  but  how  much  more  satisfactory  is  the
philosophy  of  Scripture  (which  no  sound  philosophy  ought  to  exclude),  which  tells
us  that  man  was  made  for  life,  that  death  is  the  forfeit  of  disobedience,  and  that
but  for  sin  the  struggle  of  mortality  would  never  have  been  beheld  in  our  world  I
11.  In  our  text  we  are  taught  to  look  upon  death  as  in  some  practical  sense  a
VANQUISHED  foe  ;  and  since  it  cannot  be  in  the  sense  of  staying  its  inexorable  reign
in  our  world,  it  becomes  us  to  show  the  true  and  only  sense  in  which  it  can  be
afiirmed  that  "  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  hath  abolished  death."  The  expression
is  very  remarkable  ;  and  the  doctrine  it  contains  is  animating  in  the  highest  degree
to  all  who  embrace  it  with  a  realising  faith.  The  idea  conveyed  by  the  original
word  is  that  of  such  an  effectual  counteraction  of  death,  as  involves  a  complete
victory  over  it.  1.  When  the  apostle  asserts  that  "  Christ  hath  a'lolished  death,"
we  must  understand  him,  first  of  all,  as  proclaiming  Christ's  own  personal  victory
over  it.  2.  But  we  must  not  forget  that  the  victory  which  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ
achieved  in  His  own  person  over  death  was  intimately  connected  with  the  nature
and  ends  of  that  "  decease  which  He  accomplished  at  Jerusalem."  Death,  we
must  never  forget,  entered  our  world  as  the  mark  of  apostasy,  as  the  penalty  of
transgression  ;  if  ever,  then,  it  was  to  be  "  abolished,"  it  must  be  by  some  dispensa-
tion which  should  effectually  provide  for  the  remission  of  sin,  and  for  the  restora-
tion of  apostate  man  to  the  favour  and  image  of  his  God.  In  the  hour  of  Messiah's
deep  agony,  "the  Lord  laid  on  Him  the  iniquity  of  us  all " ;  and  when  with  His
last  breath  He  exclaimed,  "  It  is  finished,"  the  mighty  work  was  then  performed
upon  which  depended  the  reconciliation  to  peace  and  life  of  untold  millions  of  the
human  race.  Having  "  finished  the  work  which  the  Father  gave  Him  to  do,"  met
every  demand  which  devolved  upon  Him  as  the  sinner's  Surety,  it  was  impossible,
upon  all  the  principles  of  the  Divine  government,  upon  all  the  arrangements  of  cove-


GHAP.  I.]  n.  TIMOTHY.  45

nanted  love,  that  He  should  be  holden  of  the  bands  of  death.  3.  When  the  apostle
asserts  that  "  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  hath  abolished  death  "  we  may  assure  our-
selves that  the  real  members  of  His  body,  all  true  Christians,  will  share  His  own
triumph.  Of  this  joyful  fact  there  is  a  series  of  progressive  evidence.  The  moment
that  any  sinner  is  quickened  to  spiritual  life,  he  is  "  quickened  together  with  Christ,"
and  is  brought  to  feel  in  that  conversion  "  the  power  of  His  resurrection  and  the
fellowship  of  His  sufferings,"  and  is  "  made  conformable  unto  His  death."  4.  The
next  stage  of  the  proof  that  death  shall  be  abolished  will  be  supplied  when  believers
are  "  absent  from  the  body  and  present  with  the  Lord."  The  fruition  of  the  celestial
paradise  wiU  divest  them  of  every  doubt  or  misgiving  as  to  the  resurrection  of  their
mortal  bodies.  Every  time  they  gaze  on  the  glorified  humanity  of  Him  in  whose
presence  they  stand  they  will  exult  in  the  thought  of  that  mighty  exercise  of  power
and  love  which  shall  quicken  their  tabernacles  of  clay,  and  unite  them  as  spiritual
bodies  to  their  emancipated  and  happy  spirits.  They  are  waiting  in  glorious  hope
•'  for  the  adoption,  to  wit,  the  redemption  of  their  bodies  "  ;  and,  having  received
the  first-fruits,  they  are  looking  forward  to  the  harvest  of  the  earth,  when  the  number
of  God's  elect  shall  be  accomplished,  and  when  all  the  objects  of  celestial  hope  shall
be  fully  realised.  At  last  the  bright  moment  of  perfected  bliss  shall  arrive  when
death  shall  be  literally  •'abolished";  when  all  the  regions  of  mortality  shall  be
divested  of  their  spoils ;  when  the  whole  redeemed  Church  shall  stand  complete  in
her  glorified  Head ;  when  all  shall  be  perfectly  conformed  in  body  and  soul  to  the
image  of  Him  who  is  "the  first-born  among  many  brethren."  6.  But  there  is  oue
view  of  this  subject  which  yet  remains  to  be  taken  by  us :  it  is  the  proof  which  is  so
often  afforded  of  the  truth  of  the  apostle's  declaration  that  death  is  "  abolisbed,"  in
the  feelings  with  which  departing  saints  are  often  enabled  to  look  forward  to  their
great  change.  Some  there  are,  indeed,  of  God's  servants  who  "  through  fear  of  death
are  all  their  lifetime  subject  to  bondage  " ;  their  minds  are  perplexed  with  doubts  and
fears,  and  they  cannot  realise  their  title  to  the  everlasting  inheritance.  But  it  is
matter  of  great  joy  and  thankfulness  when  faith  is  triumphant  in  the  dying  moment ;
when  it  can  sing  with  an  unfaltering  tongue,  "  0  death,  where  is  thy  sting,"  thy
boasted  sting?  *'  0  grave,  where  is  thy  victory?  The  sting  of  death  is  sin,  and  the
strength  of  sin  is  the  law  ;  but  thanks  be  to  God,  which  giveth  us  the  victory  through
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  [J.  Morison,  D.D.)  Death  abolished : — The  question  is,
therefore,  in  what  sense  hath  death  been  abolished  by  Christ.  It  means  that  He
hath  made  death  of  none  effect.  In  order  to  explain  this  we  lay  down  three
propositions.  I.  That  the  felt  poweb  op  death  over  man  is  accokdinq  to  the
STATE  OF  HIS  souii.  The  power  of  death  over  man  is  not  in  the  unconsciousness
which  he  produces.  So  far  as  unconsciousness  is  concerned  there  is  death  in  eveiy
sleep.  Not  in  the  dissolution  it  produces.  For  physical  dissolution  is  going  on
every  day  in  the  body.  Where  then  is  the  power  of  death  ?  It  is  in  the  state  of
our  souls  in  relation  to  it.  Let  us  suppose  that  we  had  no  capacity  for  forming  any
idea  of  death.  What  power  would  death  have  over  us  ?  None  until  it  came ;  Kke
the  beast  or  the  bird  we  should  lie  down  on  the  green  turf,  and  breathe  out  our
last  breath  without  one  regretful  or  apprehensive  thought.  Or,  let  us  suppose  that
we  had  ideas  concerning  death,  all  of  which  were  of  a  pleasing  character.  What
power  would  death  have  over  us  in  this  case?  None.  We  should  rejoice  in  it.
II.  That  the  state  of  a  depeaved  man's  soul  gives  death  its  felt  power.  1.
All  the  affections  of  his  soul  are  confined  to  earthly  objects.  All  men  whose  natures
are  unchristianised  love  the  world  and  the  things  of  the  world.  All  they  love,  all
they  plan  and  toil  and  hope  for,  are  here.  2.  He  has  terrible  forebodings  as  to  the
consequence  of  death  to  him.  III.  That  Christ  hath  abolished  this  depraved
STATE  OF  soul  IN  Hi3  DISCIPLES.  How  docs  He  accomplish  this  ?  Not  merely  by
the  revelation  of  a  future  life,  but  by  the  impartation  of  a  new  spiritual  life — a  Ufe
of  conscious  pardon  and  of  spiritual  sympathy.  This  new  life — 1.  Has  a  stronger
sympathy  with  the  spiritual  than  the  material.  The  affections  are  set  not  on  things
below,  but  on  things  above.  Hence,  where  is  the  dread  of  death  to  the  true
Christian  ?  This  new  life — 2.  Has  a  stronger  sympathy  with  the  future  than  the
present.  Christ  turns  the  hearts  of  His  people  to  the  future  as  their  heaven.
Who,  therefore,  would  dread  the  dawn  of  the  future  into  which  the  heart  has  gone  ?
This  new  life — 3.  Has  a  stronger  sympathy  with  the  Infinite  Father  than  with  any
other  object.  Christ  sets  the  heart  of  His  disciple  upon  the  Infinite  Father.  Can
death  or  any  other  event  fill  him  with  dread  who  loves  the  Infinite  supremely  ?
From  this  subject  we  learn— (1)  The  value  of  Christianity.  (2)  The  test  of
godliness.    (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)        The  victor  vanquished : — We  have  here— 1.  An


46  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [OUF.  i.

agent  referred  to  by  the  word  "  Who,"  that  is  Jesus  Christ.  2.  We  have  a  work
which  He  has  done — "  abolished  death."  3.  A  glorious  disclosure  which  He  has
made,  "brought  life  and  immortality  to  light."  4.  The  means  by  which  this
revelation  is  made  known — "the  gospel."  I.  The  agent.  When  men  have  an
important  work  to  do,  it  is  of  great  consequence  to  find  a  properly  qualified  person
to  do  it.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  possessed  all  the  requisite  qualifications  for  the
great  work  of  atoning  for  sins  and  reconciling  man  to  God,  since  He  was  both  God
and  man.  Not  merely  that  men  might  be  pardoned  and  set  free,  but  that  they
might  be  restored  to  the  favour  of  God,  and  the  long  interrupted  harmony  and
anion  between  God  and  man  re-established.  IL  Now  let  us  glance  at  what  He  has
vosz — "  abolished  death  "  (Bom.  v.  12).  But  there  is  a  threefold  division  of  death :
Temporal,  or  the  death  of  the  body  ;  spiritual,  or  being  dead  to  spiritual  things ;
and  eternal  death,  or  the  separation  of  soul  and  body  from  God  for  ever.  Death  is
represented  as  a  sovereign  exercising  dominion  over  the  world,  for  it  is  said
"  death  reigned  from  Adam  to  Moses,  even  over  them  that  had  not  sinned  after  the
similitude  of  Adam's  transgressions."  "  Death  reigned,"  says  the  apostle.  The
figure  is  a  bold  and  striking  one.  It  represents  Death  as  a  monarch  exercising
dominion  or  power.  His  reign  is  absolute.  He  strikes  whom  and  where  he  pleases,
there  is  no  escape.  All  must  bow  beneath  his  sceptre.  His  reign  is  universal.
Old  and  young,  rich  and  poor,  high  and  low,  are  alike  the  subjects  of  his  gloomy
empire,  and  but  for  the  gospel,  bis  reign  would  be  eternal.  The  dominion  of  the
gloomy  tyrant  has  been  shattered,  and  death  itself  has,  as  our  text  says,  been
abolished.  Its  terrors  are  abated  and  its  sting  removed.  We  come  to  consider  how,
and  in  what  measure,  this  has  been  done.  What  is  it  to  abolish  anything  ?  It  is
to  cause  it  to  cease,  to  put  an  end  to  it.  Thus  slavery  was  abolished  in  the  British
Empire  and  the  United  States.  Its  abolition  cost  Britain  much,  and  cost  the
United  States  thousands  of  lives  and  millions  of  money.  This  whole  acoorsed
system  of  man-stealing,  and  all  the  horrors  connected  with  it,  is  wiped  out  and
destroyed.  So  has  the  Lord  Jesus  done  with  death.  He  has  destroyed  the  stern
tyrant  by  destroying  that  which  is  the  cause  of  death — sin  (Heb.  ii.  9).  Thus  death
was  destroyed  by  dying ;  by  His  becoming  obedient  to  the  death  of  the  Cross,  He
broke  the  empire  and  dominion  of  death  for  ever,  and  opened  to  mtm  "  the  door  of
eternal  life  "  and  His  resurrection  was  proof  that  God's  justice  was  completely
satisfied  with  the  ransom  offered.  "Who  hath  abolished  death."  The  apostle
here  seems  to  speak  in  some  measure  by  anticipation.  Sometimes  the  sacred
writers  represent  things  which  are  certain  to  be  done  as  if  they  were  done  already.
Sin,  which  is  the  cause  of  death,  has  been  atoned  for,  and  so  death's  empire  has
there  received  a  fatal  blow.  Every  evU  habit,  desire,  and  disposition  overcome,
every  temptation  to  evil  successfully  resisted,  every  good  word  and  work,  all  tend
to  lessen  his  power  and  wrest  from  Death  his  dominion.  Thus  life  has  prevailed
over  death  so  far  as  the  gospel  has  made  its  way  into  the  homes  and  hearts  of  men.
So  in  various  ways  and  on  every  side  death  has  been  losing  his  sway,  and  his
empire  is  waning.  Nowhere  is  the  fact  that  death  has  been  aboUshed  seen  in  a
clearer  light  than  in  the  triumphant  departure  of  God's  children.  Dr,  Payson,  a
little  before  he  breathed  his  last,  said,  "The  battle's  fought,  the  battle's  fought,  and
the  victory  is  won— won  for  ever.  I  am  going  to  bathe  in  an  ocean  of  purity  and
benevolence,  and  happiness  to  all  eternity."  "  Why  should  I  murmur,"  said  John
Howard,  the  noble  Christian  philanthropist,  when  ending  his  journey  in  a  strange
land,  "  Heaven  is  as  near  to  Bussia  as  it  is  to  England."  "  My  head  is  in  heaven  "
(said  the  wife  of  Philip  Henry,  the  Commentator);  "my  heart  is  in  heaven,
another  step  and  I  shall  be  there  too."  "  Almost  well,  and  nearly  at  home,"  said
the  saintly  Richard  Baxter,  when  asked  by  a  friend  how  he  did  shortly  before  he
died.  And  a  lady,  describing  the  last  hours  of  that  venerable  patriarch  of  science.
Sir  David  Brewster,  says,  "  The  sight  was  a  cordial  from  heaven  to  me.  I  believed
before,  but  now  I  have  seen  that  Christ  has  truly  abolished  death."  UI.  Now
observe  the  next  thing  Christ  has  done  fob  us.  He  has  "  brought  life  and  inmaor-
tality  to  light  through  the  gospel. "  (J.  Reid. )  Of  the  immortality  of  the  loul  a$  dis-
covered by  nature  and  by  revelation : — In  the  handling  of  these  words  I  shall — I.  Open
to  tou  the  ueanino  of  the  several  expressions  in  the  text.  1.  What  is  here
meant  by  "  the  appearing  of  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ "  ?  The  Scripture  aseth
several  phrases  to  express  this  thing  to  us.  As  it  was  the  voluntary  undertaking  of
God  the  Son,  so  it  is  called  His  coming  into  the  world.  In  relation  to  His  incarna-
tion, whereby  He  was  made  visible  to  us  in  His  body,  and  likewise  in  reference  to
the  obsoore  promises  and  prophecies  and  types  of  the  Old  Testament,  it  is  called


•BAT.  1.]  n.  TIMOTHY.  47

Etis  manifestation,  or  appearance.  2.  What  is  meant  bj  the  abolishing  of  death.
By  this  we  are  not  to  understand  that  Christ,  by  His  appearance,  hath  rooted
death  out  of  the  world,  bo  that  men  are  no  longer  subject  to  it.  3.  What  is  here
meant  by  bringing  ••  life  and  immortality  to  light."  Life  and  immortality  is  here
by  s  frequent  Hebraism  put  for  immortal  life ;  as  also,  immediately  before  the  text,
you  find  purpose  and  grace  put  for  God's  gracious  purpose.  The  phrase  of  bringing
to  light  is  spoken  of  things  which  were  before  each  either  wholly  or  in  a  great
measurehid,  either  were  not  at  all  discovered  before,  or  not  so  clearly.    I  proceed — II.

To  SHOW  WHAT  ChBIST'S  COMING  INTO  THE  WORLD  HATH  DONE  T0WAKD3  THE  ABOLISHING
OP   DEATH,   AND   THE   BRINGING   OP  "  LIPE   AND  IMMORTALITY  TO   LIGHT."      I  shall  Speak

distinctly  to  these  two :  1.  What  Christ's  appearance  and  coming  into  the  world
hath  done  towards  the  abolishing  of  death,  or  how  death  is  abolished  by  the  appear-
ance of  Christ.     (1)  By  taking  our  nature  upon  Him  He  became  subject  to  the
frailties  and  miseries  of  mortality,  and  liable  to  the  suffering  of  death,  by  which
expiation  of  sin  was  made.     (2)  As  Christ,  by  taking  our  nature  upon  Htm,  became
capable  of  suffering  death,  and  thereby  making  expiation  for  sin,  so  by  dying  He
became  capable  of  rising  again  from  the  dead,  whereby  He  hath  gained  a  perfect
Tiotory  and  conquest  over  death  and  the  powers  of  darlmess.    2.  What  Christ  hath
done  towards  the  bringing  of  "  life  and  immortality  to  light."    It  will  be  requisite
to  inquire.  What  assurance  men  had  or  might  have  had  of  the  immortality  of  the
soul,  and  consequently  of  a  future  state,  before  the  revelation  of  the  gospel  by
Christ's  coming  into  the  world.    And  here  are  two  things  distinctly  to  be  con-
sidered.    What  arguments  natural  reason  doth  furnish  us  withal  to  persuade  us  to
this  principle,  that  our  souls  are  immortal,  and  consequently  that  another  state
remains  for  men  after  this  life.     But  before  I  come  to  speak  particularly  to  the
arguments  which  natural  reason  affords  us  for  the  proof  of  this  principle,  I  shall
premise  certain  general  considerations,  which  may  give  light  and  force  to  the
following  arguments:  By  the  soul  we  mean  a  part  of  man  distinct  from  his
body,  or  a  principle  in  him  which  is  not  matter.     By  the  immortality  of  the  soul  I
mean  nothing  else,  but  that  it  survives  the  body,  that  when  the  body  dies  and  falls
to  the  ground,  yet  this  principle,  which  we  call  the  soul,  still  remains  and  lives
separate  from  it.     That  he  that  goes  about  to  prove  the  soul's  immortality  sup-
poseth  the  existence  of  a  Deity,  that  there  is  a  God.    The  existence  of  a  God  being
supposed,  this  doth  very  much  facilitate  the  other,  of  the  soul's  immortality.    For
this  being  an  essential  property  of  that  Divine  nature,  that  He  is  a  Spirit,  that  is,
something  that  is  not  matter;  it  being  once  granted  that  God  is,  thus  much  is
gained,  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  a  spirit,  an  immaterial  substance,  that  is  not
Cable  to  die  or  perish.     It  is  highly  reasonable  that  men  should  acquiesce  and  rest
satisfied  in  such  reasons  and  arguments  for  the  proof  of  any  thing,  as  the  nature
of  the  thing  to  be  proved  will  bear ;  because  there  are  several  kinds  and  degrees  of
evidence,  which  all  things  are  not  equally  capable  of.    Having  premised  these
general  considerations  to  clear  my  way,  I  now  come  to  speak  to  the  particular  argu-
ments whereby  the  immortality  of  the  soul  may  be  ma^  e  out  to  our  reason.     And
the  best  way  to  estimate  the  force  of  the  arguments  which  I  shall  bring  for  it  will
be  to  consider  beforehand  with  ourselves  what  evidence  we  can,  in  reason,  expect
for  a  thing  of  this  nature.     (1)  That  the  thing  be  a  natural  notion  and  dictate  of
our  minds.     (2)  That  it  doth  not  contradict  any  other  principle  that  nature  hath
planted  in  us,  but  does  very  well  accord  and  agree  with  all  other  the  most  natural
notions  of  our  minds.     (3)  That  it  be  suitable  to  our  natural  fears  and  hopes.     (4)
That  it  tends  to  the  happiness  of  man,  and  the  good  order  and  government  of  the
world.  (5)  That  it  gives  the  most  rational  account  o  I  all  those  inward  actions  which  we
are  conscious  to  ourselves  of,  as  perception,  understanding,  memory,  wUl,  which
we  cannot,  without  great  unreasonableness,  ascribe  to  matter  as  the  cause  of  them.
If  all  these  be  thus,  as  I  shall  endeavour  to  make  it  appear  they  are,  what  greater
satisfaction  could  we  desire  to  have  of  the  immortality  of  our  souls  than  these
arguments  give  us  ?     1.  The  immortality  of  the  soul  is  very  agreeable  to  the  natural
notion  which  we  have  of  God,  one  part  whereof  is,  that  He  is  essentially  good  and
just.     (1)  For  His  goodness.     It  is  very  agreeable  to  that  to  think  that  (jod  would
make  some  creatures  for  as  long  a  duration  as  they  are  capable  of.     (2)  It  is  very
agreeable  to  the  justice  of  God  to  think  the  souls  of  men  remain  after  this  life,
that  there  may  be  a  state  of  reward  and  recompense  in  another  world.    2.  Another
notion  which  is  deeply  rooted  in  the  nature  of  man  is,  that  there  is  a  difference
between  good  and  evil,  which  is  not  founded  in  the  imagination  of  persons,  or  in
the  oastom  and  usage  of  the  world,  but  in  the  nature  of  things.     To  oome  then  to


48  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i.

my  purpose,  it  is  very  agreeable  to  this  natural  notion  of  the  difference  between
good  and  evil,  to  believe  the  soul's  immortality.  For  nothing  is  more  reasonable  to
imagine  than  that  good  and  evil,  as  they  are  differenced  in  their  nature,  so  they
shall  be  in  their  rewards  ;  that  it  shall  one  time  or  other  be  well  to  them  that  do
well,  and  evil  to  the  wicked  man.  III.  This  principle,  of  the  soul's  immortality,  ia
suitable  to  the  natural  hopes  and  fears  of  men.  To  the  natural  hopes  of  men.
Whence  is  it  that  men  are  so  desirous  to  purchase  alasting  fame,  and  to  perpetuate  their
memory  to  posterity,  but  that  they  hope  that  there  is  something  belonging  to  them
which  shall  survive  the  fate  of  the  body,  and  when  that  lies  in  the  silent  grave  shall
be  sensible  of  the  honour  which  is  done  to  their  memory,  and  shall  enjoy  the  plea-
sure of  the  just  and  impartial  fame,  which  shall  speak  of  them  to  posterity  without
envy  or  flattery?  IV.  This  doctrine  of  the  immortaUty  of  the  soul  does  evidently
tend  to  the  happiness  and  perfection  of  man,  and  to  the  good  order  and  government
of  the  world.  This  doctrine  tends  to  the  happiness  of  man  considered  in  society,
to  the  good  order  and  government  of  the  world.  If  this  principle  were  banished  out
of  the  world,  government  would  want  its  most  firm  basis  and  foundation ;  there
would  be  infinitely  more  disorders  in  the  world  were  men  not  restrained  from  injus-
tice and  violence  by  principles  of  conscience,  and  the  awe  of  another  world.  And
that  this  is  so,  is  evident  from  hence,  that  all  magistrates  think  themselves  concerned
to  cherish  religion,  and  to  maintain  in  the  minds  of  men  the  belief  of  a  God,  and
of  a  future  state.  V.  The  fifth  and  last  argument  is,  That  this  supposition  of  the
soul's  immortahty  gives  the  fairest  account  and  easiest  solution  of  the  phenomena
of  human  nature,  of  those  several  actions  and  operations  which  we  are  conscious  to
ourselves  of,  and  which,  without  great  violence  to  our  reason,  cannot  be  resolved
into  a  bodily  principle,  and  ascribed  to  mere  matter;  such  are  perception,  memory,
liberty,  and  the  several  acts  of  understanding  and  reason.  These  operations  we
find  in  ourselves,  and  we  cannot  imagine  how  they  should  be  performed  by  mere
matter ;  therefore  we  ought,  in  all  reason,  to  resolve  them  into  some  principle  of
another  nature  from  matter,  that  is,  into  something  that  is  immaterial,  and  conse-
quently immortal,  that  is  incapable  in  its  own  nature  of  corruption  and  dissolution.
I  come  now  to  the  second  thing  I  propounded,  which  is  to  show  what  assurance  the
world  had,  de  facto,  of  this  great  principle  of  religion,  the  soul's  immortality,  before
the  revelation  of  the  gospel.  First,  what  assurance  the  heathens  had  of  the  soul's
immortality.  1.  It  is  evident  that  there  was  a  general  inclination  in  mankind,  even
after  its  greatest  corruption  and  degeneracy,  to  the  belief  of  this  principle  ;  which
appears  in  that  all  people  and  nations  of  the  world,  after  they  were  sunk  into  the
greatest  degeneracy,  and  all  (except  only  the  Jews)  became  idolaters,  did  universally
agree  in  this  apprehension,  that  their  souls  did  remain  after  their  bodies  and  pass
into  a  state  of  happiness  or  misery,  according  as  they  had  demeaned  them- elves  in
this  life.  2.  The  unlearned  and  common  people  among  the  heathen  seem  to  have
had  the  truest  and  least  wavering  apprehensions  in  this  matter ;  the  reason  of
which  seems  to  be  plain,  because  their  belief  followed  the  bias  and  inclination  of
their  nature,  and  they  had  not  their  natural  notions  embroiled  and  disordered  by
obscure  and  uncertain  reasonings  about  it,  as  the  philosophers  had,  whose  under-
standings were  prefixed  with  infinite  niceties  and  objections,  which  never  troubled
the  heads  of  the  common  people.  3.  The  learned  among  the  heathen  did  not  so
generally  agree  in  this  principle,  and  those  who  did  consent  in  it  were  many  of  them
more  wavering  and  unsettled  than  the  common  people.  Epicurus  and  his  followers
were  peremptory  in  the  denial  of  it :  but,  by  their  own  acknowledgment,  they  did
herein  offer  great  violence  to  their  natures,  and  had  much  ado  to  divest  themselves
of  the  contrary  apprehension  and  fears.  The  stoics  were  very  incUnalde  to  the
belief  of  a  future  state  ;  but  yet  they  almost  everywhere  speak  very  doubtfully  of  it.
Secondly,  What  assurance  the  Jews  had  of  the  soul's  immortality  and  a  future
state.  And  of  this  I  shall  give  you  an  account  in  these  following  paiticulars  :  1.
They  had  all  the  assurance  which  natural  light,  and  the  common  reason  of  mankind,
does  ordinarily  afford  men  concerning  this  matter  ;  they  had  common  to  them  with
the  heathens  all  the  advantage  that  nature  gives  men  to  come  to  the  knowledge  of
this  truth,  2.  They  had  by  Divine  revelation  a  fuller  assurance  of  those  truths
which  have  a  nearer  connection  with  this  principle,  and  which  do  very  much  tend  to
facilitate  the  belief  of  it ;  as,  namely,  concerning  the  providence  of  God,  and
His  interesting  Himself  particularly  in  the  affairs  of  the  world.  And  then,
besides  this,  the  Jews  had  assurance  of  the  existence  of  spirits  by  the  more
immediate  ministry  of  angels  among  them.  And  this  does  directly  make  way  for
the  belief  of  an  immaterial  principle,  and  oouseciueutly  of  the  soul's  immortalitj.


OHAP.  I.]  II.  TIMOTHY,  49

3.  There  were  some  remarkable  instances  of  the  Old  Testament  which  did  tend
very  much  to  persuade  men  to  this  truth :  I  mean  the  instances  of  Enoch  and
Elias,  who  did  not  die  like  other  men,  but  were  translated,  and  taken  up  into  heaven
in  an  extraordinary  manner.  4.  This  was  typified  and  shadowed  forth  to  them  by
the  legal  administrations.  The  whole  economy  of  their  worship  and  temple,  of
their  rites  and  ceremonies,  and  Sabbaths,  did  shadow  out  some  farther  thing  to
them,  though  in  a  very  obscure  manner :  the  land  of  Canaan,  and  their  coming  to
the  possession  of  it,  after  so  many  years'  travail  in  the  wilderness,  did  represent
that  heavenly  inheritance  which  good  men  should  be  possessed  of  after  the  troubles
of  this  Ufa.  But  I  shall  chiefly  insist  on  the  general  promises  which  we  find  in
these  books  of  Moses,  of  God's  blessing  good  men,  and  declaring  that  He  was  their
God,  even  after  their  death.  6.  Toward  the  expiration  of  the  legal  dispensation
there  was  yet  a  clearer  revelation  of  a  future  state.  The  text  in  Daniel  seems  to  be
much  plainer  than  any  in  the  Old  Testament :  '*  And  many  of  them  that  sleep  in
the  dust  of  the  earth  shall  awake  ;  some  to  everlasting  life,  and  some  to  shame  and
everlasting  contempt "  (Dan.  xii.  2).  6.  Notwithstanding  this,  I  say  that  the
immortaUty  of  the  soul,  and  a  future  state,  was  not  expressly  and  clearly  revealed
in  the  Old  Testament,  at  least  not  in  Moses'  law.  The  special  and  particular  pro-
mises of  that  dispensation  were  of  temporal  good  things ;  and  the  great  blessing
of  eternal  life  was  but  somewhat  obscurely  involved  and  signified  in  the  types  and
general  promises.  And  so  I  proceed  to  the  second  thing  I  propounded,  which  is  to
show  what  farther  evidence  and  assurance  the  gospel  gives  us  of  it  than  the  world
had  before  :  what  clearer  discoveries  we  have  by  Christ's  coming,  than  the  heathena
or  Jews  had  before.  1.  The  rewards  of  another  life  are  more  clearly  revealed  in  the
gospel.  2.  The  rewards  of  another  life,  as  they  are  clearly  and  expressly  revealed
by  the  gospel,  so  that  they  may  have  the  greater  power  and  influence  upon  us,  and
we  may  have  the  greater  assurance  of  them,  they  are  revealed  with  very  particular
circumstances.  3.  The  gospel  gives  us  yet  farther  assurance  of  these  things  by
Buch  an  argument  as  is  like  to  be  the  most  convincing  and  satisfactory  to  common
capacities  ;  and  that  is,  by  a  Uvely  instance  of  the  thing  to  be  proved,  in  raising
Christ  from  the  dead  (Acts  xvii.  30, 31).  4.  And  lastly,  the  effects  which  the  clear
discovery  of  this  truth  had  upon  the  world  are  such  as  the  world  never  saw  before,
and  are  a  farther  inducement  to  persuade  us  of  the  truth  and  reality  of  it.  After
the  gospel  was  entertained  in  the  world,  to  show  that  those  who  embraced  it  did
fully  believe  this  principle,  and  were  abundantly  satisfied  concerning  the  rewards
and  happiness  of  another  life,  they  did,  for  the  sake  of  their  religion,  despise  this
life  and  all  the  enjoyments  of  it,  from  a  thorough  persuasion  of  a  far  greater  happi-
ness than  this  world  could  afford  remaining  in  the  next  life.  (J.  Tillotson,  D.D.)
Life  and  immortality  brought  to  light  by  the  gospel : — But,  supposing  Moses  or  the
law  of  nature  to  afford  evidence  for  a  future  life  and  immortality,  it  remains  to  be
considered  in  what  sense  the  words  of  the  text  are  to  be  understood,  which  do  affirm
that  life  and  immortality  were  brought  to  light  through  the  gospel.  To  bring  any
thing  to  hght  may  signify,  according  to  the  idiom  of  the  English  tongue,  to  discover
or  reveal  a  thing  which  was  perfectly  unknown  before  :  but  the  word  in  the  original
is  so  far  from  countenancing,  that  it  will  hardly  admit  of  this  sense,  (patTiZHv  signifies
(not  to  bring  to  light,  but)  to  enlighten,  illustrate,  or  clear  up  anything.  You  may
judge  by  the  use  of  the  word  in  other  places  :  'tis  used  in  John  i.  9 — "  That  was  the
true  light  which  hghteth  [or  enlighteneth]  every  man  that  cometh  into  the  world."
Jesus  Christ  did  not  by  coming  into  the  world  bring  men  to  light ;  but  He  did  by
the  gospel  enlighten  men,  and  make  those  who  were  dark  and  ignorant  before  wise
even  to  salvation.  In  like  manner  our  Lord  did  enlighten  the  doctrine  of  life  and
immortality,  not  by  giving  the  first  or  only  notice  of  it,  but  by  clearing  up  the  doubts
and  difficulties  under  which  it  laboured,  and  giving  a  better  evidence  for  the  truth
and  certainty  of  it,  than  nature  or  any  revelation  before  had  done.  If  we  consider
how  our  Saviour  has  enlightened  this  doctrine,  it  will  appear  that  He  has  removed
the  difficulty  at  which  nature  stumbled.  As  death  was  no  part  of  the  state  of  nature,
BO  the  difficulties  arising  from  it  were  not  provided  for  in  the  religion  of  nature.  To
remove  these  was  the  proper  work  6i  revelation.  These  our  Lord  has  effectually
cleared  by  His  gospel,  and  shown  us  that  the  body  may  and  shall  be  united  to  the
spirit  in  the  day  of  the  Lord,  so  that  the  complete  man  shall  stand  before  the  great
Tribunal  to  receive  a  just  recompense  of  reward  for  the  things  done  in  the  body.  (T.
Sherlock f  D.D.)        Immortality  brought  to  light: — I.  Oub  Lord  hath  given  ds  a

CLEARER  KNOWLEDOB  THAN   WITHOUT  HiM  WE  COULD  EVER  HAVE  ACQUIRED  OF  OUR  STATE

AfXBB  DEATH.    For,  fixst,  the  best  arguments  which  human  reason  suggests  for  th«

4


so  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  u

immortality  of  the  soul  are  founded  upon  right  notions  of  God  and  of  morality.  But
before  the  gospel  was  revealed  the  common  people  among  the  Gentiles  had  low  and
imperfect  notions  of  these  important  truths,  and  consequently  they  were  not  per-
suaded upon  good  grounds  of  their  future  existence.  The  proofs  of  the  soul'a
immortality,  which  are  taken  from  its  own  nature,  from  its  simplicity,  spirituality,
and  inward  activity,  are  by  no  means  to  be  despised,  they  have  much  probability,
and  they  never  were  or  will  be  confuted.  The  moral  arguments,  as  they  are
called,  in  behalf  of  the  soul's  immortality,  as  they  are  more  familiar  and  in-
telligible, so  are  they  more  satisfactory.  Now,  it  cannot  be  supposed  that
God,  who  is  perfectly  wise,  would  endue  the  soul  of  man  with  a  capacity  of
well-doing,  and  of  perpetual  improvement,  unless  He  intended  it  for  other  purposes
than  to  live  here  for  a  very  short  space,  and  then  perish  for  ever.  He  did  not
create  the  sun  to  shine  for  one  day,  and  the  moon  to  shine  for  one  night,  and  then
to  be  turned  out  of  being.  These  sort  of  arguments,  obvious  and  persuasive  as  they
are,  yet  were  usually  overlooked  in  the  Pagan  world ;  polytheism,  vice,  and  ignorance
had  made  men  insensible  of  their  force ;  these  arguments  shone  forth  along  with
Christianity,  and  were  in  a  great  measure  owing  to  the  gospel.  They  who  argued
justly  enough  to  conclude  from  the  nature  of  God  and  of  man  that  it  was  reason-
able to  believe  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  and  to  hope  that  a  future  state  of
happiness  should  be  the  reward  of  a  well-spent  life,  yet  could  not  hence  fairly  draw
any  conclusions  to  their  own  full  satisfaction.  Many  who  believed  the  immortality
of  souls  believed  also  a  continual  and  successive  removal  of  souls  from  one  body
to  another,  and  no  fixed  state  of  permanent  happiness.  Our  Lord  hath  opened  to
XXB  a  better  prospect  than  this,  promising  us  an  incorruptible  body,  a  life  that  shall
not  be  taken  from  us,  an  unchangeable  state,  and  a  house  eternal  in  the  heavens.
Some  who  in  words  acknowledged  the  immortality  of  the  soul  seem  in  reaUty  to
have  taken  it  away,  by  imagining  that  the  human  soul  was  a  part  of  the  great  soul
of  the  world,  of  the  Deity,  and  that  upon  its  separation  from  the  body  it  was
reunited  to  it.  1.  The  gospel  assures  us  that  we  shall  rise  again.  2.  We  are
assured  that  the  happiness  of  the  good  shall  be  complete,  unchangeable,  and  endless.
8.  We  have  also  reason,  from  some  places  of  Scripture,  to  suppose  that  the  souls  of
the  good  are  not  deprived  of  thought,  but  are  in  a  place  of  peace  and  contentment
during  their  separation  from  the  body.     II.  The  second  thing  which  we  proposed

TO  PBOVB  IB,  THAT  ChBIST,  BT   HiS   RESURKECTION,  HATH   FULLY  ASSURED   US   THAT   Hb

CAN  AND  WILL  BAisE  UP  His  8EBVANTS  TO  ETERNAL  LIFE.  If  it  be  Certain  that  Chrfst
arose  from  the  dead,  the  consequence  is  plain  and  unavoidable  that  the  religion
taught  by  Him  is  true.  I  have  only  a  few  inferences  to  lay  before  you.  1.  Our
Lord  hath  taught  us  that  our  souls  are  immortal.  2.  Our  Lord  hath  taught  us  that
death  is  only  the  death  or  sleep  of  the  body,  that  the  souls  of  the  good  live
to  God,  and  that  at  the  last  day,  when  He  shall  appear,  they  shall  be  clothed  with
immortal  and  glorified  bodies,  and  dwell  for  ever  with  Him.  And  to  confirm  these  truths.
He  arose  Himself  in  power  and  splendour,  and  became  the  first  fruits  of  them  that  sleep.
3.  The  resurrection  of  Christ  contains  in  it  the  strongest  motives  to  cast  off  our  sins,
and  to  prepare  ourselves  for  the  glories  which  shall  be  revealed,  and  to  take  off  oar
affections  from  this  world,  and  to  set  them  on  things  above.  {J.  Jortin,  D.D.)
Life  and  immortality  brought  to  light  by  the  gospel : — By  the  plain  revelation  of  this
Btate  of  immortality — 1.  Is  most  illustriously  manifested  to  us  the  transcendent
goodness  and  indulgence  of  our  most  merciful  Creator,  in  that  He  will  be  pleased
to  reward  such  imperfect  services,  such  mean  performances  as  the  best  of  ours  are,
with  glory  so  immense,  as  that  eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  nor  can  it  enter
into  the  heart  of  man  to  conceive  the  greatness  of  it.  2.  By  this  revelation  of
immortal  life  is  farther  demonstrated  the  exceeding  great  love  of  our  blessed
Saviour,  who,  by  His  death  and  perfect  obedience,  not  only  purchased  pardon  for
all  our  past  rebellions  and  transgressions,  not  only  redeemed  us  from  hell  and
destruction,  to  which  we  had  all  rendered  ourselves  most  justly  liable,  which  alone
had  been  an  unspeakable  favour,  but  also  merited  an  everlasting  kingdom  of  glory
for  us,  if  with  true  repentance  we  return  to  our  duty.  3.  This  especially  recom-
mends our  Christianity  to  us,  which  contains  such  glad  tidings,  which  propounds
Buoh  mighty  arguments  to  engage  us  to  our  duty,  such  as  no  other  religion  ever  did
or  could.     I.  To  those  who  would  seem  to  doubt  of  this  fundamental  doctbinb

OF  A  FUTURE  LIFE.  II.  To  THOSE  WHO  PBOFESS  TO  BELIEVE  IT,  BUT  NOT  FULLY  AND
HEARTILY.      HI.    To   THOSE   WHO   DO   REALLY   AND   CONSTANTLY  BELIEVE   IT.      I.  Let   US

for  once  be  so  kind  to  the  sceptical  disputers  against  religion  as  to  suppose  what
they  are  never  able  to  prove — that  it  is  a  very  doubtful  thing  whether  there  will


CHAP.  1.]  IL  TIMOTHY.  61

be  another  life  after  this.  We  ought  to  believe  and  lire  as  if  all  these  doctrines  of
religion  were  most  certainly  true  ;  for  every  wise  man  will  run  as  little  hazard  aa
he  can,  especially  in  such  things  as  are  of  the  highest  conoemment  to  him,  and
wherein  a  mistake  would  be  fatal  and  undoing.  II.  To  those  who  profess  to  believe
this  immortal  life,  but  yet  do  it  not  really  and  heartily.  And  this  I  fear  is  the  casa
of  the  generality  of  Christians  amongst  us.  Are  any  of  those  good  things  which  men
here  court  and  seek  after  so  desirable  and  considerable  as  the  glories  and  joys  of
heaven  ?  Or  are  there  any  evils  in  this  world  that  can  vie  terrors  with  hell  ?  III.
To  those  who  do  heartily  and  constantly  believe  this  great  truth  of  another  life  after
this  ;  who  not  only  assent  to  this  doctrine  with  their  understandings,  but  have  made
this  future  happiness  their  ultimate  choice  and  desire.  This  will  fortify  our  minds
against  all  the  temptations  we  may  meet  with  from  this  world,  or  any  of  its
bewitching  enjoyments.  This  faith  will  inspire  us  with  strength  and  activity,  and
carry  us  out  even  beyond  ourselves ;  will  animate  us  with  such  courage  and  resolu-
tion, as  that  we  shall  despise  all  dangers  and  difficulties,  and  thiuk  eternal  happiness
a  good  bargain,  whatever  pains  or  trouble  it  may  cost  us  to  purchase  it.  This  con»
quers  the  love  of  life  itself,  which  is  most  deeply  implanted  in  our  natures ;  for
what  will  not  a  man  give  or  part  with  for  the  saving  of  his  life  ?  Yet  they  who
have  been  endued  with  this  faith  have  not  counted  their  lives  dear  to  Him,  so  that
they  might  finish  their  course  with  joy.  This  faith  by  degrees  moulds  and  trans-
forms the  mind  into  a  likeness  to  these  heavenly  objects  ;  it  advances  and  raises
our  spirits,  so  that  they  become  truly  great  and  noble,  and  make  us,  as  St.  Peter
tells  us,  partakers  of  a  divine  nature.  It  fiUeth  the  soul  with  constant  peace  and
satisfaction,  so  that  in  all  conditions  of  life  a  good  man  can  feast  himself  with
unseen  joys  and  delights,  which  the  worldly  man  neither  knows  nor  can  relish.
Nay,  this  faith  arms  a  man  against  the  fear  of  death  ;  it  strips  that  king  of  terrors
of  all  his  grim  looks  :  for  he  considers  it  only  as  God's  messenger  to  knock  off  his
fetters,  to  free  him  from  this  fleshly  prison,  and  to  conduct  him  to  that  blessed
place,  where  he  shall  be  more  happy  than  he  can  wish  or  desire  to  be,  and  th^t
for  ever.     {Dr.  Callamy.)  Life  and  immortality  revealed  in  the  gospel : — Life

and  immortality  here  seem  to  refer  both  to  the  soul  and  the  body,  the  two  con-
stituents of  our  person.  As  applied  to  the  body,  life  and  immortality  signify  that
though  our  bodies  are  dissolved  at  death,  and  return  into  their  native  elements,  yet
they  shall  be  formed  anew  with  vast  improvements,  and  raised  to  an  immortal
existence  :  so  that  they  shall  be  as  though  death  never  had  had  any  power  over
them  ;  and  thus  death  shall  be  abolished,  annihilated,  and  all  traces  of  the  ruins
it  had  made  for  ever  disappear,  as  though  they  had  never  been.  It  is  in  this  sense
chiefly  that  the  word  "  immortahty,"  or  "  incorruptibility  "  is  made  use  of  in  my
text.  But  then  the  resurrection  of  the  body  supposes  the  perpetual  existence  of
the  soul,  for  whose  sake  it  is  raised ;  therefore  life  and  immortality,  as  referring  to
the  soul,  signify  that  it  is  immortal,  in  a  strict  and  proper  seuse ;  that  is,  that  it
cannot  die  at  all,  or  be  dissolved  like  the  body.  In  this  complex  sense  we  may
understand  the  immortality  of  which  my  text  speaks.  Now  it  is  to  the  gospel
that  we  owe  the  clear  discovery  of  immortality  in  both  these  senses.  As  for  the
resurrection  of  the  dead,  which  confers  a  kind  of  immortality  upon  our  mortal
bodies,  it  is  altogether  the  discovery  of  Divine  revelation.  As  for  the  immortality
of  the  Boul,  Christian  philosophers  flnd  it  no  difficulty  to  establish  it  upon  th«
plain  principles  of  reason.  But  it  should  be  considered  that  those  are  not  the
arguments  of  the  populace,  the  bulk  of  mankind,  but  of  a  few  philosophic  studioua
men.  But  as  immortality  is  the  prerogative  of  aU  mankind,  of  the  ignorant  and
illiterate,  as  well  as  of  the  wise  and  learned,  all  mankind,  of  all  ranks  of  onder-
standing,  are  equally  concerned  in  the  doctrine  of  immortality ;  and  therefore  a
common  revelation  was  necessary,  which  would  teach  the  ploughman  and  mechanic,
as  well  as  the  philosopher,  that  he  was  formed  for  an  immortal  existence,  and,  con-
sequently, that  it  is  his  grand  concern  to  fit  himself  for  a  happiness  beyond  th«
grave  as  lasting  as  his  nature.  Now,  it  is  the  gospel  alone  that  makes  this
important  discovery  plain  and  obvious  to  all.  It  must  also  be  considered  that  men
may  be  able  to  demonstrate  a  truth,  when  the  hint  is  but  once  given,  which  they
would  never  have  discovered,  nor  perhaps  suspected,  without  that  hint.  Person!
may  be  assisted  in  their  searches  by  the  hght  of  revelation ;  but,  being  accustomed
to  it,  they  may  mistake  it  for  the  light  of  their  own  reason  ;  or  they  may  not  be  so
honest  and  humble  as  to  acknowledge  the  assistance  they  have  received.  Th*
surest  way  to  know  what  mere  unassisted  reason  can  do  is  to  inquire  what  it  haa
actually  done  in  those  sages  of  the  heathen  world  who  had  no  other  guide,  and  ia


62  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i.

whom  it  was  carried  to  the  highest  degree  of  improvement.  Now  we  find,  in  fact,
that  though  some  philosophers  had  plausibilities  and  presumptious  that  their  souls
should  exist  after  the  dissolution  of  their  bodies,  yet  that  they  rather  supposed,  or
wished,  or  thought  it  probable,  than  firmly  believed  it  upon  good  evidence.  What
&  vast  inheritance  is  this,  unalienably  entailed  upon  every  child  of  Adam  I  What
importance,  what  value,  does  this  consideration  give  to  that  neglected  thing  the
Boul  1  What  an  awful  being  is  it  1  Immortality  1  The  highest  angel,  if  the  crea-
ture of  a  day  or  of  a  thousand  years,  what  would  he  be?  A  fading  flower,  a  vanish-
ing vapour,  a  flying  shadow.  When  his  day  or  his  thousand  years  are  past,  he  ii
as  truly  nothing  as  if  he  had  never  been.  It  is  little  matter  what  becomes  of  him :
let  him  stand  or  fall,  let  him  be  happy  or  miserable,  it  is  just  the  same  in  a  little
time ;  he  is  gone,  and  there  is  no  more  of  him — no  traces  of  him  left.  But  an
immortal  I  a  creature  that  shall  never,  never,  never  cease  to  be  !  that  shall  expand
his  capacities  of  action,  of  pleasure,  or  pain,  through  an  everlasting  duration !  what
an  awful,  important  being  is  this  1  And  is  my  soul — this  little  spark  of  reason  in
my  breast — is  that  such  a  being  ?  I  tremble  at  myself.  I  revere  my  own  dignity,
and  am  struck  with  a  kind  of  pleasing  horror  to  view  what  I  must  be.  And  is
there  anything  so  worthy  of  the  care  of  such  a  being  as  the  happiness,  the  ever-
lasting happiness,  of  my  immortal  part?  (S.  Davies,  A.M.)  Immortality  brought
to  light  by  the  gospel : — Let  us  first  advert  to  what  may  be  called  the  physical  state,
and  then  to  the  moral  state  of  the  mind ;  and  under  each  head  let  us  endeavour  to
contrast  the  insuflSciency  of  the  light  of  nature  with  the  sufficiency  and  fulness  of
the  light  of  the  gospel.  I.  An  argument  for  its  immortality  has  been  drawn  from
the  consideration  of  what  we  should  term  the  physics  of  the  mind — that  is,  from
the  consideration  of  its  properties,  when  it  is  regarded  as  having  a  separate  or
Bubstantive  heing  of  its  own.  For  example,  it  has  been  said  that  spirit  is  not
matter,  and  therefore  must  be  imperishable.  We  confess  that  we  see  not  the  force
of  this  reasoning.  We  are  not  sure  by  nature  of  the  premises  ;  and  neither  do  we
apprehend  how  the  conclusion  flows  from  it.  Now,  in  the  recorded  fact  of  our
Saviour's  resurrection,  we  see  what  many  would  call  a  more  popular,  but  what  we
should  deem  a  far  more  substantial  and  satisfactory,  argument  for  the  soul's
immortality  than  any  that  is  furnished  by  the  speculation  which  we  have  now
alluded  to.  To  us  the  one  appears  as  much  superior  to  the  other,  as  history  is
more  solid  than  hypothesis,  or  as  experience  is  of  a  texture  more  firm  than
imagination,  or  as  the  philosophy  of  our  modern  Bacon  is  of  a  surer  and  sounder
character  than  the  philosophy  of  the  old  schoolmen.  Let  it  be  remarked  that  the
word  which  we  render  "  abolished  "  signifies  also  "  made  of  no  effect."  The  latter
interpretation  of  the  word  is  certainly  more  appUcable  to  our  first  or  our  temporal
death.  He  has  not  abolished  temporal  death.  It  still  reigns  with  unmitigated
violence,  and  sweeps  off  its  successive  generations  with  as  great  sureness  and
rapidity  as  ever.  This  part  of  the  sentence  is  not  aboUshed,  but  is  rendered
ineffectual.  II.  But  another  argument  for  the  immortality  of  man  has  been  drawn
by  philosophers  from  the  moral  state  of  his  mind  ;  and  more  especially  from  that
progressive  expansion  which  they  affirm  it  to  have  undergone  in  respect  of  its
virtues  as  well  as  of  its  powers.  Still  we  fear  that,  in  respect  of  this  argument  too,
the  flowery  description  of  the  moralists  has  no  proof,  and  more  particularly  no
experience  to  support  it.  Yes  1  we  have  heard  them  talk,  and  with  eloquence  too,
of  the  good  man  and  of  his  prospects ;  of  his  progress  in  life  being  a  splendid
career  of  virtue,  and  of  his  death  being  a  gentle  transition  to  another  and  a  better
world  ;  of  its  being  the  goal  where  he  reaps  the  honourable  reward  that  is  due  to
his  accomplishments,  or  being  little  more  than  a  step  in  his  proud  march  to
eternity.  This  is  all  very  fine,  but  it  is  the  fineness  of  poetry.  Where  is  the
evidence  of  its  being  any  better  than  a  deceitful  imagination  ?  Death  gives  the  lie
to  all  the  speculations  of  all  the  moralists ;  but  it  only  gives  evidence  and  con-
eistency  to  the  statements  of  the  gospel.  The  doctrines  of  the  New  Testament
will  bear  to  be  confronted  with  the  rough  and  vigorous  lessons  of  experience.  They
attempt  no  ornament  and  no  palliation.  I  cannot  trust  the  physician  who  plays
upon  the  surface  of  my  disease,  and  throws  over  it  the  disguise  of  false  colouring.
I  have  more  confidence  to  put  in  him  who,  hke  Christ  the  Physician  of  my  soul,
has  looked  the  malady  fairly  in  the  face — has  taken  it  up  in  all  its  extent,  and  in
all  its  soreness — has  resolved  it  into  its  original  principles — has  probed  it  to  the
very  bottom,  and  has  set  himself  forward  to  combat  with  the  radical  elements  of
the  disease.  This  is  what  the  Saviour  has  done  with  death.  He  has  plucked  it  of
^ts  eting.    0e  has  taken  a  full  survey  of  the  corruption,  and  met  it  in  every  one


CHAP.  1.]  II.  TIMOTHY.


quarter  where  its  malignity  operates.  It  was  sin  which  constituted  the  virulence  in
the  disease,  and  He  hath  extracted  it.  He  hath  expiated  the  sentence ;  and  the
beUever,  rejoicing  in  the  assurance  that  all  is  clear  with  God,  serves  Him  without
fear  in  righteousness  and  in  holiness  all  the  days  of  his  life.  (T.  Chalmers,  D.D.)
Life  and  immortality  brought  to  light  by  the  gospel : — I.  First  let  tjs  consideb  the

EVIDENCE  WHICH  THE   WORLD   HAD  FOR  THIS  DOCTRINE  PRIOR  TO  THE  ADVENT  OF  ChRIST.

The  general  and  continued  prevalence  of  this  opinion,  even  admitting  it  to  have
originated  in  revelation,  must  be  traced  ultimately  to  the  natural  sentiments  of  the
human  heart.  We  are  all  naturally  desirous  of  immortality.  We  naturally  love
our  being,  and  of  consequence  naturally  desire  its  continuance.  The  thought  of
being  reduced  into  nothing  is  revolting  to  a  rational  soul.  Numerous  considerations
tend  to  give  it  a  rational  support,  and  to  some  of  these  suffer  me  to  direct  your
attention.  1.  I  observe  that  the  very  nature  of  the  human  soul  itself,  so  far  as  we
are  capable  of  comprehending  it,  affords  a  strong  presumption  in  favour  of  its
immortality.  It  is  perfectly  distinct  and  essentially  different  from  the  earthly
tabernacle  in  which  it  is  enshrined ;  for  we  know  that  it  thinks  and  acts  indepen-
dently of  the  body,  and  even  when  the  body  is  at  rest.  2.  So  far  is  this  from
being  the  case,  that  there  is  a  strong  probabihty,  arising  from  the  analogy  of
nature,  of  the  continuance  of  our  existence  after  the  great  change  of  death  has
passed  upon  us.  All  nature  dies  to  live  again.  3.  This  anticipation  is  still  further
confirmed  by  a  consideration  of  man  as  a  moral  and  accountable  being.  4.  If,
from  considering  man,  we  turn  our  attention  to  God,  whose  creatures  we  are,  and
of  whose  government  we  are  the  subjects,  the  evidence  in  favour  of  immortality
rises  still  further  in  its  importance  and  strength.  These  evidences,  however,  are
not  to  be  represented,  as  has  been  done  by  some,  as  of  so  decisive  and  complete  a
character  as  to  supersede  the  necessity  of  Divine  revelation.  To  be  convinced  of
this,  we  need  only  consider  the  case  of  those  sages  of  the  heathen  world,  who  had
no  other  light  than  that  of  unassisted  reason  to  guide  them.  We  find  many  of  the
best  and  greatest  amongst  them  filled  with  doubts  and  perplexities  on  the  subject.
Brutus,  a  man  of  rigid  and  stoical  virtue,  was,  by  the  principles  of  his  sect,  an
Bssertor  of  a  future  state ;  but,  finding  his  own  cause  and  that  of  his  friends  unsuc-
cessful, he  sunk  into  despair,  and,  in  the  immediate  prospect  of  his  departure,
made  this  extraordinary  exclamation :  "  I  have  worshipped  virtue  as  the  supreme
good,  but  have  found  it  to  be  only  an  idol  and  a  name."  Socrates,  who  was  con-
fessedly the  brightest  character  in  the  heathen  world,  seems  to  have  possessed
much  clearer  views  of  immortality  than  any  other  individual  among  the  Greek
philosophers.  Yet  even  his  opinions  are  not  delivered  without  much  hesitation  and
doubt,  and  are  far  from  being  either  uniform  or  consistent.  At  one  time  we  find
him  affirming  it  to  have  been  his  deliberate  opinion,  after  the  most  dispassionate
inquiry,  that  the  good  and  wise  had  every  reasonable  hope  of  happiness  in  a  future
state  of  existence.  And  yet  this  conviction,  though  he  distinctly  avows  it,  was  not
80  firmly  settled  in  his  own  mind  as  to  prevent  him  taking  his  last  leave  of  his
friends  by  these  most  impressive  words :  '•  It  is  time  that  I  should  go  away  to  die,
and  that  ye  should  return  to  the  active  business  of  hfe.  Whether  you  or  I  have
the  better  portion,  is  known  only  to  the  immortal  gods,  but  I  think  cannot  be
known  with  certainty  by  any  individual  man."  Cicero,  though  one  of  the  most
enlightened  men  of  aH  antiquity,  and  one  that  wrote  more  on  this  subject  than  any
other  individual,  yet  seems  to  have  no  settled  or  deliberate  opinion  with  regard  to
it ;  and,  in  one  particular  passage,  in  which  he  refers  to  the  perplexing  and  con-
trary views  entertained  by  philosophers,  we  find  him  declaring:  "But  of  these
doctrines  which  is  to  be  received  as  true,  some  god  must  declare  unto  us ;  which  is
the  more  probable  even,  is  extremely  doubtful."  II.  Let  us  now  examine  the  superior
EVIDENCE  WHICH  THE  GOSPEL  GIVES  US  ON  THIS  SUBJECT.  1.  In  the  gospcl  we  havc  att
express  confirmation  of  the  hope  of  nature,  that  the  souls  of  men  survive  the  dissolu-
tion of  their  bodies,  and  continue  capable  of  exercising  those  powers  and  faculties
which  are  essential  to  them.  2.  Besides  assuring  us  of  the  continued  existence  and
consciousness  of  the  spirit  after  death,  the  gospel  informs  ns  that  the  tabernacle  of
clay  in  which  it  was  lodged,  but  which  now  hes  mouldering  in  the  dust  of  the  earth,
sh^l  in  due  time  be  raised  up  in  unfading  life  and  activity,  and  re-united  to  its
former  spirit.  3.  We  are  further  assured  in  the  gospel  that  the  grand  event  of  the
resurrection  will  be  the  introduction  to  a  state  of  retribution,  which  will  admit  of
neither  termination  nor  change.  4.  While  the  gospel  thus  reveals  to  us  a  future
state  of  inconceivable  and  endless  bliss,  it  at  the  same  time  clearly  points  out  the
only  certain  way  in  which  we  can  attain  to  the  enjoyment  of  it.    (P.  Grant,)


U  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  l

Death  dboltBhcd,  and  life  and  immortality  brought  to  light : — In  disconrsing  npon
these  words,  it  shall  be  my  endeavoor  to  show  what  Jesus  Christ  has  effected — L
In  His  own  person.  Referring  to  the  text,  we  find  mention  made  of  "  Jesas  Christ,
who  hath  abolished  death."  It  will,  I  doubt  not,  be  readily  admitted  that,  if  the
cause  be  removed,  the  resulting  effects  must  necessarily  cease.  What,  then,  is  the
cause  of  death  ?  It  is  a  melancholy  and  humiliating  reflection  that  man — the  lord
of  this  lower  world,  the  vicegerent  of  the  great  Supreme  on  earth — should  die,  as
do  the  brutes  over  whom  he  holds  a  delegated  sway.  Yet  it  is  not  more  melancholy
and  humiliating  than  it  is  true — "  His  life  is  but  as  a  vapour  that  appeareth  for  a
little  time,  and  then  vanisheth  away."  Yet  it  was  not  always  so.  The  mortality
of  man  is  the  direful  effect  of  sin.  And  when  it  is  stated  that  Jesus  Christ  "hath
abolished  death,"  it  cannot  mean  that  we  are  consequently  exempt  from  paying  the
debt  of  our  fallen  nature.  By  no  means ;  "  it  is  appointed  unto  all  men  once  to
die."  The  most  merciless  tyrants  have,  at  some  particular  seasons,  shown  signs  of
a  merciful  and  yielding  disposition ;  and  the  tears  of  imploring  loveliness  have
pierced  even  their  hard  and  cruel  hearts.  But  not  all  the  fascinations  of  beauty
can  arouse  one  kindly  feeling  in  the  breast  of  the  king  of  terrors,  or  make  one
single  impression  on  his  relentless  nature.  By  the  term  "  death  "  here,  we  are  not
to  nnderstand  merely  natural  death,  but  the  corruption  and  decomposition  which
take  place  in  consequence  of  it;  and,  though  we  must  allow  it  a  short  and
momentary  triumph,  yet  in  the  end  it  will  be  totally  "  abolished."  And  how  has  this
been  brought  to  pass  ?  By  Jesus  Christ.  By  His  righteousness  and  atoning  sacri-
fice, satisfaction  has  been  made  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world ;  by  His  resurrec-
tion and  ascension,  proof  is  given  that  the  power  and  dominion  of  death  must
eventually  terminate .  Let  us  now  proceed  to  consider  what  the  same  gracious
Saviour  has  effected  for  us — II.  Bt  means  of  the  gospel.  He  has  brought  life
and  immortality  to  light."  The  literal  translation  of  the  original  is  :  "  He  hath
illustrated  life  and  immortality  by  the  gospel."  This  doctrine  had  never  been
illustrated  and  demonstrated  before ;  it  existed  in  promise,  but  had  never  been
practically  exhibited.  But  through  what  medium  are  we  assured  of  this  f  It  is
the  gospel  alone  which  brings  immortal  life  to  light.  It  is  this  which  rouses,
extends,  enlarges,  and  refines  our  limited  views  and  sentiments.  (T.  Massey,  A.B.)
Immortal  life  : — We  will  consider  three  things — first,  the  great  subject  "  brought  to
light,"  "  life  and  immortality";  secondly,  the  revelation — "He  hath  brought  life
and  immortality  to  light "  ;  and,  thirdly,  we  will  glance  at  the  means  by  which  this
glorious  subject  is  placed  in  the  light  of  open  day — it  is  "by  the  gospel."
I.  Immortality  naturally  and  essentially  belongs  to  God  alonb,  "  who  only
hath  immortality,  dwelling  in  the  light  which  no  man  approach  unto ;  whom  no
man  hath  seen  nor  can  see."  By  "  life  and  immortality,"  in  the  language  of  the
text,  we  simply  understand  immortal  life,  or  existence  incapable  of  decay.  Human
existence,  or  existence  in  the  present  world,  is  not,  strictly  speaking,  immortality ;
it  is  liable  to  decay.  The  natural  powers  are  liable  to  decay,  and  the  natural  mem-
bers crumble  into  dust ;  and  the  intellectual  powers  are  also  liable  to  decay,  in
consequence  of  their  being  encased  in,  and  connected  with  this  crumbling  and
mouldering  tabernacle.  The  gospel  has  brought  to  light  this  glorious  fact :  that
there  is  an  existence  in  another  state  for  creatures  such  as  we  are,  incapable  of
decay.  By  which  we  understand  that  it  is  an  existence  without  sin  ;  for  in  sin  is
involved  and  included  all  the  elements  of  destruction,  and  nothing  can  remove  the
elements  of  destruction  but  the  removal  of  sin.  All  the  powers  shall  be  cleansed,
nicely  balanced,  rightly  directed,  and  constantly  employed ;  and  they  shall  be
raised  beyond  the  reach  of  that  which  might  tarnish,  sully,  deprave,  or  injure  them
for  ever.  As  it  is  a  state  of  existence  without  sin,  so,  consequently,  it  is  a  state  of
existence  without  sickness.  And  as  there  will  be  no  sickness,  as  a  matter  of  course
there  will  be  no  pain.  And  that  fear,  which  is  such  a  source  of  torment,  will  be
done  away.  And  then  as  to  gratification  ;  there  is  nothing  that  can  gratify  a  per-
fected intellect  or  a  purified  heart,  but  we  shall  possess  it  in  all  its  fulness  and
purity,  in  order  that  we  may  enjoy  it  for  evermore.  "  Life,"  with  holiness ;  for  as
holiness  is  the  principal  perfection  of  God's  nature,  so  holiness  will  be  the  prin
oipal  characteristic  of  the  Lord's  people  in  a  better  state.  '•  Life,"  with  knowledge ;
for  immortal  life  stands  virtually  in  connection  with  spiritual  knowledge.  Hence
Christ  says  :  "  This  is  life  eternal,  that  they  might  know  Thee  the  only  true  God,
and  Jesus  Christ,  whom  Thou  hast  sent."  It  will  be  life,  with  peace  in  perfection,
and  life  in  the  possession  of  joy ;  and  all  the  future  will  be  the  anticipation  of
perfect  satisfaction.    It  is,  we  may  observe,  life  with  God — we  shall  be  "  for  ever


CBAi.u]  U.  TIMOTHY.  '  66

with  the  Lord  " — life  in  the  presence,  life  in  the  possession,  and  life  in  the  enjoy*
ment  of  God.  We  may  remark  that  it  is  life  of  the  most  perfect  kind,  in  the
highest  degree.  Now  we  know  not  what  life  in  perfection  is.  I  conceive  that  the
highest  kind  of  life  will,  in  all  the  experience  of  the  Lord's  holy  ones,  be  wrought
op  to  the  highest  degree  of  perfection,  and,  in  that  state,  it  will  be  spent  to  reflect
His  honoor,  to  perpetuate  the  glory  of  His  grace,  and  for  the  honour  of  His
glorious  perfections,  for  ever.  For,  in  other  words,  we  may  say  it  is  life  in
employment  and  in  enjoyment.  We  associate  these  two  together,  for  in  our
minds  they  always  are  associated:  we  can  conceive  of  no  suitable  employment
without  enjoyment.  H.  The  bevelation  :  "  life  and  immortality  are  brought
to  light,"  intimating  that  immortal  life  was  obscure  before.  The  heathen
had  some  idea  of  a  state  of  immortal  existence  for  the  soul,  but  not  for  the  body ;
although,  according  to  the  gospel,  immortality  is  intended  for  the  body  equally
with  the  soul.  1.  He  "  brought  to  light,"  the  purpose  of  God,  which  was  to
be  wrought  out  through  all  the  opposition  of  sin  and  Satan,  and  of  man  under
their  influence,  that  He  would  have  a  people  possess  an  immortal  existence
incapable  of  decay — a  life  of  the  highest  kind,  in  the  most  perfect  degree.  2.
He  not  only  "  brought  to  light "  the  purpose,  but  the  promise.  How  frequently
and  how  plainly  does  our  Lord  refer  to  this,  particularly  in  the  Gospel  of  St.  John.
We  can  refer  but  to  one  passage — the  sixth  chapter  and  the  fortieth  verse — "  This
is  the  will  of  Him  that  sent  Me,  that  every  one  which  seeth  the  Son,  and  believeth
on  Him,  may  have  everlasting  life ;  and  I  will  raise  him  up  at  the  last  day."  3.
He  not  only  *'  brought  to  light "  the  promise,  but  He  was  Himself  the  example.
You  know  He  yielded  to  the  death  upon  the  cross.  He  came  forth  in  the  possession
of  immortal  life,  with  an  immortal  body  and  an  immortal  soul.  4.  He  exhibited
eternal  life,  as  a  blessing  promised  to  the  Church.  "This,"  says  the  apostle
John,  with  emphasis — "  this  is  the  record,  that  God  hath  given  to  us  eternal  life,
and  this  Ufe  is  in  His  Son."  5.  He  not  only  exhibited  it  to  us  as  a  blessing
promised,  but  as  a  prize  to  be  gained;  for  there  is  nothing  in  the  gospel  to
sanction  indolence.  6.  It  is  represented  as  the  end  which  grace  has  in  view.
Hence  the  apostle,  drawing  the  parallel  between  the  two  heads,  or  pubUc  represen-
tatives, says  (Eom.  v.  20).  It  was  "  brought  to  light "  as  the  great  object  of  hope,
apon  which  the  eye  of  hope  is  to  be  fixed  from  time  to  time.  And  what  made
primitive  Christians  so  cheerful,  and  dauntless,  and  bold,  and  courageous,  was  just
this:  they  "were  living,"  says  St.  Paul,  *'  in  hope  of  eternal  life,  which  God,  who
cannot  lie,  promised  before  the  world  began."    HI.  The  means  by  which  this

BIiESSINO  IB  "  BBOCOHT  TO  LiaHT  "  IS  "  THE  GOSPEL."       1.    NoW,  iu  OHO  vicW  of  it,  the

gospel  is  a  kind  of  telescope,  without  which  it  is  impossible  to  look  so  far  into  the
distance  as  to  see  immortal  life.  There  it  is  in  the  distance,  but  our  faculties  are
80  weakened  by  sin,  and  the  mists  of  ignorance  have  so  gathered  between  us  and
it  that  it  is  necessary  there  should  be  something  to  bring  the  mind's  eye  into
eontaot  with  it.  The  gospel  is  that  something.  It  brings  the  subject  near,  just  in
the  same  way  as  a  telescope  seems  to  bring  the  distant  object  near ;  so  that  we
can  look  at  it,  gaze  upon  it,  examine  it,  admire  it,  and  enjoy  it.  2.  The  gospel
brings  "life  and  immortality  to  hght,"  because  it  shows  us  how  we  may  get  rid  of
sin,  the  cause  of  death.  3.  The  gospel  not  only  tells  how  we  may  get  rid  of  sin,
the  cause  of  death,  but  how  we  may  obtain  justification,  the  title  to  life.  4.  As
it  tells  us  how  to  obtain  justification,  which  is  the  title  to  life,  so  it  informs
US  how  we  may  surmount  every  obstacle  that  would  keep  us  from  the  possession
and  enjoyment  of  it.  It  brings  to  our  help  the  power  of  God,  the  wisdom  of
God,  and  the  Spirit  of  God;  in  other  words,  it  presents  to  us  the  Saviour,  in
all  His  fidness,  and  tells  us  how  to  every  believer  in  Him  He  "is  made
wisdom,  and  righteousness,  and  sanctification,  and  redemption."  {Jos.  Smith.)
Eternal  life: — By  what  means  has  Jesus  Christ  brought  Ufe  and  immortality
to  light?  I  bring  a  triple  reply.  By  His  teaching,  by  His  redemption,  by
His  resurrection.  Let  us  touch  upon  each  of  these  points.  1.  By  His  teaching,
I  said ;  but  I  must  explain  my  thought.  Do  I  mean  that  Jesus  Christ  brought
to  men  logical  arguments  in  order  to  prove  eternal  life,  that  He  made  of  them
a  learned,  rigorous,  invincible  demonstration,  that  He  gave  to  the  proofs  which
the  philosophers  employed  before  Him  an  irrefutable  value,  that  He  Himself
added  new  proofs  which  convinced  the  reason  for  ever  ?  Never,  brethren ;  I  will
not  say  that,  because  I  do  not  think  it.  Jesus  Christ  never  undertook  to  prove  the
future  life,  and  you  will  seek  in  vain  on  His  lips  for  a  single  scientific  reasoning
which  had  that  aim :  the  gospel  no  more  demonstrates  the  future  life  than  it


56  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i.

demonstrates  the  existence  of  God.  Brought  it  to  light !  Ho\t  ?  What  must  be
done  in  order  to  bring  immortality  to  light?  Ah!  I  understand  you.  The
mysterious  veil  must  be  removed  which  hides  the  invisible  world  from  us,  that  it
may  be  penetrated  and  its  secrets  told  to  us.  We  ourselves  are  fatally  arrested  on
the  shores  of  the  formidable  ocean  of  death,  and  we  do  not  know  whether  any  new
land  shines  there,  beyond  the  flood,  on  the  mysterious  horizon.  Darkness  covers
its  waves  ;  we  try  to  throw  light  upon  them,  to  direct  the  rays  of  our  thought
upon  their  depths ;  but  that  thought,  which  can  follow  the  stars  in  their  courses
and  calculate  the  laws  of  the  world,  is  exhausted  in  the  haze.  We  listen,  and  we
hear  only  the  monotonous  noise  of  the  billows  in  which  the  groanings  of  all  past
generations  seem  to  be  mingled,  swallowed  up  in  the  common  shipwreck  which
awaits  us  all.  No  one  has  come  from  that  world,  we  say,  to  relate  its  secrets  to  us.
But  let  some  one  appear,  let  him  satisfy  our  ardent  curiosity,  let  him  tell  us  what
heaven  is,  let  him  depict  its  beauties,  let  him  recount  the  life  which  is  the  lot  of
the  happy  in  glory,  and  our  thirst  will  at  least  be  appeased.  Now,  has  Jesus  Christ
done  that  ?  Has  He  related  to  us  what  passes  in  heaven  ?  Has  He  unveiled  its
mysteries  to  us?  So  little,  as  has  been  often  remarked,  that  the  gospel  yields
nothing  here  to  our  curiosity.  If  to  bring  immortality  to  light  signifies  to  relate  the
secrets  of  the  invisible  world,  it  must  resolutely  be  said,  Jesus  Christ  has  not  done
that.  How  striking  does  that  moderation  appear  when  we  think  that  Jesus  Christ
could  so  easily  have  inflamed  the  souls  of  His  disciples,  and  encouraged  them  to  die,
by  depicting  to  them  the  splendours  and  the  enjoyments  of  the  world  beyond!
EecaU  the  many  founders  of  religion  and  false  prophets  who  sent  their  disciples  to
death,  intoxicating  them  with  the  promise  of  the  delights  which  paradise  reserved
for  them.  In  the  teaching  of  Jesus  Christ  there  is  nothing  like  that.  We  see  what
Jesus  Christ  has  not  done,  and  what  we  might  have  expected  from  Him.  I  come
back  to  my  question :  How  has  He,  by  His  teaching,  brought  life  and  immortality
to  light  ?  To  solve  it,  to  understand  the  novelty  of  His  teaching  as  to  this,  let  us
see  what  ideas  Jesus  Christ  found  reigning  around  Him  on  this  point.  What  did
the  book  of  the  Jews,  the  Old  Testament,  teach  on  this  matter  ?  I  hear  it  affirmed
to-day  that  the  idea  of  the  future  life  is  foreign  to  the  Old  Testament.  In  support
of  that  idea  the  silence  of  the  Old  Testament  is  alleged  as  to  the  point.  Let  na
examine  it.  I  open  the  Old  Testament,  that  book  to  which  the  idea  of  immortality
has  remained,  so  it  is  said  to  us,  almost  unknown,  and  in  its  first  pages  I  see
announced  the  startling  fact  that  death  was  not  in  the  first  intention  and  will  of
God  ;  that  it  is  a  disorder,  an  overthrow,  fruit  of  that  moral  overthrow  called  sin.
Whence  this  conclusion  is  imposed  on  us,  that  man,  created  in  the  image  of  God,  is
made  by  Him  for  immortality.  And  in  the  pages  which  follow,  speaking  of  a
patriarch  who  walked  in  the  ways  of  God,  the  Bible  tells  us  of  Enoch,  as  further  on
it  tells  of  EUjah,  that  he  returned  to  God  without  passing  through  death.  I  come
to  the  law  of  Moses.  There  is  no  mention  made  in  it  of  eternity,  I  acknowledge
this  without  hesitation ;  but  I  beg  to  remark  that  the  question  here  is  of  a  code
addressed  to  a  people,  and  that  peoples  do  not  live  again  as  peoples.  Legislation
relates  only  to  the  present  life  ;  when  even  it  should  have  to  do  with  a  religion  like
that  of  Moses,  it  would  have  to  do  with  it  only  by  its  visible  sides.  The  sole
sanctions  which  it  could  promise  are  temporal  sanctions  ;  it  has  not  to  penetrate
into  the  world  beyond,  for  its  mission  expires  there.  After  the  law  come  the  Psalms
and  the  prophets.  The  Psalms — ah!  I  know  they  often  express,  with  a  bitter
Badness,  the  idea  that  the  activity  of  man  ends  at  the  tomb ;  but,  to-day,  could  you
not  catch  on  the  lips  of  a  Christian  similar  expressions,  when  he  thinks  of  the
brevity  of  life,  of  the  little  time  which  is  given  him  here  below  to  serve  his  God  ?
In  addition  to  which,  by  the  side  of  those  longings,  those  presentiments  of  eternity,
there  are,  I  acknowledge,  doubts,  anxieties,  uncertainties,  in  the  presence  of  death
among  the  believers  of  the  Old  Testament.  It  is  still  the  age  of  twilight;  shadows
are  everywhere  mingled  with  the  hght.  We  can  now  imagine  the  state  of  beliefs  in
the  centre  where  Jesus  Christ  appeared.  What  did  Jesus  Christ  do  ?  He  sanctioned
by  His  Divine  authority  belief  intheEesnrrection  ;  He  openly  combated  Sadduceeism  ;
He  returned  unceasingly  to  the  great  thought  of  a  last  judgment ;  but  is  that  all  T
If  I  wish  to  pum  it  up  in  one  word,  I  do  not  hesitate  to  say  that  Jesus  Christ  has
founded  the  faith  in  eternal  life.  And  how  ?  It  was  not  always  in  simply  supposing
it,  in  illuminating  all  His  teachings  with  that  light,  it  was  not  only  in  speaking  of
heaven,  as  F6nelon  has  so  admirably  put  it,  as  a  son  speaks  of  the  house  of  his
father;  it  is  still,  it  is  above  all,  in  revealing  to  us  an  ideal  of  life  to  which  our
conscience  is  forced  to  subscribe,  and  which  is  a  mockery  if  it  should  not  continue


CHAP.  1.]  11.  TIMOTHY.  67

and  expand  in  eternity.  What  do  all  those  words  teach  me  ?  Eternal  life.  Listen  1
"  Blessed  are  they  that  mourn,  for  they  shall  he  comforted  !  Blessed  are  those  who
hunger  and  thirst  after  righteousness,  for  they  shall  be  filled  I  Blessed  are  the
meek,  for  they  shall  inherit  the  earth  !  Blessed  are  the  merciful,  for  they  shall  obtain
mercy  1 "  Say  if  each  of  those  words  does  not  open  before  your  gaze  hke  a  splen-
did vista  into  eternity  itself.  Tell  me  if  each  of  those  words  does  not  end  by
stretching  into  eternal  life.  This  simple  example  shows,  in  a  striking  manner,  how
Jesus  Christ  has  founded  faith  in  the  future  life.  He  has  founded  it  on  the  human
Boul  itself,  interrogated  in  its  deepest  and  truest  instincts.  Taught  by  that  reflection,
let  us  now  take  His  teaching  in  its  central  and  ruling  thought.  Indeed,  how  shall
we  seek  the  kingdom  of  God,  if  eternity  is  a  vain  word  ?  How  shall  we  pursue  the
ideal  righteousness,  if  we  ought  to  content  ourselves  with  what  the  earth  can  give
us  ?  How  shall  we  follow  after  holiness,  if  we  must  negative  our  living  some  day
freed  from  that  law  of  sin  which  we  carry  in  our  members  ?  How  shall  we  love,  in
short,  how  shall  we  give  our  heart  to  God  and  to  aU  Divine  things,  if  we  should  not
some  day  find  God,  and  in  Him  possess  all  in  eternity  ?  Jesus  Christ  interrogates
the  human  soul,  and  evokes  in  its  depths  those  aspirations  which  eternity  alone  can
satisfy.  Hence,  then,  this  is  how  the  question  shall  be  put:  Faith  in  eternity  will
be  faith  even  in  the  kingdom  of  God.  The  more  we  believe  in  the  triumph  of
righteousness,  of  truth,  of  goodness,  the  more  we  shall  beUeve  in  eternal  life ;  the
more  satisfied  we  are  with  the  present  life,  the  less  we  shall  understand  that  eternity
is  necessary.  Instead  of  saying  then,  as  the  mystics  will  do  after  Christ,  '•  Let  your
imagination  lose  itself  in  ecstasy,  and  you  will  see  heaven  "  ;  instead  of  saying,  as
philosophers  had  said  before  Him,  "  Gather  in  your  reason  all  the  proofs  which
demonstrate  immortality,"  Jesus  Christ  simply  said,  "  Love,  sanctify  yourselves,
thirst  after  righteousness  ;  the  more  you  do  that,  the  more  will  eternity  be  necessary
to  you,  the  more  you  will  love  it,  the  more  you  will  believe  in  it ;  for  to  live  for
holiness  is  to  enter  already,  even  here  below,  into  eternal  life."  So,  for  Jesus
Christ,  eternal  life  begins,  even  here  below,  for  every  soul  submissive  to  God;  that
word  is  used  forty  times  in  the  New  Testament,  and  it  always  designates  the  state
of  a  soul  which  has  entered  into  communion  with  God.  There  alone  is  true  life  in
reality.  Eternity  embraces  the  present  and  the  past  as  well  as  the  future.  Eternity,
we  are  in  etett..  .^l  For  him  who  has  entered  into  the  plan  of  God,  the  heavenly
kingdom  begins  even  here  below  ;  only,  while  here  below,  everything  is  subjected  to
the  blast  of  instability :  in  that  other  economy  which  we  call  heaven,  life  will  be
full  and  lasting,  and  joy  will  be  there  for  ever.  2.  That  is  how  Jesus  Christ,  by  His
teaching,  has  founded  faith  in  eternal  life;  but  even  that  teaching  had  never
sufficed  to  found  that  belief,  if  the  work  of  redemption  had  not  followed  and
crowned  it.  Eternal  life  is  communion  with  God.  But  is  it  sufficient  to  tell  us  so?
No,  we  have  gone  out  from  communion  with  God,  Have  we  not  all  violated  the
law  of  the  heavenly  city,  and  can  we  enter  it  without  a  restorative  act — without  a
holy  pardon  giving  us  access  to  it  ?  The  road  which  leads  us  to  God  passes  the
foot  of  a  cross,  and  if  that  cross  had  not  been  planted  that  road  would  never  have
been  opened  to  a  single  person.  Without  redemption  there  is  no  eternal  life.  It  is
by  His  Cross  as  much  as  by  His  teaching  that  Jesus  Christ  has  brought  immortaUty
to  light.  3.  But  would  the  Cross  itself  have  had  that  efficacy  if  the  Eesurrection
had  not  followed  it  ?  Listen  to  St.  Paul.  When  he  wrote  to  Timothy  that  Jesus  Christ
had  conquered  death  and  brought  hfe  and  immortality  to  light  through  the  gospel,
on  what,  before  aU,  did  he  place  the  accent  if  it  was  not  on  the  resurrection  of  the
Lord  ?  What  would  remain  of  the  gospel  without  the  Besurrection  ?  "  The  person
of  Jesus  Christ  and  His  teaching,"  you  reply,  "  His  life  and  His  words,  will  always
shine  with  the  same  lustre.  What  could  a  miracle  add  to  the  sublimity  of  His
discourses,  or  of  His  character  ?  "  The  reply  seems  plausible ;  and  yet,  I  would
ask  your  attention  here  to  a  fact.  We  have  heard  in  our  days  many  men  holding
the  same  language,  who  wanted  a  Christ  witbout  miracles  and  without  a  resurrec-
tion, who  asked  us  what  such  prodigies  added  to  His  holiness.  Ye  irs  have  passed,
we  have  seen  those  men  following  the  current  of  their  thoughts  ;  little  by  httle  the
perfect  holiness  of  Christ  is  obscured  in  their  eyes ;  they  have  discovered  blots  in
His  Hfe  ;  His  Divine  aureole  has  grown  pale ;  they  see  no  more  in  Him  to-day  than
the  sage  of  Nazareth,  suldime,  but  ignorant,  and  a  sinner  like  all  the  children  of
men.  In  reflecting  on  this,  I  have  found  that  the  result  of  an  irresistible  logic  was
there.  The  person  of  Christ  is  one  like  His  teaching.  You  cannot  arbitrarily  strike
off  such  or  such  parts.  All  holds  together  in  Him  ;  His  life,  His  words  tend  to  the
Besurrectiop  »» ta  thair  nature^  fulfilnaent ;  everyjiing  in  Hiro  Rupposes  a  victory


58  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  i.

OTer  death ;  if  that  viotoiy  has  not  been  obtained,  His  aathority  is  shaken,  Hit
words  lose  something  of  their  serene  certitude,  His  ideal  grandeur  grows  dim.  As
we  have  said,  facts  prove  it  every  day.  Let  us  suppose,  however,  that  it  is  not  so.
Let  OS  admit  that  Christ,  conquered  by  death  Uke  all  men,  remains  as  grand,  as  holy
Have  you  reflected  on  the  other  side  of  the  question  f  Have  you  asked  yourself  if  faith
in  the  future  life  would  not  for  ever  be  shaken  on  the  day  when  the  fact  of  the  resur-
rection of  Jesus  Christ  should  have  disappeared  from  history?  (E.  Bersier,  D.D.)
The  reasonableness  of  life : — It  may  at  flrst  be  thought  that  in  the  words  of  the  text
St.  Paul  has  overstated  the  originality  of  his  gospel  in  its  doctrine  of  immortality.
For,  on  the  one  hand,  we  And  the  tokens  of  Arm  beUef  in  a  Ufe  beyond  the  grave
among  the  very  lowest  savages :  it  is  shown  in  their  legends,  in  their  accounts  of
dreams,  in  their  customs  of  burial.  But  St.  Paul  does  not,  could  not,  deny  that  the
expectation  of  an  eternal  life  and  the  suspicion  of  immortahty  were  astir  among
men  before  Christ  rose  from  the  dead,  the  flrst-fruits  of  them  that  slept :  what  he
does  claim  is  that  through  the  gospel  of  the  Resurrection  God  has  brought  the  truth
to  light,  and  substituted  for  the  shifting  glimpses,  the  twilight  hope,  the  unfinished
prophecy  of  the  past,  a  fact  as  stable  as  his  prison  walls,  %  fact  which  brings
immortality  itself  into  the  broad  light  of  day,  and  sets  it,  for  those  who  believe  that
Christ  is  risen,  among  the  steadiest  axioms  of  life.  He  is  satisfied  that  his  eyes
have  seen  the  form,  his  ears  have  heard  the  voice  of  One  who  liveth,  and  was  dead,
and  is  alive  for  evermore.  The  expectation  of  a  future  Ufe  had  indeed  long  been  in
the  world :  but  it  had  been  a  very  different  thing  from  this,  la  the  infantile  mind
of  the  savage  it  had  been  little  mure  than  the  mere  inability  to  imagine  how  he
ooold  cease  to  be  :  it  cost  him  less  effort  to  think  of  the  present  as  continuing  than
as  stopping:  he  had  not  fancy  or  energy  enough  to  conceive  an  end.  It  was
impossible  that  a  state  of  mind  so  purely  negative  should  long  take  rank  as  an
expectation  among  civihsed  men :  in  their  higher  and  more  active  souls  it  must
either  become  positive  or  pass  away.  It  does  become  positive  to  the  Greek  and  to
the  Jew :  but  at  the  same  time  it  loses  something  of  that  unfaltering  certainty  with
which  it  swayed  the  savage.  Even  David  wonders  "  What  profit  is  there  in  my
blood,  when  I  go  dovm  to  the  pit  t  "  even  Hezekiah  cries  to  God,  "  The  grave  cannot
praise  Thee  ;  death  cannot  celebrate  Thee  :  they  that  go  down  into  the  pit  cannot
hope  for  Thy  truth."  Whatever  Christianity  has  done,  or  failed  to  do,  this  at  least
we  need  not  fear  to  claim  for  it :  that  it  has  availed  to  plant  the  belief  of  our
immortahty  among  the  deepest  and  most  general  convictions  of  oar  race  :  that  it
has  borne  even  into  the  least  imaginative  hearts  the  unfailing  hope  of  a  pure  and
glorious  life  bejond  the  death  of  the  body :  that  it  has  shot  through  our  language,
our  hterature,  our  customs,  and  our  moral  ideas  the  searching  light  of  a  judgment
to  come  and  the  quickening  glory  of  a  promised  Heaven  ;  that  it  has  sustained  and
intensified  this  hope  through  countless  changes  of  thought  and  feeUng  in  centuries
of  quickest  intellectual  development :  and  that  it  is  now  impossible  to  conceive  the
force  which  could  dislodge  from  so  many  milUon  hearts  the  axiom  which  they  have
learned  from  the  gospel  of  the  Besurrection.  But  is  there  in  this  achievement  any
evidence  that  that  gospel  is  true  ?  Let  us  seek  some  answer  to  this  question.  And
first,  may  not  this  be  said  with  truth :  that  there  are  some  conceptions  of  our  life,
of  ourselves,  and  of  this  present  world,  which,  as  moral  beings,  we  have  no  right  to
entertain?  We  have  no  right,  for  instance,  to  entertain,  still  less  to  impart,  the
theory  that  there  is  any  sin  which  men  cannot  avoid,  any  vice  which  they  had
better  practise :  we  have  no  right  to  say  to  ourselves  or  others  that  our  humanity  is
naturally  vile  or  brutal.  Conscience  can  condemn  a  thought  as  distinctly  and
authoritatively  as  it  can  an  act :  and  there  are  abstract  views  of  ourselves  and  our
life  which  can  only  be  accepted  by  doing  ruinous  violence  to  the  moral  sense.  Such,
and  so  criminal,  is  or  would  be  the  belief  that  this  present  life  is  all  unreal  and
meaningless,  a  thing  to  be  mocked  at  or  despised  as  silly  and  abortive :  as  though
all  its  interests  and  issues,  even  when  they  seem  most  free  and  hopeful,  were  really
in  the  relentless  grip  of  a  bUnd  or  cruel  force,  and  its  government  or  anarchy,  with
all  that  we  call  law  and  right  and  reason,  a  mere  amusement  for  some  scornful
spectator  of  our  manifold  delusion.  We  have  no  right,  even  in  thought,  so  to  jeer
at  ourselves :  no  man,  being  rational  and  moral,  may  think  so  meanly  of  his
manhood.  We  hve  then,  we  go  on  working,  upon  the  behef  that  the  main  and
dominant  element  in  life  is  reasonable  and  righteous :  it  is  a  belief  which  morality
inculcates  as  a  duty ;  without  which  effort  and  progress  are  words  drained  of  all
meaning.  But  does  this  world,  indeed,  display  the  character  which  we  are  thns
forced  to  impute  to  it,  if  all  the  issues  of  a  human  life  are  finished  all  its


CHA».  I.]  n.  TIMOTHY.  59

drama  played,  its  accounts  all  balanced,  and  its  story  closed,  when  the  frail
body  dies  ;   if  life  and   immortality  indeed  have  not  been  brought  to  light  ?
But  there  are  unnumbered  souls  for  whom  only  the  hope  which   Christianity
has    given    them    can  justify    the  patient  continuance  of    life,    or    arrest  the
quick  growth  of  disappointment  towards  despair  and  madness.     (F.  Paget,  D.D.)
The  argument  for  iminortality : — It  seems  to  me  a  very  striking  evidence  of  the
pressure  of  the  burden  of  life  in  our  times  that  so  many  thoughtful  and  cultivated
men  and  women  outside  the  pale  of  our  Churches  are  not  only  indifferent  to,  but
contemptuous  of,  immortality.     I  trace  the  present  terrible  questionings,  to  use  no
stronger  word,  of  the  fundamental  realities  of  our  being,  our  relation  to  God  as  a
living  Being  and  our  personal  immortality,  to  no  ignoble  source.    I  believe  that
they  are  mainly  due  to  the  increased  pressure  of  the  burden  of  hfe  under  our  pre-
sent conditions  of  highly  developed  sympathies  and  lofty  views  of  duty.     Hence
life  seems  full  of  sadness  and  confusion,  and  the  doctrine  is  rather  welcomed  which
finds  many  able,  though  sad,  preachers  in  these  days  that  at  death  we  have  done
with  it  for  ever.     The  doctrine  of  immortality  is  not  so  much  formally  asserted  in
Scripture  as  assumed  throughout  as  the  basis  of  its  appeals,  and  of  its  treatment  of
the  questions  of  conduct,  of  duty,  with  which  it  occupies  itself.     It  is  no  new  truth
which  the  New  Testament  discovers  and  makes  known ;  an  old  truth,  the  oldest
truth,  old  as  the  constitution  of  man's  nature,  is  *'  brought  to  light  by  the  gospel."
The  dim  form  of  it  is  brought  out  into  the  daylight,  and  all  men  not  only  feel,  but
see,  it  to  be  a  truth  of  God.    Here,  in  the  Bible,  is  the  strong  confirmation  and
assurance  of  the  doctrine.    No  man  can  accept  this  revelation  as  containing  God's
counsel,  and  deny  or  question  man's  immortality.    But  while  our  faith  rests
Becnrely  on  the  revelation  and  the  history  which  the  ages  have  handed  down,  it  is
deeply  important  to  consider  how  far  the  truth  is  supported  or  discredited  by  all
that  we  can  gather  from  other  sources  of  the  nature,  the  constitution,  and  the
destiny  of  man.    How  far  does  the  study  of  man's  nature  and  history  help  or  hinder
our  belief  in  immortahty  ?    The  argument  is  as  follows :  The  belief  that  Christ,  the
risen  Christ,  was  reigning  with  almighty  power,  and  subduing  aU  things  to  Him-
self,  was  a  thought  ever  present  with  the  men  of  all  classes,  orders,  and  callings,
who  wrought  most  mightily  on  the  reconstitution  upon  a  Christian  basis  of  human
society.    I  say,  reconstitution  on  a  Christian  basis  of  human  society.    I  wish  I  had
time  to  go  into  the  question ;  I  think  it  would  not  be  difficult  to  show  that  human
society  within  the  civilised  area  was  literally  perishing  of  moral  corruption,  when
the  light  and  truth  which  Christianity  brought  into  the  world  restored  it  at  the
very  spring.    Nothing  is  more  marked  in  the  apostolic  age  than  the  contrast  between
the  despondent,  despairing  tone  of  the  noblest  pagan  literature,  which  utters  its
deepest  wail  over  the  hopeless  corruption  of  society,  and  the  tone  of  vital  ani-
mation, of  buoyant,   exultant  hope  which  pervades  the  whole  field  of  the  in-
tellectual and  spiritual  activity  of  the  Christian  Church.    The  one  is  manifestly
the  wail  of  a  world  settling  into  death,  the  other  the  joyful  cry  of  a  world
new-born,  and  conscious  of  a  vigorous,  aspiring  life.    And  behind  the  latter,
its  inspiring   idea,   its   moving  force,  was   the  reign   of  the   risen  and  living
Lord.    It  was  not  the  tale  of  Calvary  simply,  the  history  of  the  martyrdom
of  martyrdoms,  mighty  as  was  the  influence  which  that  could  not  but  wield
over  men.    It  was  distinctly  belief  in  Christ  as  a  reigning  King :  one  who  was  a
present  and  transcendent  force  in  the  government  of  all  human  affairs.    I  do  not
say  that  the  result  of  this  vision  of  the  reigning  Christ  was  such  heavenly  order  on
earth  as  reigns  on  high.    Alas  I  no.     Man's  passion,  selfishness,  vanity,  and  lust
are  too  strong.    But  I  do  affirm  that  this  was  the  strongest  principle,  tbe  conquer-
ing principle  of  resi::tance  to  all  that  had  been  wasting  and  destroying  heathen
society  before  Christ  appeared.     It  was  this  which  created  the  stern  conflict  against
sin,  vice,  and  wrong  which  has  been  fought  out  through  all  the  Christian  ages.     So
from  the  open  tomb,  whose  bars  the  Saviour  burst  as  He  arose,  a  flood  of  glorious,
kindling  lis- ht  streamed  forth;  it  spread  as  dawn  sprf ads  in  the  morning  sky;  it
touched  all  forms  of  things  in  man's  dark  and  dreary  world  with  its  spleudour,  and
called  man  forth  from  the  tomb  in  which  his  higher  life  seemed  buried  to  a  new
career  of  fruitful,  sunlit  activity,  opening  a  wondrous  depth  of  meaning:  in  the
Saviour's  words,  •'  The  hour  is  coming,  and  now  is,  when  the  dead  shall  hear  the
voice  of  the  Son  of  God,  and  they  that  hear  shall  live."    The  exceeding  readiness
and  joyfulness  with  which  a  truth  so  transcendeotlv  wonderful,  so  far  out  of  and
above  the  visible  order  of  things,  was  welcomed  everywhere,  penetrating  men's
hearts  as  though  they  were  made  for  it,  as  sunUght  penetrates  the  darkness  of  the


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  u

world,  would  be  utterly  inexplicable,  except  on  the  theory  that  they  were  made  for
it ;  that  there  was  that  in  their  nature  which  was  pining  and  longing  for  it ;  which
was  made  to  live  and  rejoice  in  the  light  of  it,  as  flowers  drink  in  the  light  and  the
dew.  They  received  the  truth  as  truly  the  most  natural  of  all  things,  according  to
the  order  of  the  higher  nature ;  and  they  lodged  it  at  once  as  an  unquestionable
verity  in  the  treasury  of  their  beliefs  and  hopes.  It  is  easy  to  say  in  answer  to
this  that  it  was  a  fascinating  doctrine,  and  won  its  way  easily  by  the  promise  which
it  appeared  to  hold  forth  to  mankind.  No  wonder,  it  is  said,  men  naturally  long
for  immortality,  and  catch  easily  at  any  doctrine,  however  delusive,  which  seems  to
respond  to  their  longing  and  justify  their  hope.  "  Man  naturally  longs  for  immor-
tality." Let  us  look  at  it  a  little,  and  ask  ourselves  why  he  longs  ;  how  the  idea
could  rise  and  take  such  firm  possession  of  the  strongest  and  most  progressive
races  of  our  world.  If  he  longs,  it  is  somehow  because  he  was  made  to  long.  Out
of  something  in  his  constitution  the  longing  springs.  Now  nature  through  all  her
orders  seems  to  have  made  all  creatures  contented  with  the  conditions  of  their  life.
The  brute  seems  to  rest  with  full  contentment  on  the  resources  of  his  world.  Hia
soul  shows  no  sign  of  being  tormented  by  dreams ;  his  life  withers  under  no  blight
of  regret.  All  creatures  rest  in  their  orders,  and  are  content  and  glad.  Violate
the  order  of  their  nature,  rob  them  of  their  congenial  surroundings,  and  they  grow
restless,  sad,  and  poor.  Eob  a  flower  of  light  or  moisture,  and  it  struggles  with
something  Uke  agonising  earnestness  in  quest  of  them.  This  well-known  tendency
in  perverted  things  to  revert  to  the  primitive  type  seems  to  be  set  in  nature  as  a
wonderful  sign  that  things  are  at  rest  in  their  natural  conditions — content  with
their  life  and  its  sphere  ;  and  that  only  by  ways  of  which  they  are  quite  unconscious,
and  which  rob  them  of  no  enjoyment  of  or  contentment  with  their  present,  they
prepare  for  the  farther  and  higher  developments  of  life.  This  restless  longing  in
man,  then,  for  that  which  is  beyond  the  range  of  his  visible  world,  this  haunting
of  the  unseen  by  his  thoughts  and  hopes,  this  •'  eager  hope,  this  fond  desire,  this
longing  after  immortality,"  what  does  it  mean  ?  Has  Nature,  which  makes  all
things,  in  all  orders,  at  rest  in  their  sphere,  wantonly  and  cruelly  made  man,  her
masterpiece,  restless  and  sad  ?  We  are  driven  to  believe  by  the  very  order  of  Nature
that  this  insatiable  longing,  which  somehow  she  generates  and  sustains  in  man,  and
which  is  the  largest  feature  in  his  life,  is  not  visionary  and  futile,  but  profoundly
significant,  pointing  with  the  surest,  firmest  finger  to  the  reality,  the  soUd  enduring
reality,  of  that  sphere  of  being  to  which  she  has  taught  him  to  lift  his  thoughts
and  aspirations,  and  in  which  he  will  find,  according  to  the  universal  order  of  the
creation,  the  harmonious  completeness  of  his  life.  It  spread,  then,  the  beUef  in
this  truth,  rapidly,  joyfully,  irresistibly,  not  by  art,  not  by  fraud,  not  by  force,  but
because  it  was  of  the  nature  of  hght  which  inevitably  conquers  and  scatters  dark-
ness. Men  saw  themselves  and  their  life,  their  present,  their  future,  in  the  light  of
it,  and  the  revelation  was  convincing.  We  have  here,  not  the  longing  only,  but,  to
carry  it  no  further,  we  have  the  life  of  Christendom  for  eighteen  centuries  built  on
it ;  we  have  it  as  the  mainspring  of  human  progress  for  incomparably  the  most
civilised,  developed,  and  progressive  era  of  human  history.  How  did  it  come  there?
Either — 1.  This  result  grew  by  natural  development  out  of  the  precedent  states
and  conditions  of  Ufe,  ascending  under  the  guidance  of  what,  for  want  of  a  better
understanding  of  things,  men  call  Nature — the  vital  force  which  is  behind  all  the
movement  and  progress  of  the  world — through  the  successive  stages  of  creature
existence  to  the  height  of  man.  In  that  case,  what  men  caU  Nature  would  be
responsible  for  it — and  then  this  would  result.  There  is  no  freedom  or  intelligent
choice  in  Nature,  according  to  the  materialists.  Everything  that  is  grows  out  of  ita
antecedents  by  inexorable  law.  But  what  it  is  impossible  to  believe  is  that  Nature,
the  vital  force,  call  it  what  you  will,  has  pressed  on  the  development  up  to  man,
and  endowed  man  with  this  propulsive  movement  of  his  whole  being  towards  the
sphere  of  the  spiritual,  the  immortal,  the  eternal,  and  then  confesses  its  failure  to
carry  it  further,  leaving  its  noblest  child  a  prey  to  aimless  longings  and  barren
hope.  Is  there  everywhere  glorious  progress  up  to  man,  while  for  man  the  way
onward  and  upward,  which  Nature  has  somehow  taught  him  to  look  for  and  to
struggle  towards,  is  finally  and  for  ever  barred  ?  Is  a  broken  column  the  perfect
emblem  of  this  great  universe?  Is  its  highest  achievement  a  sad,  wistful,  hopeless
life?  For  that  is  what  man's  life  inevitably  becomes  when  he  is  cut  ofi  from  God
and  immortaUty.  Nature  does  nothing  in  vain  in  the  creation.  All  works  into  a
sublime  procession  of  progress.  Let  no  one  tempt  you  to  believe  that  the  proces-
sion halts,  and  that  the  progress  which  stretches  through  the  whole  chord  of  being.


CHAP.  «.]  II.  TIMOTHY,  61

from  a  nebula  to  a  constellation,  from  an  atom  to  a  world,  from  a  cell-germ  to  a
man,  is  broken  off  in  man  and  dies  out  for  ever.  2.  Still  more  impossible  is  it  to
believe  that  this  hope  has  no  substance  behind  the  veil  to  which  it  clings,  and  in
which  as  an  anchor  of  the  soul  it  holds,  on  the  other  hypothesis,  that  the
order  of  things  is  the  work  of  a  Divine  hand,  that  the  wisdom  and  power  of  God
are  at  work  on  all  developments  and  progresses  of  life.  It  seems  blankly  impossible
to  believe  that  God  could  have  created  man  to  imagine,  to  frame  to  himself,  a
picture  of  a  whole  universe  of  being  behind  the  veil  of  sense,  and  beyond  the  river
of  death ;  could  serenely  watch  him  as  he  imagines  it,  and  pleases  himself  with
forecasting  it  as  the  theatre  of  his  immortal  Ufe  ;  could  use  it  as  an  instrument  to
stir  and  stimulate  his  sluggish  nature,  and  keep  his  faculties  on  the  strain  of
effort  by  hope,  when  it  is  all  a  wretched  illusion.  Can  it  be  believed  for  a  moment
that  a  wise  Being  can  so  have  arranged  His  world  that  His  loftiest  creatures  in
nature  and  endowment  can  only  live  the  lower  life  by  dreaming  about  a  higher,
which  is  but  a  dream  ?  If  that  is  your  scheme  of  the  great  creation,  with  man  to
head  it,  what  kind  of  demon  do  you  make  of  your  God?  No  1  Whether  we  look
at  this  aspect  and  attitude  of  man  towards  the  eternal  as  the  last  outcome  of  the
vital  pressure,  be  it  what  it  may,  which  is  working  through  creation,  or  as  the  fruit
of  the  design  of  an  intelligent  Creator,  who  saw  this  end  from  the  beginning  of  the
processions  of  life — equally  we  are  driven  to  the  conviction  which  revelation  makes
sure,  that  man  on  the  topstone  of  the  material  creation  plants  his  foot  on  the
threshold  of  a  higher,  a  spiritual,  an  eternal  world.  (J.  Baldwin  Brown,  B.A.)
Death  abolished — life  brought  to  light : — If  the  railway  runs  to  a  particular  station
and  there  stops,  we  call  that  station  a  terminus ;  and  the  association  of  finality
springs  up  in  cur  mind  with  regard  to  it,  which  has  an  influence  upon  our  thoughts
and  feelings  during  the  whole  of  the  journey,  and  especially  towards  its  close.
*'  That  is  the  station  where  we  all  stop  and  leave  the  carriages,  having  exhausted
the  value  of  our  tickets."  But  if  a  new  length  of  line  be  added,  although  the
station  remains,  it  is  a  different  fact ;  its  terminal  character  is  abolished ;  the
association  of  finality  is  dissolved  from  henceforth  in  our  minds ,  and  we  think  of
the  station  no  longer  as  a  place  where  we  must  all  come  to  a  standstill,  but  as  a
point  of  brief  tarrying  on  the  way  to  other  destinations.  Now  Christ,  by  Hia
revelation  of  life  and  immortahty,  has  added  a  line  of  indefinite  length  to  the  great
human  journey ;  it  stretches  away  through  prospects  of  vast  extent  and  inconceiv-
able grandeur ;  in  the  thought  of  life  the  terminahty  of  death  is  lost,  and  it  becomes
only  a  fresh  starting-point  beyond  which  the  noblest  scenery  begins  to  open.  Let
us,  then,  trace  out  some  of  those  common  experiences  of  our  minds  which  lead  as
np  towards  Christ's  revelation,  which  predispose  us  beforehand  to  expect  that  such
a  revelation  would  be  given  to  us,  and  enable  us  the  better  to  appreciate  its  evidences
and  welcome  its  reality  when  it  arrives.  1.  Take  first  our  natural  reluctance  at  the
thought  of  death  as  a  terminus.  It  is  easy  to  see  that  wherever  men  have  thought
seriously,  felt  keenly,  loved  deeply,  acted  nobly,  they  have  known  this  reluctance  against
death  which  reason  could  not  overcome.  Take  as  illustration  those  plaints  which
break  out  again  and  again  in  the  sad,  sweet  music  of  the  Book  of  Job.  Listen  again  to
this  strain  of  King  Hezekiah  on  his  recovery  from  a  dangerous  sickness  :  "  I  said  in
the  cattrng  off  of  my  days,  I  shaU  go  to  the  gates  of  the  grave  ;  I  am  deprived  of
the  residue  of  my  years.  I  said,  I  shall  not  see  the  Lord,  even  the  Lord  in  the
land  of  the  living.  .  .  .  The  grave  caimot  praise  Thee,  death  cannot  celebrate  Thee;
they  that  go  down  into  the  pit  cannot  hope  for  Thy  truth.  The  hving,  the  living,
he  shaU  praise  Thee,  as  I  do  this  day."  We  are  struck,  in  these  examples,  with
the  complete  vacancy  with  regard  to  the  future.  Apparently  men  had  no  power  to
conceive  of  death  in  any  other  aspect  than  a  terminus.  They  could  not  get  the
idea  of  continuation  into  their  thoughts ;  we  cannot  get  it  out  of  ours.  The  ex-
planation is  that  it  has  pleased  God  to  reveal  truth  to  the  world  by  degrees  ;  and
the  want  of  some  one  great  truth  leaves  the  mind  helpless.  It  cannot  see  what  is
to  be  seen.  If  we  look  at  a  Chinese  picture  we  perceive  that  the  artist  does  not
understand  the  truths  of  light  and  distance  and  gradation.  He  sees  nature  as  a
flat  screen,  and  paints  her  so.  He  cannot  make  the  eye  travel  away  into  the  back-
ground of  limitless  distance,  as  our  great  masters  do.  He  wants  the  knowledge  of
a  few  truths  which  would  at  once  alter  his  whole  conceptions  of  nature  and  mode
of  representing  it.  I  have  stood  in  a  gloomy  chamber,  where  my  vision  was
bounded  by  its  walls ;  but  suddenly  a  sliding  door  has  been  drawn,  and  there  has
burst  upon  me  a  glorious  view  of  rushing  stream,  and  rock,  and  woodland,  arched
hj  the  blue  sky,  and  suggesting  enchanting  distances.    If  ever  I  enter  that  pavilioa


62  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRJTOR.  [chap.  U

again,  I  shall  not  look  upon  the  dead  wall  with  a  blank  and  baffled  gaze ;  I  shall
already  seem  to  pierce  it  in  imagination  before  the  door  is  drawn,  and  be  gazing
ont  on  the  bright  scene  beyond.  Men  in  those  early  days  were  groping  for  that
sliding  door  unconsciously.  The  sadness  and  impatience  at  the  bounding  line  of
death  impelled  their  thoughts  to  question  whether  it  was  really  a  bounding  line.
Their  growing  intelligent  faith  in  the  goodness  of  God  worked  in  the  same  direction
with  the  natural  reluctance  against  death,  till  the  first  spark  of  the  nobler  truth
was  at  last  struck  out ;  the  first  lines  of  gold  appeared  along  the  horizon,  heralding
the  coming  of  the  Divine  Light-Bringer.  2.  Next,  we  may  note  the  great  deterrent
which  the  idea  of  immortality  has  proved  to  be  in  human  life.  Wht^n  once  an
inkling  of  the  great  truth  had  entered  men's  minds  it  held  them,  and  held  them
with  increasing  tenacity.  It  appears  to  be  one  of  those  truths  which,  once
glimpsed,  can  never  again  be  wholly  lost  sight  of.  There  are,  we  know,  to  be
found  those  who  stoutly  deny  in  words  a  future  life ;  but  it  may  be  questioned
whether  they  can  shake  off  the  yoke  of  the  thought  from  their  deliberations.  No
man  can  be  certain  there  is  not  a  future  life,  and  this  uncertainty  is  quite  sufficient,
as  Shakespeare  says  in  a  well-known  passage,  to  "  puzzle  the  will,"  and  make  the
man  draw  back  from  the  verge  of  a  crime.  There  are  certain  conditions  of  the
human  mind  which  appear  to  require  the  check  supplied  by  the  belief  in  immor-
tality. It  seems  to  be  needed  to  ballast  the  temper  under  great  sufferings  and  great
temptations.  Under  the  Boman  Empire  suicide  was  sadly  common,  because,  there
being  no  powerful  belief  of  immortality,  men  thought  themselves  at  liberty  to  dis-
pose of  their  lives  as  they  pleased.  And  we  may  justly  argue  that  the  full  revela-
tion of  life  and  immortality  by  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  was  called  for  by  the
saddened,  wearied,  dejected  mental  condition  into  which  the  world,  with  all  its
thought  and  civilisation,  had  fallen.  The  belief  in  a  future  life  is  doubtless  an
immense  restraint  upon  wickedness,  even  although  many  do  not  know,  or  will  not
admit,  what  it  is  that  restrains  them.  One  of  the  keenest  judges  of  human  nature
(Dr.  Johnson)  once  said  :  "  The  belief  in  immortality  is  impressed  upon  all  men,
and  all  men  act  under  an  impression  of  it,  however  they  may  talk,  and  though,
perhaps,  they  may  be  t'carcely  sensible  of  it."  To  this  the  reply  was  made  that
some  people  seemed  to  have  not  the  least  notion  of  immortality ;  and  a  distin-
guished man  was  mentioned  as  an  exnmple.  "  Sir,"  the  great  moralist  replied,  "  if
it  were  not  for  the  notion  of  immortality,  he  would  cut  a  throat  to  fill  his  pockets."
History  and  human  life  in  general  show  us  that  the  nature  of  men  requires  repres-
sion; and  that  human  laws  and  government  are  not  sufficient  for  the  purpose,
although  they  act  upon  the  same  powerful  principle  of  fear.  Whenever  and
wherever  the  awful  idea  of  a  future  has  been  pressed  home  upon  men,  there  has
been  a  speedy  lessening  of  violence,  ferocity,  and  crime.  8.  Lastly,  let  us  think  of
the  belief  of  immortality  as  a  needed  incentive  in  human  nature.  We  need
stimulus,  as  well  as  repression.  The  one  fact  is  as  clear  and  constant  as  the  other.
We  are  naturally  indolent  except  in  the  pursuit  of  our  desires,  tastes,  interests.  It
is  doubtful  whetljer  any  man  loves  and  pursues  goodness  purely  for  its  own  sake  ;
at  all  events,  to  any  considerable  extent.  The  revelation  of  a  future  life  comes  in
to  meet  this  requirement ;  for  all  that  goads  and  stirs  up  our  spiritual  energies
draws  its  power  from  immortality,  and  from  nowhere  else.  We  are  promised  in  an
especial  manner  that  we  are  to  enjoy  the  sense  of  power  and  victory  ;  and  every
pure  and  powerful  instinct  of  our  nature  is  offered  its  appropriate  gratification  in  a
state  where  Ood  hath  prepared  fur  them  that  love  Him  things  which  eye  hath  not
seen  nor  ear  heard,  neither  bath  it  entered  into  the  heart  of  man  to  conceive.  {E.
Johnston,  M.A.)  Continuity  : — The  message  of  Easter,  the  gospel  of  the  Resurrec-
tion, is  the  revelation  of  the  Divine  continuity  of  life,  which  shows  ns  what  life  is
already,  with  its  mysterious  connections  and  conflict ;  it  shows  us  how  we  may  con-
ceive of  life  bereafter  in  its  fiual  consummation ;  it  shows  us  how  we  may  even
now  gain  for  the  fulfilment  of  our  appointed  work  the  support  of  a  Divine  fellow-
ship. The  revelation  of  the  risen  Christ  is  the  revelation  of  life  present
Believers  are  undoubtedly  to  blame  for  allowing  it  to  be  supposed  for  a  single
instant  that  their  faith  deals  only,  or  deals  mainly,  with  the  future.  The  clear
voice  of  apostolic  teaching  is,  "  We  have  passed  out  of  death  into  life."  We  have
passed,  and  not  we  shall  pass  hereafter.  "This  is  eternal  life"  in  actual
fruition,  and  not  this  will  bring  life  as  a  later  reward.  *'  Our  citizenship  is  in
heaven."  "  We  have  come  to  Mount  Zion,  and  unto  the  city  of  the  living  God,
the  heavenly  Jerusalem."  And,  indeed,  a  gospel  to  be  real  must  bn  present.  No
one  can  look  upon  the  phenomena  of  life  without  feeling  its  oppressing  riddles^


CHAP.  1.1  IT.  TIMOTHY.  63

We  need  some  light  npon  them.  Earthly  life  is,  and  it  must  be,  fragmentary,
Borrow-laden,  sinful.  Who  has  not  asked  at  some  still  moment,  "  How  is  my  brief
span  of  years  crowded  with  little  cares  and  little  duties,  relating  to  that  past  out  of
which  it  came,  and  to  that  future  into  which  it  will  soon  pass  "  ?  In  the  risen  Christ
we  see  the  coherence,  the  unity  of  all  action,  and  the  real  significance  of  simple
work  done  in  silence  and  obscurity.  The  manhood  which  Christ  raised  to  heaven
was  enriched  by  the  heritage  of  long  ages,  and  matured  in  the  fulfilment  of  the
humblest  oflSces  of  duty.  A  brief  ministry  only  revealed  what  had  been  slowly
shaped  in  unnoticed  and  forgotten  ways.  Looking  to  Him,  living  in  Him  here  and
now,  we  know  that  each  human  life  is  one  in  all  its  parts,  and  is  essentially
Divine ;  we  know  that  it  is  one  by  the  subtle  influences  which  pass  on  from  year  to
year,  and  from  day  to  day ;  one  by  the  continuous  action  of  the  will  which  shapes
the  fabrics  of  our  character.  We  know  that  it  is  Divine ;  Divine  in  its  present,  if
unseen,  influence.  Divine  in  the  assurance  of  its  future  consummation.  We  know
also  that  the  unity  of  each  single  life  is  an  image  of  the  larger  unity  in  which  each
single  hfe  is  included.  In  the  risen  Christ  we  see  the  outcome  of  suffering ;  we
cannot  admit  that  in  His  life,  closed  to  the  eyes  of  men  in  betrayal,  desertion,
torture,  there  was  one  useless  pang,  one  shadow  of  failure.  All  ministered  to  the
same  end.  In  the  issue,  even  as  we  see  it  now,  human  judgments  have  been
reversed.  In  the  risen  Christ  we  see  the  overthrow  of  sin.  The  end  of  sin  is
death,  and  Christ  made  death  itself  the  way  to  life.  The  resurrection  of  Christ  ia
thus  a  revelation  of  life  present,  disclosing  the  unity  and  the  grandeur  of  the  cause
to  which,  with  great  services  or  small,  we  all  minister,  drawing  joy,  the  joy  of  the
Lord,  out  of  our  transitory  sadnesses  and  disappointments,  and  pains,  bringing  the
assurance  that  our  last  enemy  shall  be  destroyed.  It  is  also  a  revelation  of  life
future.  It  is  indeed  a  revelation  of  the  future,  because  it  is  a  revelation  of  the
present.  Future  and  present  are  essentially  combined  in  the  eternal.  Under
this  second  aspect  the  Eesurrection  conveys  a  two-fold  lesson :  it  reveals  the
permanence  of  the  present  in  the  future  ;  it  reveals  also  in  the  future,  as  far  as  we
can  gain  the  thought,  a  form  of  life,  fuller,  better,  more  complete  than  this  of  our
separated  personalities.  In  Him,  the  representative  of  humanity,  we  see  that  the
perfection  of  earthly  life  is  undiminished  by  death ;  we  see  that  what  seems  to  be
dissolution  is  only  transfiguration ;  we  see  that  all  that  belongs  to  the  essence  of
manhood  can  exist  under  new  conditions  ;  we  see  that  whatever  be  the  unknown
glories  and  the  unimaginable  endowments  of  the  after  life,  nothing  is  cast  ofl  which
rightly  claims  our  affection  and  our  reverence  in  this.  This,  however,  is  not  all.
Beyond  this  revelation  of  the  ennobled  permanence  of  the  present  in  the  life  of  the
Eesurrection,  further  depths  of  thought  are  open  to  us.  Here  on  earth  our  lives  are
fragmentary  and  isolated ;  we  are  all  separated  one  from  another,  and  we  are
weakened  by  the  separation.  Our  material  frames  are  not,  as  we  are  tempted  to
think,  the  instruments  of  our  union,  but  the  barriers  by  which  we  are  divided.
The  most  active  fellowship  is  at  last  irrevocably  interrupted ;  the  most  intimate
sympathy  leaves  regions  of  feeling  ununited ;  but  in  the  risen  Christ  we  seem  to
have  held  out  to  us  the  image  of  a  diviner  life,  in  which  each  single  believer  shall
be  incorporated  and  yet  not  absorbed ;  the  unity  which  is  now  foreshadowed  in  the
unity  of  will  with  will  is  hereafter,  as  it  seems,  to  be  realised  in  a  unity  which  shall
embrace  the  whole  being ;  each  one  will  consciously  share  in  the  fulness  of  a  Ufe
to  which  he  has  given  himself,  and  will  serve  that  by  which  he  is  maintained.
To  be  in  Christ  is  now  the  description  of  our  vital  energy ;  it  will  then  be  the  sum
of  our  existence ;  the  body  of  Christ  will  then  be  no  longer  a  figure,  but  a  reality
beyond  all  figures.  And  so  it  is  given  us  to  feel,  even  in  the  midst  of  our  conflicts
and  estrangements,  that  the  saddest  differences  of  our  mortal  state  are  lost,  as  we
are  reminded  by  the  most  moving  epitaph  in  our  abbey :  "  Lost  in  the  hope  of  the
resurrection."  {B.  F.  Westcott,  D.D.)  Life  and  immortality  brought  to  light : —
If  on  a  starlight  night  we  undertake  a  journey  on  foot,  and  we  know  the  general
bearings  of  the  country  along  which  we  pass  and  the  general  direction  of  the  course
we  must  take  to  reach  the  desired  goal,  we  may  vdth  care  and  painstaking  come  to
the  end  of  our  journey  in  safety.  The  moon  is  shining  in  the  heavens,  the  con-
stellations are  gUttering  over  our  heads,  and  by  the  aid  of  the  stars  travellers  can
cross  the  trackless  desert.  But  there  are  disadvantages  in  taking  the  journey  by
night  which  do  not  exist  in  the  full  light  of  day.  With  care  we  may  keep  the
beaten  path  by  night,  yet  sometimes  there  are  difficulties  in  so  doing.  Mr.  Forbes
tells  us  that  in  his  long  night  ride  in  South  Africa  he  was  obliged  to  alight  from
his  horse  to  feel  the  ground,  that  he  might  be  sure  of  the  waggon-track.    Thea


64  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  v

there  are  finger-posts  here  and  there,  but  the  light  at  night  will  not  enable  us  to
decipher  the  inscriptions.  We  pass  by  pleasant  orchards  and  gardens,  and  in  the
daytime  we  see  the  fruits  and  flowers,  but  these  are  hidden  in  the  night.  There
are  avenues  of  trees  whose  boughs  and  branches  interlace,  which  cast  dark  shadows
in  the  night,  but  which  in  the  day  form  cool  resting-places.  The  beauty  of  the
landscape  is  for  the  most  part  lost  in  the  night,  but  in  the  day  we  look  upon  it  with
pleasure.  The  night  journey  is  not  so  convenient  and  pleasant  as  the  journey  by
day.  Now,  the  journey  by  night  represents  to  us  the  life  of  the  saints  of  God  before
the  advent  of  the  Saviour  into  the  world,  and  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  The
journey  by  day  represents  the  life  of  God's  children  hving  in  the  broad  daylight  of
the  Christian  revelation.  Christ  said  of  Himself,  "  I  am  the  light  of  the  world."
Before  His  coming  it  was  the  night-time  of  Divine  revelation.  God's  saints  must
walk  by  faith,  as  men  walk  in  the  night  by  the  light  of  the  moon  and  stars.  When
He  came,  the  Sun  of  Kighteousness  arose  to  bless  the  world  with  His  light.  There
were  dark  shadows  for  the  ancient  saints  where  we  find  quiet  resting-places.  There
were  mysteries  which  they  could  not  decipher,  which  are  clear  to  us  in  the  Ught  of
Christ.  I.  CoNSiDEB  Chkist  abolishing  death.  1.  Christ  removed  the  uncer-
tainty that  hung  over  death.  If  we  go  down  into  the  catacombs  of  Rome,  the
subterranean  passages  beneath  the  city,  we  may  see  the  remains  of  heathen  and
Christian  lying  side  by  side.  Over  the  heathen  dead  are  inscribed  words  of  hopeless
sorrow.  A  Pat^-an  mother  writes  words  of  bitter  despair  over  her  child,  as  if  the
handful  of  ashes  were  all  that  remained  of  the  darling  she  once  fondled  and
cherished.  The  ancient  writings  and  funeral  inscriptions  of  the  heathen  world,
with  few  exceptions,  corroborate  the  words  of  the  Apostle  Paul  that  they  lived
without  hope,  and  that  their  sorrow  for  their  departed  friends  was  without  hope.
On  the  other  hand,  the  words  written  over  the  Christian  dead  speak  of  the  departed
as  being  at  rest  with  God.  Over  them  we  might  write  the  words  inscribed  over  the
entrance  to  the  catacombs  of  Paris,  "  Beyond  these  bounds  they  rest  in  peace,  looking
for  the  blessed  hope."  We  must  not  attribute  the  same  hopelessness  to  the  Hebrew
patriarchs,  prophets,  and  righteous  men  of  the  elder  dispensation.  They  seem  to
have  had  a  persuasion  of  a  life  beyond  the  present.  But  a  comparison  of  the
words  of  the  Old  Testament  saints  with  those  of  the  apostles  will  present  to  us  a
contrast.  "  To  die  is  gain."  "  Our  home  is  in  heaven,  from  whence  we  look  for
the  Saviour."  •'  I  am  now  ready  to  be  offered,  and  the  time  of  my  departure  is  at
hand.  There  is  laid  up  for  me  the  crown  of  righteousness."  Christ  removed  the
uncertainty  and  obscurity  which  hung  over  death,  and  asserted  the  resurrection  of
all  the  dead,  both  of  the  just  and  the  unjust.  2.  Christ  gives  assurance  of  the
full  remission  of  sins  and  of  the  Divine  favour  to  all  who  believe  on  Him.  *'  The
sting  of  death  is  sin."  II.  Jesus  Christ  hath  brought  life  and  immoetalittt
TO  LIGHT.  Mark  the  force  of  the  words  "hfe"  and  "  immoitality."  Life,
as  will  be  seen  by  comparing  the  passages  in  which  the  word  occurs  in  the
New  Tet-tament,  represents  the  highest  blessedness  to  which  we  can  attain.
If  we  are  in  Christ,  a  new  life  has  been  implanted  within  us  by  the  Holy
Spirit,  and  that  life  will  grow  and  expand  until  we  reach  the  highest  of  which
our  nature  is  capable.  This  term  includes  all  the  blessedness  to  be  found  in  com-
munion with  God,  from  the  open  vision  of  the  Saviour  and  His  glory,  from  the  society
of  God's  redeemed  people,  from  the  study  of  God's  works  in  creation,  providence,  and
redemption,  from  the  fullest  and  mobt  perfect  service  of  God ;  in  one  word,  all  that  we
sum  up  in  the  word  heaven.  The  word  immortality  completes  the  conception  of  the
better  life,  showing  that  it  is  without  decay  or  death.  Whilst  everything  around  us
is sufigestive  of  decay,  the  life  of  the  Spirit  is  one  of  immortality.  (W.  Bull,  M.A.)
Life  and  innnorUdity  brought  to  light  by  Jesus  Christ : — Death,  as  a  physical  fact,
is  inevitable  and  universal.  The  history  of  our  race  is  a  succession  of  generations ;
v>hich  march,  with  unceasing  tramp,  across  life's  narrow  stnge,  each  treading  on
the  heels  of  its  hurrying  predecessor.  Like  the  leaves  of  the  forest  in  spring,  they
come ;  only  to  be  soon  swept  away  again,  like  the  leaves  of  the  forest  in  autumn.
They  chase  one  another  to  destruction,  like  snowstorms  scudding  across  the
insatiate  ocean's  breast.  No  man  can  hope  that  he  will  be  one  solitary  leaf,  which
the  autumn's  blast  will  spare ;  or  one  solitary  snowflake,  which  will  not  melt
among  the  billows.  Therefore  are  all  men,  "  through  fear  of  death,  all  their  lifetime
subject  to  bondage."  But  Jesus  has  "  abolished  death  " — has  robbed  him  of  his
terrors,  and  broken  the  horn  of  his  power.  He  lias  illumed  the  dark  recesses  of
the  tomb  ;  and  by  a  most  Divine  camera,  pictured  on  the  disc  of  faith  the  distant
iuture  to  our  gaze.    He  has  connected  that  future  with  our  present  life ;  and  has


•HIP.  I.]  II.  TIMOTHY,  '  efi

thas  restored  to  the  latter  its  true  dignity  and  significance,  while  He  has  for  ever
dissipated  the  notion  that  man's  doom  is  annihilation.    I.  Before  the  appearance
OF  Christ  life  and  immortality   were  coxcealed   in   deepest  darkness.      The
Egyptians,  Phoenicians,  Persians,  and  Chaldeans,  seem  to  have  had  no  idea  of  u
future  life  whatever.     Their  wise  men  were  merely  students  of  nature.     The
materialism   of  the  Chinese  was,  if  possible,  still  more  blank  aud  absolute.     In
India  the  loftiest   reach   of  speculation  produced  only  the   doctrine   of  Divine
absorption.     In  Greece,  philosophy,   which  means  the   study  of  religion,  began
about  six  centuries  before  Christ.     Thales  was  born  at  Miletus,  in  Asia  Minor.    He
ranked  among  the  seven  wise  men.     He  lived  to  a  good  old  «ge,  and  enjoyed  a  high
reputation  for  virtue.     He  first  uttered  that  magnificent  aphorism  "  Know  thyself ."
This  reveals  to  us  a  man  of  solitary  meditation.     He  was  wont  to  wander  along  the
pebbly  beach  of  the  muttering  sea  ;  and  it  seemed  to  him  that  water,  by  which  all
things  are  nourished  and  kept  aUve,  was  the  prime  source  of  creation.      The  gods
were  made  of  this  element.     So  was  every  human  being,  and  at  death  the  soul  is
soaked  up  by  the  parent  earth.    How  mournful  the  reflection,  that  our  race  had
gone  so  far  astray  from  wisdom  and  from  God,  as  to  invent  only  so  poor  and  crude
an  hypothesis  through  the  most  intense  thinking  of  its  noblest  sage  !     Nest  came
one  to  say  that  the  soul  was  air  ;  another,  that  it  was  fire.     Neither  of  these  con-
jectures allowed  a  future  life.      Pythagoras,    a  mathematician,   conceived  that
numbers  were  the  beginning  of  creation.     This  mystical  dogma  was  soon  rendered
more  intelligible  by  one  of  his  followers,  an  enthusiastic  musician,  who  imagined
that  the  haman  body  was  an  instrument  of  music,  and  the  soul  but  the  symphony
of  its  playing.     When  the  chords  of  the  lyre  were  snapped  by  death,  then  of  course
the  melody  departed,  the  soul  became  extinct.     We  now  come  to  the  prince  of  all
Pagan  religionists,  Xenophanes.     He  was  born  in  Ionia  some  five  hundred  years
before  Christ.     He  renounced  all  worldly  grandeur,  and  applied  himself,  with  most
zealous  devotion,  to  studies  about  God  and  man.   He  apprehended  the  Infinite  One
as  a  self-existent  and  eternal  Spirit.    But  when  he  sought  to  know  the  truth  about
his  own  soul  and  its  destiny,  he  was  completely  baffled.     He  bitterly  complained
that  "  error  is  spread  over  all  things,"  and  declared,  in  declining  age,  that  he  was
yet,  "  hoary  of  years,  exposed  to  doubt  and  distraction  of  all  kinds."    Time  would
utterly  fail  to  tell  of  others,  who  sought  with  similar  non- success  to  solve  this  great
problem,  "  If  a  man  die  shall  he  live  again  ?  "   None  ever  advanced  one  step  beyond
Xenophanes.     He  may  fairly  be  taken  as  the  type  of  man  at  his  best  state,  with
regard  to  religious  knowledge,  so  far  as  the  gospel  is  unknown.     As  to  our  own
country,  let  me  remind  you  of  an  anecdote  about  our  druidical  ancestors,  which
most  beautifully  and  pathetically  exhibits  their  utter  ignorance  of  futurity.     Their
chieftains  sat  together  in  their  council-hall,  consulting  about  peace  and  war.    It
was  the  darkest  hour  of  night.    Resinous  torches,  rudely  fastened  against  the  walls,
flhed  a  few  ghastly  rays  upon  the  grim  countenances  of  the  perplexed  warriors.     As
they  sat  thus  in  deUberation,  a  poor  bird,  scared  by  some  alarm  and  attracted  by
the  light,  suddenly  fluttered  into  their  midst  through  a  small  side  window.     Mora
frightened  than  before,  it  ha'^tily  flew  across  to  the  opposite  side,  and  escaped  again,
through  another  opening,  into  the  darkness  from  which  it  had  so  transiently  emerged.
**  Ah  1 "  said  the  orator  then  speaking,  "  how  like  is  our  miserable  life  to  that  poor
bird's  passage  !     We  come  out  of  darkness,  and  know  not  why  we  are  here  :  and
then  we  are  hurried  into  darkness  again,  not  knowing  whither  we  go."  I  have  now
established  our  position  that,  save  for  Cbrist  and  His  gospel,  men  have  ever  been
ignorant  of  life  and  immortality.     It  is  so  still.    Without  ranging  over  the  heathen
world,  we  may  just  state,  that  precisely  the  same  questions  are  being  agitated  in
Germany  at  this  moment  as  were  discussed  in  ancient  Greece ;  and,  apart  from  the
Bible,  with  no  better  means  of  solving  them,  with  no  better  hopes  of  success.
•'  The  united  force  of  thousands  of  intellects,  some  of  them  among  the  gi-eatest  that
have  made  the  past  illustrious,  has  been  steadily  concentrated  on  these  problems
without  the  least  result.     Centuries  of  labour  have  not  produced  any  perceptible
progress."      But  let  us  now  turn  to  Christ  and  His  gospel :  and — II.  Consider  how
He  has  brought  life  and  immortality  to  light,  thereby  abolishing  death.     In
explication  of  this  delightful  topic,  we  must  declare,  first,  what  Christ  has  taught,
and,  secondly,  what  He  has  done,  in  relation  to  our  immortal  life.   1.  He  has  taught
as  the  truth  concerning  the  future.     The  Saviour's  doctrine  of  immortality  com-
prises four  particulars  :  (1)  That  men  are  spiritual  and  immortal  creatures.     (2\
That  their  future  state  will  be  one  either  of  perfect  happiness  or  of  unmitigatea
woe.     (3)  That  the  decision  of  this  altprnative,  in  every  case,  will  depend  upon

5


66  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  t.

personal  moral  character;  and  (4)  That  the  acqaieition  and  formation  of  thia
character  is  confined  to  the  term  of  our  earthly  life.  2.  We  are  to  state  what  He
has  done  to  secure  for  us  individually  an  immortality  of  blessedness.  It  would  not
have  been  enough  merely  to  inform  us  about  the  future.  We  need  to  be  guided
into  it  with  safety.  If  others  could  have  demonstrated  to  us  a  final  world  of
blessedness,  they  could  not  have  made  it  ours ;  but  Jesus  has  procured  for  us  a
title  to  the  felicities,  whose  existence  He  has  proved.  He  has  undertaken  to  be  to
us  "  the  Way,  the  Truth,  the  Life."  We  were  guilty — He  takes  away  our  sin,
having  "  died,  the  just  for  the  unjust,  to  bring  us  to  God,"  We  were  polluted — He
is  our  sanctification,  purifying  our  souls  "  with  the  washing  of  regeneration  and
renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  We  were  undeserving,  but  He  achieves  for  us  a  title
to  heaven.  "The  gift  of  God  is  eternal  life  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  That
He  may  actually  Uft  us  up  to  the  mansions  above,  is  the  reason  why  He  has
enlightened  us  concerning  them.  {T.  G.  Horton.)  The  discoveries  made  in  the
gospel  with  respect  to  a  future  state  : — The  vale  of  death  is  a  road  in  which  all  men
must  travel ;  a  path  in  which  our  fathers  have  gone  before,  and  we  ourselves  must
soon  follow.  It  is  therefore  natural,  and  indeed  of  great  importance,  to  inquire,
whither  it  leads  and  where  it  will  bring  us.    I.  The  gospel  has  confibmed  thb

EVIDBMCE  AND  ASSCBED  VB  07  THE  OEBTAINTY  OF  A  FDTUBE  STATE.      Our  SavioUt  haS

done  much  more  than  merely  confirmed  the  truth  of  a  future  state.  II.  As  He  has
assured  us  of  a  life  to  come,  so  He  has  bevealed  the  uanneb  of  oub  DELrvEBANCs
FBOM  death,  bt  A  BLESSED  AND  A  0L0BI0X7S  BESuBBECTiON.  This  is  the  greatest  and
most  important  discovery  that  was  ever  made  to  the  world.  HI.  Our  Saviour  has
revealed  in  the  gospel  not  only  the  resurrection  but  also  the  glorification  of  thb
BODT.  It  is  at  present  mortal,  tending  constantly  to  dissolution,  and,  at  last,
crumbling  into  dust;  but  it  will  be  raised  incorruptible,  and  capable  of  lasting
through  immortal  ages,  like  the  soul  to  which  it  is  to  be  united.  IV.  Another
important  discovery  made  by  the  gospel  is  the  general  judgjient  by  Jesus
Christ.  This  article  of  faith,  as  well  as  the  two  former,  is  matter  of  pure  revelation.
Whether  God  would  sit  in  judgment  Himself,  or  delegate  that  office  to  another ;
whether  the  judge  would  make  a  visible  appearance,  or  remain  invisible  in  judgment ;
and  whether  our  fate  should  be  decided  by  a  particular  trial  of  every  person  at
death,  or  by  a  public  and  general  judgment  of  the  world,  were  unknown  to  mankind.
To  reveal  these  important  circumstances  was  reserved  for  our  Lord  and  Saviour
Jesus  Christ,  who  abolished  death,  and  brought  life  and  immortality  to  light  by  the
gospel.    Our  Saviour's  information  extends  beyond  the  future  judgment.    V.  He

HAS    intimated    TO   TJB  THE    GENERAL    NATURE    OF   THE   HEAVENLY    FELICITY,    and   the

principal  sources  from  which  it  will  spring.  The  gospel  plainly  intimates  that  in
the  heavenly  state  good  men  shall  be  deUvered  from  the  natural  evils  of  this  life,
which  fall  heavy  on  some,  and  from  which  none  are  entirely  exempted ;  that  they
shall  be  delivered  from  the  injuries  of  evil  men ;  nay,  that  they  shall  be  delivered
from  the  sufferings  which  they  frequently  bring  upon  themselves  here,  by  the
irregularity  of  their  passions,  and  the  folly  of  their  own  conduct.  In  the  future  state,
the  gospel  informs  us,  the  understanding  will  be  enlarged,  and  made  capable  of
extensive  acquisitions ;  the  heart  will  be  completely  purified,  and  rendered  sus-
ceptible of  the  finest  feelings,  especially  of  love ;  and,  to  give  scope  to  these
afiections,  we  shall  be  admitted  into  the  noblest  society,  and  enjoy  a  delightful
intercourse  with  angels  and  saints,  with  Christ  and  God,  with  all  that  is  great  and
good  in  the  universe.     VI.  To  complete  the  discoveries  of  the  gospel,  oub  Savioub

HAS  INFORMED  US  THAT  THB  FUTURE  HAPPINESS   IS   ETERNAL.       As   the   jOyS   Of   hoaveu

are  complete  and  satisfactory,  so  they  are  permanent  and  perpeti^al ;  subject  to  no
abatement,  to  no  interruption  or  decay ;  not  only  large  as  our  wishes,  but  lasting  as
our  immortal  souls.  (Andrew  Donnan.)  Immortality  is  the  glorious  discovery  of
Christianity  : — I  say  discovery,  not  because  a  future  life  was  wholly  unknown  before
Christ,  but  because  it  was  so  revealed  by  Him  as  to  become,  to  a  considerable  extent,
a  new  doctrine.  Before  Christ,  immortality  was  a  conjecture  or  a  vague  hope.
Jesus,  by  His  teaching  and  resurrection  has  made  it  a  certainty.  Again,  before
Christ,  a  future  life  lent  little  aid  to  virtue.  It  was  seized  upon  by  the  imagination
and  passions,  and  so  perverted  by  them  as  often  to  minister  to  vice.  In  Christianity
this  doctrine  is  wholly  turned  to  a  moral  use ;  and  the  future  is  revenled  only  to  give
motives,  resolution,  force  to  self-conflict  and  to  a  holy  life.  My  aim,  in  this
discourse,  is  to  strengthen,  if  I  may,  your  conviction  of  immortality ;  and  I  have
thought  that  I  may  do  this  by  showing  that  this  great  truth  is  also  a  dictate  of
nature ;  (hat  reason,  though  unable  to  establish  it,  yet  accords  with  and  adopts  it ;


CHIP.  1.]  IT.  TIMOTHY.  67

that  it  is  written  alike  in  God's  Word  and  in  the  soul.  It  is  plainly  rational  to  expect
that,  if  man  was  made  for  immortality,  the  marks  of  this  destination  will  be  found
in  his  very  constitution,  and  that  these  marks  will  grow  stronger  in  proportion  to
the  unfolding  of  his  faculties.  I  would  show  that  this  expectation  proves  just  that
the  teaching  of  revelation,  in  regard  to  a  future  life,  finds  a  strong  response  in  our
own  nature.  This  topic  is  the  more  important,  because  to  some  men  there  seem  to
be  appearances  in  nature  unfavourable  to  immortality.  To  many,  the  constant
operation  of  decay  in  all  the  works  of  creation,  the  dissolution  of  all  the  forms  of
animal  and  vegetable  nature,  gives  a  feeling,  as  if  destruction  were  the  law  to  which
we  and  all  beings  are  subjected.  It  has  often  been  said  by  the  sceptic,  that  the
races  or  classes  of  being  are  alone  perpetual,  that  all  the  individuals  which  compose
them  are  doomed  to  perish.  Now  I  affirm  that  the  more  we  know  of  the  mind  the
more  we  see  reason  to  distinguish  it  from  the  animal  and  vegetable  races  which
grow  and  decay  around  us ;  and  that  in  its  very  nature  we  see  reason  for  exempting  it
from  the  universal  law  of  destruction.  When  we  look  around  us  on  the  earth  we
do  indeed  see  everything  changing,  decaying,  passing  away ;  and  so  inclined  are  we
to  reason  from  analogy  or  resemblance,  that  it  is  not  wonderful  that  the  dissolution
of  all  the  organised  forms  of  matter  should  seem  to  us  to  announce  our  own
destruction.  But  we  overlook  the  distinctions  between  matter  and  mind ;  and  these
are  so  immense  as  to  justify  the  directly  opposite  conclusion.  Let  me  point  out
some  of  these  distinctions.  1.  When  we  look  at  the  organised  productions  of
nature  we  see  that  they  require  only  a  limited  time,  and  most  of  them  a  very  short
time,  to  reach  their  perfection,  and  accomplish  their  end.  Take,  e.g. ,  that  noble
production,  a  tree.  Having  reached  a  certain  height,  and  borne  leaves,  flowers,
and  fruit,  it  has  nothing  more  to  do.  Its  powers  are  fully  developed ;  it  has  no
hidden  capacities,  of  which  its  buds  and  fruit  are  only  the  beginnings  and  pledges.
Its  design  is  fulfilled ;  the  principle  of  life  within  it  can  effect  no  more.  Not  so
the  mind.  We  can  never  say  of  this,  as  of  a  full-grown  tree  in  autumn,  it  has
answered  its  end,  it  has  done  its  work,  its  capacity  is  exhausted.  The  mind,  by
going  forward,  does  not  reach  insurmountable  prison-walls,  but  learns  more  and
more  the  boundlessness  of  its  powers,  and  of  the  range  for  which  it  was  created.  2.
I  now  add,  that  the  system  of  nature  to  which  the  tree  belongs  requires  that  it
should  stop  where  it  does.  Were  it  to  grow  for  ever  it  would  be  an  infinite  mis-
chief. But  the  indefinite  expansion  of  the  mind,  instead  of  warring  with  and
counteracting  the  system  of  creation,  harmonises  with  and  perfects  it.  One  tree,
should  it  grow  for  ever,  would  exclude  other  forms  of  vegetable  life.  One  mind^
in  proportion  to  its  expansion,  awakens  and,  in  a  sense,  creates,  other  minds.  It  is
an  ever-enlarging  source  of  thought  and  love.  3.  Another  distinction  between
material  forms  and  the  mind  is,  that  to  the  former  destruction  is  no  loss.  They
exist  for  others  wholly,  in  no  degree  for  themselves;  and  others  only  can  sorrow  for
their  fall.  The  mind,  on  the  contrary,  has  a  deep  interest  in  its  own  existence.  In
this  respect,  indeed,  it  is  distinguished  from  the  animal  as  well  as  the  vegetable.
An  improved  mind  understands  the  greatness  of  its  own  nature,  and  the  worth  of
existence,  as  these  cannot  be  understood  by  the  unimproved.  The  thought  of  its
own  destruction  suggests  to  it  an  extent  of  ruin  which  the  latter  cannot  compre-
hend. The  thought  of  such  faculties  as  reason,  conscience  and  moral  will,  being
extinguished — of  powers  akin  to  the  Divine  energy,  being  annihilated  by  their
Author — of  truth  and  virtue,  those  images  of  God,  being  blotted  out — of  progress
towards  perfection,  being  broken  off  almost  at  its  beginning — this  is  a  thought  fitted
to  overwhelm  a  mind  in  which  the  consciousness  of  its  spiritual  nature  is  in  a  good
degree  unfolded.  In  other  words,  the  more  the  mind  is  true  to  itself  and  to  God,
the  more  it  clings  to  existence,  the  more  it  shrinks  from  extinction  as  an  infiinite
loss.  Would  not  its  destruction,  then,  be  a  very  different  thing  from  the  destruction
of  material  beings,  and  does  the  latter  furnish  an  analogy  or  presumption  in  support
of  the  former  ?  To  me,  the  undoubted  fact  that  the  mind  thirsts  for  continued
being,  just  in  proportion  as  it  obeys  the  will  of  its  Maker,  is  a  proof,  next  to
irresistible,  of  its  being  destined  by  Him  for  immortality.  4.  Let  me  add  one  more
distinction  between  the  mind  and  material  forms.  I  return  to  the  tree.  We  speak
of  the  tree  as  destroyed.  We  say  that  destruction  is  the  order  of  nature,  and
some  say  that  man  must  not  hope  to  escape  the  universal  law.  Now  we  deceive
ourselves  in  this  use  of  words.  There  is  in  reality  no  destruction  in  the  material
world.  True,  the  tree  is  resolved  into  its  elements  ;  but  its  elements  survive,  and
still  more,  they  survive  to  fulfil  the  same  end  which  they  before  accomplished.
Not  a  power  of  nature  is  lost.     The  particles  of  the  decayed  tree  are  only  left  at


68  THE  BIBUCAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  t

liberty  to  form  new,  perhaps  more  beautiful  and  useful  combinations.  They  may
shoot  up  into  more  luxuriant  foliage,  or  enter  into  the  structure  of  the  highest
animals.  But  were  mind  to  perish,  there  would  be  absolute,  irretrievable  destruction ;
for  mind,  from  its  nature,  is  something  individual,  an  uncompounded  essence,
which  cannot  be  broken  into  parts  and  enter  into  union  with  other  minds.  I  am
myself,  and  can  become  no  other  being.  My  experience,  my  history,  cannot  become
my  neighbour's.  My  consciousness,  my  memory,  my  interest  in  my  past  life,  my
affections,  cannot  be  transferred.  If  in  any  instance  I  have  withstood  temptation,
and  through  such  resistance  have  acquired  power  over  myself  and  a  claim  to  the
approbation  of  my  fellow-beings,  this  resistance,  this  power,  this  claim,  are  my  own ;
I  cannot  make  them  another's.  I  can  give  away  my  property,  my  limbs  ;  but  that
which  makes  myself,  in  other  words,  my  consciousness,  my  recollections,  my
feelings,  my  hopes,  these  can  never  become  parts  of  another  mind.  In  the
extinction  of  a  thinking,  moral  being,  who  has  gained  truth  and  virtue,  there  would
be  an  absolute  destruction.  (W.  E,  Channing,  D.D.)  The  Christian  view  of
death : — It  is  noticeable  how  small  a  space  is  given  to  death  in  the  New  Testament,
as  if  our  Lord  Jesus  made  light  of  it !  His  idea  of  it  is  sleep.  How  full  of  peace-
fulness  is  this  idea  1  There  is  nothing  dreadful  about  it.  "  Lord,  if  he  sleep  he
shall  do  well!"  Beautiful  and  benign  sleep  I  Our  little  children,  when  the  time
«omes  and  the  parent  commands  it,  go  to  sleep.  They  laugh  as  they  climb  the
stairs ;  there  is  a  short  silence  as  they  kneel ;  then  we  hear  them  singing  as  the
last  evening  sunbeams  brighten  the  room,  till  sleep  nestles  down  on  their  eyelids
and  they  know  nothing  more  till  the  morning's  sun  wakes  the  birds  outside,  and
another  day  is  here  1  Thus  shall  it  be  with  God's  children  when  they  die.  Their
Father  will,  at  the  proper  time,  bid  them  put  there  work  aside  and  go  to  rest.  Not
unwillingly,  but  with  cheerful  love  they  obey.  Amid  the  evening  glow  of  that
Divine  kindness  which  has  brightened  their  working  hours  they  will  say  "  good-
night "  to  their  friends  and  the  world  and  peacefully  "  sleep  in  Jesus,"  "  until  the
day  break  and  the  shadows  flee  away."  (I.  E.  Page.)  Life  enlarged  by  death : —
A  child  that  has  been  penned  up  in  narrow  quarters,  with  few  playthings,  and  in  con-
strained circumstances,  has  a  grandfather  and  grandmother  living  in  the  country.
There  is  the  farmhouse  full  of  rude  abundance ;  there  are  the  ample  grounds ;
there  is  the  brook,  with  fish  in  it ;  there  is  the  big  barn  ;  and  there  are  all  manner
of  things  in  the  barn-yard.  The  child  has  been  out  there  once  ;  and  he  had  such
liberty,  and  found  his  grandma  such  a  dear  old  grandma,  and  his  grandpa  such  a
kind  old  grandpa,  that  the  days  were  not  long  enough.  He  had  so  much  sport,  and
was  made  so  much  of,  and  was  never  scolded,  and  never  sent  to  school,  and  had
nothing  to  do  or  to  think  of  but  to  play,  play,  play  all  the  time,  that  he  would  have
liked  to  abide  there.  But  he  has  been  taken  back  to  the  city,  and  he  Uves  in  a
narrow  house,  and  has  to  go  to  school,  and  has  to  do  this  thing  and  that  which  are
irksome  to  him,  and  is  put  through  all  the  paces  which  are  thought  necessary  for  his
education  and  development ;  and  he  longs  for  his  country  experience  again.  When
spring  comes  round  once  more,  the  father  and  mother  say  to  the  little  fellow,  "  Now,
if  you  are  a  good  boy,  next  June  we  are  going  to  take  you  out  to  grandpa's."  The
idea  of  going  out  of  the  city  to  grandpa's  1  The  child's  mind  is  filled  with  all
manner  of  dehghts.  Ah,  what  perfect  ecstacy  he  feels !  He  dreams  about  going,
and  rejoices  in  the  thought.  He  does  not  analyse  the  intermediate  steps,  nor  think
much  about  them.  His  grandpa's  is  the  place  where,  to  his  thought  and  afifection,
centres  everything  that  is  most  heavenly — for  a  boy  on  earth,  that  is.  I  suppose
that  comes  nearer  to  representing  the  feelings  which  the  primitive  disciples,  the
early  Christians,  had  about  dying,  than  any  other  illustration  that  you  could  well
make.  It  was  to  go  and  be  with  the  Lord.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  A  great  may  be : — Rabe-
lais, when  dying,  said,  "  I  go  to  seek  a  great  may  be."  (T.  CarlyJe.)  Immortality  : —
Benan  is  unquestionably  one  of  the  most  distinguished  among  those  who  deny  the
existence  of  a  creative  will  and  personal  God.  Yet  Renan  cannot  make  up  his  mind
that  he  has  lost  for  ever  his  beloved  sister ;  that  she  has  passed  into  the  night  of
nothingness.  He  dedicates  his  "  Life  of  Jesus  "  to  her  memory;  .  .  .  and  invokes
*•  the  pure  soul  of  his  sister  Hem  iette,  who  died  at  Byblos,  September  24,  1861,  to
reveal  to  him,  from  the  bosom  of  God  in  which  she  rests,  those  truths  which  are
mightier  than  death,  and  take  away  the  fear  of  death."  (J.  H.  Rigg,  D.D.)  The
lighted  valley  of  death : — In  India  a  dreaded  pass  stretches  between  high  rocks
which  frown  from  either  side,  as  if  ready  to  entomb  the  traveller  who  walks  below.
But  when,  towards  evening,  the  sun  in  its  westward  journey  reaches  the  head  of  the
defile  and  pours  its  rajs  directly  into  it,  the  whole  aspect  of  the  valley  is  changed


CEAP.  I.]  JL  TIMOTHY,  69

The  sun,  standing  there,  brightens  the  gloom  into  light  and  beauty.  Who  now
■would  dread  to  pass  that  way  ?  Thus  shall  it  be  with  those  who  die  in  Christ.
The  living  have  always  dreaded  the  gloom  of  the  dark  valley;  but  what  if,  as  we
pass,  the  Sun  of  Kighteousness  shall  shine  overhead?  (I,  E.Page.)  "Now
open  your  eyes'' : — As  one,  taking  his  friend  up  a  hillside  in  Scotland,  that  he
might  have  a  glorious  view  of  Loch  Lomond,  bade  him  close  his  eyes,  and  led
him  by  the  hand  till  he  could  say,  as  the  splendour  of  the  landscape  lay  before
him,  "  Now  open  your  eyes,"  so  Christ  has  a  glory  of  heaven  to  show  His
people ;  but  ere  its  full  revelation  they  must  close  their  eyes  in  death  and  clasp  His
hand  for  a  few  steps  in  darkness,  to  open  them  at  His  bidding  amid  the  glories  of
heaven,  and  behold  for  themselves  what  "  He  hath  prepared  for  them  that  love
Him."    (Ibid.)

Ver.  11.  A  preacher,  and  an  apostle,  and  a  teacher  of  the  Gentiles. — I.  A  public
PREACHEB  is  One  who  may  discharge  his  office  ever  in  one  and  the  same  place.  U,
An  apostle  goes  about  everywhere  ;  but  he  would  have  fully  satisfied  the  require-
ments of  his  apostolic  office  if  he  had  once  for  all  declared  his  message.  IH.  Teacher.
Here  we  have  in  addition  diligence  and  perseverance  in  teaching :  from  which  arose
Buffering.  {J.  A.  Bengel.)  The  preacher  a  crier : — It  is  an  argument,  that  the
preacher  brings  not  stolen  stuff  nor  bad  commodity.  He  whose  fruit  is  best,  as
■we  see  in  cities,  crieth  loudsst.  A  low  voice  in  the  street  argueth  either  an  ill-
oommodity  or  a  false  way  of  obtaining  it.  {J.  Barlow,  D.D. )  Not  to  cavil  with  the
preacher : — Again,  this  must  teach  the  auditors  not  to  cavil  with  the  crier,  but  to
hear  the  words  of  exhortation  patiently.  Some,  like  Festus,  tell  Paul,  if  he  cry
aloud,  that  he  is  beside  himself ;  reputing  the  preacher  rude,  indiscreet,  passionate.
Why  ?  Can  a  bell  have  too  shrill  a  sound  ?  a  hound  too  deep  or  bass  a  mouth  ?
a  piece  give  too  great  a  report  ?  or  a  crier  extend  his  voice  too  high  ?    Shall  not  the

shepherd  shout  when  the  sheep  are  wandering,  or  ready  to  be  devoured  by  the

wolf  ?  Will  ye  not  ring  the  bells  awake,  when  the  city  is  on  fire  f  Di  -  '  irge  the
greatest  cannon,  when  the  ship  is  in  distress,  and  in  danger  to  be  lost  in  t.  .;  haven?
And  shall  not  the  preacher  cry,  roar,  and,  as  John,  bellow  like  an  ox  (for  so  the
word  is  read),  when  men  sleep  and  sink  in  sin,  and  be  in  hazard  to  be  drowned  and
devoured  by  Satan,  that  cruel  wolf,  and  pirate  of  the  soul  ?  (Ibid.)  The  servants
ofOod  take  delight  to  dwell  and  discourse  of  good  things  (Act  xx.  7) : — It's  no  burden
or  wearisomeness  to  the  saints  to  enlarge  their  speech  on  heavenly  subjects.  A
traveller  when  he  hath  taken  a  view  of  the  situation  of  m'any  towns  and  countries,
beheld  the  rare  monuments  that  he  hath  met  withal,  rejoiceth  to  make  relation
thereof  unto  his  friends  after  his  return ;  and  so  is  it  with  a  Christian,  who  is  a
spiritual  traveller :  when  he  hath  seen  into  the  mysteries  of  rehgion,  found  out  the
great  secrets  therein  contained,  by  the  painful  travel  of  his  mind,  he  maketh  it  the
joy  of  his  heart  largely  to  discourse  thereof  unto  his  brethren.    (Ibid.)    Love  makes

'^''^eachers : — But  did  they  love  the  gospel  they  neither  would  or  could  be  silent ;  for
their  word,  like  fire  in  straw,  would  burst  forth.  Will  not  the  soldier  speak  of  his
wounds,  the  huntsman  of  his  hounds,  and  the  husbandman  of  his  cattle  and
grounds  ?  And  shall  we  love  the  gospel  and  never  make  mention  of  it?  No,  no  :
this  little  speech  of  heavenly  things  argueth  that  the  love  of  many  is  but  ^jld.
Love  the  word  once,  and  say  nothing  of  it,  if  thou  canst.  (Ibid.)  A  gospel
preacher : — Bramwell  was  a  plain  preacher  in  the  States,  and  to  some  extent  an
uncultivated  preacher ;  but  he  was  full  of  faith  and  zeal,  and  his  ministry  was
attended  with  marvellous  power.  He  was  preaching  in  a  little  village  on  one
occasion,  and  the  German  minister,  Trubner,  was  induced  to  go  and  hear  him.
Trubner  was  a  very  cultivated  scholar,  and  a  profound  critic  ;  and  when  some  of
Bramwell's  friends  saw  him  there  they  said,  '*  Alas  !  alas  1  for  poor  Bramwell,  how
Trubner  will  criticise  him  !  "  Precious  little  did  Bramwell  care  for  him,  or  for  all
the  philosophers  under  the  sun.  He  preached,  and  set  before  his  audience  the
everlasting  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  when  Trubner  went  out  of  the  church  one  of
his  friends  said  to  him,  "  How  did  you  like  him  ?  Don't  you  think  he  wanders  a
good  deal  in  his  preaching  ?"  "  Oh,  yes,"  said  the  old  Lutheran,  "  he  do  wander
most  delightfully  from  de  subject  to  de  heart."    (The  Teacher'i  Cabinet.)

Ver.  12.  I  also  suffer  these  ■things. — Pride  in  the  profane  causeth  goodmen  to  tufer
for  welldoing : — The  Pharisees  were  zealous  for  the  law  and  ceremonies,  and  Paul
preached  the  gospel,  called  them  beggarly  and  impotent  rudiments ;  told  that  it
they  were  circumcised  Christ  profited  them  nothing.    Why,  this  so  took  down  the


70  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR,  [chap.  t.

pride  of  man,  that  he  should  not  be  justified  by  his  own  works,  but  by  another's,
that  Paul  was  persecuted,  and  hardly  intreated  of  his  own  countrymen.  If  a
skilful  tailor  take  measure  of  a  crooked  and  misshapen  person,  and  fit  the  garment
proportionable  to  the  pattern,  a  proud  piece  of  flesh  will  pout,  swell,  and  wrangle
with  the  workmen ;  so  let  the  ministers  and  men  of  God  do  good,  divide  the
Word  aright,  high  and  lofty  spirits  will  be  muttering,  for  they  cannot  endure
the  light,  or  to  be  told  of  their  deformities.  Thus  Paul  was  reputed  an  enemy
for  telling  tbem  the  truth.  A  counterfeit  and  false  glass  is  the  fittest  for  old,
withered,  and  wrinkled  curtizans  to  view  themselves  in;  for  if  it  should  show
them  their  right  shapes,  all  things  to  nothing,  they  split  it  against  the  walls.
(J.  Barlow,  D.D.)  For  I  know  whom  I  have  lielieved.-^The  foundation  of  the
Christian's  hope: — I.  One  ground  of  the  apostle's  assurance  was  a  persuasion
THAT  Christ  is  able  to  keep  the  souls  committed  unto  Him.  1.  It  is  implied
that  Christ  is  able  to  bring  the  soul  into  a  state  of  salvation.  2.  This  per-
suasion of  the  apostle  implied  that  Christ  is  able  also  to  preserve  the  soul  in  a
state    of    salvation.    He  added,  as  the  other    ground  of  his  assurance — II.  A

CONSCIOUSNESS     THAT     HE     HAD    HIMSELF     COMMITTED     UNTO     ChRIST     HIS     OWN    SOUL.

However  firmly  he  might  be  persuaded  of  Christ's  ability  to  save  the  souls
committed  to  Him,  he  yet  could  not  be  assured  that  He  would  save  his  soul  unless
he  felt  conscious  of  the  fact,  that  it  was  really  committed  unto  Him.  Let  us  now
see  what  things  this  consciousness  also  implied.  1.  It  implied  that  he  had
knowingly  given  up  all  thoughts  and  hopes  of  saving  himself  by  his  own  merits  and
doings.  2.  It  was  further  implied  in  it,  that  he  now  knowingly  placed  all  his  hopes
and  dependence  on  the  sacrifice  and  mediation  of  Jesus  Christ  alone.  3.  But  it
was  also  imphed  in  it  that,  from  the  time  in  which  he  had  thus  renounced  his  own
righteousness,  and  by  faith  had  hoped  in  the  righteousness  of  Christ,  he  had  lived
and  acted  consistently  with  such  a  faith  and  hope.  {E.  Cooper.)  The  Christian's
confidence  in  Christ : — The  faith  of  the  Christian  is  here  seen.  I.  In  its  object —
"  I  know  whom  I  have  believed."  II.  In  its  character.  It  is  seen  in  many  noble
qualities  and  bearings,  inseparably  connected  with  each  other  in  the  triumphant
profession  made  by  the  apostle.  1.  Knowledge  is  here  the  foundation  of  faith —
•'  I  know  whom  I  have  believed."  Tes,  he  knew  by  irresistible  demonstration —
such  as  extracted  the  venom  of  his  heart  against  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  and  filled  it
with  inextinguishable  love  and  fervent  devoteduess  to  Him.  2.  As  knowledge  ia
the  foundation  of  faith,  so  faith  is  the  reposing  of  an  absolute  trust — "  I  am
persuaded  that  He  is  able  to  keep  that  which  I  have  committed  to  Him."  III.  In
its  consummation — "against  that  day."  There  is  to  be  a  consummation — when  we
shall  receive  "the  end  of  our  faith,  even  the  salvation  of  our  soul."  The
province  of  faith  is  but  for  a  season,  and  it  shaU  give  place  to  the  vision  and
fruition  of  God.  (W.  B.  Collyer,  D.D.)  The  internal  evidence  of  experience  : — The
:.evidence8  for  revelation  have  been  commonly  divided  under  two  heads,  external  and
internal.  Under  the  head  of  external  evidence,  we  may  class  aU  those  proofs,
which,  though  relating  to  what  is  found  in  the  Scriptures,  are  nevertheless  exterior
to  the  Word  of  God;  such,  for  instance,  as  the  authenticity  of  the  Books  of
Scripture,  and  the  genuineness  of  their  authorship,  the  miracles  by  which  the
truths  that  the  apostles  delivered  were  attested,  and  the  sufferings  and  persecution
which  they  underwent.  But  then  the  internal  evidence  is  not  less  important.  We
might,  first,  take  the  internal  evidence  of  Scripture  which  we  gather  from  the  Word
of  God  itself — the  harmony  of  one  portion  of  it  with  another,  and  the  circumstance
that  in  our  investigation  of  its  bright  and  blessed  pages,  they  seem  at  once  to
commend  themselves,  as  what  we  might  expect  to  come  from  the  God  of  truth.  And
then  there  is  the  internal  evidence,  which  may  be  gathered  from  the  Christian's
own  experience — the  attestation,  so  to  speak,  of  a  Christian's  own  experience  to
the  truths  which  he  finds  revealed  in  the  Scriptures  of  God.  Now  we  believe  that
it  is  to  evidence  partaking  of  this  character  that  the  apostle  alludes  in  our  text.
There  was  no  confounding  of  his  principles ;  there  was  no  putting  down  of  the
truth  which  he  maintained ;  nothing  was  able  to  terrify  him  out  of  what  he  had
embraced  as  the  truth  of  God.  "For  I  know  whom  I  have  believed,  and  am
persuaded  that  He  is  able  to  keep  that  which  I  have  committed  unto  Him  against
that  day."  Now  this  class  of  evidence,  we  believe,  will,  more  or  less,  be  the
evidence  of  every  believer  in  the  Lord  Jesus.  I.  The  first  point  which  is  presented
for  our  consideration  is  that  the  apostle  believed  the  oospel.  This  is  the  first
act  of  the  sinner  with  respect  to  Jesus.  II.  But  the  believer  goes  further.  He  does
ot  rest  with  dependence  upon  the  promise,  that  the  Lord  will  be  with  him  unto


^01


OHir.  J.]  11.  TIMOTHY,  71

the  end  of  the  world ;  but  he  is  assared  of  this,  because  he  finds  that  so  fab  as  hb

HAS   TBUSTSD  THS  PB0UI8B,   GoD    HAS    AOTUALLT  BEEN   WITH    HIU.       He    haS    found

Him  true  to  His  word  by  positive  experience.    HI.  The  confidenob  which  Pauii

HAD  IN  THE  FCTORB  GATHERED  FBOM  HIS  EXPEBIENOE  OF  THE  PAST.      {H.   W.  McGrath,

M^.)  The  believer's  confidence  in  the  prospect  of  eternity : — I.  The  awful  period.
It  is  not  mentioned  by  name ;  but  the  apostle  only  calls  it "  that  day."  What  day  T
The  day  of  death,  when  "  the  dust  returns  to  the  earth  as  it  was,  and  the  spirit
returns  unto  God  who  gave  it "  P  Or  the  day  of  judgment  ?  Doubtless  the  day  of
judgment.  This  is  often  in  the  Scripture  called  "  that  day,"  in  order  to  show  us
that  it  is  a  very  important,  a  very  remarkable,  a  very  distinguished  day.  11.  What
the  APOSTLE  DID  in  the  prospect  of  this  period.  He  deposited  something  in  the
Bedeemer's  hands;  "  that  which  I  have  committed  unto  Him  against  that  day."
What,  now,  was  this  deposit?  You  evidently  see  it  was  something  personal,  in
which  he  acted  as  a  believer.  And  it  is  not  necessary,  as  far  as  I  know,  to  exclude
anything  from  the  transaction ;  but  principally  we  are  to  understand  the  eternal
concerns  of  his  sool.  And  if  this  required  any  confirmation,  it  may  be  derived
from  the  example  of  poor  Stephen,  who,  when  he  was  dying,  said,  "  Lord  Jesus
receive  my  spirit " — and  from  the  experience  of  David,  who  in  an  hour  of  danger
said,  "  Into  Thy  hand  I  commit  my  spirit ;  Thou  hast  redeemed  me,  0  Lord  God
of  truth  1 "  It  means,  therefore,  simply  believing.  The  apostle's  representation  of
faith  here  will  remind  us  of  several  things.  1.  The  coiomitting  our  eternal  all  into
His  bands  implies  conviction.  The  man  before  was  deluded  by  error  and  blinded
by  ignorance  ;  but  now  "  the  eyes  of  his  understanding"  are  opened.  (1)  Now  he  is
convinced  of  the  value  of  his  soul.  (2)  He  is  now  convinced  of  the  danger  of  the  soul.
(3)  And  now,  too,  he  is  eonvinced  of  his  inability  to  save  his  soul.  2.  And  this  act
implies  also  a  concern  for  its  security  and  welfare.  3.  The  act  of  committing  the
soul  to  Christ  also  implies  application  to  the  Redeemer  for  the  purpose  of  salvation.
4.  It  implies  submission.  III.  The  satisfaction  felt  in  the  review  of  the  transac-
tion. 1.  Ton  see  what  the  satisfaction  is  derived  from  :  and,  generally  considered,
yon  observe  that  it  takes  in  the  apostle's  acquaintance  with  the  great  Depository
himself — "  I  know  whom  I  have  believed."  2.  You  have  seen  the  satisfaction
generally  expressed ;  but  here  is  a  particular  reference  with  regard  to  it.  "  And  I
am  persuaded,"  says  he,  "  that  He  is  able  to  keep  that  which  I  have  committed  unto
Him  against  that  day."  (W.  Jay.)  Acquaintance  with  Christ  the  Christian's
ttrength : — Since  the  same  source  from  whence  Paul  had  all  his  high  attainments
is  as  open  in  all  its  fulness  to  each  of  us,  as  it  was  to  him,  let  us  consider  the  way
in  which  that  inexhaustible  fountain  was  made  available  to  him  to  draw  supplies
according  to  all  his  need,  whether  for  support  under  the  discouragement  of  his
trials,  or  for  direction  under  the  perplexity  of  his  difficulties.  One  word  of  the
text  will  open  the  whole  of  this  to  us  :  "  I  know" ; — •'  I  know  whom  I  have  believed,"
says  he.  Knowledge  was  the  substance  of  his  power.  Nay,  then,  says  the
nnleamed  Christian,  it  is  too  difficult  for  me.  Such  knowledge  is  too  wonderful
and  excellent.  It  is  high,  I  cannot  attain  onto  it.  It  is  not  for  me.  How
discouraging  I  will  the  poor  and  busy  man  say.  I  have  neither  the  leisure  nor  the
means  and  opportunity  of  gaining  it.  How  heartless  the  attempt,  then,  will  the
weak-minded  and  humble  Christian  say,  conscious  of  his  wealmess.  How  can  I
ever  hope  to  reach  even  a  measure  of  that,  when  I  feel  my  weakness  and  inability
every  step  I  take.  But  to  the  most  nnleamed,  to  the  busiest,  to  the  most  feeble-
minded, I  say,  that  this  knowledge  and  all  the  power  it  contains  is  for  yon.  Mark
the  text.  The  apostle  does  not  say,  I  know  the  support  I  shall  receive,  or  the
direction  that  will  be  given  me,  for  I  am  wise  and  experienced,  but, "  I  know  whom  I
have  believed."  His  knowledge  was  not  of  things,  but  of  a  person,  and  that  but
one.  I.  Here  is  mentioned  his  knowledge  of  the  tbdstee.  Let  us  consider  some
particulars  of  the  more  obvious  but  important  kind,  wherein  the  apostle  knew,  and
we  should  know  Him.  1.  He  knew  that  He  was  faithful,  therefore  he  believed  Him.
2.  He  knew  Him  to  be  able.  3.  He  knew  Him  to  be  willing.  4.  He  knew  Hitn  to
be  all-vnse,  both  to  see  his  trouble,  and  the  best  way  to  get  him  out  of  it.  5.  Nay,
though  clouds  and  darkness  surrounded  him,  Paul  staggered  not  at  this,  for  he
knew  the  ways  of  the  Lord,  that  this  is  His  method  of  dealing  with  His  children.
In  a  word  he  knew  Him  to  be  the  sum  of  all  happiness,  the  source  of  all  strength,
the  pledge  and  faithfulness  of  all  the  promises,  the  depository  of  all  power,  the
ruler  of  all  events,  the  head  over  all  things  to  His  people,  the  Saviour  both  of  soul
and  body.  II.  What  was  it  that  the  apostle  committed  to  Him  ?  What  was  that
deposit  (as  it  is  in  the  original),  he  was  persuaded  He  was  able  to  keep  i    I  answer


72  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  I.


in  one  word,  hw  treasure.    But  that  would  assume  many  forms  under  different
circumstances.     1.  When  the  guilt  of  sin  would  come  upon  his  conscience,  it  would
be  the  salvation  of  his  soul.     2.  When  ihe  power  of  temptation  would  come  over
him,  it  would  be  his  integrity  in  serving  God.  3.  When  personal  dangers  surrounded
him,  and  left  him  no  way  of  escape,  it  would  be  his  self-preservation.     4.  When
assailed  by  the   malicious  insinuations  of  false  apostles,  and  attacks  upon  his
motives,  as  at  Corinth,  it  would  be  his  character.  5.  When  he  heard  of  the  entering
in  of  grievous  wolves  into  the  flock  he  had  fed  so  carefully,  it  would  be  the  care  o£
all  the  churches.     Whatever  it  was,  in  short,  that  at  the  moment  most  occupied
his  thoughts  and  attention,  that  was  what  he  had  deposited  for  safe-keeping  iu  the
hands   of  Christ,  and  which  he  was  persuaded  He  was  able  to  keep  against  all
assaults  until  that  day,  when  the  secrets  of  all  hearts  shall  be  revealed,  and  every
man  shall  Lave  his  praise  of  God,   {G.Jeans,  M.A.)        Grounds  of  confidence  in  the
Saviour^s  ability  : — We  have  here  a  strong  expression  of  his   confidence  in  the
Saviour :  let  us  consider,  first,  the  nature,  and  then  the  ground  of  this  confidence.
I.  Its  nature.  Some  suppose  the  deposit,  which  the  apostle  mentions  as  committed
to  him,  to  <?enote  the  gospel  truht  in  general:  and  this  view  is  favoured  by  the
similar  expression  in  the  context,  "  that  good  thing,  which  was  committed  to  thee,
keep — hold  fast  the  form  of  sound  words."    But  it  seems  more  probable  that  he
refers  in  the  text  to  the  interest  of  his  salvation,  the  trust  of  his  whole  being,  hia
body,  soul,  and  spirit,  which  he  had  confidently  committed  to  Christ,  as  Him  who
had  "abolished  death,  and  brought  life  and  immortality  to  light."    In  the  near
view  of  martyidom,  dissolution,  and  eternity,  his  confidence  remained  unshaken.
This  is  a  trust  unfit  to  be  reposed  in  any  created  arm.    No  potentate  can  hold  back
his  own  spirit,  much  less  another's,  a  moment  from  death :  no  angel  could  under-
take such  a  trust ;  he  would  abjure  it.     Some  portion  of  our  interests  we  commit
to  others,  but  never  think  of  committing  our  whole  spirit  to  a  creature.    Hence  we
infer  that  Jesus  Christ  is  truly  God :  else  it  were  highly  improper,  and  indeed
accursed,   thus  to   trust  Him.      II.  The  grounds  on  which  the  apostle  teusts
THE  Saviour.     He  saw  that  in  His  character  which  warranted  such  confidence,  and
he  had  a  conviction  of  His  ability.     There  was  some  peculiarity  in  Paul's  case,  to
which  we  may  advert,  but  which  we  need  not  anxiously  separate  from  the  general
case  of  Chrit-tians.     1.  The  first  ground,  peculiar  to  Paul,  is  his  vision  of  Christ  at
Damascus  :  this  penetrated  him  with  reverence  and  attachment  for  the  glorious
person  then  revealed:  his  heart  was  melted  like  wax,  and  he  cried,  "Lord,  what
wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do  ?  "    2.  He  was  confirmed  in  his  trust  by  his  subsequent
experience  of  the  favour  and  power  of  Christ.     His  eyes  were  opened  by  Ananias  at
Christ's  command.     Miraculous  powers  of  great  variety  were  conferred  on  himself;
Bo  that  he  did  perhaps  even  greater  wonders  than  Christ  had  done.  He  was  inspired
to  preach  with  power  and  boldness  :  "  the  power  of  Christ  rested  on  him."     In  hia
soul  such  a  renovation  took  place,  as  only  Divine  power  could  have  effected :  he
was  purified  with  humility  and  enlarged  with  love  ;  his  prospects  were  exti  ndid  far
beyond  time  :  and  all  this  was  the  effect  of  Christ's  ascension,  and  His  gift  of  the
Holy  Spirit.     3.  Jesus  Christ  had  wrought  the  great  salvation,  and  reconciled  it
with  all  the  attributes  of  God.     4.  The  rank  which  Jesus  Chiist  holds  in  heaven  -
assures  us  that  He  "is  able  to  keep  that  which  is  committed  to  Him."    6.  As
Jesus  Christ  is  the  appointed  Judge  of  all,  so  eternal  life  is  at  His  disposal  in  Hia
judicial  character.     (R.Hall,  M.A.)      A  funeral  sermon : — I.  The  bacred  deposit
WHICH  THE  apostle  HAD  MADE.     All  that  coucemed  his  soul,  his  hopes  and  his
desires,  his  deliverance  from  guilt,  and  the  enjoyment  of  the  eternal  favour  of  his
God,  comprised  the  whole  amount  of  that  deposit  he  had  committed  to  the  custody
of  his  Redeemer.    Now  this  transaction  intiujates — 1.  The  perfect  consciousness  of
a  separate  and  immortal  existence.     2.    A  deep  sense  of  the  supreme   value   of
the  soul.      3.  A  powerful  conviction   of  the  awful  nature  of  death.      II.   The

HIGH    SATISFACTION  HE    FELT  WITH    REGARD   TO    ITS    SAFETY.       1.    He   knew  Him    in   the

powejr  of  His  arm.  2.  He  knew  Him  in  His  sacred  relation  to  the  Church,  as
Prophet,  Priest,  and  King.  3.  He  knew  Him,  in  all  the  promises  of  Hia  Word.
4.  This  persuasion  was  founded  upon  the  certain  return  of  the  Saviour  as  the
Judge  of  all.  Hence  he  speaks  of  his  soul  being  kept  in  safety  against  that
day.  (J.  E.  Good.)  The  confidence  of  St.  Paul : — I.  His  knowledge  expressed
— he  knew  whom  ne  believed.  It  was  not  in  himself  he  trusted,  nor  on  his  own
foundation  that  he  built ;  he  staked  nothing  on  his  own  reason  or  imagination  or
sclf-begotton  opinions  ;  nor  had  he  any  reliance  on  his  own  merits,  or  a  high  notion
of  the  worth  of  his  exertions,  even  for  the  cause  of  his  fellow -creatures,  or  for  the


CHAP.  I.]  JI,  TIMOTHY.  '  73

glory  of  God.  It  was  not  the  world  or  the  world's  opinion  that  he  trusted  or
followed,  or  any  human  judgment  or  conclusion  that  he  rested  upon,  as  apart  from
God's  revelation.  1.  He  knew  Him  as  the  revealed  Saviour  spoken  of  and  promised
from  age  to  age.  2.  He  knew  Him  as  the  Almighty  Saviour,  the  eternal  Son  of  the
Father,  fully  sufficient  for  the  wants  of  fallen  man,  and  entirely  adapted  to  the  very
work  of  redemption  which  He  came  from  heaven  to  fulfil.  3.  And  he  knew  and  y
believed  this  on  the  personal  experience  of  that  power  in  his  own  heart ;  the
presence  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ  in  his  own  soul,  having  already  revived  and
quickened  him  from  the  death  of  his  former  corrupt  and  blinded  state.  II.
The  trust  he  reposed  in  the  object  of  his  faith — "  I  am  persuaded  that  He
is  able  to  keep  that  which  I  have  committed  to  Him  against  that  day."  There
was  a  persuasion,  or,  as  the  original  describes  it,  a  full  reliance  and  settled
repose  in  his  mind  on  the  object  of  his  faith — the  Saviour  whom  he  believed.
It  is  perhaps  here  a  question,  whether  the  apostle  meant  to  say  in  these
words,  that  Christ  could  and  would  keep  that  which  he  had  committed  to
Christ;  or,  that  which  Christ  had  committed  to  him.  Doubtless  there  is  an
interchange,  as  it  were,  an  intercommunion  between  Christ  and  the  soul  of  the
believer ;  so  that  something  is  committed  from  Christ  to  the  soul  of  His  servant,
and  something  also  committed  from  the  soul  to  Christ  ;  and  both  are  kept  by  the
power  of  Christ  alone.  Christ  committed  His  truth.  His  word.  His  gospel  to  the
apostle,  to  be  received  in  the  heart  and  proclaimed  throughout  the  world  ;  and  the
apostle  committed  himself,  his  all,  to  Christ.  By  His  grace  alone  could  the  purity
and  perpetuity  of  Divine  truth  be  upheld  in  the  world ;  and  by  His  Spirit  alone
could  the  apostle  be  himself  upheld  amidst  the  shocks  of  temptation  and  the
inroads  of  time  and  the  world,  and  conducted  surely  forwaid  unto  that  day.
It  was  in  the  former  sense  perhaps  that,  in  a  following  verse,  the  apostle
said  to  Timothy — "  That  good  thing  which  was  committed  to  thee,  keep  by
the  Holy  Ghost  which  dwelleth  in  us."  But  take  the  text  rather  in  the  view  given
to  us  by  our  own  translation,  and  we  shall  find  that  apostle  had  been  persuaded,
and  not  in  vain,  to  entrust  to  Christ  and  His  grace,  his  credit,  his  peace,  bis  soul
for  ever.  1.  His  credit.  He  had  to  go  forth  truly,  to  Jew  and  Gentile,  to  preach
what  might  seem  a  new  reUgion — the  one  truth  of  God,  hidden  from  ages  and
generations,  and  now  made  manifest  by  the  gospel ;  and  he  had  to  pledge  himself
that  it  was  true,  and  worthy  their  acceptance.  He  was  persuaded  Christ  could  x
keep  the  word  he  had  given,  and  fulfil  the  promises  he  had  made.  2.  He  committed
to  Christ  his  peace.  Peace,  such  as  the  world  valued  and  sought  after,  the  apostle
was  not  very  likely  ever  to  ensure  :  he  had  to  meet  danger  and  want,  to  face
enemies  and  bear  insult.  Happiness  under  such  circumstances  must  have  been
very  different  from  what  the  world  calls  happiness  :  but  it  was  not  the  less  so
for  that,  nor  could  he  the  less  confidently  tru-t  his  inward  peace  and  even  outward
circumstances  to  Him  who  judged  and  m  Liiained  his  cause,  and  who  had  said —
"  Peace  I  leave  with  you;  not  as  the  world  giveth  give  I  unto  you."  3.  To
Him,  in  fine,  the  apostle  committed,  doubtless,  his  soul,  his  all,  for  time  and
eternity.  He  acted  here  in  the  full  spirit  of  his  fellow-apostle  St.  Peter  (1  Pet.
iv.  19).  {C.  J.  Honre,  M.A.)  Faith  illustrated  : — I.  The  grandest  action  op  the
Christian's  life.  The  apostle  says,  he  committed  himself  into  the  hands  of  Christ.
I  saw  the  other  day  a  remarkable  picture,  which  I  f^hall  use  as  an  illustration
of  the  way  of  salvation  by  faith  in  Jesus.  An  offender  had  committed  a  crime  s/
for  which  he  must  die,  but  it  was  in  the  olden  time  when  churches  were  considered
to  be  sanctuaries  in  which  criminals  might  hide  themselves  and  so  escape.  See  the
transgressor — he  rushes  towards  the  church,  the  guards  pursue  him  with  their
drawn  swords,  all  athirst  for  his  blood,  they  pursue  him  even  to  the  church  door.
He  rushes  up  the  steps,  and  just  as  they  are  about  to  overtake  him  and  hew  him
in  pieces  on  the  threshold  of  the  church,  out  comes  the  bishop,  and  holding  up
the  crucifix  he  cries,  "  Back,  back !  stain  not  the  precincts  of  God's  house  with
blood  !  stand  back  I"  and  the  guards  at  once  respect  the  emidem  and  stand  bad;,
while  the  poor  fugitive  hides  himself  behind  the  robes  of  the  priest.  It  is  even/
so  with  Christ.  The  guilty  sinner  flies  to  the  cross — flies  straight  away  to  Jepui=,
and  though  Justice  pursues  him,  Christ  lifts  up  His  wounded  hands  and  cries
to  Justice,  "  Stand  back !  stand  back  !  I  shelter  this  sinner ;  in  the  secret  place.
of  My  tabernacle  do  I  hide  him  ;  I  wUl  not  suffer  him  to  perish,  for  he  puts  his
trust  in  Me."  The  apostle  meant  that  he  did  make  a  full  and  free  surrender  of
himself  to  Christ,  to  be  Christ's  property,  and  Christ's  servant  for  ever.  I  must  add,
however,  that  this  act  of  faith  must  not  be  performed  once  only,  but  it  must  be


74  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  u

continaed  as  long  as  yon  live.  As  long  as  yon  live  yon  most  have  no  other
confidence  but  "  Jesas  only."  You  may  take  Him  now  to-day,  to  have  and  to  hold
through  life  and  in  death,  in  tempest  and  in  sunshine,  in  poverty  and  in  wealth,
never  to  part  or  sunder  from  Him.  You  must  take  Him  to  be  your  only  prop,
your  only  pillar  from  this  day  forth  and  for  ever.  U.  Thb  justifioatiom  of
THIS  OKAND  ACT  07  TBusT.  Confidence  is  sometimes  folly  ;  trusting  in  man  is  always
so.  When  I  exhort  you,  then,  to  put  your  entire  confidence  in  Christ,  am  I  Justi-
fied in  BO  doing?  "I  have  not  trusted  to  an  unknown  and  untried  pretender.  I
have  not  relied  upon  one  whose  character  I  could  suspect.  I  have  confidence
in  one  whose  power,  whose  willingness,  whose  love,  whose  truthfulness  I  know.
I  know  whom  I  have  believed."  Paul  not  only  knew  these  things  by  faith,  but
he  knew  much  of  them  by  experience.  Our  knowledge  of  Christ  is  somewhat
like  climbing  one  of  our  Welsh  mountains.  When  jou  are  at  the  base  you  see
but  little ;  the  mountain  itself  appears  to  be  but  one  hall  as  high  as  it  really  is.
Confined  in  a  little  valley  you  discover  scarcely  anything  but  the  rippling  brooks
as  they  descend  into  the  stream  at  the  base  of  the  mountain.  Climb  the  first
rising  knoll,  and  the  valley  lengthens  and  widens  beneath  your  feet.  Go  up
higher,  and  higher  still,  till  you  stand  upon  the  summit  of  one  of  the  great
roots  that  start  out  as  spurs  from  the  sides  of  the  mountain,  you  see  the
country  for  some  four  or  five  miles  round,  and  you  are  delighted  with  the  widening
prospect.  But  go  onward,  and  onward,  and  onward,  and  how  the  scene  enlarges,
till  at  last,  when  you  are  on  the  summit,  and  look  east,  west,  north,  and  south,
you  see  almust  all  England  lying  before  you.  Yonder  is  a  forest  in  some  distant
country,  perhaps  two  hundred  miles  away,  and  yonder  the  sea,  and  there  a
shining  river  and  the  smoking  chimneys  of  a  manufacturing  town,  or  there  the
masts  of  the  ships  in  some  well-known  port.  All  these  things  please  and
delight  you,  an-l  you  say,  «•  I  could  not  have  imagined  th  tt  so  much  could
be  seen  at  this  elevation."  Now,  the  Christian  life  is  of  the  same  order.  When
we  first  believe  in  Christ  we  see  but  little  of  Him.  The  higher  we  climb  the  more
we  discover  of  His  excellencies  and  His  beauties.  But  who  has  ever  gained  the
summit  ?  Paul  now  grown  old,  sitting,  grey  hair'd,  shivering  in  a  dungeon  in
Rome— he  could  say,  with  greater  power  than  we  can,  "I  know  whom  I  have
believed  I " — for  each  experience  had  been  like  the  climbing  of  a  hill,  each  tritd
had  been  like  the  ascending  to  another  summit,  and  his  death  seemed  like  the
gaining  of  the  very  top  of  the  mountain  from  which  ha  could  see  the  whole  of  the
faithiulnc's  and  the  love  of  Him  to  whom  he  had  committed  his  soul.  HI.
Thz  apostle's  confidence.  "  I  am  persuaded  that  He  is  able  to  keep  that  which
I  have  committed  to  Him."  See  this  man.  He  is  sure  he  shall  be  saved.  But
whj^  ?  Paul!  art  thou  sure  that  thou  canst  keep  thyself?  "  No,"  says  he,  "I
have  noihing  to  do  with  that "  :  and  yet  thou  art  sure  of  thy  salvation  I  "  Yes,"
sailh  he,  "  I  am  1 "  How  is  it,  then  ?  "  Why,  I  am  persuaded  that  He  is  able  to
keep  me.  Christ,  to  whom  I  commit  myself,  I  know  hath  power  enough  to  hold
me  to  the  end."  Martin  Luther  was  bold  enough  to  exclaim,  "  Let  Him  that
died  for  my  soul,  see  to  the  salvation  of  it."  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Assurance : — I.
The  objfct  of  faith — "  I  know  whom  I  have  believed."  Well,  now,  whom
have  you  believed  ?  Have  you  believed  Juggernaut  ?  Have  you  believed  the
Hindoo  Brahmins?  The  glorious  covenant  Head  of  His  Church — I  have
believed  Him.  "  Ele  that  believeth  on  the  Son  of  God  hath  everlasting  life;
and  he  that  believeth  not  hath  not  life."  Where  there  is  no  believing  of  a  saving
description  upon  the  Person  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  there  is  no  salvation.  It  is
in  vain  to  tell  me  of  all  the  excellencies  of  the  creature,  of  all  the  attainments  of
moral  philosophy,  an>)  of  all  the  pride  of  superstition,  it  only  just  makes  a  pioua
road  to  hell  for  those  who  pretend  to  pursue  it.  There  is  no  such  thing  as  salvation,
no  such  thing  as  safety,  for  time  or  for  eternity,  but  by  believing  on  the  Son  of
God.  "  I  know."  I  beseech  you  to  mark  the  positive  nature  of  the  assertion.  It  is
not,  "I  hope,  or  trust";  it  is  not,  "I  can,  or  shall,  or  may,  believe  in  Him";  but,
"I  know  whom  I  have  believed."  I  do  not  like  anything  less  than  "  I  know,"  even
in  thinj-'s  temporal.  If  I  were  to  ask  my  servant  whether  such  and  such  a  matter
is  safe,  or  right,  or  done  properly,  and  I  were  to  receive  for  an  answer,  "  I  think  so,"
or  "Probably  it  may  be  so  "  ;  "Do  not  tell  me  that,"  I  should  say,  perhaps  some-
what angrily;  "Do  you  know  it?  is  it  really  so?"  Surely,  then,  if  I  should
require  tuis  in  temporal  matters,  what  should  I  look  for  in  tilings  spiritual  You
tell  me  Goil  is  merciful,  and  I  shall  do  as  well  as  others  in  the  end.  "  I  know  whom
I  have  believed."    The  question  might  be  put  to  the  persons  who  make  such  an


OBAT.  1.J  n.  TIMOTHY.


\


assertion,  "What  do  you  know  of  Him?"  "Well,  I  will  tell  yon.  I  know  very
well  that  He  is  truly,  properly,  essentially,  eternally  God.  I  know  enough  of  Him
to  be  quite  sure  that  He  is  truly,  and  properly,  and  sinlessly  man.  I  know  for
certain  of  Him,  that  He  is,  in  His  complex  character,  as  God  and  man,  M<^diator,
Surety,  Daysman  for  His  Church,  in  official  standing."  Do  you  know  all  this?
Do  you  know  Him  personally?  Can  you  say,  *'  I  know  that  in  His  office  He  has
accomplished  all  that  is  requisite  for  the  salvation  of  His  Church."  Look  at  the
word  "  believe  "  before  we  quit  this  part  of  our  subject.  "  I  know  whom  I  have
believed."  What  is  believing  ?  In  the  margin  of  our  Bible  we  read  "  trusted."
Well,  believing  is  trusting,  and  trusting  is  believing.  H.  The  natuee  of  faith's
ACTINGS — '•  that  which  I  have  committed  to  Him."  There  is  something  about  this
which  enters  at  once  into  tbe  daily  experience  of  a  child  of  God,  and  I  think  if  it
were  more  extensively  practised  in  our  experience,  we  should  be  happier  Christians
— the  committing  of  everything  to  Him.  I  have  committed  to  Him  my  soul's
concerns ;  I  have  committed  to  Him  the  affairs  of  time ;  and  I  committed  to
Him  His  visible  Church,  which  neither  legislators  nor  monarchs  care  anything
about,  but  to  distract  and  to  destroy.  Look  at  these  things  for  a  few  moments.
I  have  committed  to  Him  my  soul's  concerns.  And  these  are  of  two  descriptions ;
my  soul's  concerns  for  security,  salvation,  eternal  life ;  and  my  soul's  concerns
in  regard  to  spiritual  existence,  and  spiritual  prosperity,  in  my  way  to  glory.  I
commit  both  to  Him.  Now  the  nature  of  faith's  actings  is  to  commit  all  to
Jesus,  in  both  these  respects.  If  the  filthy  effluvia  of  human  nature's  risings
annoy  me,  I  shall  cry,  "  Lord,  subdue  all  my  iniquity."  I  commit  them  all  to
Him ;  cannot  do  anything  without  Him,  and  I  am  sure  it  is  no  good  talking
about  it.  "  Lord,  conquer  my  depravity.  Lord,  fulfil  Thy  promises,  that  '  sin
shall  not  have  dominion.'  "  Then  go  on  to  mark,  that  it  is  faith's  province  to
commit  the  affairs  of  this  life  to  Him.  They  are  not  too  little,  they  are  not  too
mean  for  Him  to  notice,  nor  for  Him  to  manage,  and  it  may  be  viewed  as  the  peculiar
privilege  of  the  Christian  to  carry  to  the  throne  of  grace,  and  commit  to  Christ,  every
arrangement  He  may  make,  every  bargain  into  which  He  may  enter,  every  association
He  may  form,  and  every  companion  He  may  choose.  So  with  all  His  successes — to
commit  them  all  to  Him,  remembering  that  it  is  He  who  giveth  power  to  get  wealth.
So,  again,  with  regard  to  losses  and  crosses,  painful  events.  HI.  The  expectation
OF  FAITH.  "  He  is  able  to  keep  "  it ;  and  that  is  the  point  which  fixes  upon  my  atten-
tion. Blessings  on  His  name,  that  He  is  as  willing  as  He  is  able  I  He  is  interested
in  it.  But  this  statement  implies  great  danger  or  difficulty,  or  the  Divine  keep-
ing would  not  be  necessary.  It  implies  that  our  beloved  Zion  is  surrounded  with
every  description  of  enemies  and  dangers,  or  it  would  not  be  said  that  it  needs
Divine  keeping.  Moreover,  there  seems  in  this  expectation  of  faith  enough  to
nourish  assurance  itself.  "  He  is  able  to  keep  that  which  I  have  committed  to
Him."  Well,  then,  assurance  may  lift  up  its  head,  and  say,  "If  it  be  the  soul's
concerns,  I  have  nothing  to  doubt — I  trust  it  all  in  His  hands.  If  it  be  the
affairs  of  my  family,  or  my  business,  I  have  nothing  to  harass  me  concerning
them."  One  word  more.  "  Against  that  day."  We  might  mention  the  day  of  the
termination  of  that  trouble,  the  day  of  the  accomplishment  of  that  desire,  the  day
of  the  consummation  of  a  certain  purpose  or  scheme  in  God's  providence,  relative
to  our  spiritual  or  temporal  affairs ;  but  I  must  hasten  to  that  day  the  apostle
had  immediately  in  view,  "that  day"  when  Christ  shall  claim  His  own;  "that
day  "  when  all  the  election  of  grace  shall  appear  before  Him,  and  be  presented  to  the
Father  "  a  perfect  Church,  without  spot  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing."  (J.  IroTu.)
The  grounds  of  the  believer^s  confidence : — What  a  noble  picture  have  we  here  I
Elsewhere  we  are  told  that  the  apostle  was  "  in  presence  weak,  and  in  speech  con-
temptible " ;  but  he  does  not  appear  so  now.  We  see  in  him  a  courage  and  calmness
more  than  human.  "  What  though  my  departure  from  this  world  be  marked  by
infamy,  and  violence,  and  scorn — what  though  friends  forsake,  and  the  world  revile,
and  foes  pursue  me  with  unresting  hatred,  I  have  one  treasure  of  which  they  can-
not rob  me,  one  refuge  to  which  I  can  always  fly,  one  Friend  who  •  having  loved  me,
will  love  me  unto  the  end.' "  I.  The  tebms  in  which  the  apostle  makes  this  noble
declakation  of  his  confidenob.  The  apostle  does  not  say,  •'  what  I  have  believed,"
as  if  his  hope  stood  in  his  creed,  which  might  be  very  exact — or  in  his  Church,  which
might  be  very  true — or  in  his  labours,  which  were  incessant  and  self-denying — or  in
his  life,  which  was  without  reproach  and  blameless  ;  but  he  says,  "  The  proper  object
of  my  confidence  is  a  Person ;  my  religion  consists  in  having  found  a  Friend — a  Friend
with  whom  all  my  interests  for  time  and  for  eternity  may  be  entrusted.    I  cleave  to  &


T6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [oha».  u

liying,  infallible,  Divine  Protector.  '  I  know  whom  I  have  believed. ' "  The  ex-
pression, as  you  perceive,  is  in  true  keeping  with  the  entire  spirit  of  New  Testament
theology.  When  a  sinner  awakes  to  the  first  sight  of  his  danger,  the  first  words  to
be  addressed  to  him  are,  "  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be
aaved."  This  is  a  principle  of  the  Divine  procedure  which  would  commend  itself
were  it  only  for  its  beautiful  and  pure  simplicity.  When  pressed  with  the  terrors  of
a  guilty  conscience,  when  despair  and  fear  seem  to  be  coming  in  upon  me  like  a
flood,  I  want  something  to  fly  to  at  once ;  I  want  to  be  directed  immediately  to  an
altar  of  safety.  Tell  me  not  of  things  to  be  believed,  or  learned,  or  sought  for,  or
rone,  but  tell  me  of  one  simple  act  which  shall  bring  me  within  reach  of  mercy.
Do  not  lose  time  in  considering  how  "  life  aud  immortality  are  to  be  brought  to
light " — take  Him  as  "  the  life."  A  convinced  sinner  cannot  do  better  than  em-
brace a  theology  of  one  article — "I  know  whom  I  have  believed."  Again,  let  us
look  at  the  word  "  believed."  In  the  writings  of  St.  Paul  the  expression  stands  for
the  highest  form  of  moral  persuasion.  It  implies  the  strength  of  an  all-pervading
practical  conviction — the  reposing  of  a  loving,  perfect,  and  confiding  trust.  The
advance  of  this  upon  a  mere  intellectual  faith  you  will  perceive — for  not  only  is  it
believed  that  Christ  came  for  man's  salvation,  but  that  this  salvation  has  become
individually  applied  to  ourselves.  '•  I  know  whom  I  have  believed."  My  faith  rests
npon  my  knowledge,  just  as  my  knowledge  reacts  upon  my  faith.  I  am  not  making
a  plunge  into  eternity  in  the  dark.  I  have  looked  to  the  soundness  of  my  Eock  to
Bee  whether  it  will  bear  me ;  I  have  "  tasted  that  the  Lord  is  gracious,"  and  there-
fore am  *'  confident  of  this  very  thing,  that  He  that  hath  begun  a  good  work
In  me,  will  perform  it  unto  the  day  of  Christ."  The  word  points  out  to  us  the
danger  of  taking  our  religion  on  trust ;  the  duty  of  subjecting  our  opinions  to  a
diligent  and  inquiring  search.  An  uninvestigated  faith  can  never  be  a  happy  faith.
Christ's  work  for  us  must  be  believed,  but  Christ's  work  in  us  must  be  proved.  Let
Qs  take  the  next  words,  showing  to  us  the  nature  of  the  Christian's  deposit — "  I
know  whom  I  have  believed,  and  am  persuaded  that  He  is  able  to  keep  that  which
I  have  committed  unto  Him  against  that  day."  To  the  trust  here  spoken  of  we  can
place  no  limit.  How  great  the  privilege  of  having  this  treasure  locked  up  in  safe
custody,  feeling  that  whatever  else  is  taken  from  us,  our  souls  are  enclosed  in  the
Banctuary  of  heaven — that  our  Jesus  puts  His  hand  upon  these  and  says,  "  These
Bouls  are  Mine  " — Mine  to  be  kept,  Mine  to  be  watched  over,  Mine  to  be  purged
from  all  dross  and  defilement,  and  to  be  rendered  back  each  to  his  own,  "  at  that
day  I  "  And  the  apostle  mentions  this  day,  in  preference  to  the  day  of  his  death,
because  although  the  earlier  period  would  abundantly  vindicate  the  Saviour's
faithfulness,  yet  the  other  is  the  day  when  Christ  shall  formally  give  up
His  great  trust — when,  in  the  presence  of  all  the  intelligences  of  heaven,  He
shall  show  how  carefully  He  has  watched  over  souls,  through  the  conflicts  o£
life,  through  the  terrors  of  death,  through  the  long  repose  of  the  grave,  now  to
hold  them  up  as  His  jewels,  and  reward,  and  crown  at  "  that  day."     11.  Thb

OBOnNDS   ON  WHICH   THE   APOSTLE   BESTS   HIS   CONFIDENCE.       TheSO,  aS  We  should  SUp-

pose,  must  consist  in  the  personal  qualifications  of  Him  who  was  the  subject  of
Buch  trust,  in  the  attributes  of  His  holy  nature,  in  the  efficacy  of  His  atoning  work,
in  the  virtue  of  His  meritorious  obedience,  in  the  continued  exertions  of  His
resumed  Divinity  now  that  He  is  seated  at  the  right  hand  of  God.  Thus,  let  us
look  at  the  attributes  of  His  nature — at  His  power,  for  example ;  does  He  not  say.
*•  All  things  are  delivered  into  My  hand  "  ;  "  all  power  is  given  unto  Me  in  heaven
and  in  earth";  "I  open,  and  no  man  shutteth;  I  shut,  and  no  man  openethl"
Who,  then,  can  harm  us,  if  we  have  secured  such  a  Friend  as  this?  But,  further,
we  know  Paul  would  have  a  ground  of  persuasion  in  the  work  of  Christ,  in  the
snfficiency  of  His  obedience,  in  the  infinite  reach  of  His  atonement.  The  apostle
was  one  who  felt  painfully  the  greatness  of  his  own  deficiencies.  His  language  ever
was  "  •  In  the  Lord  Jehovah  have  I  righteousness  and  strength.'  My  only  trust  is
*  that  I  may  be  found  in  Him.' "  But  once  more,  the  apostle  would  find  a  com-
forting ground  of  persuasion  in  the  thought  that  the  Saviour  in  whom  he  believed,
lived  for  ever.  It  is  a  sad  reflection  with  regard  to  our  earthly  friends,  that  how-
ever cherished  or  however  tried,  death  will  soon  take  them  away.  (D.  Moore,  M.A.)
A  $afe  deposit: — We  sometimes  believe  in  men  whom  we  do  not  know.  We  think
we  know  them ;  but  we  are  mistaken.  We  may  inquire ;  we  may  observe ;
we  may  ask  for  testimony  and  receive  it :  we  may  even  put  men  to  severe  test :
■till  we  are  sometimes  mistaken  and  deceived,  and  we  have  to  confess,  "  I  did
not  know  the  man  whom  I  trusted."    The  case  presented  by   the  text  is  the


CHAP.  I."  II,  TIMOTHY,  rr

opposite  of  that.  In  this  instance  we  have  trust  leading  to  increased  and
enlarged  knowledge — knowledge  strengthening  trust,  and  both  producing  the
expression  of  full  assurance.  You  observe  that  the  language  of  the  text  is  some-
what metaphorical.  We  have  certain  facts  in  the  Christian  life  put  before  us  here
under  the  figure  of  a  deposit — a  depositor — a  depositary,  and  the  confidence  of  the
depositor.  I.  What  is  this  deposit  ?  Was  it  the  soul  of  the  writer  ?  Was  it  the
well-being  of  Paul  in  his  persecution,  the  getting  good  out  of  his  sorrow  (1  Pet.  iv.
19).  Was  it  the  work  of  his  salvation — that  work  to  which  he  himself  refers,  when,
addressing  some  of  his  converts,  he  says,  "  He  which  hath  begun  a  good  work  in  you
will  perform  it  "  ?  Was  it  his  future  crown — the  crown  of  righteousness  ?  Was  it
his  converts,  for  whom  he  was  perpetually  praying  ?  Was  it  his  apostolate  ?  Was
it  the  welfare  of  the  Churches  ?  Was  it  the  truth,  and  the  proclamation  of  the
truth  ?  The  great  care  of  a  man  on  a  dying  bed  is  himself,  and  this  should  be  our
great  care  in  life ;  yet  to  take  charge  of  himself  no  man  is  capable.  Whatever
capacity  a  man  may  have  had,  or  human  nature  may  have  had  before  the  fall,  the
loss  of  capacity  which  sinfulness  and  transgression  have  occasioned  is  immense ;
and  there  is  a  fearful  loss  of  position.  The  soul  is  guilty,  and  needs  pardon,
righteousness,  and  restoration.  The  spirit  is  polluted,  and  it  is  dark,  dim,  dull,  and
deathly,  through  its  pollution — it  wants  light  and  life.  A  physician  is  needed  to
whom  this  soul,  conscious  of  its  guilt  and  of  the  disease  of  sin,  may  commit  itself.
A  priest  is  needed,  who  can  undertake  the  work  of  atonement ;  and  an  advocate,
who  can  make  intercession.  Such  an  advocate,  such  a  priest,  such  a  physician,
Paul  had  found  in  Jesus  Christ ;  and  to  Him,  who  unites  in  His  own  person  all  that
a  sinner  needs  to  find  in  a  Saviour,  Paul  had  given  up  himself.  H.  The  depositor.
This  is  Saul  of  Tarsus.  Did  Gamaliel  teach  him  this  ?  Some  of  Gamaliel's
strongest  and  most  prominent  lessons  were  self-reliance.  The  tendency  of  his
teaching  was  to  lead  the  young  Saul  to  depend  upon  himself,  and  he  had,  as  we
know,  from  the  story  of  his  life,  an  immense  amount  of  self-confidence.  There  is
nothing  committed  to  God  to  keep — the  man  only  talks  of  his  own  virtues  and  good
deeds,  comparing  himself  with  another.  This  is  not  Saul  the  Pharisee,  it  is  Saul
the  Christian.  It  is  Saul,  but  it  is  Saul  born  again,  it  is  Saul  born  from  above,  it
is  Saul  a  new  creation,  old  things  have  passed  away,  behold  all  things  have  become
new  1  New,  this  confidence  in  another ;  old,  that  self-confidence.  "  I  can  take  care
of  myself,"  would  have  been  his  language  a  few  years  ago ;  "  my  prayers  and  alms-
giving, and  good  works  will  save  me,"  he  would  then  have  said  ;  now,  he  is  entirely
changed,  and  he  represents  the  state  of  his  heart  in  writing,  "  I  know  whom  I
have  believed,  and  am  persuaded  that  He  is  able  to  keep  that  which  I  have  com-
mitted unto  Him  against  that  day."  Saul  of  Tarsus  took  charge  of  himself,  but
Saul  the  Christian  committed  himself  to  another.  And  who  is  that  other  ?  III.  The
DEPosiTABT.  Does  Paul  here  refer  to  God,  whose  name  he  mentions  in  the  eighth
verse,  or  to  our  Saviour,  Jesus  Christ,  whom  he  introduces  to  us  in  the  tenth  verse  ?
We  think  he  refers  to  our  Saviour,  Jesus  Christ — not,  of  course,  that  we  can  separate
God  and  our  Saviour,  Jesus  Christ — because  "  God  is  in  Christ,  reconciling  the
world  unto  Himself."  The  depositary,  mark,  is  Christ ;  the  anointed  Keeper  of
souls ;  one  upon  whom  the  unction  of  the  Holy  Ghost  was  poured  out  without
measure,  that  He  might  take  charge  of  souls ;  Christ — observe,  Jesus  Christ,  the
divine  and  devoted  Keeper  of  souls.  Now,  to  "  Jesus  Christ,  our  Saviour,  who  hath
abolished  death,  and  brought  life  and  immortaUty  to  light  ";  to  the  "  Word  made
flesh,"  "  God  manifest  in  flesh,"  "  God  over  all  blessed  for  evermore,"  to  Him  did
Paul  commit  himself.  It  is  in  vain  that  you  try  to  mingle  these  things — taking  the
responsibility  of  life  upon  your  shoulders  and  committing  yourself  to  another.  You
cannot  do  this ;  you  must  either  madly  and  vainly  try  to  bear  the  burden  alone,  or
you  must  commit  the  whole  to  your  Saviour,  and  all  then  that  you  are  responsible
for  is,  doing  what  He  tells  you,  and  not  doing  that  which  He  forbids  you.  But,  as
to  the  charge,  the  charge  is  His ;  and  as  to  the  responsibility,  the  responsibility  is
His ;  and  as  to  the  care,  all  the  care  is  His.  Is  there  any  danger  of  your  abusing
these  truths  ?  Is  it  possible  that  any  of  you  can  say,  "  Well,  if  this  be  the  case,  I
have  certainly  asked  Christ  to  take  the  charge  of  my  soul,  and  I  may  be  as  careless
as  I  please."  When  you  put  yourself  into  the  hands  of  a  physician,  you  feel  that
yoa  are  accountable  for  obedience  to  his  instructions,  and  that  his  resources  are
made  available  to  you  just  as  you  are  submissive  to  his  treatment.  Just  so
with  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  IV.  The  confidence  of  the  depositob.  "  I
know  whom  I  have  believed,  and  am  persuaded  that  He  is  able  to  keep  that
which  I  have  committed  unto  Him  against  that  day."    The  confidence  of  Paul


78  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i.

relates  to  four  objects : — 1.  The  general  character  of  the  depositary.  "  I  know  what
He  is,  and  what  He  can  do ;  I  see  and  I  appreciate  all  the  attributes  of  His  nature ;
I  know  that  He  has  an  eye  that  never  slumbers  nor  sleeps,  an  arm  that  is  never
weary,  a  working  hand  that  is  stretched  out  still,  a  heart  of  love — the  extent  and
energy  of  which  surpass  knowledge.  2.  Then  it  rests  in  the  ability  of  the
depositary  with  respect  to  this  particular  trust.  *•  He  is  able  to  keep  " — ablb  to
keep.  Few  men  had  so  seen  the  dangers  of  this  world  as  Paul.  God  keeps  some
Bouls  in  a  blissful,  childish  ignorance  of  their  dangers,  and  they  go  through  life  with
an  amount  of  simplicity  which  is  extraordinary,  and  which  we  cannot  account  for
except  upon  the  principle  that  God  does  literally  hide  them  as  in  His  pavilion.  But
there  are  others  whose  spiritual  senses  are  so  quickened,  that  they  see  almost  every-
thing relating  to  their  religious  life — at  least  the  many  of  the  spiritual  and  evil
influences  to  which  they  are  exposed.  3.  This  confidence  relates  to  the  continuous*
ness  of  the  present  assurance.  "  He  is  able  to  keep  that  which  I  have  committed
to  Him  against  that  day."  The  fires  of  that  day  shall  burn  the  wood,  hay,  stubble,
and  shall  develop  in  grand  contrast  the  gold,  and  the  silver,  and  the  precious  stones.
••  Against  that  day  •  He  is  able  to  keep  that  which  I  have  committed  to  Him.*  He
knows  what  the  test  of  that  day  will  be,  and  against  that  day  He  is  able  to  guard
my  trust,  and  nothing  that  I  have  committed  to  His  hands,  shall  even  in  that  day
be  lost."  4.  Further,  you  observe,  the  apostle  rests  very  much  in  the  accuracy,
and  in  the  soundness  of  his  own  experience.  *'  I  know,"  he  says,  "  whom  I  have
believed."  And  how  did  he  know?  Did  he  know  through  having  received  the
testimony  of  the  prophets,  who  all  bore  witness  to  the  Saviour  f  Did  he  know
pimply  through  having  listened  to  Christian  teaching,  or  to  the  teaching  of  such  an
one  as  Ananias  ?  No ;  from  these  sources  he  did  derive  information,  but  he  knew
through  following  Christ,  that  He  was  able  to  keep  that  which  he  had  committed
to  Him — he  knew  through  taking  advantage  of  Christ,  that  He  was  able — just  as
you  know  what  a  physician  can  do,  by  his  attendance  at  your  sick  bed,  or  as  you
may  know  what  a  legal  adviser  is  able  to  do,  by  the  counsel  he  gives  you  in  some
time  of  temporal  perplexity,  or  just  as  you  may  know  a  friend  by  his  aid  in  the
hour  of  adversity.  He  had,  again  and  again,  put  Jesus  Christ  to  the  proof,  and  the
proof  had  shown  that  not  even  God's  words  had  fully  described  the  Saviour.
(S.  Martin.)  Christian  confidence : — Let  us  look,  first  of  all,  at  this  persuasion,
which  I  want  you  to  be  the  subject  of  ;  and  then  we  will  see  the  ground  on  which  it
rested ;  and  then  the  consequences  of  which  it  was  productive.  1.  "  I  am  per-
suaded that  He  is  able  to  keep  that  which  I  have  committed  unto  Him  against  that
day."  You  see,  it  amounts  to  a  perfect  persuasion  of  security  here  ;  here  is  absolute
safety,  and  the  experience  of  it.  The  word  "  persuaded  "  is  as  strong  as  possible.  It
was  the  deep  inwrought  oonviction  of  his  soul ;  it  was  not  liable  to  be  disturbed  ;
it  was  a  settled  fact,  as  you  dispose  of  a  thing,  and  say,  That  is  done,  it  is  settled.
It  was  the  persuasion  of  his  mind,  that  all  was  safe  for  eternity.  Observe  the
remarkable  use  in  this  text  of  the  word  that  by  the  apostle,  which  is  very  instruc-
tive. He  says,  "  I  am  persuaded  that  He  is  able  to  keep  that  which  I  have  com-
mitted unto  Him  against  that  day."  He  uses  the  word,  you  see,  twice,  with  no
antecedent  in  either  case  exactly,  and  no  specific  object  mentioned  to  which  it
refers.  There  is  something  very  striking  about  that.  He  takes  for  granted,  that  all
will  understand  it;  that  no  mistake  can  possibly  exist  about  it ;  that  no  man  will
read  the  verse,  and  not  at  once  interpret  to  what  the  word  "  that "  refers  in  both
instances.  "  Keep  that  I  "  Why,  no  child  here  doubts  what  he  means.  "  My  soul."
"  Against  that  day ! "  No  child  can  doubt  what  day — the  great  day  of  His  own
coming.  They  are  the  two  things  in  comparison  with  which  everything  else  sinks
into  absolute,  utter  insignificance.  The  beauty  of  this  passage,  I  think,  is  in  that
word  "  commit."  As  expressive  and  explanatory  of  the  meaning  of  the  word  faith,
I  do  not  know  any  more  beautiful  term.  People  seem  at  a  loss  to  understand  what
is  meant  at  last  by  faith.  The  best  interpretation,  I  think,  is  to  be  found  in  the
idea  which  that  word  "  commit "  conveys.  You  commit  your  goods  to  a  person  you
can  trust ;  you  commit  your  body,  your  life,  all  you  have  got,  exactly  in  proportion
as  you  have  grounds  for  trusting  a  man — your  welfare,  your  character,  your  reputa-
tion, your  honour.  You  say,  "  I  can  leave  my  honour  in  your  hands."  That  is
exactly  the  meaning  of  the  word  here :  "  I  have  committed."  There  is  something
very  beautiful  in  it,  and  it  seems  practically  to  be  this :  "  I  have  put  the  matter  out
of  my  hands  into  His."  Now,  I  wish  you  would  quietly  enter  into  that  idea,  and
thoroughly  understand  it.  I  do  not  know  anything  that  could  positively  give  real
comfort  to  a  man,  like  the  oeitainty  that  he  has  put  his  soul's  interests  out  of  hia


OBAT.  I.)  n.  TIMOTHY.


own  hands  into  safe  keeping.  I  think  this  word  "  commit "  implies  not  only  the
apostle's  sense  of  the  value  of  the  soul,  but  a  man's  practical  inability  to  keep  his
own  soul.  Why  do  you  commit  your  property  to  some  one  to  keep  ?  Because  you
feel  that  you  cannot  keep  it  yourself,  for  some  reason — never  mind  what.  Why  do
you  commit  your  health  into  the  hands  of  a  physician  7  Because  you  feel  that  yoa
cannot  cure  yourself.  And  so  on  with  regard  to  anything  else.  You  commit  your
child  to  an  instructor,  because  you  feel  that  you  have  more  confidence  in  the
instructor.  So  that  the  fact  of  committing  anything  to  another  supposes  some
inability  on  our  part  to  do  the  thing.  Just  so  with  the  soul.  I  dwell  on  that  with
unspeakable  comfort.  There  is  a  relief  to  my  soul  in  this  idea,  that  with  its  tre-
mendous responsibilities,  with  the  awful  destinies  before  it,  I  can  hand  it  over  into
Jesus  Christ's  keeping,  and  that  He  will  keep  that  which  I  commit  unto  Him.  2.
But  on  what  ground  did  the  apostle  arrive  at  this  supposition — because  there  must
be  some  ground  for  it  ?  For  instance :  if  I  were  to  say  to  you  to-morrow,  "  Go  and
commit  your  property  and  your  interests  into  the  hands  of  some  man,"  yon  would
say,  "  Why  that  man  ?  On  what  grounds?  I  know  nothing  about  that  man."  But
if  I  were  to  say,  '•  That  man  that  you  know  thoroughly  well,"  and  you  were
thoroughly  alive  to  his  capability  and  power,  what  would  you  say  ?  You  would
say,  "  Yes,  I  know  whom  yon  call  upon  me  to  believe ;  I  am  persuaded  that  he  is
able  to  keep  that,  if  I  do  commit  it  to  him."  You  see,  it  would  altogether  depend
upon  the  knowledge  yon  have  of  the  man.  So  Paul  says  here :  "  I  know  whom
I  believe ;  therefore  I  am  persuaded  that  He  is  able  to  keep  that  which  I  have  com-
mitted unto  Him  against  that  day."  Now,  then,  what  do  we  know  about  Him?
What  kind  of  knowledge  is  it  that  would  warrant  Paul,  or  that  will  warrant  you  and
me,  that  we  can  commit  all  to  Jesus  Christ  ?  There  might  be,  of  course,  endless  par-
ticulars specified.  This  is  the  reason  why  I  call  upon  you  so  much  to  study  the  whole
work  and  character  of  Christ.  It  is,  depend  upon  it,  being  thoroughly  acquainted  with
the  work  of  Jesus  Christ,  it  is  having  an  intelligent  understanding  of  all  that  He  has
done,  that  gives  this  kind  of  unqualified  assurance  and  happy  confidence.  Therefore
we  read,  "  This  is  eternal  life,  to  know  Thee."  It  is  not  just  a  sort  of  glimpse ;  it  is
not  merely  saying,  "  I  believed  Christ  died  " ;  but  it  is  understanding  and  knowiug
these  things.  I  often  tell  you,  and  I  am  persuaded  of  it,  that  throughout  eternity
our  study  will  be  the  cross  of  Christ.  "  Against  that  day  " — that  is,  right  on  from
the  present  moment  till  that  day  comes.  You  will  observe,  that  implies  the  state
after  death,  as  well  as  our  present  state.  I  have  nothing  to  suffer  in  the  inter-
mediate state — no  purgatory — no  difficulties  of  any  kind.  He  has  kept  me  through
life;  He  will  keep  me  afterwards,  for  He  will  keep  that  which  I  have  committed
unto  Him  to  that  day.  It  ruus  on  from  the  moment  a  man  commits  his  soul  to
Christ.  The  expression  is  very  striking  here.  It  seems  to  teach  us.  and  to  prove
by  implication,  that  after  that  day  there  is  no  danger.  Then  security  will  not  be  a
matter  merely  of  pronuse,  but  of  circumstances.  When  I  am  perfected  in  body  and  soul,
where  will  be  my  danger?  When  I  am  in  mansions  where  there  is  a  gulf  betwixt  the
mansions  and  bell  where  Satan  is,  and  he  cannot  ferry  it,  all  wiU  be  perfectly  safe.
Therefore  we  are  to  be  as  pillars  in  the  temple  of  God,  and  to  go  no  more  out  for
ever.  3.  Now,  then,  what  was  the  consequence  of  it?  "lam  not  ashamed."  Why
was  he  not  ashamed  ?  Because  he  was  the  subject  of  that  glorious  persuasion  that
all  was  safe.  And  I  want  you  to  believe,  that  there  is  the  closest  connection  between
boldness  in  a  Christian's  career  and  assurance  in  a  Christian's  heart ;  that  no  man
will  take  the  walk  of  a  Christian,  and  occupy  the  path  as  he  ought  to  do,  boldly  and
consistently  and  in  a  straightforward  way,  unless  he  feels  that  all  is  safe  with
regard  to  his  everlasting  state.  He  says,  "  For  which  cause  I  suffer."  For  what
cause  ?  Because  "  I  am  appointed  a  preacher,  and  an  apostle,  and  a  teacher  of  the
Gentiles  ;  for  the  which  cause  I  suffer."  When  Paul  was  first  brought  to  God,  what
did  the  Lord  say  about  him  ?  He  said,  "  I  will  show  him  how  great  things  he  must
suffer  for  My  name's  sake."  It  is  very  remarkable,  He  did  not  say,  "  I  will  show
him  what  great  things  he  shall  do,"  but  "  what  great  things  he  shall  suffer."  II  we
are  consistent  followers  of  God,  we  must  be  sufferers.  Having  alluded  to  his
Bufferings,  he  says,  "I  suffer";  but  he  adds,  "I  am  not  ashamed."  "I  stand
manfully  forward  and  confe^cj  Him."  Now,  what  is  the  ground?  I  have  already
mentioned  it.  It  is  because  of  that  persuasion.  That  is  the  antidote.  (C  Moly-
neux,  B.A.)  The  use  and  abuse  of  dogma: — A  good  man  at  the  present  day,
writing  a  letter,  with  death  staring  him  in  the  face,  to  an  intimate  friend,  would
be  likely  to  write,  not,  •'  I  know  whom  I  have  believed,"  but,  "  I  know  what  I  have
believed."    It  comes  more  natural  to  us  to  express  our  religious  convictions  so — to


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaj.  I.

think  more  of  the  "  what  "  than  of  the  "  whom" — to  cling  rather  to  the  creed,  or
doctrinal  system,  than  to  the  Living  Person,  to  whom  system  and  creed  bear
witness.      Of  course,  the  doctrinal  system  implies   the  Living  Person;   but  the
system  is  nearer  to  our  thoughts  than  the  Person.     With  St.  Paul  it  was  otherwise.
To  him  the  Living  Person — God  our  Father,  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  and  Saviour —
was  everything,  was  all  in  all ;  the  system  was  nothing — nay,  we  may  say,  had  no
existence.     Therefore  it  is,  that,  in  view  of  death  and  judgment,  and  all  that  is
most  trying   to  human  faith  and   courage,  he  writes,   "  Nevertheless  I   am  not
ashamed  " — I  feel  no  fear — "for  I  know  whom  I  have  believed,  and  am  persuaded
that  He  is  able  to  keep  that  which  I  have  committed  to  Him  against  that  day."
Now  this  is  a  matter  which  both  requires  and  deserves  the  most  careful  elucidation.
It  has  a  very  important  bearing  upon  present  difficulties  and  pressing  questions  of
the  day,     St.  Paul  was  trained  up,  as  a  boy  and  a  young  man,  in  an  elaborate
religious  system,  of  which  the  Scribes  were  the  expositors,  and  the  Pharisees  the
devoted  adherents.     He  was  at  one  time,  as  he  tells  us,  an  enthusiastic  votary  of
this  system  himself.    But  the  moment  came  at  last  when  he  found  himself  com-
pelled to  renounce  this  system  utterly,  to  cast  himself  at  the  foot  of  the  cross,  and
to  consecrate  his  whole  hfe  to  the  love  and  the  service  of  Jesus  Christ.     From  that
moment  Christ  was  everything  to  him.     Strictly  speaking,  he  no  longer  had  any-
thing that  could  be  called  a  religious  system.     All  was  Christ.     Take  one  or  two  of
his  most  expressive  phrases,  and  you  will  feel  how  true  this  is  :  •'  To  me  to  live  is
Christ."     "  I  am  crucified  with  Christ,  and  it  is  no  longer  I  that  live,  but  Christ
liveth  in  me."     We,  too,  have  been  trained  up,  more  or  less  carefully,  in  an
elaborate  religious  system.    Must  we  break  with  this  system,  as  St.  Paul  brokp  with
the  religious  system  in  which  he  had  been  educated,  in  order  to  find,  as  he  found
Christ?     Must  we  learn  to  say  with  him,  in  the  sense  in  which  he  said  it,  "  What
things  were  gain  to  me,  these  I  counted  loss  for  Christ "  ?    Or  is  it  given  to  us  to
travel  by  a  road  which  was  denied  to  him — to  preserve  unbroken  the  continuity  of
religious  thoupht.    Here  we  are  in  fact  touching  what  I  have  called  one  of  the  most
pressing  questions  of  the  day,  the  use  and  abuse  of  dogma.     And  here  we  find  our-
selves in  presence  of  two  conflicting  tendencies — two  tendencies  which  run  abso-
lutely counter,  the  one  to  the  other ;  one,  an  impatience,  a  fierce  intolerance  of
dof?ma ;  the  other,  an  equally  fierce  insistance  upon  dogma,  as  almost  the  one
thing  needful  for  these  latter  days,  and  the  sole  antidote  for  their  disorders.     Yoa
know  the  battle-cries  of  the  two  contending  parties ;  one,  demanding  definite,  dis-
tinctive, dogmatic,  Church  teaching;  the  other,  demanding  not  dogma,  but  religion.
Observe,  then,  first  of  all,  that  it  is  impossible  for  us  to  put  ourselves  exactly  in  St.
Paul's  position,  or  to  get  at  his  result  precisely  in  his  way.    Eighteen  centuries  lie
between  us  and  him — eighteen  centuries  of  controversy,  of  division,  of  development.
Dogma  is  an  inevitable  growth  of  time,  as  every  one  may  learn  from  his  own
experience.    The  opinions  of  any  person  who  thinks  at  all,  and  in  proportion  as  he
thinks,  pass  with  lapse  of  time  out  of  a  semi-fluid  state  into  one  that  is  fixed  and
solid.      Such  conclusions  are  to  the  individual  thinker  what  dogmas  are  to  the
Christian  Church.     St.  Paul  had  never  formulated  to  himself  the  dogma  of  the
Trinity  in  Unity :  but  in  the  lapse  of  centuries  that  dogma  became  a  necessity  of
Christian  thought.    But  then,  this  development  of  dogma — necessary  as  it  is,  bene-
ficial as  it  may  be — must  never  be  confounded  with  the  reality  of  spiritual  worship
— the  worship  of  the  Father  in  spirit  and  in  truth.     It  moves  along  a  lower  level
altogether — the  level  of  the  understanding,  not  of  the  spirit  or  of  the  soul.     Herein
lies  the  peril  of  that  vehement  insistance  upon  dogmatic  teaching,  which  is  so  com-
mon in  these  days.     Unless  it  be  most  carefully  guarded,  it  leads  straight  to  the
conclusion  tbat  to  hold  the  right  dogmas  is  to  be  in  the  way  of  life.     The  light  of
life,  the  light  which  quickens,  the  light  which  is  life,  can  be  ours  only  on  condition
that  we  follow  Christ.     Dogmatic  developments,  then,  are  one  thing;  the  religious
or  spiritual  life  of  the  soul  is  another  thing.     And  the  former  may,  certainly,  be  so
handled  and  used,  as  to  give  no  help  to  the  latter.     Yet  there  is,  undoubtedly,  a
relation  between  the  two ;  and  the  former  may  be  made  to  minister  to  the  latter,  if
we  will.    And  the  question  is,  What  is  this  relation  ?  and,  How  may  the  dogmatic
development  be  made  subservient  to  tbe  spiritual  life?     Christ  says,  "I  am  come
that  they  might  have  life,  and  that  they  might  have  it  more  abundantly."    Life,
eternal  life,  salvation,  redemption,  righteousness  :  such  words  as  these  express  tht
first  and  the  last  thought  of  the  gospel  of  Christ,  the  aim  of  which  is  ever  to  touch
and  quicken  and  heal  the  souls  of  men.    First  in  the  historical  order,  and  first  in
the  order  of  thought,  comes  the  spiritual  reality,  "  the  word  of  life";  afterwards


CHAP.  1.J  n.  TIMOTHY.  81

the  dogmatic  form  and  framework.  The  latter  is,  as  it  were,  the  body,  of  which  the
former  is  the  soul.  The  words  of  Jesus  are,  as  we  should  expect  they  would  be,  the
purest  conceivable  expression  of  spiritual  truth,  with  the  slightest  possible  admixture
of  anything  extraneous  and  unessential.  For  this  very  reason  it  is  often  exceed-
ingly difficult  to  grasp  their  import — always  quite  impossible  to  exhaust  their
fulness.  When  we  pass  from  the  words  of  Jesus  to  the  words  of  His  apostles,  we
trace  the  first  beginnings  of  that  inevitable  action  of  the  human  intellect  upon
spiritual  truth,  of  which  the  growth  of  dogma  is  the  result.  It  could  not  be  other-
wise. The  disciple  could  not  be  altogether  as  the  Master.  But  though  we  may
thus  trace  in  the  Epistles  of  the  New  Testament  the  development  of  the  first
"  organic  filaments,"  out  of  which  in  time  would  be  constructed  the  full-grown  body
of  Christian  dogma — the  shooting  of  the  little  spikes  of  ice  across  the  waters  of  Ufa
and  salvation,  which  would  eventually  lead  on  to  the  fixity  and  rigidity  of  the
whole ; — yet  are  they  so  full  of  light,  from  proximity  to  the  Fountain  of  all  light,  that
the  spiritual  always  predominates  over  the  intellectual,  and  the  spiritual  elements
of  their  teaching  are  visible  on  the  surface,  or  scarcely  below  the  surface,  of  the
words  in  which  it  is  couched.  But,  as  time  went  on,  the  intellectual  form  began
more  and  more  to  predominate  over  the  spiritual  substance ;  until,  at  last,  it  has
come  to  be  often  no  slight  task  to  disentangle  the  one  from  the  other,  and  so  to  get
at  that  which  is  spiritual;  and  which,  being  spiritual,  can  be  made  food  and
refreshment  and  life  to  the  soul.  So  far  we  have  been  dealing  with  the  questions:
"What  is  the  relation  of  dogma  to  religion?"  and  "How  may  the  dogmatio
development  be  made  to  minister  to  the  religious  life  ?  "  And  our  answer  to  these
questions  may  be  summed  up  thus :  Christ's  own  words,  first  and  before  all,  go
etraight  to  the  springs  of  the  religious  life,  that  is,  the  life  of  faith  and  hope  and
love,  of  aspiration  and  endeavour ;  and,  after  these,  the  words  of  His  apostles.
Christian  dogma  grows  out  of  the  unavoidable  action  of  the  human  intellect  upon
these  words,  and  upon  the  thoughts  which  they  express.  In  order  to  minister  to
the  soul's  true  life,  such  dogma  must  be  translated  back,  by  the  aid  of  the  Holy
Scriptures,  into  the  spiritual  elements  out  of  which  it  has  sprung.  When  it
becomes  the  question  of  the  truth  or  falsehood  of  any  particular  dogmatic  develop-
ment, the  testing  process  with  reference  to  it  will  take  two  forms.  We  shall
ascertain  whether,  or  no,  it  can  be  resolved  or  translated  back  into  any  spiritual
elements — into  any  rays  of  that  light,  of  which  it  is  said,  "  I  am  the  light  of  the
world."  And,  again,  we  shall  ascertain,  if  possible,  what  are  its  direct  effects  upon
human  conduct  and  character.  Does  it  tend,  or  not,  to  produce  that  new  life,  of
which  Jesus  Christ  is  the  pattern  ?  If  it  does ;  then,  unquestionably,  there  are  in
itrays  of  the  true  light,  though  mixed,  it  may  be,  with  much  error,  and  crossed  by
many  bands  of  darkness.  It  must  be  our  endeavour  to  disengage  the  rays  of  Ught
from  the  darkness  which  accompanies  them.  Each  generation  of  Christendom  in
turn  has  seen  something  of  those  riches,  which  was  hidden  from  others.  No  one
generation  has  yet  seen  the  whole.  Now,  that  this  should  be  so,  has  many  lessons
for  us  ;  one  or  two  of  which  we  will  set  down,  and  so  bring  our  subject  to  a  con-
clusion. First  of  all,  it  devolves  upon  each  generation  in  turn  a  grave  responsibility ;
for  each  in  turn  may  be  put  to  the  necessity  of  revising  the  work  of  its  predecessors
— such  revision  being  rendered  necessary  by  the  peculiar  circumstances  of  tho
generation  in  and  for  which  the  work  is  done.  And  whilst  saying  this,  and  claim-
ing this  our  lawful  liberty,  we  can  also  do  full  justice  to  the  generations  which  have
preceded  us,  and  recognise  the  imnaense  debt  of  gratitude  which  we  owe  to  them.
They  have  registered,  for  their  own  benefit  and  for  ours,  that  aspect  of  the  "  un-
searchable riches,"  which  it  was  given  to  them  to  see.  Every  succeeding  generation
is  bound  to  take  full  and  reverent  account  of  the  labours  of  its  predecessors,  on  pain
of  forfeiting  something — some  aspect  of  truth — which  it  would  be  most  perilous  and
damaging  to  lose.  And  this,  last  of  all,  teaches  us  a  much-needed  lesson  of  humility,
charity,  and  tolerance.  (D.  J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  Faith  : — In  analysing  those  -^c
words  I  find  three  distinct  ideas : — The  faith  of  St.  Paul  expressed  by  the  words,  ''^
•'  I  have  believed  "  ;  the  object  of  his  faith  which  he  recalls  by  sa.ying  whom  he  has
beUeved ;  the  certainty  of  his  faith  marked  with  so  much  strength  and  serenity  by
this  expression,  "  I  know  whom  I  have  believed."  I.  What  is  faith?  Consult,  on
this  subject  the  most  widely  spread  opinion  of  this  time  and  country.  You  will  be
told  that  faith  is  an  act  of  intellectual  submission  by  which  man  accepts  as  certain
the  teachings  of  religious  authority.  Faith  would  thus  be  to  the  intellectual  sphere
what  obedience  is  to  the  practical.  This  idea  early  appears  in  the  Church  with  the
decline  of  Christian  spirituaJity.    Faith  being  thus  understood,  it  resulted  that  tha

6


8t  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  fCHAP.  u

more  nomerous  were  the  articles  of  faith  which  the  believer  admitted  the  stronger
seemed  his  faith,  and  that  the  more  difiScuIt  those  articles  were  to  admit  it  was  the
more  meritorious.  According  to  this  way  of  seeing,  he  would  be  pre-eminently  the
man  of  faith  who,  refusing  to  know  anything,  to  wish  anything,  to  judge  anything
of  himself,  ooald  say,  "  I  believe  what  the  Church  believes,"  and  be  would  have  no
other  rule  but  absolute  submission,  without  reserve,  to  the  authority  speaking  hj
the  voice  of  his  spiritual  director.  I  ask  you  if  yon  there  recognise  the  teaching  of
Scripture,  if  that  is  the  idea  which  it  gives  us  of  faith  ?  Ton  have  read  those
admirable  pages  in  which  the  author  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  passes  in  review
all  the  believers  of  the  ancient  covenant,  all  those  men  of  whom  the  world  was  not
worthy.  Now,  in  all  those  examples,  is  faith  ever  presented  to  you  as  an  abdication
of  the  intelligence,  as  the  passive  acceptation  of  a  certain  number  of  truths?
Never.  I  know,  however,  and  God  preserve  me  from  forgetting,  that  there  is  an
element  of  submission  and  of  obedience  in  faith,  but  at  the  same  time  I  affirm  that
all  of  faith  is  not  included  therein.  Faith,  according  to  Scripture,  is  the  impulse  of
the  sodI  grasping  the  invisible  God,  and,  in  its  highest  sense,  the  faith  which  saves
is  the  impulse  of  the  trusting  soul  apprehending  in  Jesus  Christ  the  Saviour  and
the  Son  of  God.  Why  talk  to  us  of  abdication  ?  In  the  impulse  of  faith  there  is  all
the  soul — the  soul  that  loves  and  thinks,  the  soul  with  all  its  spiritual  energies.  It
is  said  to  us,  one  must  be  weak  in  order  to  believe.  Are  you  quite  sure?  Take,  il
you  will,  one  of  the  most  elementary  acts  of  faith,  such  as  every  honest  man  has
performed  in  his  life.  Before  you  is  easy  enjoyment,  bnt  selfish  and  guilty;  it  is
the  pleasure  which  attracts  you — go  on,  it  is  yours.  But,  just  on  the  point  of  yield-
ing,  the  cry  of  your  conscience  rouses  you,  you  recover  yourself  and  you  assert  your
duty.  .  .  .  What  are  you  doing  then  ?  An  act  of  faith,  for  you  assert  the  invisible ;
for  duty  neither  is  weighed  nor  is  touched,  for,  to  him  who  denies  it,  there  is  no
demonstration  that  can  prove  it.  Well!  is  that  always  an  easy  victory?  Is  it
promised  to  the  feeble  ?  Is  it  necessary  to  abdicate  to  obtain  it  ?  In  this  example
faith  is  not  raised  above  moral  evidence ;  but  do  you  penetrate  beyond,  into  the
Ephere  of  spiritual  realities?  Imagine  a  life  entirely  filled  with  the  thoughts  of
God,  entirely  illuminated  with  His  light,  wholly  inspired  with  His  love,  in  one  word,
the  life  of  St.  Paul ;  when  you  contemplate  it,  are  you  not  struck  by  the  heroism  it
contains  ?  Is  there  in  the  faith  which  is  the  moving  spring  of  it  only  a  passive
submission,  an  intellectual  belief  in  a  certain  number  of  truths  ?  No ;  in  this
assertion  of  the  invisible  world  there  is  a  force  and  a  greatness  which  lays  hold  on
you ;  never,  perhaps,  does  the  human  soul  wrest  from  you  a  sincerer  admiration  than
when  you  see  it  taking  flight  into  the  unknown,  with  no  other  support  than  its  faith
in  the  living  God.  In  showing  what  it  is  we  also  answer  those  who  say,  "  Of  what
good  is  faith  ?  "  H.  Whom  shall  i  believe  ?  To  this  question  I  reply  with  St.  Paul,
Jesus  Christ.  Jesus  Christ  ?  and  why  ?  To  believe,  I  have  said,  is  to  trust.  The
question  is  to  know  to  whom  I  shall  trust  the  destinies  of  my  soul.  It  is  my  whole
future  which  I  am  to  suspend  on  the  word  of  a  man ;  it  is  the  inmost  life  of  my
heart,  it  is  my  eternal  hopes.  And  if  I  am  deceived,  if  it  is  found  that  I  have  boilt
on  the  sand,  if  one  day  all  this  inward  edifice  of  my  life  should  fall  to  pieces  I  We
must  see  clearly  here.  No  illusion,  no  over-exciting  of  the  imagination,  no  effer-
vescence. Why  ?  I  will  try  and  say  it  again  in  a  few  words.  I  will  repeat  what
those  millions  of  adorers,  for  eighteen  centuries,  have  confessed,  who  have  been
able  to  say  with  St.  Paul,  "  I  know  whom  I  have  believed."  Whom  shall  I  believe  ?
I  have  said  it  in  the  depth  of  my  darkness,  and  have  seen  rising  up  before  me  the
Bon  of  Man.  Alone  amongst  all  He  said,  "I  know  whence  I  come,  and  I  know
whither  I  go."  Alone,  without  hesitation,  with  sovereign  authority.  He  showed  the
way  which  leads  to  God.  He  spoke  of  heaven  as  one  who  descended  from  it.
Everywhere  and  always  He  gave  Himself  out  to  be  the  Sent  of  the  Father,  His  only
Bon,  the  Master  of  souls.  I  have  listened  to  His  voice,  it  had  a  strange  accent
which  recalled  no  other  human  voice ;  beautiful  with  a  simpUcity  which  nothing
approaches,  it  exercised  a  power  to  which  nothing  can  be  compared.  What  gave  it
that  power?  It  was  not  reasoning,  nor  human  eloquence,  but  the  radiance  of  truth
penetrating  the  heart  and  conscience;  in  listening  to  it,  I  felt  my  heart  taken
possession  of ;  I  yielded  to  that  authority  so  strong  and  sweet ;  in  proportion  as  He
spoke  it  seemed  as  if  heaven  opened  and  displayed  itself  to  my  eyes  ;  I  beheld  God
as  He  is,  I  saw  man  as  he  ought  to  be.  An  irresistible  adhesion  to  that  teaching
rose  from  my  heart  to  my  lips,  and  with  Simon  Peter  I  cried  •'  To  whom  shall  we
go  ?  Thou  hast  the  words  of  eternal  life."  Was  it  only  my  soul  which  vibrated  at
that  speech  7    I  looked,  and,  around  me,  hanging  on  the  lips  of  Christ,  I  saw  an


tour,  u]  U.  TIMOTHY.  88

ever-growing  mnltitade  assembled  from  all  places,  coming  ont  from  all  conditions
on  the  earth ;  there  were  poor  and  rich,  ignorant  and  wise,  children  and  old  men,
pare  spirits  and  defiled  spirits,  and,  like  me,  all  were  impressed  with  that  word,  aU
fomid,  as  I  did,  light,  certainty,  and  peace.  Can  I  let  my  whole  destiny  depend  on
a  word  of  man,  and  have  I  not  the  right  to  ask  Elm  who  thus  leads  me  on  in  His
steps  whttt  entitles  Him  to  my  confidence,  and  how  He  can  prove  to  me  that  He
comes  from  God  ?  "0  Thou  who  callest  Thyself  the  witness  of  God,  Thou  who
speakest  of  heaven  as  if  it  had  been  Thy  dwelling-place.  Thou  who  enlightenest  the
mystery  of  death  to  our  gaze.  Thou  who  pardonest  sin,  show  us  that  Thou  art  He
who  should  come."  Jesus  Christ  has  repUed  to  this  demand  of  our  soul.  We  ask
Him  if  He  comes  from  God,  and  He  has  done  before  us  the  works  of  God ;  I  do  not
speak  of  His  miracles,  although  they  are  still  unexplained  in  their  simple  grandeur,
in  their  sublime  spirituality,  in  that  indescribable  truth  which  marks  them  with  an
inimitable  seal.  Jesus  has  done  more  than  miracles.  He  has  revealed  God  in  His
person  ;  He  has  given  the  proof  of  His  Divine  mission  in  His  life.  It  is  holiness
before  which  conscience  perceives  itself  accused  and  judged.  The  more  I  contem-
plate it,  the  more  I  experience  a  feeling  of  adoration  and  of  deep  humiliation  ;  and
when  at  last  men  come  and  try  to  explain  this  life,  and  to  show  me  in  it  an  inven-
tion of  mankind,  I  protest,  I  feel  that  the  explanations  are  miserable,  I  feel  that  the
reality  breaks  all  that  framework.  Then,  by  an  irresistible  logic,  I  feel  that  if
Christ  is  holy,  He  must  have  spoken  truly,  and  ought  to  be  believed.  Is  that  all  ?
Yes,  if  I  only  needed  light  and  certainty ;  but  there  is  a  still  deeper,  more  ardent,
more  irresistible  instinct  in  my  soul :  I  feel  myself  guilty,  I  thirst  for  pardon  and
for  salvation.  St.  Paul  felt  himself  a  sinner,  condemned  by  his  conscience ;  ha
sought  salvation  in  his  works,  he  was  exhausted  in  that  sorrowful  strife ;  he  found
salvation  only  on  the  cross.  There  he  saw,  according  to  his  own  words,  the  Just
One  offering  Himself  for  the  unjust ;  the  Holy  One  bearing  the  curse  of  the  sinner.
In  that  redeeming  sacrifice,  St.  Paul  found  assuagement  for  his  conscience ;  the
love  of  God  as  he  recognised  it  in  Jesus  Christ  penetrated  his  heart  and  life ;  is  it
not  that  which  overflows  in  all  his  epistles,  in  all  his  apostolate  ?  la  it  not  that
which  inspires,  which  inflames  all  his  life  ?  Is  it  not  that  which  dictated  to  him
these  words,  '•  I  know  whom  I  have  believed  "  ?  It  is  also  that  which  makes  the
foundation  of  Christian  faith  ;  it  is  that  which  millions  of  souls,  led,  like  Paul,  to
the  foot  of  the  cross  by  their  feeling  of  misery,  have  found  in  Jesus  Christ ;  it  is
that  which  has  transformed  them,  taken  them  out  of  themselves,  conquered  for  ever
by  Jesus  Christ.  IH.  The  certainty  of  faith  !  Do  not  these  words  rouse  a  painful
sentiment  in  you  ?  No  one  will  contradict  me  if  I  affirm,  that  there  is  in  our  epoch
a  kind  of  instinctive  neglect  of  all  that  is  firm  and  exact  in  points  of  belief  and
Christian  life.  Let  us  examine  it.  We  are  passing  through  a  time  of  grave  crisis
where  all  the  elements  of  our  religious  faith  are  submitted  to  the  most  penetrating
analysis,  and  whatever  may  be  our  degree  of  culture  we  cannot  escape  from  it.  So,
something  analogous  to  the  artistic  sentiment  is  made  for  the  religious  sentiment
In  music,  for  example,  no  one,  assuredly,  preoccupies  himself  with  truth.  The
most  varied,  the  most  opposed  styles  are  allowed,  provided  that  some  inspiration
and  some  genius  are  felt  in  them.  One  day,  people  will  applaud  a  sombre  and
dreamy  symphony  ;  others  will  prefer  a  composition  brilUant  with  force  and  bright-
ness ;  others,  again,  the  softened  charm  of  a  melody  full  of  grace :  as  many  various
tastes  as  art  can  satisfy.  Now,  it  is  just  so  that  to-day  it  is  claimed  religion  should
be  treated.  It  is  wished  that  man  should  be  religious ;  it  is  said  that  he  who  is  not  so
is  destitute  of  one  sense,  as  he  to  whom  painting  or  music  is  a  matter  of  indifler-
ence ;  but  this  religious  sense  should,  it  is  said,  seek  its  satisfaction  there  where  it
finds  it.  To  some  a  stately  worship  is  necessary,  to  others  an  austere  worship  ;  to
some  the  gentleness  of  an  indulgent  God,  to  others  the  holiness  of  the  God  of  the
Bible ;  to  some  an  entirely  moral  religion,  to  others  dogmas  and  curious  mysteries.
Do  I  need  to  ask,  what  becomes  with  that  manner  of  looking,  of  the  certainty  of  faith
and  religious  truth?  Hence  that  sad  sight  of  souls  always  seeking  and  never
reaching  to  the  possession  of  truth,  always  in  quest  of  religious  emotions,  but  in-
capable of  affirming  their  faith,  and,  above  all,  of  changing  their  life.  Nothing  is
more  contrary  to  St.  Paul's  certitude,  to  that  firm  assurance  which  makes  him  say,
"  I  know  whom  I  have  believed."  Can  we  be  astonished  that  such  a  religion  should
be  without  real  force  and  without  real  action  ?  It  could  not  be  otherwise.  It  might
be  able,  I  acknowledge,  to  produce  fleeting  movements,  vivid  emotions,  and  sincere
outbursts,  but  lasting  effects  never.  I  affirm,  first,  that  it  will  convert  nobody.  And
why  ?    Because  conversion  is  the  most  deep-seated  change  in  the  affections  anJ


ii  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  i.

Ufe  of  man,  and  he  will  never  exchange  the  known  for  the  onknown,  real  life  with
its  passions,  its  pleasures,  however  senseless  they  appear,  for  the  pale  and  cold
abstractions  of  a  belief  with  no  precise  object  and  for  the  worship  of  a  vague  and
problematic  God.  To  fight  against  passions  and  lusts  and  refuse  the  compensation
of  satisfied  pride,  to  bend  the  will,  to  conquer  the  flesh,  and  to  submit  Ufe  to  the
austere  discipline  of  obedience,  that  is  a  work  which  a  vague,  indecisive  religion
will  never  accomplish.  Without  religious  certainty  there  is  no  holiness  and,  I  add
also,  no  consolation.  Let  us  also  add  that  a  religion  without  a  certainty  is  a  religion
without  action,  without  progressive  force.  How  can  it  advance  ?  Will  it  lay  the
foundations  of  lasting  works,  wiU  it  know  how  to  conquer,  will  it  send  its  mission-
aries afar  ?  Missionaries,  and  why  ?  Is  it  with  vague  reveries  and  floating  opinions
that  they  set  out,  hke  the  apostles,  to  conquer  the  world  ?  The  Ufe  of  St.  Paul  is
the  best  explanation  of  his  faith.  Supported  by  his  example,  and  by  the  experience
of  all  Christians,  I  would  say  to  you,  "  Do  you  wish  to  possess  that  strong  immov-
able faith  which  alone  can  sustain  and  console  ?  Fulfil  the  works  of  faith.  Serve
the  truth,  and  the  truth  shall  illuminate  you ;  follow  Jesus  Christ,  and  you
will  believe  in  Christ."  '*  There  is  no  royal  road  to  science,"  said  an  ancient
philosopher  to  a  prince  who  was  irritated  at  finding  study  so  difficult ;  so
in  my  turn  I  would  say,  "  There  is  no  demonstration  of  Christianity,  no
apology  which  dispenses  with  obeying  the  truth,  and  with  passing  through
humiliation  and  inward  renunciation,  without  which  faith  is  only  a  vain  theory."
The  best  proof  of  the  truth  of  Christianity  will  always  be  a  proof  of  experience ;
nothing  will  outvalue  that  irrefutable  argument  of  St.  Paul.     {E.  Bersier,  D.D.)

"^Assured  security  in  Christ : — In  the  style  of  these  apostolic  words  there  is  a
positiveness  most  refreshing  in  this  age  of  doubt.  "  I  know,"  says  he.  And  that
is  not  enough — "  I  am  persuaded."  He  speaks  like  one  who  cannot  tolerate
a  doubt.  There  is  no  question  about  whether  he  has  believed  or  not.  "  I  know
whom  I  have  believed."  There  is  no  question  as  to  whether  he  was  right  in
BO  believing.  "  I  am  persuaded  that  he  is  able  to  keep  that  which  I  have  com-
mitted to  Him."  There  is  no  suspicion  as  to  the  future  ;  he  is  as  positive  for  yearg
to  come  as  he  is  for  this  present  moment.  "  He  is  able  to  keep  that  which  I  have
committed  to  Him  against  that  day."  Where  positiveness  is  the  result  of  knowledge
and  of  meditation,  it  becomes  sublime,  as  it  was  in  the  apostle's  case ;  and  being
sublime  it  becomes  influential ;  in  this  case,  it  certainly  must  have  been  influential
over  the  heart  of  Timothy,  and  over  the  minds  of  the  tens  of  thousands  who  have
during  these  nineteen  centuries  perused  this  epistle.  It  encourages  the  timid  when
they  see  others  preserved ;  it  confirms  the  waveriug  when  they  see  others  steadfast.
The  apostle's  confidence  was  that  Christ  was  an  able  guardian.  1.  So  he  meant  that
Jesus  is  able  to  keep  the  soul  from  falling  into  damning  sin.  2.  But  the  apostle
did  not  merely  trust  Christ  thus  to  keep  him  from  sin,  he  relied  upon  the  same  arm
to  preserve  him  from  despair.  3.  Doubtless  the  apostle  meant,  too,  that  Christ  was
able  to  keep  him  from  the  power  of  death.     4.  The  apostle  is  also  certain  that

■  Christ  is  able  to  preserve  his  soul  in  another  world.  5.  Paul  believed,  lastly,  that
Christ  was  able  to  preserve  his  body.  "  I  cannot  talk  hke  that,"  saith  one  ;  "  I  cannot
say, '  I  know  and  I  am  persuaded,*  I  am  very  thankful  that  I  can  say,  I  hope,  I  trust,
I  think."  In  order  to  help  you  to  advance,  we  will  notice  how  the  apostle  Paul
attained  to  such  assurance.  1.  One  main  help  to  him  was  his  habit,  as  seen
in  this  text,  of  always  making  faith  the  most  prominent  point  of  consideration.
Faith  is  twice  mentioned  in  the  few  lines  before  us.  "I  know  whom  I  have
believed,  and  am  persuaded  that  He  is  able  to  keep  that  which  I  have  committed
to  Him."  Paul  knew  what  faith  was,  namely,  a  committal  of  his  precious  things
into  the  custody  of  Christ.  He  does  not  say,  "  I  have  served  Christ."  No  ;  he
does  not  say,  "  I  am  growing  like  Christ,  therefore  I  am  persuaded  I  shall  be  kept."
Ho  ;  he  makes  most  prominent  in  his  thought  the  fact  that  he  believed,  and  so  had
committed  himself  to  Christ.  2.  The  next  help  to  assurance,  as  I  gather  from  the
text,  is  this ;  the  apostle  maintained  most  clearly  his  view  of  a  personal  Christ.
Observe  how  three  times  he  mentioned  his  Lord.  "  I  know  whom  I  have  believed,
and  am  persuaded  that  He  is  able  to  keep  that  which  I  have  committed  to  Him."
He  does  not  say,  "I  know  the  doctrines  I  believe."  Surely  he  did,  but  this  was  not
the  main  point.  No  mere  doctrines  can  ever  be  the  stay  of  the  soul.  What  can  a
dogma  do  ?  These  are  like  medicines,  but  you  need  a  hand  to  give  you  them  ;
you  want  the  physician  to  administer  them  to  you ;  otherwise  you  may  die  with
ftll  these  precious  medicines  close  at  hand.  We  want  a  person  to  trust  to.  3.
Xhe  aposUe  attained  this  full  assoianoe  through  growing  knowledge.    He  did  not


«BAY.  I.)  n.  TIMOTHY.


say  "  I  am  persuaded  that  Christ  will  save  me,  apart  from  anything  I  know  about

Him  " ;  but  he  begins  by  saying,  "  I  know."    Let  no  Christian  among  us  neglect

the  means  provided  for  obtaining  a  fuller  knowledge  of  the  gospel  of  Christ.  I  would

that  this  age  produced  more  thoughtful  and  studious  Christians.    4.  Once,  again,

the  apostle,  it  appears  from  the  text,  gained  his  assurance  from  close  consideration

as  well  as  from  knowledge.    "  I  know  and  am  persuaded."    As  I  have  already  said,

persuasion  is  the  result  of  argument.    The  apostle  had  turned  this  matter  over  in

his  mind  ;  he  had  meditated  on  the  pros  and  cons  ;  he  had  carefully  weighed  each

difficulty,  and  he  felt  the  preponderating  force  of  truth  which  swept  each  difficulty

out  of  the  way.     How  many  Christians  are  like  the  miser  who  never  feels  sure

about  the  safety  of  his  money,  even  though  he  has  locked  up  the  iron  safe,  and

secured  the  room  in  which  he  keeps  it,  and  locked  up  the  house,  and  bolted  and

barred  every  door  1    In  the  dead  of  night  he  thinks  he  hears  a  footstep,  and

tremblingly  he  goes  down  to  inspect  his  strong-room.    Having  searched  the  room,

and  tested  all  the  iron  bars  in  the  window,  and  discovered  no  thief,  he  fears  that

the  robber  may  have  come  and  gone,  and  stolen  his  precious  charge.     So  he  opens

the  door  of  his  iron  safe,  he  looks  and  pries,  he  finds  his  bag  of  gold  all  safe,  and

those  deeds,  those  bonds,  they  are  safe  too.     He  puts  them  away,  shuts  the  door,

locks  it,  bolts  and  bars  the  room  in  which  is  the  safe  and  all  its  contents ;  but  even

as  he  goes  to  bed,  he  fancies  that  a  thief  has  just  now  broken  in.    So  he  scarcely

ever  enjoys  sound,  refreshing  sleep.     The  safety  of  the  Christian's  treasure  is  of

qnite    another  sort.     His  soul,  not  under  bolt  and  bar,  or  under  lock  and  key

of  his  own  securing,  but  he  has  transferred  his  all  to  the  King  eternal,  immortal,

invisible,  the  only  wise  God,  our  Saviour — and  such  is  his  security  that  he  enjoys

the  sleep  of  the  beloved,  calmly  resting,  for  all    is  well.      Now   to   close,   what

is  the  influence  of  this  assurance  when  it  penetrates  the  mind  ?     It  enables  us  to

bear  all  the  obloquy  which  we  may  incur  in  serving  the  Lord.     They  said  Paul  was

a  fool.     "  Well,"  replied  the  apostle,  "  I  am  not  ashamed,  for  I  know  whom  I  have

believed  ;  I  am  willing  to  be  thought  a  fool."     (C  H.  Spurgeon.)       Assurance  : — It

Burely  is  evident  that  while  justification  is  all  that  is  necessary  for  safety,  an

assured  knowledge  of  our  justification  on  our  own  part  must  be  necessary  to  give  us

the  comfort  and  the  joy  of  safety.     Further,  it  is  clear  that  the  character  of  aU  our

subsequent  experiences  must  very  largely  depend  upon  such  an  assured  knowledge ;

for  I  cannot  feel,  or  speak,  or  act  as  a  justified  man  unless  I  not  only  am  justified,

but  know  that  I  am  justified.     Nor  can  I  claim  my  proper  privileges,  and  enjoy  the

blessed  results  of  my  new  relationship  with  God,  unless  I  know  certainly  that  this

relationship  exists.     For  our  position  is,  that,  though  it  be  possible  that  you  may

be  safe  in  God's  sight,  and  yet  not  be  safe  in  your  own,  you  cannot  lead  the

life  that  God  intends  you  to  lead  unless  you  know  of  this  your  safety.    First,  you

cannot  draw  near  to  Him  with  the  filial  confidence  which   should  characterise

all  true  Christian  experience,  and  enter  into  the  closest  relations   of  true  and

trustful  love.      Next,  you  cannot  learn  from  the  happy  results  of  this  first  act

of  faith  tbe  great  life-lesson  of  faith.     Then  again  you  lose  those  mighty  motives

of  grateful,  joyous  love  which  should  be  the  incentives  to  a  truly  spiritual  life,  and

instead  of  these  there  is  certain  to  be  an  element  of  servile  bondage  even  in  your

very  devotion,  and  you  must  forfeit  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  child  of  God ;  and

last,  but  not  least,  there  can  be  no  power  in  your  testimony ;  for  how  can  you

induce  others  to  accept  a  benefit  of  the  personal  effects  of  which  you  yourself  know

nothing  ?     If  your  religion  leaves  you  only  in  a  state  of  uncertainty,  how  is  it  ever

Hkely  that  you  will  have  weight  with  others  in  inducing  them  to  turn  their  backs

upon  those  "  pleasures  of  sin  for  a  season  "  which,  although  they  may  be  fleeting

and  unsatisfactory,  are  nevertheless  a  certainty  while  they  do  last.     On  the  other

side,  let  me  point  out  that  this  knowledge  of  salvation  is  the  eifect  and  not  the

condition  of  justification.     It  would  be  absurd  to  teach  that  men  are  justified

by  knowing  that  they  are  justified.     Of  course  they  can  only  know  it  when  it

has  happened,  and  to  make  such  knowledge  the  condition  of  justification  would

involve  a  palpable  contradiction.     Indeed  it  would  be  equivalent  to  saying  you

must  believe  what  is  false  in  order  to  make  it  true.    Look  at  these  words  of

St.  Paul;  they  sound  bold  and  strong;  yet  just  reflect  for  a  moment.    Would

anything  less  than  such  a  confidence  as  is  indicated   here   have  been  sufficient

to  enable  him  to  lead  the  life  that  he  did?    Would  he  ever  have  been  fit  for

his  Ufe's  work  if  his  assurance  of  his  own  personal  relations  with  God  through

Christ  had  been  more  dubious, and  his  standing  more  precarious?   Would  anything

less  than  this  settled  conviction  have  enabled  him  fearlessly  to  face  all  the  odd«


M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  (ohat.  t.

that  were  against  him,  and  have  borne  him  on  through  many  a  shock  of  battle
towards  the  victor's  crown  ?  But  now  let  us  look  more  closely  into  this  pregnant
saying,  and  endeavour  to  analyse  its  meaning.  On  looking  carefully  at  the  words
you  will  find  that  in  stating  one  thing  St.  Paul  really  states  three.    Fibst,  hx  tblls

OS  THAT  HB  HAS  ASSUMED  A  DISTINCT  MOBAL  ATTITUDE,  AN  ATTITUDE  OF  TBU8T  T0WABD8
A  PABTICUUlB  PERSON.  NeXT,  THAT  THE  ASSUMPTION  AND  MAINTENANCE  OF  THIS
ATTITUDE  IS  WITH  HIM  A  MATTEB  OP  PEESONAL  CONSCIOUSNESS  ;  AND  NEXT,  THAT  HE  IS
ACQUAINTED   WITH   AND   THOROUGHLY   SATISFIED   WITH   THE    CHABACTEB   OF   THE   PEBSOH

THUS  TBUSTED.  Let  US  Consider  each  of  these  statements  severally  ;  and  turning  to
the  first,  we  notice  that  St.  Paul  represents  his  confidence  as  being  reposed  not  in  a
doctrine,  or  a  fact,  but  a  person.  "  I  know  whom  I  have  believed."  Many  go
wrong  here.  I  have  heard  some  speak  as  if  we  were  to  be  justified  by  believing  in
the  doctrine  of  justification  by  faith.  Let  me  say  to  such  what  common-sense
should  have  let  them  to  conclude  without  its  being  necessary  to  say  it,  that  we  are
no  more  justified  by  believing  in  the  doctrine  of  justification  by  faith  than  we  are
carried  from  London  to  Edinburgh  by  believing  in  the  expansive  force  of  steam.
Knowledge  of  the  laws  of  the  expansion  of  vapour  may  induce  me  to  enter  a  railway
train,  and  similarly,  knowledge  of  the  doctrine  of  justification  may  induce  me
to  trust  myself  to  Him  who  justifies ;  but  I  am  no  more  justified  by  believing  this
doctrine  than  I  am  transported  from  place  to  place  by  believing  in  the  laws
of  dynamics.  Others  seem  to  believe  that  our  faith  is  to  be  reposed  upon  the
doctrine  of  the  Atonement,  and  not  a  few  upon  certain  particular  theories  which
are  supposed  to  attach  to  that  doctrine.  But  surely  it  is  clear  that  our  views
of  doctrine  may  be  never  so  orthodox  and  correct,  and  yet  our  hearts  may  not
have  found  rest  in  Him  to  whom  the  doctrine  witnesses.  Once  again,  some  seem
to  regard  our  salvation  as  dependent  upon  belief  in  a  fact ;  but  surely  it  is  possible
to  accept  the  fact,  and  yet  come  no  nearer  to  Him  who  was  the  principal  actor  in
that  fact.  Faith  rests  on  a  person,  not  a  doctrine,  or  a  fact ;  but  when  we  believe
In  the  person,  this  undoubtedly  involves  faith  in  the  doctrine  (so  far  as  it  is
necessary  for  us  to  understand  it)  and  in  the  fact.  For  if  I  beUeve  in  Jesus  Christ,
I  believe  in  Him  as  God's  express  provision  to  meet  the  case  of  fallen  humanity,
and  this  involves  the  doctrine.  Once  again,  if  I  believe  in  Christ,  I  believe  in  Him
as  having  accomplished  all  that  was  necessary  to  meet  the  case  of  fallen  humanity,
and  this  involves  the  fact.  The  doctrine  and  the  fact  both  meet  in  Him  ;  but  apart
from  Him  neither  is  of  any  real  spiritual  value  to  me.  Nay,  I  will  go  so  far  as  to
say  that  my  apprehension  of  the  doctrine,  and  even  of  the  fact,  may  be  very
inadequate  and  incomplete,  yet  if  with  all  my  heart  I  rest  upon  the  person,
my  confidence  can  never  be  disappointed.  Now  let  us  consider  this  statement  that
St.  Paul  makes  as  to  his  moral  attitude  towards  Christ.  He  tells  us  that  he  knows
whom  he  has  believed.  The  phrase  is  especially  deserving  of  attention,  and  yet,
curiously  enough,  it  is  generally  misquoted.  How  commonly  do  we  hear  it  quoted
as  if  the  words  were,  "  I  know  in  whom  I  have  believed."  I  fear  that  the  frequency
of  the  misquotation  ariees  from  the  fact  that  men  do  not  clearly  discern  the  point
to  which  the  words  of  the  apostle  as  they  stand  were  specially  designed  to  bear
witness.  The  phrase,  as  St.  Paul  wrote  it,  points  to  a  distinctly  personal  relation,
and  the  words  might,  with  strict  accuracy,  be  rendered,  "  I  Imow  whom  I  have
trusted."  The  words,  as  they  are  misquoted,  may  be  destitute  of  this  element
of  personal  relation  altogether.  If  I  were  to  affirm  of  some  distinguished  com-
mercial house  in  this  city  that  I  believed  in  it,  that  would  not  necessarily  mean
that  I  had  left  all  my  money  in  its  hands.  If  I  were  to  say  that  I  beheved  in  a
well-known  physician,  that  would  not  lead  you  to  conclude  that  he  had  cured,  or
even  that  I  had  applied  to  him  to  cure,  any  disease  from  which  I  might  be
Buffering.  But  if  I  stated  that  I  had  trusted  that  firm  or  that  physician,  then  you
would  know  that  a  certain  actual  personal  relation  was  established  between  me
and  the  man  or  the  company  of  men  of  whom  I  thus  spoke.  How  many  there  are
who  believe  in  Christ  just  as  we  believe  in  a  bank  where  we  have  no  account,
or  a  physician  whose  skill  we  have  never  proved,  and  our  belief  does  us  as  much
good  in  the  one  case  as  in  the  other.  But  perhaps  the  true  character  of  trust  is,  if
possible,  still  more  strikingly  brought  out  by  the  word  which  St.  Paul  here  employs
ill  the  original  Greek.  It  is  the  word  that  would  be  used  by  any  Greek  to  indicate
the  sum  of  money  deposited,  in  trust,  in  the  hands  of  a  commercial  agent,  or,  as
we  should  say,  a  banker  ;  in  fact,  the  words  used  here  simply  mean  "  my  deposit."
If  you  carry  about  a  large  sum  of  money  on  your  person,  or  if  you  keep  it  in  your
house,  you  run  a  certain  risk  of  losing  it.    In  order  to  ensure  the  safety  of  your


OBAP.  I.]  n.  TIMOTHY,  87

property  yon  make  it  over  into  the  hands  of  a  banker ;  and  if  you  have  perfect
con£dence  in  the  firm  to  which  you  commit  it,  you  no  longer  have  an  anxious
thought  about  it.     There  it  is  safe  in  the  bauk.    Even  so  there  had  come  a  time
when  St.  Paul's  eyes  were  opened  to  find  that  he  was  in  danger  of  losing  that
beside  which  all  worldly  wealth  is  a  mere  trifle — his  own  soul ;  for  what  indeed  "  is
a  man  profited,  if  he  ga^n  the  whole  world  and  lose  his  own  soul?  "    Nay,  it  was
not  only  that  his  soul  was  in  danger  amongst  the  robbers,  it  was  actually  forfeited
to  the  destroyer,  and  then  it  was  that,  in  his  helpless  despair,  he  made  it  over  into
another's  hands — that  other  who  had  a  right  to  preserve  it  and  keep  it  alive,  because
He  had  ransomed  it  from  the  destroyer,  and  from  that  time  forward  there  he  had  left
it  safe  and  secure,  because  He  to  whom  he  had  entrusted  it  was  trustworthy.    Now
have  you  done  the  same?  Have  you  not  only  believed  in  Jesus,  but  have  you  trusted
Him  ?  Then  this  must  lead  us  to  the  second  of  the  three  things  that  we  saw  St.  Paul
here  affirms.     Evidently  St.  Paul  knew,  and  was  perfectly  sure,  of  his  own  moral
attitude  towards  God  ;  and  here  he  explicitly  asserts  that  his  faith  was  a  matter  of
distinct  moral  consciousness,  for  "  I  know  whom  I  have  believed  "  certainly
contains  within  itself  "  I  know  that  I  have  believed."    Now  turn  this  over  in  your
mind.     Surely  it  is  reasonable  enough  when  we  come  to  think  of  it ;  for  if  we  have
something  weighing  on  our  minds  that  seems  a  thing  of  great  importance,  surely  if
we  make  it  over  into  the  hands  of  another,  and  leave  it  with  him,  we  can  hardly
fail  to  be  conscious  of  having  done  so.    The  question  sometimes  may  be  asked — and
indeed  it  often  is  asked — "  How  am  I  to  know  that  I  have  believed  ?  "    I  confess
that  it  is  not  easy  to  answer  such  an  inquiry ;  but  there  are  a  good  many  similar
questions  which  it  would  be  equally  hard  to  answer  if  people  ever  asked  them,
which,  however,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  they  never  do.    If  I  were  to  ask  you  to-night,
'•  How  do  you  know  that  you  hear  me  speaking  to  you?  "  the  only  answer  you  could
return  would  be — one  that  may  sound  very  unphilosophical,  but  for  all  that  one
that  is  perfectly  sufficient — "  Because  I  do."    If  you  answer,  "  Ah !  but  then  that
is  a  matter  of  sense,"  I  reply,  "Tes,  but  is  it  otherwise  with  matters  that  don't
belong  to  the  region  of  sense-perception  at  all  ?  "    If  I  were  to  ask  you,  "  How  do
you  know  that  you  remember,  or  that  you  imagine,  or  that  you  think,  or  that  yoa
perform  any  mental  process?  "  your  answer  must  still  be,  "Because  I  do."    You  do
not  feel  either  able  or  desirous  to  give  any  further  proof  of  these  experiences ;  it  is
enough  that  they  are  experiences — matters  of  direct  consciousness.    But  we  need
not  in  order  to  illustrate  this  point  go  beyond  this  question  that  we  are  at  present
considering.    You  ask,  "  How  may  I  know  that  I  believe  ?  "    This  question  sounds
to  you  reasonable  when  you  are  speaking  of  Christ  as  the  object  of  faith.    Does  it
sound  equally  reasonable  when  you  speak  in  the  same  terms  of  your  fellow-man  ?
How  do  you  know,  my  dear  child,  that  you  believe  in  your  own  mother  ?    How  do
you  know,  yon,  my  brother,  who  are  engaged  in  commerce,  that  you  believe  in  your
own  banker  ?    You  can  only  answer  in  each  case,  "  Because  I  do  "  ;  but  surely  that
answer  is  sufficient,  and  you  do  not  feel  seriously  exercised  about  the  reality  of  your
confidence,  because  you  have  no  other  proof  of  it  excepting  an  appeal  to  your  own
personal  consciousness.    Let  us  now  notice,  further,  that  he  knew  well,  and  was
perfectly  satisfied  with,  the  character  of  the  person  whom  he  did  believe.     Herein
lay  the  secret  of  his  calm,  the  full  assurance  of  his  faith.    You  may  have  your
money  invested  in  a  concern  which,  on  the  whole,  yon  regard  as  a  safe  and  satis-
factory one,  yet  when  panics  are  prevailing  in  the  city,  and  well-known  houses  are
failing,  you  may  be  conscious  of  some  little  anxiety,  some  passing  misgiving.     You
have  faith  in  the  firm,  but  perhaps  not  full  assurance  of  faith.     It  is  otherwise  with
the  money  that  you  have  invested  in  the  funds  of  the  nation  ;  that  must  be  safe  as
long  as  Great  Britain  holds  her  place  amongst  the  nations  of  the  world.     Clearly
our  sense  of  comfort  in  trusting,  our  full  assurance  of  confidence  lies   in  our
knowledge  of,  and  is  developed  by,  our  contemplation  of  the  object  up"n  which
our  trust  is  reposed — if  indeed  that  object  be  worthy  of  it — and  feelings  of  peace
and  calm  will  necessarily  flow  from  this.     {W.  Hay  Aitken,  M.A.)        I  know  whom
J  have  believed  : — "Whom — "  Paul  says.  Quite  another  thing  from  "  what. "  "  I  know
what  I  have  believed";  that  is  good.     "I  know  whom  I  have  believed";  that
is  better — best.     Such  beheving  has  easily  its  advantages,  several  of  them.     When
the  thing  we  believe  is  a  person,  our  believing,  creed,  becomes  simple  and  coherent;
the  lines  of  our  thinking  all  gather  at  a  point,  our  creed  is  made  one,  like  grapes
growing  in  one  cluster  from  one  stem.    I  am  interested  on  occasion  to  ask  Christian
people  what  their  Christian  belief  is.     It  is  instructive  to  note  the  wide  divergence
of  answer.    One  believes  one  thing,  another,  another  thing.    "I  know  whom  I


88  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  I,

have  believed."  To  be  a  Christian  is  to  believe  in  Christ.  And  what  is  it
to  believe  in  Christ  7  We  reach  too  high  for  our  answers ;  neoessary  truth  grows
on  low  branches.  The  boy  says — "  I  believe  in  my  father."  All  is  told  that  needs
to  be  told.  Another  thing  about  this  creed  with  a  person  in  it  is,  that  it  gives
something  for  all  our  faculties  to  do.  •'  I  know  what  I  believe."  Such  a  creed  is
only  intellectual  ;  it  is  an  affair  of  thinking,  reasoning,  inference.  Theological
thought  and  discussion  works  so  far ,  only  on  the  same  lines  as  scientifio.
Mind  only  works ;  no  heart,  nothing  volitional.  A  creed  that  gathers  directly
about  person  yields  keen  thinking,  but  yields  much  beside.  It  starts  feeling,  sets
the  affections  in  play,  draws  out  the  will  and  puts  it  to  work.  We  each  of  us  have
one  or  more  men  that  we  believe  in,  with  aU  our  mind,  heart  and  strength — men
that  are  so  far  forth  our  creed;  and  they  stir  and  stimulate  us  in  every  way,
clearing  our  ideas,  to  be  sure,  but  firing  our  hearts  and  making  our  resolutions
sinewy  and  nervy.  Christ  made  Paul  a  man  of  profound  thinking,  but  a  man
of  fervid  passion  and  giant  purpose — gave  every  faculty  in  him  something  to  do.
He  was  great  all  over.  A  third  and  consequent  advantage  in  a  personal  creed
is  that  it  is  the  only  kind  that  can  produce  effects,  and  work  within  us  substantial
alteration.  I  am  not  criticising  creeds.  It  is  an  excellent  thing  to  know  what  we
believe,  and  to  be  able  with  conciseness  and  effect  to  state  it.  Paul  does  not  say
I  know  what  I  believe,  but  I  know  whom  I  believe,  which  goes  wider  and  higher.
Such  a  creed  is  not  one  that  Paul  holds,  but  one  that  holds  Paul,  and  can  do
something  with  him  therefore.  No  quantity  of  correct  idea  about  the  sun
can  take  the  place  of  standing  and  living  where  the  sun  shines;  and  standing
and  living  where  the  sun  shines  will  save  from  fatal  results  a  vast  amount
of  incorrect  ideas  about  the  sun.  Belief  in  person  works  back  upon  me  as  an
energy,  alters  me,  builds  me  up  or  tears  me  down — at  any  rate  never  leaves
me  alone ;  it  works  as  gravity  does  among  the  stars ;  keeps  everything  on
the  move.  Such  belief  is  not  mental  attitude,  but  moral  appropriation  ;  it  is  the
bee  clinging  to  the  clover-blossom  and  sucking  out  the  sweet.  It  is  regulative  and
constructive.  We  are  determined  by  the  person  we  believe  in.  BeUef  makes  him
my  possession.  Belief  breaks  down  his  walls  and  widens  him  out  till  he  contains
me.  His  thoughts  reappear  as  my  thoughts ;  his  ways,  manners,  feelings,  hopes,
impulses,  motives,  become  mine.  I  know  whom  I  have  believed.  We  make  our
or<£nary  creeds,  and  revise  and  amend  and  repeal  them.  Personal  creeds  make  us,
and  revise,  amend  and  repeal  us.  No  picture  of  a  friend  can  be  accurate  enough  to
begin  to  take  the  friend's  place  or  do  the  friend's  work.  No  idea  of  a  person  can
ever  be  enough  like  the  person  to  serve  as  substitute.  Knowing  what  God  is  to
perfection  would  never  become  the  equivalent  of  knowing  God.  If  we  bring  this  to
the  level  of  common  life,  its  workings  are  simple  and  manifest.  It  is  in  the  home.
The  mother  is  the  child's  first  creed.  He  behaves  in  her  before  he  believes  what
she  says,  and  it  is  by  his  belief  in  her  that  he  grows  and  ripens.  If  we  cannot  tell
it  all  out  in  worde  what  this  believing  in  a  mother  or  father  means,  we  feel  the
meaning  of  it,  and  the  deep  sense  is  worth  more  than  the  wordy  paragraph,  any
time.  Education  is  an  affair  of  person — person  meeting  person.  Pupils  do  not
become  wise  by  being  told  things.  Wisdom  is  not  the  accumulation  of  specific
cognitions.  It  is  men  that  educate.  Person  is  the  true  schoolmaster.  Even  an
encyclopaedia  does  not  become  an  educator  by  being  dressed  in  gentlemen's  clothes.
What  best  helps  a  boy  to  become  a  man  is  to  have  somebody  to  look  up  to  ;  which
is  like  our  text — "  I  know  whom  I  have  believed."  And  out  on  the  broader  fields
of  social  and  national  life  we  encounter  the  same  principle  over  again.  The
present  wealth  of  a  people  depends  largely  upon  its  commerce  and  productive
industries.  The  stability  of  a  people  and  its  promise  for  the  future,  depends  quite
as  much  upon  the  quality  of  the  men  upon  whom  the  masses  allow  their  regards  to
fix  and  their  loyalty  to  fasten.  "  I  know  whom  I  have  believed."  And  believing
in  Christ  in  this  way  to  begin  with,  issued  in  Paul's  believing  a  host  of  particular
facts  in  regard  to  Christ,  and  Paul's  theology  is  his  blossomed  piety.  No  amount
of  faith  in  Christ's  words  will  add  up  into  faith  in  Him.  You  must  have  noticed
bow  full  all  Christ's  teachings  are  of  the  personal  pronoun  "I."  Paul's  Christianity
began  on  the  road  to  Damascus.  The  only  man  that  can  truly  inform  me  is  the
man  that  can  form  himself  in  me ;  that  is  what  information  means — immensely
personal  again,  you  see,  as  evei*ything  of  much  account  is.  And  it  is  so  everywhere.
Beligious  matters,  in  this  respect,  step  in  the  same  ranks  with  other  matters.  The
grandest  convictions  that  we  receive  from  other  people  are  not  constructed  in  us  by
their  logic,  bat  created  in  us  by  their  personal  inspiration.    The  gospel  is  not  the


CHAP.  L]  II.  TIMOTHY.  89

Divine  book,  bat  the  Divine  Man,  and  a  great  many  miniature  copies  of  that  gospel
are  around  us,  working  still  effects  along  personal  lines.  We  make  Christianity
hard  by  crumbling  it  up  into  impersonal  propositions.  It  is  no  part  of  our  genius
to  like  a  truth  apart  from  its  flesh  and  blood  incarnation  in  some  live  man.  It  is
a  hard  and  awkward  thing  for  me  to  believe  in  the  doctrine  of  the  immortality  of
the  soul,  for  instance,  I  do  not  like  the  doctrine  ;  my  intellect  abhors  it.  No  logic
could  persuade  me  of  its  truth,  and  I  should  never  think  of  trying  to  syllogise
anybody  else  into  a  possession  of  it.  But  my  father  is  immortal  and  I  Imow  it.
Your  mother  is  immortal,  and  you  cannot  start  in  your  mind  a  suspicion  to  the
contrary.  From  all  this  we  gather  that  a  man  who  gets  called  an  unbeliever,  and
even  calls  himself  such,  may  believe  a  great  deal  more  than  he  suspects.  Uncon-
scious orthodoxy  is  a  factor  of  the  times  that  needs  to  be  taken  into  earnest  account.
There  are  quantities  of  unutilised  and  unsuspected  faith.  You  do  not  believe
in  immortality.  Did  you  ever  see  anybody  that  you  had  some  little  idea  had  about
him  something  or  other  that  death  could  not  touch  ?  Let  alone  the  abstract  and
come  close  to  the  concrete  and  personal,  and  let  it  work.  You  reject  the  doctrine
of  a  change  of  heart ;  and  it  is  a  doctrine  repugnant  to  our  natures  and  a  conundrum
to  our  intelligence.  Did  you  ever  see  anybody  who  stopped  being  what  he  had  been
and  commenced  being  what  he  had  not  been  ?  If  you  find  it  hard  work  to  square
your  opinions  with  the  catechism,  see  whether  you  do  not  draw  into  a  little  closer
coincidence  with  men  and  women  whose  lives  transparently  embody  the  gospel,  and
then  draw  jour  inference.  To  another  class  of  uncertain  hearers  I  want  to  add,
Do  not  try  to  get  your  religious  ideas  all  arranged  and  your  doctrinal  notions
balanced.  There  is  a  great  deal  of  that  kind  that  is  best  taken  care  of  when
it  is  left  to  take  care  of  itself.  There  is  no  advantage  in  borrowing  some  one's  else
opinion  and  no  use  in  hurrying  your  own  opinion.  Begin  with  what  is  personal,
as  he  did — "I  know  whom  I  have  believed."  Try  to  know  the  Lord.  Draw  nigh  to
God  and  He  will  draw  nigh  to  you.  "  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  beginning
of  knowledge."  There  is  no  other  way  of  beginning  to  be  a  Christian  but  the  old
way — "Come  unto  Me."  And  you  and  I,  fellow  Christians,  owe  it  to  these  un-
settled people  among  us  and  about  us  to  help  them  to  strong  anchorage  upon
Christ ;  and  our  qualifications  for  the  work  will  be  our  own  thorough  rest  in  and
establishment  upon  Christ  and  an  ineffable  commixture  of  love  and  tact,  and  tact
considered  not  as  a  natural  talent,  but  as  a  heavenly  grace.  In  our  relations
to  these  people,  there  is  another  thing  for  us  to  remember  of  a  more  positive
character,  which  is,  as  we  have  seen,  that  there  is  nothing  that  tells  upon  men  and
their  convictions  like  life.  Men  believe  in  the  personal.  Truth  pure  and  simple
goes  but  a  little  way,  except  as  it  is  lived.  Abstractions  are  not  current  outside  of
the  schools.  The  best  preaching  of  a  change  of  heart  is  a  heart  that  is  changed.
These  people  are  not  going  to  be  touched  by  anything  that  has  not  breath  and
a  pulse.  Living  is  the  best  teaching.  So  that  if  you  and  I  are  going  to  help  these
people  to  be  conscious  and  pronounced  Christians,  we  are  not  going  to  accomplish
it  by  merely  telling  them  about  Christ  and  compounding  before  them  feeble  dilutions
of  Divine  biography,  but  by  being  ourselves  so  personally  charged  with  the  personal
Spirit  of  God  in  Christ  that  in  our  words  they  shall  hear  Him,  in  our  love  they  shall
feel  Him,  in  our  behaviour  they  shall  be  witnesses  of  Him,  and  in  this  way  He
become  to  them  the  Way,  Truth  and  Life,  all-invigorating  power,  all-comprehensive
creed.  (C.  H.  Parkhurst.)  Nothing  to  hold  by  : — An  infidel  was  dying,  and  his
infidelity  beginning  to  give  way,  was  rallied  by  his  friends,  who  surrounded  his
dying  bed.  "  Hold  out,"  they  all  cried,  "  don't  give  way."  "  Ah  !  "  said  the  dying
man,  "  I  would  hold  out  if  I  had  anything  to  hold  by,  but  what  have  I  ? "
{Anon.)  Confidence  in  Christ : — I.  The  Chbistian  has  in  his  possession  a
TBEASDBE.  1.  It  is  his  greatest  treasure.  2.  At  his  own  disposal.  3.  Involves
his  whole  welfare  for  ever.  II.  The  Christian  has  entrdsted  his  treasure  to
THE  PROTECTION  OP  Chbist.  1.  It  is  in  danger  of  being  lost.  2.  Man  cannot
secure  its  safety  himself.     3.  Christ  is  the  only  Preserver.    IH.  The  Christian

BAB   entrusted   HIS   TREASURE   TO   ChRIST   WITH    UNBOUNDED    CONFIDENCE.        BeCaUSe

of  his  faith  in  Christ's — 1.  Power.   2.  Promises.    3.  Prestige.    IV.  The  Christian's

CONSCIOUSNESS   OF   THE    SAFETY   OF     HIS    TREASURE    IN     ChBIST    IS   A   SOURCE    OF   GREAT

PEACE  IN  THE  TROUBLES  OF  LIFE.  1.  Bccausc  the  greatest  interest  is  secured.  2.
Because  trials  will  further  this  interest.  3.  Because  trials  will  soon  end.  (B.  D.
Johns.)  Knowledge  conducive  of  assurance  : — This  must  move  us  all  to  get
knowledge  of  God,  if  we  would  have  faith  in  Him,  yea,  the  best  must  grow  herein ;
in  (he  better  we  know  Him  the  more  confidently  shall  we  believe  in  Him.    Fox


M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I.

it  is  80  in  all  other  things.  When  I  know  the  firmness  of  the  land  I  will  the  better
rest  my  foot  on  it ;  the  strength  of  my  staff,  the  rather  lean  my  whole  body  upon
it,  and  the  faithfulness  of  a  friend,  put  and  repose  my  confidence  in  him.  And  we
must  know  God.  First,  in  His  power,  how  that  He  is  able  to  do  whatsoever  He
will.  This  confirmed  Abraham's  faith,  and  moved  him  to  offer  his  son.  Secondly,
we  must  know  Him  in  His  truth  and  justice.  Thirdly,  we  are  to  know  God  in  His
stabiUty.  How  that  time  changeth  not  His  nature,  neither  altereth  His  purpose.
Fourthly,  we  are  to  understand  that  God  is  Sovereign  Lord,  that  there  is  none
higher  than  He;  for  if  we  should  trust  in  an  inferior  we  might  be  deceived.
Fifthly,  We  must  know  God  in  Christ.  {J.  Barlow,  D.D.)  TVs  all  real : — A  Bible-
class  convert,  who  subsequently  became  a  teacher,  accidentally  injured  himself
through  lifting  a  heavy  weight,  and  his  sufferings  in  consequence  were  very  severe.
Yet,  notwithstanding  his  pain  and  poverty,  he  was  extremely  happy,  and  clung  to
Christ  with  a  triumphant  faith.  This  poor  fellow's  dying  testimony  was  very
striking,  and  one  of  his  last  desires  has  never  been  forgotten.  When  just  about
crossing  the  river  of  death,  he  broke  out  into  this  expression,  "  Oh,  Mr.  Orsman,  I
would  like  to  get  well  again,  if  only  for  one  day,  just  to  go  round  to  my  old
companions,  and  tell  them  tt'«  all  real."  {Sword  and  Trowel.)  The  love  of  Christ
stronger  than  the  terrors  of  death : — At  the  conclusion  of  an  evening  service  in  a
fishing  village,  a  young  man  stood  up,  and  with  great  earnestness  began  to  address
his  feUows.  He  said,  "  You  all  remember  Johnnie  Greengrass  ?  "  There  was  a
murmur  of  assent  all  over  the  gathering.  "  You  know  that  he  was  drowned  last
year.  I  was  his  comrade  on  board  our  boat.  As  we  were  changing  the  vessel's
course  one  night,  off  the  Old  Head  of  Kinsale,  he  was  struck  by  the  lower  part  of
the  mainsail  and  swept  overboard.  He  was  a  good  swimmer,  but  had  been  so
disabled  by  the  blow  that  he  coold  only  struggle  in  the  water.  We  made  all  haste
to  try  and  save  him.  Before  we  got  seated  in  the  punt,  we  heard  Johnnie's  voice,
over  the  waves  beyond  the  stem,  singing  the  last  Une  of  his  favourite  hymn,  "  II
ever  I  loved  Thee,  my  Jesus,  'tis  now.'  We  made  every  effort  to  find  him,  but  in
vain.  He  vf&s  drowned ;  but  the  last  words  which  we  had  heard  from  his  lips
assured  us  that  the  love  of  Christ  had  proved  stronger  than  the  terrors  of  death.
He  knew  that  neither  death  nor  life  could  separate  him  from  the  love  of  Christ,
and  so  he  Bank  beneath  the  waves,  singing,  *  If  ever  I  loved  Thee,  my  Jesus,  'tis
now.'  "  (T.  Brown,  M.A.)  Venturing  on  Christ : — The  Eev.  Dr.  Simpson  was
for  many  years  tutor  in  the  college  at  Hoxton,  and  while  he  stood  very  low  in  his
own  esteem,  he  ranked  high  in  that  of  others.  After  a  long  life  spent  in  the
service  of  Christ,  he  approached  his  latter  end  with  holy  joy.  Among  other  ex-
pressions  which  indicated  his  love  to  the  Redeemer,  and  his  interest  in  the  favour
of  God,  he  spoke  with  disapprobation  of  a  phrase  often  used  by  some  pious  people,
" Venturing  on  Christ."  "When,"  said  he,  "I  consider  the  infinite  dignity  and
all-sufficiency  of  Christ,  I  am  ashamed  to  talk  of  venturing  on  Him.  Oh,  had  I
ten  thousand  souls,  I  would,  at  this  moment,  cast  them  aU  into  His  hands  with
the  utmost  confidence."  A  few  hours  before  his  dissolution,  he  addressed  himself
to  the  last  enemy,  in  a  strain  like  that  of  the  apostle,  when  he  exclaimed,  "  O
death,  where  is  thy  sting  ?  "  Displaying  his  characteristic  fervour,  as  though  he
saw  the  tyrant  approaching,  he  said,  "  What  art  thou  f  I  am  not  afraid  of  thee.
Thou  art  a  vanquished  enemy  through  the  blood  of  the  Cross."  Trusting
Christ  entirely : — I  have  sometimes  used  the  following  experience  as  an  illustra-
tion of  salvation.  For  fifteen  years  I  lived  by  the  seaside,  and  was  a  frequent
bather,  and  yet  never  learned  to  swim.  I  would  persist  in  keeping  one  foot  upon
the  bottom,  for  then  I  felt  safe.  But  one  day,  in  a  rough  sea,  a  great  wave  fairly
picked  me  off  my  feet,  and  I  struck  out  for  dear  hfe.  I  awoke  to  the  fact  that  I
could  swim,  that  the  waves  would  bear  me  up  if  I  trusted  them  entirely,  and  I  no
longer  clung  to  my  own  way  of  self-help.  Even  so  does  Christ  save.  How  often
the  trying  to  help  one's  self  keeps  from  peace  and  rest !  and  when  the  soul  first
abandons  all  to  Christ,  ventures  wholly  on  Him,  that  soul  finds,  to  its  own  as-
tonishment, that  Christ  indeed  bears  up  and  saves  him.  {H.  TV.  Childs.^  Jesus
sufficient : — An  old  lady  who  lately  died  in  Melbourne  said  to  her  minister,  "  Do
yon  think  my  faith  will  hold  out?  "  "Well,  I  don't  know  much  about  that,"
replied  the  man  of  God,  "  but  I  am  sure  that  Jesus  Christ  will  hold  out,  and  that
is  enough  for  you.  'Looking,'  not  to  our  faith,  but  *  unto  Jesus.'  "  {T,  Spurgeon.)
The  safety  of  believers  : — I.  The  obodnds  upon  which  this  comfortable  persuasion
18  BDiLT.  II.  The  manner  in  which  this  persuasion  is  produced  and  promoted  in
XHX  80ULS  of  tbob  belibvxbs.     1.  Thti  knowledge  of  Christ,  which  is  necessary  to


CHAP.  1.]  11.  TIMOTHY.  91

prodace  and  promote  the  comfortable  persuasion  expressed  in  the  text,  is  partly
derived  from  testimony.  (1)  God  the  Father  has  in  all  ages  borne  witness  to  the
power  and  faithfulness  of  His  own  beloved  Son,  our  blessed  Saviour.  This  He
did  of  old  time  by  visions  and  voices,  by  prophecies  and  typical  ordinances.  (2)
Christ  Himself  likewise  thus  testifies  concerning  His  own  power  and  readiness  to
save  (Matt.  xi.  28).  (3)  Nor  must  the  testimony  of  the  Holy  Spirit  be  forgotten,
"It  is  the  Spirit  that  beareth  witness,  because  the  Spirit  is  truth."  (4)  All  the
saints  who  lived  in  former  times,  the  whole  company  of  the  faithful,  all  the
patriarchs  and  prophets,  the  apostles  and  martyrs,  bear  testimony  to  this  interest-
ing fact.  They  all  died  in  the  faith  of  its  comforting  truth.  (5)  Our  fellow-
Christians,  likewise,  in  the  present  day,  may  be  produced  as  witnesses  to  the  power
and  faithfulness  of  the  Eedeemer.  They  Uve  in  different  and  distant  places ;  their
cases  are  various,  and  their  attainments  unequal ;  but  they  all  will  unite  in  declar-
ing that  ever  since  they  were  enabled  to  commit  their  souls  to  Christ,  they  have
found  a  peace  and  joy  to  which  they  were  strangers  before,  and  that  not  one  word
of  all  that  He  hath  spoken  hath  failed  to  be  accomplished.  2.  That  this  know-
ledge is  likewise  in  part  derived  from  the  believer's  own  experience  (see  John  iv.
42).  Concluding  reflections :  1.  How  much  are  they  to  be  pitied,  who  have  no
interest  in  the  Saviour,  who  have  never  been  thoroughly  convinced  of  their  wretched
condition  as  sinners,  and  who,  consequently,  have  not  committed  the  momentous
concerns  of  their  souls  into  the  hands  of  Christ.  2.  That  we  may  abound  more
and  more  in  this  hope,  through  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  let  us  study  to  grow
in  grace,  and  in  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  3.  Have  we  committed
our  immortal  interests  into  the  hands  of  Christ,  and  shall  we  not  trust  Him  with
all  our  lesser  concerns  ?  4.  Let  us  look  forward  with  believing  expectation  to  the
day  when  it  will  appear  with  Divine  evidence,  how  faithfully  Jesus  has  kept  all
that  has  been  committed  unto  Him.  (D.  Black.)  Nothing  between  the  soul  and
its  Saviour : — When  Dr.  Alexander,  one  of  the  professors  of  theology  in  Princeton
University,  was  dying,  he  was  visited  by  a  former  student.  After  briefly  exchang-
ing two  or  three  questions  as  to  health,  the  dying  divine  requested  his  old  disciple
to  recite  a  verse  of  the  Bible  to  be  a  comfort  to  him  in  his  death  struggles.  After
a  moment's  reflection  the  student  repeated  from  memory  that  verse — "  I  know  in
whom  I  have  believed,  and  that  He  is  able  to  keep  that  which  I  have  committed
unto  Him  unto  that  day."  "No,  no,"  replied  the  dying  saint,  " that  is  not  the
verse :  it  is  not '  I  know  in  whom  I  have  believed. '  but  '  I  know  whom  I  have
believed.'  I  cannot  allow  the  little  word*  in 'to  intervene  between  me  and  my
Saviour  to-day,  I  cannot  allow  the  smallest  word  in  the  Enghsh  language  to  go
between  me  and  my  Saviour  in  the  floods  of  Jordan."  The  folly  of  not
trusting  Christ: — I  was  busy  at  work  during  the  deep,  still  hush  of  a  hot
July  noon,  when  my  attention  was  suddenly  drawn  to  a  fluttering  sound  in
the  room  where  I  was  sitting.  A  little  bird  from  the  neighbouring  woods  had
entered  by  the  open  window,  and  was  dashing  wildly  to  and  fro  in  its  frantic
efforts  to  escape  again.  I  did  not  move  at  first,  unwilling  to  increase  its  alarm,
and  hoping  it  would  soon  find  its  way  out.  But  when  after  a  little  I  again  looked  '
up,  I  saw  that  the  little  creature  was  circling  round  and  round  in  desperate  alarm ;
and,  moreover,  that  the  low,  whitewashed  ceiling  was  being  streaked  all  over  with
blood  from  its  poor  head,  which  it  grazed  incessantly  in  its  endeavours  to  get
farther  away  from  me.  I  thought  it  was  time  for  me  now  to  come  to  its  help,  but
all  my  endeavours  only  made  matters  worse.  The  more  I  tried  to  aid  its  escape,
the  more  blindly  and  swiftly  did  it  dash  itself  against  the  walls  and  ceiling.  I
could  but  sit  down  and  wait  till  it  fell  helpless  and  exhausted  at  my  feet.  Tha
water  stood  in  my  eyes  as  I  took  it  up  and  laid  it  in  a  safe  place,  from  which,
when  recovered,  it  could  fly  safely  away.  "Poor  foolish  thing,"  I  said,  "how
much  alarm  and  suffering  you  would  have  been  spared  could  you  only  have  trusted
me,  and  suffered  me  to  set  you  at  liberty  long  ago.  But  you  have  been  to  me  a
lively  picture  of  the  way  in  which  we  sinners  of  mankind  treat  a  loving  and  n
compassionate  Saviour."  God  a  good  Keeper : — God  hath  all  the  properties  \  \y
of  a  good  keeper.  First,  He  is  wise.  Secondly,  powerful.  Thirdly,  watchful.  AV'^
Fourthly,  faithful.  He  hath  given  laws  to  be  faithful,  and  then  shall  not  He  ?  /
The  certainty  of  salvation  : — When  the  soul  is  settled  that  person  will  be  resolute
in  every  good  course.  A  faint-hearted  soldier,  were  he  resolved  beforehand  that  he  '\
should  escape  death  and  danger,  conquer  his  foes,  and  win  the  field,  would  he  not  V  ^^^
put  on  his  armour,  gird  his  sword  upon  his  thigh,  and  march  furiously  against  his
adversaries  ?   And  shall  not  then  the  Christian  soldier,  who  is  persuaded  of  victory,


\


92  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i.

to  have  the  spoil,  and  possess  a  crown  of  righteousness  and  glory,  go  on  with  an
undaunted  courage  in  the  face  of  the  devil,  death,  and  hell  ?  This  doctrine
reproveth  those  that  for  the  most  part  never  mind  this  duty.  We  see  many  who
settle  their  houses  on  a  good  foundation,  establish  their  trees  that  the  wind  shake
them  not,  and  by  a  staff  to  underprop  their  feeble  bodies  that  they  catch  not  a
fall,  the  which  we  in  its  kind  commend.  But  how  few  spend  any  time  to  have
their  souls  settled  in  the  certainty  of  salvation.  {J.  Barlow,  D.D.)  Faith  and
feeling : — Dr.  Archibald  Alexander,  eminent  for  learning  and  for  consecration,
when  asked  by  one  of  his  students  at  Princeton  whether  he  always  had  full  assur-
ance of  faith,  replied,  "  Yes,  except  when  the  wind  blows  from  the  east."  (T.  de
Witt  Talmage.)  Christian  faith: — Christian  faith  is  the  faith  of  a  transaction  ;
it  is  not  the  committing  of  one's  thought  in  assent  to  a  proposition,  but  it  is  the
trusting  of  one's  being  to  another  Being,  there  to  be  rested,  kept,  guided,  moulded,
governed,  and  possessed  for  ever.  {H.  Bushnell.)  Christian  faith  is  a  grand
cathedral  with  divinely-pictured  windows.  Standing  without,  you  see  no  glory,  nor
can  possibly  imagine  any.  Nothing  is  visible  but  the  merest  outline  of  dusky
shapes.  Standing  withm,  all  is  clear  and  defined,  every  ray  of  light  reveals  an
array  of  unspeakable  splendours.  (J.  Ruskin. )  Faith  a  personal  rein  tion  to  Christ : —
If  the  object  of  faith  were  certain  truths,  the  assent  of  the  understanding  would  bo
enough.  If  the  object  of  faith  were  unset  n  things,  the  confident  persuasion  of
them  would  be  sufficient.  If  the  object  of  faith  were  promises  of  future  good,  the
hope  rising  to  certainty  of  the  possession  of  these  would  be  sufficient.  But  if  the
object  be  more  than  truths,  more  than  unseen  realities,  more  than  promises ;  if  the
object  be  a  living  Person,  then  there  follows  inseparably  this,  that  faith  is  not
merely  the  assent  of  the  understanding,  that  faith  is  not  merely  the  persuasion  of
the  reality  of  unseen  things,  that  faith  is  not  merely  the  confident  expectation  of
future  good  ;  but  that  faith  is  the  personal  relation  of  him  that  believes  to  the
living  Person  its  object,  the  relation  which  is  expressed  not  more  clearly,  but
perhaps  a  Uttle  more  forcibly  to  us  by  substituting  another  word,  and  saying,
Paith  is  trust.  [A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Trust  in  Christ  supported  by  cuimdative
evidence : — I  do  not  pretend  to  have  a  scientific  knowledge  of  Divine  things,  or  to
rest  my  convictions  upon  a  scientific  demonstration;  but  I  can  venture  to  say
that  "  I  know  whom  I  have  believed."  Such  a  belief  will  be  supported  by  collateral
evidence,  acquiring  from  age  to  age  a  cumulative  and  converging  force  ;  but  its
essential  virtue  will  in  all  ages  be  derived  from  the  vital  sources  of  personal  love
and  trust.  {H.  Wace,  D.D.)  Character  entrusted  to  God: — When  John  Wesley  waa
going  over  all  the  country  proclaiming  a  crucified  Saviour  for  sinners,  the
magazines  and  papers  of  the  day  slandered  him  as  those  of  our  day  do  God's
servants  still.  In  one  paper  there  was  an  article  so  abusive  and  slanderous  that  a
friend  determined  to  contradict  it.  He  laid  the  article  and  its  reply  before  Wesley,
who  said,  "When  I  gave  my  soul  to  Jesus,  I  gave  Him  my  cbaiacter  to  keep  as
well.  I  have  to  do  my  work  and  have  no  time  to  attend  to  it."  Christians  who
are  doing  the  Lord's  work  should  go  on  with  it,  leaving  themselves  and  their  cha-
racter in  His  hands.  The  soul  entrusted  to  Christ: — St.  Paul  says,  "  that  which
I  have  committed  unto  Him."  This  meant  his  soul.  Suppose  you  have  a  precious
jewel  worth  fifty  or  a  hundred  thousand  dollars.  It  is  bo  valuable  that  you  are
afraid  you  may  lose  it,  or  that  some  one  may  steal  it  from  you.  And  suppose  you
have  a  friend  who  has  a  safe  that  is  fire-proof  and  robber-proof.  You  take  your
jewel  to  this  friend,  and  say  to  him :  "Please  take  charge  of  this  jewel,  and  keep
it  for  me  in  your  fire-proof."  He  takes  it  and  locks  it  up  there.  And  now  you
feel  comfortable  about  that  jewel.  You  know  your  friend  is  faithful,  and  your
jewel  is  safe.  You  do  not  worry  about  it  any  more.  You  are  ready  to  say  about
your  jewel  what  St.  Paul  said  about  his  soul,  because  you  feel  sure  that  it  is  safe.
{Richard  Neutun.)  Knoiving  Christ : — There  are  two  ways  in  which  we  are  used
to  know  persons.  Sometimes  it  means  to  know  them  through  some  other  person.
Sometimes  it  means  to  know  them  ourselves.  Ihere  is  evidently  a  world-wide
difference  between  the  two.  Let  me  illustrate  it  thus :  We  all  know  our  Sovereign,
her  character,  her  state,  her  pi-erogative,  her  powers.  But  very  few  know  tbe
Queen.  Yet  it  is  very  evident  that  those  who  have  been  admitted  to  her  presence,
and  who  have  actually  spoken  and  conversed  in  friendship  with  her,  will  have  very
different  feelings  towards  her,  and  repose  in  her,  and  that  their  whole  hearts  will
go  out  to  her  immensely  more  than  those  who  know  her  only  at  a  distance,  and
through  the  ordinary  public  channels.  It  is  so  with  Christ.  Some  of  you  know
Christ  by  the  education  of  your  childhood  ;  some  by  the  testimony  of  others  ;  some


CHAi-.  1.J  11.  TIMOTHY.  9i

by  the  reading  of  your  Bible.  Others  have  felt  His  presence.  They  have  com-
muned with  Him.  They  have  presented  petitions,  and  they  have  had  their
answers  from  Himself.  They  have  laid  burdens  at  His  feet,  and  He  has  taken
them  up.  He  has  accepted  their  little  gifts  and  smiled  at  their  small  services.
They  have  proved  Him.  Isn't  He  another  Bemg,  isn't  He  another  Christ  to  that
man  ?  They  know  Him.  And  what  do  they  know  of  Thee,  0  blessed  Jesus  ?  They
know  Thee  as  the  most  loving  and  the  lovehest  of  all — all  grace,  full  of  tenderness
and  sympathy,  stooping  to  the  meanest,  and  kind  to  the  very  worst.  Our  Brother,
our  Light,  our  Life,  our  Joy — who  has  taken  away  all  our  sins  and  carried  all  our
load.  That  knowledge  can  never  begin  but  in  one  way — by  a  certain  inner  life,  by
a  walk  of  holiness,  by  the  teaching  of  sorrow,  in  the  school  of  discipline,  from
heavy  leanings,  by  acts  of  self-abandonment,  by  goings  down  into  tbe  dust,  by  the
grand  influence  of  the  Spirit,  by  Jesus  revealing  Himself.  But  once  known- — and
from  that  moment  it  will  be  as  hard  not  to  trust  as  it  is  now  difficult  to  do;  as
impossible  for  the  heart  to  doubt  as  it  is  to  that  poor,  prone  heart  now  to  question
everyrhing.  If  you  reaUy  know,  you  cannot  help  believing.  "  If  thou  knewest  the
gift  of  God,  and  who  it  is  that  saith  to  thee, '  Give  Me  to  drink,'  thou  wouldest  have
asked  of  Him,  and  He  would  have  given  thee  living  water."  But  there  is  a  truth
in  St.  Paul's  words  which  I  am  very  anxious  to  press  upon  you.  See  where  the
great  apostle,  the  aged  believer,  the  ripe  saint,  found  all  his  argument  and  all  his
stand,  as  it  were.  Not — and  if  any  man  might  he  might — not  in  anything  which
had  been  worked  by  him ;  not  in  anything  in  him ;  not  in  his  acts ;  not  in  his
feelings ;  not  in  his  faith  ;  not  in  his  conversion,  however  remarkable  ;  not  in  his
sanctification,  however  complete  ;  but  simply  and  absolutely  and  only  in  God.  "  I
know" — as  if  he  cared  to  know  nothing  else,  all  other  knowledge  being  unsatisfactory
or  worse — "  I  know  Him  whom  I  have  trusted. "  It  may  seem  a  strange  thing  to  say,
but  it  is  really  easier  to  know  God  than  it  is  to  know  ourselves.  It  is  remarkable
that  the  Bible  tells  us  a  great  deal  more  about  God  than  it  does  about  our  own
hearts.  The  great  end  of  reading  the  Bible  is  to  know  God.  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)
Covjidence  and  concern: — I.  First,  observe  what  Paul  had  done.  1.  He  had
trusted  a  person — "  I  know  whom  I  have  believed."  2.  Paul  had  gone  further,  and
had  practically  carried  out  his  confidence,  for  he  had  deposited  everything  with  this
person.  A  poor  idiot,  who  had  been  instructed  by  an  earnest  Christian  man,  some-
what alarmed  him  by  a  strange  remark,  for  he  feared  that  all  his  teaching  had  been
in  vain.  He  said  to  this  poor  creature,  "  You  know  that  you  have  a  soul,  John  ?  "
"No,"  said  he,  "I  have  no  soul."  "No  soul!"  thought  the  teacher,  "this  is
dreadful  ignorance."  AU  his  fears  were  rolled  away  when  his  half-witted  pupil
added,  "  I  had  a  soul  once,  and  I  lost  it,  and  Jesus  found  it ;  and  so  I  have  let  Him
keep  it."  II.  The  next  thing  is,  what  did  Paul  know?  He  tells  us  plainly,  "I
know  whom  I  have  believed."  1.  We  are  to  understand  by  this  that  Paul  looked
steadily  at  the  object  of  his  confidence,  and  knew  that  he  relied  upon  God  in  Christ
Jesus.  He  did  not  rest  in  a  vague  hope  that  he  would  be  saved ;  nor  in  an  inde-
finite reliance  upon  the  Christian  religion  ;  nor  in  a  sanguine  expectation  that  all
things  would,  somehow,  turn  out  right  at  the  end.  He  did  not  hold  the  theory  of
our  modern  divines,  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  did  something  or  other,  which,  in
one  way  or  another,  is  more  or  less  remotely  connected  with  the  forgiveness  of  sin ;
but  he  knew  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  a  person,  and  he  deliberately  placed  himself
in  His  keeping,  knowing  Him  to  be  the  Saviour.  2.  Paul  also  knew  the  character
of  Jesus  whom  he  trusted.  His  perfect  character  abundantly  justified  the  apostle's
implicit  trust.  Paul  could  have  said,  "  I  know  that  I  trust  in  One  who  is  no  mere
man,  but  very  God  of  very  God.  I  have  not  put  my  soul  into  the  keeping  of  a
priest,  like  unto  the  sons  of  Aaron,  who  must  die ;  but  I  have  rested  myself  in  One
■whose  priesthood  is  according  to  the  law  of  an  endless  life — a  Priest  for  ever  after
the  order  of  Melchizedek.  He  upon  whom  I  confide  is  He  without  whom  was  not
anything  made  that  was  made,  who  sustaineth  all  things  by  the  Word  of  His  power,
and  who  at  His  coming  shall  shake  both  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  for  all  fulness
of  Divine  energy  dwells  in  Him. "  3.  But  how  did  Paul  come  to  know  Christ  ?
Every  page  of  Scripture,  as  the  apostle  perused  it,  revealed  Jesus  to  him.  This
book  is  a  royal  pavilion,  within  which  the  Prince  of  peace  is  to  be  met  with  by
behevers  who  look  for  Him.  In  this  celestial  mirror  Jesus  is  reflected.  Paul
also  knew  Jesus  in  another  way  than  this.  He  had  personal  acquaintance  with
Him  ;  he  knew  Him  as  "  the  Lord  Jesus,  who  appeared  unto  him  in  the  way."
He  knew  the  Lord  also  by  practical  experience  and  trial  of  Him,  Paul  had  tested
Jesus  amidst  furious  mobs,  when  stones  fell  about  him,  and  in  prison,  when  tha


94  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i.

death-damp  chilled  him  to  the  bone.  He  had  known  Christ  far  oat  at  sea,  when
Euroclydon  drove  him  up  and  down  in  the  Adriatic ;  and  he  had  known  Christ
when  the  rough  blasts  of  unbrotherly  suspicion  had  beaten  upon  him  on  the  land.
All  that  he  knew  increased  his  confidence.  He  knew  the  Lord  Jesus  because  He
had  delivered  him  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  lion.  IH.  Thirdly,  let  us  inquire —
WHAT  WAS  THE  APOSTLE  PERSUADED  OF?  1.  Implicitly  Paul  declarss  his  faith  in
our  Lord's  willingness  and  faithfulness.  2.  But  the  point  which  the  apostle
expressly  mentions  is  the  power  of  Christ — "I  am  persuaded  that  He  is  able."
He  that  goes  on  board  a  great  Atlantic  liner  does  not  say,  "  I  venture  the  weight  of
my  body  upon  this  vessel.  I  trust  it  to  bear  my  ponderous  frame."  Yet  your  body
is  more  of  a  load  to  the  vessel  than  your  soul  is  to  the  Lord  Jesus.  Did  you  ever
hear  of  the  gnat  on  the  horn  of  the  ox  which  feared  that  it  might  be  an  inconveni-
ence to  the  huge  creature  ?  Oh,  friend  I  you  are  but  a  gnat  in  comparison  with  the
Lord  Jesus,  nay,  you  are  not  so  heavy  to  the  ascended  Saviour  as  the  gnat  to  the
ox.  You  were  a  weight  to  Him  once,  but  having  borne  that  load  once  for  all,  your
salvation  is  no  burden  to  Him  now.  Well  may  you  say,  "  I  am  persuaded  that  He
is  able  to  keep  that  which  I  have  committed  unto  Him."  3.  What  was  this  which
Paul  had  committed  to  Christ  ?  He  committed  to  Him  everything  that  he  had  for
time  and  for  eternity  ;  his  body,  his  soul,  his  spirit ;  all  fears,  cares,  dangers,  sins,
doubts,  hopes,  joys :  he  just  made  a  clean  removal  of  his  all  from  himself  to  his
Lord.  Those  of  you  who  are  acquainted  with  the  original  will  follow  me  while  I
forge  a  link  between  my  third  division  and  my  fourth.  If  I  were  to  read  the  text
thus  it  would  be  quite  correct — "I  am  persuaded  that  He  is  able  to  keep  my
deposit  against  that  day."  Here  we  have  a  glimpse  of  a  second  meaning.  If
you  have  the  Revised  Version,  you  will  find  in  the  margin  "  that  which  He  has
committed  to  me  "  ;  and  the  original  allows  us  to  read  the  verse  whichever
way  we  choose — "  He  is  able  to  keep  that  which  I  have  committed  unto  Him  "
— or  "that  which  He  has  committed  unto  me."  This  last  expression,  though  I
could  not  endorse  it  as  giving  the  full  sense  of  the  text,  does  seem  to  me  to  be
a  part  of  its  meaning.  It  is  noteworthy  that,  in  the  fourteenth  verse,  the
original  has  the  same  phrase  as  in  this  verse.  It  runs  thus — "  That  good
deposit  guard  by  the  Holy  Ghost  which  dwelleth  in  us."  Inasmuch  as  the
words  are  the  same — the  apostle  speaking  of  "  my  deposit "  in  the  twelfth  verse,
and  in  the  fourteenth  verse  speaking  of  "  that  good  deposit  " — I  cannot  help
thinking  that  one  thought  dominated  his  mind.  His  soul  and  the  gospel  were  so
united  as  to  be  in  his  thought  but  one  deposit ;  and  this  he  believed  that  Jesus
was  able  to  keep.  He  seemed  to  say,  "  I  have  preached  the  gospel  which  was
committed  to  my  trust ;  and  now,  for  having  preached  it,  I  am  put  in  prison,  and
am  likely  to  die  ;  but  the  gospel  is  safe  in  better  hands  than  mine."  The  demon
of  distrust  might  have  whispered  to  him,  '*  Paul,  you  are  now  silenced,  and  your
gospel  will  be  silenced  with  you  ;  the  Church  will  die  out ;  truth  will  become
extinct."  "  No,  no,"  saith  Paul,  "  I  am  not  ashamed  ;  for  I  know  that  He  is  able
to  guard  my  deposit  against  that  day."  IV.  This  leads  me  on  to  this  fourth
point — WHAT  THE  APOSTLE  WAS  CONCERNED  ABOUT.  The  matter  about  which  he  was
concerned  was  this  deposit  of  his — this  everlasting  gospel  of  the  blessed  God.
He  expresses  his  concern  in  the  following  words — "  Hold  fast  the  form  of  sound
words,  which  thou  hast  heard  of  me,  in  faith  and  love  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus.
That  good  thing  which  was  committed  unto  thee  keep  by  the  Holy  Ghost  which
dwelleth  in  us."  1.  He  is  concerned  for  the  steadfastness  of  Timothy,  and  as  I
think  for  that  of  all  young  Christians,  and  especially  of  all  young  preachers.
What  does  he  say?  "Hold  fast  the  form  of  sound  words."  I  hear  an  objector
murmur,  "  There  is  not  much  in  words,  surely."  Sometimes  there  is  very  much  in
words.  Vital  truth  may  hinge  upon  a  single  word.  The  whole  Church  of  Christ
once  fought  a  tremendous  battle  over  a  syllable ;  but  it  was  necessary  to  fight  it  for
the  conservation  of  the  truth.  Wheu  people  rail  at  creeds  as  having  no  vitality,  I
suppose  that  I  hear  one  say  that  there  is  no  life  in  egg-shells.  Just  so  ;  there  is
no  life  in  egg-shells,  they  are  just  so  much  lime,  void  of  sensation.  "  Pray,  my
dear  sir,  do  not  put  yourself  out  to  defend  a  mere  shell."  Truly,  good  friend,  I  am
no  trifler,  nor  so  litigious  as  to  fight  for  a  mere  shell.  But  hearken  I  I  have  dis-
oovered  that  when  you  break  egg-shells  vou  spoil  eggs  ;  and  I  have  learned  that
eggs  do  not  hatch  and  ])ro(luce  life  when  shells  are  cracked.  2.  The  apostle  was
anxious,  not  only  that  thf  men  should  stand,  but  that  the  everlasting  gospel  itself
should  be  guarded.  "  That  good  thing  which  was  committed  unto  thee  keep  by
the  Holy  Ghost  which  dwelleth  in  us."    It  were  better  for  us  that  the  sun  were


CHAP.  I.]  II.  TIMOTHY,  OJi

qaenched  than  that  the  gospel  were  gone.  I  helieve  that  the  moralities,  the
liberties,  and  peradventure  the  very  existence  of  a  nation  depend  upon  the  procla-
mation of  the  gospel  in  its  midst.  How  are  we  to  keep  the  faith  ?  There  is  only
one  way.  It  is  of  little  use  trying  to  guard  the  gospel  by  writing  it  down  in  a  trust-
deed  ;  it  is  of  small  service  to  ask  men  to  subscribe  to  a  creed  :  we  must  go  to  work
in  a  more  effectual  way.  How  is  the  gospel  to  be  guarded  ?  '*  By  the  Holy  Ghost
which  dwelleth  in  us."  If  the  Holy  Spirit  dwells  in  you,  and  you  obey  His
monitions,  and  are  moulded  by  His  influences,  and  exhibit  the  result  of  His  work
in  the  holiness  of  your  lives,  then  the  faith  will  be  kept.  A  holy  people  are  the
true  body-guard  of  the  gospel.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)

Ver.  13.  Hold  fast  the  form  of  sound  words. — Systematic  knowledge  of  the
gospel : — While  Paul  was  passing  through  Syria  and  Cilicia,  confirming  the
Churches,  he  came  to  Lystra,  where  he  found  a  certain  disciple,  named  Timothy,
who  was  highly  esteemed  by  the  Christian  brethren  in  that  city.  This  recommended
him  to  the  notice  and  acquaintance  of  the  apostle  ;  who  being  fully  persuaded  of
his  unfeigned  piety  and  promising  talents,  determined  to  take  him  with  him,  and
prepare  him  by  proper  instruction  to  preach  the  gospel.  Timothy  gratefully
received  and  wisely  improved  this  precious  privilege,  made  great  proficiency  in
theological  knowledge,  and  soon  became  acquainted  with  the  whole  scheme  of
religious  sentiments  which  the  apostle  embraced  and  taught.  This  form  of  sound
words,  or  rather  this  system  of  sound  doctrines,  the  apostle  taught  Timothy,  and
exhorted  him  to  hold  fast  as  a  necessary  and  indispensable  qualification  for  the
gospel  ministry.  The  opinion  and  practice  of  the  apostle  in  this  instance  naturally
leads  us  to  conclude  that  a  systematical  knowledge  of  the  gospel  is  still  necessary
to  qualify  other  pious  young  men  as  well  as  Timothy  for  the  same  sacred  office.  1.
Young  men  who  are  preparing  for  the  ministry  should  understand  the  harmony  and
connection  which  run  through  all  the  peculiar  and  essential  doctrines  of  the  gospel.
These  are  so  intimately  connected  that  they  cannot  be  clearly  understood  separately
considered.  2.  A  systematical  knowledge  of  the  principal  doctrines  of  the  Bible  is
necessary  in  order  to  understand  and  explain  the  true  meaning  of  the  Scriptures
in  general.  3,  Young  men  who  are  preparing  for  the  ministry  should  have  a
systematical  knowledge  of  the  gospel,  that  they  may  be  able  to  guard  themselves
against  the  religious  errors  to  which  they  are  peculiarly  exposed.  4.  It  is  neces-
sary that  those  who  are  preparing  for  the  ministry  should  have  a  systematical
knowledge  of  the  gospel  in  order  to  be  able  to  refute  as  well  as  to  avoid  rehgious
errors.  6.  A  systematical  knowledge  of  the  gospel  is  no  less  necessary  in  order  to
qualify  pious  young  men  to  preach  both  the  doctrines  and  duties  of  Christianity  in
the  most  plain,  instructive,  and  profitable  manner.  It  now  remains  to  point  out
some  things  which  seem  naturally  to  flow  from  the  subject.  1.  The  first  thing
suggested  by  the  subject  is  that  there  can  be  no  reasonable  objection  against
aU  human  systems  of  divinity.  It  is  said  that  systems  of  divinity  tend  to
promote  rehgious  controversies,  which  are  highly  prejudicial  to  practical  religion.
But  it  is  very  evident  that  they  do  not  give  rise  to  religious  disputes,  because
rehgious  disputes  have  always  given  rise  to  them.  It  is  said  that  systems
of  divinity  tend  to  prevent  men  from  forming  any  real  opinions  of  their  own
and  to  infringe  upon  their  right  of  private  judgment.  No  man  can  be  said
to  have  a  real  opinion  upon  any  subject  which  is  not  derived  from  evidence ;
and  if  it  be  derived  from  evidence,  it  is  totally  immaterial  whether  he  derives  the
evidence  from  his  own  investigation,  or  from  conversation,  or  from  reading,  or  from
public  or  private  instruction.  It  is  said  that  systems  of  divinity  are  often  the
engines  of  designing  men,  and  intended  to  propagate  error  instead  of  truth.  It  is
not  denied  that  theological  systems  may  have  been  designed  and  employed  to  serve
such  an  evil  purpose.  But  it  must  be  acknowledged,  on  the  other  hand,  that  they
may  have  been  designed  and  employed  to  counteract  the  baneful  influence  of
error  and  to  promote  the  cause  of  truth.  2.  If  the  leading  sentiment  in  this
discourse  has  been  sufficiently  supported,  we  must  conclude  that  it  is  generally
improper  for  those  to  undertake  to  preach  the  gospel  who  have  never  acquired  a
systematical  knowledge  of  it.  In  the  next  place,  it  appears  from  what  has  been
said,  that  both  an  academical  and  theological  education  is  highly  necessary  to
qualify  pious  young  men  for  the  work  of  the  ministry.  3.  The  whole  train  of  the
observations  which  have  been  made  in  this  discourse  now  converge  to  a  single
point,  and  unitedly  press  the  important  duty  of  assisting  pious  and  promising
youths  to  furnish  their  minds  with  that  literary  and  theological  knowledge  which


96  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip,  u

is  indispensably  necessary  to  prepare  them  for  the  gospel  ministry.  (N.  Etxmons,
D.D.)  The  form  of  sound  words  : — The  numerous  and  conflicting  creeds,  confes-
sions of  faith,  and  systems  of  divinity  which  are  spread  over  the  religious  world
are  but  of  human  authority.  What  volumes  of  needless  controversy,  what  angry
passions,  what  words  of  strife,  and  what  deeds  of  violence  had  the  world  escaped
by  attention  to  this  simple,  obvious,  all-important  principle !  But  does  it  follow
from  this  statement  that  we  ought  to  have  no  system  of  religious  opinions  what-
ever ;  or  that,  having  a  system,  it  is  a  matter  of  indifference  what  that  system  is  ?
By  no  means.  We  are  not  indeed  to  assume  infallibility,  either  for  ourselves  or
for  the  peculiarities  of  our  creed  ;  but  it  does  not  follow  we  should  have  no  fixed
creed  at  all.  He  who  has  no  creed  has  nothing  which  he  believes  ;  and  he  who  has
nothing  which  he  believes  is  an  unbeliever,  an  infidel.  The  evil  lies  not  in  having
a  creed,  but  in  having  a  wrong  one  ;  or  in  holding  and  propagating  that  which  we
have  with  tempers  that  are  unkind  and  by  measures  that  are  unchristian.  What
we  design  at  this  time  is  a  brief  and  plain  summary  of  those  religious  principles
avowed  by  the  community  of  professing  Christians  with  which  we  are  more  especi-
ally connected.  If,  on  examination,  the  form  of  words  we  lay  before  you  should
be  proved  "  sound,"  we  may  be  allowed  to  admonish  you  in  the  words  of  the  apostle
to  "hold  it  fast."  1.  There  exists  an  Infinite  Being,  the  great  first  cause,  whom
we  call  God.  There  is  but  one  God  ;  but  this  one  God  subsists  in  three  personalities
or  modes,  commonly  distinguished  as  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost.  2.  The  Holy
Scriptures  are  the  only  sufficient  and  authorised  rule  of  faith  and  practice.  It  is
not  intended  to  be  affirmed  that  nothing  is  true  but  what  is  made  known  in  the
sacred  writings  ;  but  that  what  is  not  there  revealed  cannot  be  required  as  an  article
of  faith.  3.  Man  came  out  of  the  hands  of  his  Creator  in  a  state  of  perfect  rectitude,
holiness,  and  felicity.  But  man  was  at  the  same  time  constituted  a  moral  agent ;
that  is,  he  was  put  under  a  command  or  law  which  he  had  the  power  and  liberty  to
obey  or  disobey.  He  disobeyed  ;  and  in  consequence  of  that  act  of  infidelity  and
rebellion  fell  from  his  primeval  excellency ;  his  nature  became  morally  defiled ;  and
that  moral  defilement  he  transmitted  to  all  his  posterity.  4.  But  mankind  were
not  left  to  perish  in  ihis  fallen,  sinful,  and  wretched  state  :  a  great  plan  of  redemp-
tion and  salvation  has  been  originated,  and  is  now  in  actual  existence  and  opera-
tion. This  plan  took  its  rise  in  the  boundless  benevolence  of  the  eternal  Jehovah  ;
and  the  execution  of  it  was  laid  on  one  that  is  mighty — on  our  Lord  and  Saviour
Jesus  Christ.  5.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  Kedeemer  of  mankind  and  the  founder
of  our  holy  religion,  is  very  God.  But  for  us  men  and  for  our  salvation  the  eti'rnal
Word  became  flesh  and  dwelt  among  us,  so  that  the  Saviour  of  the  world  is  Man  as
well  as  God,  or,  in  the  style  of  the  Scriptures,  "  God  manifest  in  the  flesh."  6.  The
Bufferings  and  death  of  the  man  Christ  Jesus  are  a  proptr  and  full  satisfaction  and
atonement  for  the  sins  of  mankind.  7.  In  that  form  of  words  which  this  Christian
community  has  embraced,  it  is  essential,  not  only  that  the  blessed  Jesus  died  for
sin,  but  also  that  He  died  for  the  sins  of  all  men  ;  that  in  the  design  and  appoint-
ment of  Almighty  God,  the  blood  of  the  covenant  extends  its  saving  efficacy  wide  as
the  human  race  ;  and  that,  in  consequence  of  the  shedding  of  that  blood,  salvation
is  actually  put  within  the  grasp  of  every  human  soul.  8.  We  are  justified  before
God  and  accepted  into  His  favour,  not  by  works  of  righteousness  that  we  have  done,
but  through  faith  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  through  that  alone.  9.  It  is  the
privilege  of  all  who  are  thus  accepted  of  God  to  have  the  assurance  of  it  by  the
witness  of  the  Spirit  in  their  hearts.  10.  As  the  nature  of  man  is  corrupt  and
sinful,  before  he  can  be  admitted  into  the  everlasting  abodes  of  purity  and  bliss,  he
must  undergo  a  great  moral  change — a  change  of  disposition  and  desires — a  change
of  heart  and  soul.  This  spiritual,  happy  revolution  we  are  accustomed  to  express
by  such  terms  as  "regeneration,"  "conversion,"  "  the  new  birth,"  &c.  11.  This
regeneration  and  whatever  else  is  necessary  to  the  holiness  and  spiritual  life  of  the
soul  is  effected  through  the  interposition  and  agency  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  12.  The
soul  of  man  is  immortal.  13.  Perhaps  no  discovery  of  revelation  is  more  stupendous
or  more  consolatory  than  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection  of  the  deiid.  14.  "God
hath  appointed  a  day,  in  the  which  He  wiU  judge  the  world  in  righteousness  by
that  Man  whom  He  hath  ordained  ;  whereof  He  hath  given  assurance  unto  all
men,  in  that  He  hath  raised  Him  from  the  dead."  15.  Finally,  the  solemnities  of
that  great  and  final  day  of  God  will  issue  in  the  eternal  blessedness  and  glory  of  the
righteous,  and  in  the  endless  punishment  and  misery  of  the  wicked.  Having  thus
submitted  to  you  "  the  form,"  the  plan,  draught,  or  outline,  as  the  word  signifies,
of  what  we  consider  "  sound  words,"  we  solemnly  request  that  it  may  be  examined


CHAP.  I.]  II.  TIMOTHY.  97

by  that  only  proper  test  of  religious  truth,  the  Word  of  God.  If  it  accord  not  with
that  standard,  reject  it ;  but  if  it  do,  then  attend  to  the  admonition  in  our  text,  and
"  hold  fast  the  form  of  sound  words."  In  the  meantime,  on  this  general  admoni-
tion of  the  apostle,  we  may  venture  to  establish  the  following  exhortations.  1.
Beware  and  do  not  exchange  "  the  form  of  sound  words  "  for  the  uncertainties  and
delusions  of  infidelity.  2.  Beware  of  error  in  your  religious  doctrines.  The  mode
of  faith,  the  class  of  doctrines  we  espouse,  cannot  be  a  matter  of  indifference ;  for,
as  truth  exerts  an  influence  holy  and  happy,  so  the  tendency  of  error  is  impure  and
destructive.  3.  Finally,  beware  of  holding  '*  the  truth  in  unrighteousness."  Truth
itself  is  of  no  value  only  as  it  influences  to  an  upright,  holy,  and  benevolent
practice.  {J.  Bromley.)  The  scope  of  the  Scriptures  : — In  these  words  there  is — 1.
The  character  of  Scripture-doctrine ;  it  is  sound  words — sound  and  pure  in  itself,
and  sound  in  its  effect,  being  of  a  soul-heaUng  virtue  (Ezek.  xlvii.  9).  2.  The  sum
of  it,  faith,  showing  what  we  are  to  believe  ;  and  love,  what  we  are  to  do  (1  John  v.
3 ;  John  xiv.  15).  This  love  has  a  particular  relation  to  Christ,  all  our  obedience  being
to  be  offered  unto  God  through  Him,  as  our  faith  fixes  on  God  through  Him.  This
was  what  the  apostle  preached.  3.  Our  duty  with  respect  to  it ;  to  hold  fast  the
form  of  sound  words.  This  signifies — (1)  To  have  a  pattern  of  the  doctrine  in  our
minds,  to  which  all  that  ministers  teach  must  be  conformable.  (2)  To  hold  it  fast ;
to  cleave  to,  and  keep  hold  of  it,  without  flinching  from  it,  whatever  dangers  or
difficulties  may  attend  the  doing  so.  Both  these  senses  are  implied  in  the  words.
I.  Let  us  consider  the  nature  op  that  faith  and  obedience  which  the  Scripturb

TEACHES,    WITH    THE    CONNECTION    BETWIXT    THE    TWO.       1.    As    tO    faith.       DiviuO    faith

is  a  believing  of  what  God  has  revealed,  because  God  has  said  it,  or  revealed  it.
People  may  believe  Scripture-truths,  but  not  with  a  Divine  faith,  unless  they  believe
it  on  that  very  ground,  the  authority  of  God  speaking  in  His  Word.  And  this
Divine  faith  is  the  product  of  the  Spirit  of  God  in  the  heart  of  a  sinner,  implanting
the  habit  or  principle  of  faith  there,  and  exciting  it  to  a  hearty  reception  and  firm
belief  of  whatever  God  reveals  in  His  Word.  Hence  we  may  infer — (1)  That  there  can
be  no  right  knowledge  of  God  acquired  in  an  ordinary  way  without  the  Scriptures
(Matt.  xxii.  29).  (2)  That  where  the  Scriptures  are  not  known,  there  can  be  no  saving
faith.  (3)  That  there  is  nothing  we  are  bound  to  believe  as  a  part  of  faith  but  what
the  Scripture  teaches,  be  who  they  will  that  propose  it,  and  whatever  they  may  pretend
for  their  warrant.  2.  As  to  obedience,  it  is  that  duty  which  God  requires  of  man.  It
is  that  duty  and  obedience  which  man  owes  to  God,  to  His  will  and  laws,  in  respect
of  God's  universal  supremacy  and  sovereign  authority  over  man  ;  and  which  he
should  render  to  Him  out  of  love  and  gratitude.  (1)  That  there  can  be  no  sufficient
knowledge  of  the  duty  which  we  owe  to  God  without  the  Scriptures.  (2)  That  there
can  be  no  right  obedience  yielded  to  God  without  them.  (3)  That  there  is  no  point
of  duty  that  we  are  called  to,  but  what  the  Scripture  teaches  (Isa.  viii.  20).  As  to
the  connection  of  these  two,  faith  and  obedience  are  joined  together,  because  there
is  no  true  faith  but  what  is  foUowed  with  obedience,  and  no  true  obedience  but
what  flows  from  faith.  Faith  is  the  loadstone  of  obedience,  and  obedience  the
touchstone  of  faith,  as  appears  from  James  ii.  II.  I  proceed  now  to  consider  the
MANNER  OF  THE  Scriptdre's  TEACHING.  1.  The  Scripturc  tcaclies  some  things  ex-
pressly in  so  many  words  ;  as,  "  Except  a  man  be  born  again,  he  cannot  enter  into
the  kingdom  of  God,"  &c.  2.  The  Scriptures  teach  but  externally.  It  is  the  Spirit
that  teaches  internally.  III.  I  come  now  to  consider  the  sense  of  the  Scripture.
The  sense  of  the  Scripture  is  but  one,  and  not  manifold.  (T.  Boston,  D.D.)  The
credenda  of  Christianity : — I.  Let  us  consider  the  object  of  tenacious  preser-
vation :  "  the  form  of  sound  words  which  thou  hast  heard  of  me."  What  is  this
form  of  sound  words?  1.  I  should  answer  explicitly,  and  without  hesitation,  in
the  first  place,  the  whole  of  God's  inspired  truth,  contained  in  the  writing  of  the
Old  and  the  New  Testament.  In  the  Scriptures  are  contained  all  things  necessary  to
be  known  and  practised  ;  and,  therefore,  this  Book  must  be  held  with  a  firm  and  a
tenacious  grasp.  2.  By  "  the  form  of  sound  words,"  in  the  next  place,  it  is  not  at
all  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  the  apostle  might  intend  a  certain  formulary,  or
system  of  Divine  truth,  which  he  might  have  given  to  Timothy,  his  "  son  in  the
faith,"  and  a  younger  teacher  in  the  Church.  I  say  some  formulary,  or  system  of
Divine  truth,  in  which  the  great  principles  of  the  gospel  might  be  condensed  and
epitomised.  We  have  warrant  in  Scripture  for  such  formularies,  both  in  the  Old
Testament  and  in  the  New  ;  and  though,  indeed,  as  composed  by  mere  human
minds,  they  are  not  the  object  of  a  Divine  faith,  any  farther  than  they  are  found
in  strict  coincidence  with  the  Holy  Scriptures ;  yet  they  are,  nevertheless,  profitable

7


98  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i.

and  desirable.  1.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  of  great  advantage  to  have  a  concise,  har-
monious, connected  view  of  the  truth  as  it  stands  revealed  in  Holy  Scripture.  2.  In
the  next  place,  order  is  known  to  be  a  powerful  assistant  of  the  memory.  3.  In  the
third  place,  it  is  well  to  have  a  summary  of  Christian  truth,  in  order  that  our
testimony  among  our  fellow  creatures  may  be  clearly  understood  and  explicitly
declared.  4.  And  finally,  that  those  who  are  enemies  either  to  the  truth  or  the
practice  of  Christianity,  may  have  that  which  can  be  lifted  up  as  a  standard  against
them,  so  that  they  cannot  mutilate,  corrupt,  or  destroy,  "the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus."
It  cannot  be  doubted  but  that  these  systems  and  formularies  of  Divine  truth,  rightly
exhibited,  and  sustained  by  Holy  Scripture,  have  proved  in  every  age  a  mighty
bulwark  to  the  faith  of  the  Christian  Church.  II.  The  dtity  which  the  Christian
OWES  TO  THE  OBJECT  WHICH  WE  HAVE  CONSIDERED :  to  hold  it  fast  With  a  firm  and
with  a  determinate  grasp.  And  this  implies  the  following  things — 1.  An  accurate
acquaintance  with  the  truth  which  they  embody  and  exhibit.  The  understanding
must  be  employed  in  ascertaining  the  sense  and  meaning  of  Holy  Scripture,  in
comparing  evidence,  in  deducing  just  conclusions  from  authentic  premises,  in
tracing  the  harmony,  the  connection,  and  the  bearing  of  one  truth  upon  another,
so  that  the  various  links  of  the  chain  may  be  held  in  their  unbroken  connection.
2.  There  must  be  a  full  persuasion  of  the  truth.  3.  Finally,  there  should  be  a
conscientious  determination  to  preserve  the  truth  of  the  gospel  at  all  hazards,  and
whatever  consequences  may  possibly  ensue  with  respect  to  ourselves,  or  our  worldly
interests.  III.  The  manner  and  the  spirit  in  which  the  tenacity  of  the  truth
18  to  be  attempted.  It  is  added,  "in  faith  and  love,  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus."
For  there  is  always  some  danger  lest  human  passion  and  infirmity  should  mix
themselves  even  with  our  conscientious  regard  to  the  truth  of  God.  We  have  to
guard  against  the  wrath  of  the  angry  polemic;  tVie  bitterness  of  the  prejudiced  bigot;
visionary  and  fanatic  wildness  of  the  enthusiast.  1.  First,  we  are  to  hold  fast  the
truth  in  faith,  because  faith  is  the  only  ground  upon  which  we  receive  and  retain
the  truth.  We  do  not  receive  it  by  tradition  from  our  fellow-men ;  we  do  not  receive
it  upon  the  authority  or  credit  of  any  merely  liuman  teacher,  however  much  that
teacher  may  be  valued  by  us  ;  but  we  receive  it  on  the  ground  of  God's  authority.
He  has  revealed  it.  We  find  it  in  His  Book ;  a  book  of  which  the  evidences
fully  substantiate  the  Divine  original.  Then  we  have  a  witness  which  is  more
valuable,  in  point  of  fact,  than  ten  thousand  theories,  or  ten  thousand  merely
speculative  arguments.  This  is  the  inward  evidence  which  every  real  Ghiistian
derives  from  his  own  state  of  mind,  his  feeling,  his  character,  his  conduct ;  and  by
which  he  is  able  to  demonstrate  the  truth  of  the  blessed  gospel.  Then  we  are  to
maintain  the  truth  in  love — "  love  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus."  I  must  show  this
determined  and  this  courageous  attachment  to  the  truth,  first,  for  the  love  of  Jesus
Christ,  who  came  into  the  world  both  to  reveal  and  to  confirm  it.  I  must  maintain
it  from  love  to  my  own  soul.  Love  to  the  souls  of  others  should  impel  me  to  this
courageous  maintenance  of  the  truth  of  the  gospel.  Could  we  conceive  of  a  readier
method  of  destroying  the  entire  population  of  a  city  than  by  poisoning  the  aque-
duct, or  the  fountain,  from  which  they  were  supplied  with  their  daily  drink?  What
should  we  think  of  the  guilt  of  that  man  who  would  knowingly  drop  poison  into  a
living  spring,  that  all  who  went  to  quench  their  thirst,  instead  of  meeting  with  re-
freshment and  health,  should  meet  with  their  bane  and  their  destruction  ?  And  I
never  can  suppose  that  man  to  be  under  the  influence  of  a  candid,  generous,  and
benevolent  spirit,  who  sacrifices  the  truth,  and  fails  to  maintain  that  which  is  of
infinite  importance  to  God's  lionour,  to  the  salvation  of  the  soul,  and  to  the  existence
of  Christ's  kingdom  amongst  men,  based,  as  they  are,  upon  the  everlasting  and
immutable  truth  of  the  gospel.  (G.  Clayton,  M.A.)  The  form  of  sound  vords : —
I  do  not  suppose  that  by  this  it  is  intended  that  Paul  ever  wrote  out  fur  Timothy
a  list  of  doctrines ;  or  that  be  gave  him  a  small  abstract  of  Divinity,  to  which  he
desired  him  to  subscribe  his  name,  as  the  articles  of  the  Church  over  which  he
was  made  a  pastor.  If  so,  doubtless  that  document  would  have  been  preserved  and
enrolled  in  the  canons  of  Scripture  as  one  of  the  writings  of  an  inspired  man.  I
can  scarce  think  such  a  creed  would  have  been  lost,  whilst  other  creeds  have  been
preserved  and  handed  down  to  us.  I  conceive  that  what  the  apostle  meant  was
this : — "  Timothy,  when  I  have  preached  to  you,  you  have  heard  certain  grand
outlines  of  truth  ;  you  have  heard  from  me  the  great  system  of  faith  in  Jesus
Christ;  in  my  writings  and  public  speakings  you  have  heard  me  continually  insist
upon  a  certain  pattern  or  form  of  faith  ;  now,  I  bid  you,  my  dearly  beloved  son  in
the  gospel,  Hold  fast  the  form  of  sound  words,  which  thou  hast  heard  of  me,  in


-eHAP.l.]  U.  TIMOTHY.  99

faith  and  love  which  is  in  Christ  Jeans."  I.  "What  is  a  *' fobm  of  sotjnd  words  " ?
Ten  thousand  persons  will  quarrel  upon  this.  One  wiU  say,  "  my  creed  is  a  form
of  soimd  words  "  ;  another  will  declare  that  his  creed  also  is  sound,  if  not  infallible.
1.  We  will  not,  therefore,  enter  into  all  the  minutiae  which  distinguish  creeds
from  each  other,  but  just  simply  say,  that  no  system  can  be  a  form  of  sound  words
tmless  it  is  perfectly  Scriptural.  2.  But  since  it  is  said  that  texts  may  be  found  to
prove  almost  everything,  we  must  remark  that  a  form  of  sound  words  must  be  one
ihat  exalts  God  and  puts  down  man,  3.  We  think,  also,  that  we  may  judge  of  the
soundness  of  doctrine  by  its  tendency.  We  can  never  think  a  doctrine  sound,  when
we  see  plainly  upon  its  very  surface  that  it  has  a  tendency  to  create  sin  in  men.
4.  We  shaU,  perhaps,  be  asked,  what  we  do  regard  as  a  form  of  sound  words,  and
what  those  doctrines  are  which  are  Scriptural,  which  at  the  same  time  are  healthful
to  the  spirit  and  exalting  to  God.  We  answer,  we  believe  that  a  form  of  sound
words  must  embrace,  first  of  all,  the  doctrine  of  God's  being  and  nature,  we  must
have  the  trinity  in  unity,  and  the  unity  in  trinity.  5.  Now,  we  hold,  that  a  form
of  sound  words  must  look  npon  man  aright  as  well  as  upon  God  aright ;  it  must
teach  that  man  is  utterly  fallen,  that  he  is  sinful,  and  for  his  sin  condemned  and  in
himself  altogether  hopeless  of  salvation.  6.  And  next,  we  think  that  a  doctrine
■that  is  sound  must  have  right  views  of  salvation,  as  being  of  the  Lord  alone.  II.
Now  let  me  show  you  the  necessity  of  holding  fast  this  form  of  sound  words,

AND    KEEPING    IT    FOR   ■SOUR  OWN    SAKE,    FOR    THE    ChURCH'S    SAKE,    FOR    THE    WORLd's

SAKE.  1.  First,  for  your  own  sake,  hold  it  fast,  for  thereby  you  will  receive  ten
thousand  blessings  ;  you  will  receive  the  blessing  of  peace  in  your  conscience.  2.
"  Hold  fast  the  form  of  sound  words,"  because  it  wiU  tend  very  much  to
jour  growth.  He  who  holds  fast  the  truth  will  grow  faster  than  he  who
is  continually  shifting  from  doctrine  to  doctrine.  3.  I  would  beseech  you  to
hold  it  fast  for  your  own  sakes,  from  a  remembrance  of  the  great  evils
which  will  follow  the  contrary  course.  If  you  do  not  "  hold  fast  the  form  of
sound  words,"  listen  to  me  while  I  tell  you  what  you  will  do.  In  the  first  place,
every  deviation  from  truth  is  a  sin.  It  is  not  simply  a  sin  for  me  to  do  a  wrong
act,  but  it  is  a  sin  for  me  to  believe  a  wrong  doctrine.  If  it  be  a  sin  of  ignorance,
it  is  nevertheless  a  sin ;  but  it  is  not  so  heinous  as  a  sin  ot  negligence,  which  I
fear  it  is  with  many.  4.  "  Hold  fast  the  form  of  sound  words,"  because  error  in
doctrine  almost  inevitably  leads  to  error  in  practice.  When  a  man  believes  wrongly,
he  will  soon  act  wrongly.  5.  And  now,  for  the  good  of  the  Church  itself,  I  want
you  all  to  "  hold  fast  the  form  of  sound  words."  Would  you  wish  to  see  the  Church
prosperous?  Would  you  wish  to  see  it  peaceful?  Then  "hold  fast  the  form  of
sound  words."  What  is  the  cause  of  divisions,  schisms,  quarrels,  and  bickerings
amongst  us  ?  It  is  not  the  fault  of  the  truth  ;  it  is  the  fault  of  the  errors.  There
would  have  been  peace  in  the  Church,  entire  and  perpetual  peace,  if  there  had  been
purity — entire  and  perpetual  purity— in  the  Church,  Going  down  to  Sheerness  on
Friday,  I  was  told  by  some  one  on  board  that  during  the  late  gale  several  of  the
ships  there  had  their  anchors  rent  up,  and  had  gone  dashing  against  the  other
ships,  and  had  done  considerable  damage.  Now,  if  their  anchors  had  held  fast  and
firm,  no  damage  would  have  been  done.  Ask  me  the  cause  of  the  damage  which
has  been  done  to  our  Churches  by  the  different  denominations,  and  I  tell  you,  it  is
because  all  their  anchors  did  not  hold  fast.  6.  Keep  to  your  faith,  I  say  again,  for
the  Church's  sake,  for  so  you  will  promote  strength  in  the  Church.  I  saw  lying
between  Chatham  and  Sheerness  a  number  of  ships  th^it  I  supposed  to  be  old
hulks  ;  and  I  thought  how  stupid  Government  was  to  let  them  remain  there,  and
not  chop  them  up  for  firewood,  or  something  else  ;  but  some  one  said  to  me,  those
ships  can  soon  be  fitted  for  service  ;  they  look  old  now,  but  they  only  want  a  little
paint,  and  when  the  Admiralty  requires  them,  they  will  be  commissioned  and  made
fit  for  use.  So  we  have  heard  some  people  say,  "  There  are  those  old  doctrines  —
what  good  are  they  ?  "  Wait ;  there  is  not  a  doctrine  in  God's  Bible  that  has  not  its
use.  Those  ships  that  you  may  think  are  not  wanted,  will  be  useful  by-and-bye.
So  it  is  with  the  doctrines  of  the  Bible.  Do  not  say,  "  Break  up  those  old  doctrines,
you  can  do  without  them."  Nay,  we  want  them,  and  we  must  have  them.  7.
"  Well,"  says  one,  "  I  think  we  ought  to  hold  the  truth  firmly  ;  but  I  do  not  see
the  necessity  for  holding  the  form  of  it ;  I  think  we  might  cut  and  trim  a  little,  and
then  our  doctrines  would  be  received  better."  8.  Again,  I  say,  "  hold  fast  the  form
of  sound  words,"  for  the  world's  sake.  Pardon  me  when  I  say  that,  speaking  after
the  manner  of  men,  I  believe  that  the  progress  of  the  gospel  has  been  awfully  im-
peded by  the  errors  of  its  preachers.     I  never  wonder  when  I  see  a  Jew  an  un-


100  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i.

believer  in  Christianity,  for  this  reason,  that  the  Jews  very  seldom  see  Christianity
in  its  beauty.  For  hundreds  of  years  what  has  the  Jew  thought  Christianity  to  be  ?
Why,  pure  idolatry.  He  has  seen  the  Catholic  bow  down  to  blocks  of  wood  and
stone ;  he  has  seen  him  prostrating  himself  before  the  Virgin  Mary  and  all  saints ;
and  the  Jew  has  said,  "  Ah  I  this  is  my  watchword — Hear,  0  Israel,  the  Lord  thy
God  is  one  Lord  ;  I  could  not  be  a  Christian,  for  to  worship  one  God  is  the  essential
part  of  my  religion."  So  the  heathen,  I  believe,  have  seen  a  false  system  of
Christianity,  and  they  have  said,  "What!  is  that  your  Christianity?"  and  they
did  not  receive  it.  HI.  And  now,  let  me  warn  vou  of  two  dangers.  One
is,  that  you  will  be  very  much  tempted  to  give  up  the  form  of  sound  words
that  you  hold,  on  account  of  the  opposition  you  will  meet  with.  But  the
greatest  obstacle  you  will  have  is  a  sort  of  slight  and  cunning,  trying  to
pervert  you  to  the  belief  that  your  doctrine  is  the  same  with  one  which  is
just  the  very  opposite.  IV.  I  am  to  tell  you  of  the  great  holdfasts,  whereby
YOU  are  to  hold  fast  the  truth  of  the  gospel.  1.  If  I  might  be  allowed  to
mention  one  or  two  before  coming  to  those  in  the  text,  I  should  say,  in  the  first
place,  if  you  want  to  hold  fast  the  truth,  seek  to  get  an  understanding  of  it.  A
man  cannot  hold  a  thing  fast  unless  he  has  a  good  understanding  of  it.  I  never
want  you  to  have  the  faith  of  the  collier  who  was  asked  what  he  believed  ;  he  said
he  believed  what  the  Church  believed.  "  Well,  but  what  does  the  Church  believe  ?  "
He  said  the  Church  believed  what  he  believed,  and  he  believed  what  the  Church
believed ;  and  so  it  went  all  the  way  round.  Let  me  exhort  you,  parents,  as  much
as  lieth  in  you,  to  give  your  children  sound  instruction  in  the  great  doctrines  of  the
gospel  of  Christ.  I  believe  that  what  Irving  once  said  is  a  great  truth.  He  said,
"  In  these  modern  times  you  boast  and  glory,  and  you  think  yourselves  to  be  in  a
high  and  noble  condition,  because  you  have  your  Sabbath-schools  and  your  British-
schools,  and  all  kinds  of  schools  for  teaching  youth.  I  tell  you,"  he  said,  "  that
philanthropic  and  great  as  these  are,  they  are  the  ensigns  of  your  disgrace ;  they
show  that  your  land  is  not  a  land  where  parents  teach  thpir  children  at  home.
They  show  you  there  is  a  want  of  parental  instruction  ;  and  though  they  be  blessed
things,  these  Sabbath-schools,  they  are  indications  of  something  wrong,  for  if  we
all  taught  our  children  there  would  be  no  need  of  straDgers  to  say  to  our  children,
'  Know  the  Lord.' "  I  trust  you  will  never  give  up  that  excellent  puritanical  habit
of  catechising  your  children  at  home.  Any  father  or  mother  who  entirely  gives  up
a  child  to  the  teaching  of  another  has  made  a  mistake.  2.  But  then.  Christian
men,  above  aU  things,  if  you  hold  fast  the  truth,  pray  yourselves  right  into  it.  An
old  divine  says,  "  I  have  lost  many  things  I  learned  in  the  house  of  God,  but  I
never  lost  anything  I  ever  learned  in  the  closet."  That  which  a  man  learns  on  his
knees,  with  his  Bible  open,  he  will  never  forget.  3.  But  the  two  great  holdfasts
are  here  given — faith  and  love.  If  ye  would  hold  the  truth  fast,  put  your  faith  in
Jesus  Christ,  and  have  an  ardent  love  towards  Him.  Believe  the  truth.  Do  not
pretend  to  believe  it,  but  believe  it  thoroughly.  And  then  the  second  holdfast  is
love.  Love  Christ,  and  love  Christ's  truth  because  it  is  Christ's  truth,  for  Christ's
sake,  and  if  you  love  the  truth  you  will  not  let  it  go.  It  is  very  hard  to  turn  a  man
away  from  the  truth  he  loves.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  Service  of  the  Church  of
Enqland. — I.  Of  the  system  of  Divine  truth  which  Timothy  was,  and,  conse-
quently, all  faithful  ministers  of  the  gospel  are,  to  "  hold  fast,"  we  remark,  in  the
first  place,  that  it  is  called  a  form.  The  great  truths  of  revelation  are  scattered
over  the  whole  of  the  oracles  of  God ;  and  in  order  to  present  those  truths  in  a
comprehensive  manner  to  the  bulk  of  mankind,  who  have  neither  time  nor  incli-
nation to  seek  them  out  themselves,  the  Church  has,  in  all  ages,  retained  a  sum-
mary of  Christian  doctrine  like  that  which  we  call  the  Apostles'  Creed.  The
apostles  themselves  knew  well,  that  if  they  had  left  the  doctrines  of  Christianity
unguarded,  or  had  depen(ied  on  oral  traditions  to  convey  those  doctrines  uncorrupted
to  future  generations,  the  Word  of  God  would  have  been  lost  in  an  ungodly  world,
as  was  well-nigh  the  case  with  the  Jews,  who  had  made  the  Word  of  God  void  by
their  traditions.  As  it  is,  the  truths  of  the  gospel  have  had  (if  we  may  so  speak)
a  narrow  escape  from  the  polluting  hands  of  men.  If  our  Reformers  had  not  rescued
the  "form  of  sound  words  "  from  the  errors  of  ten  preceding  centuries,  we  should
not  now  be  exhorting  you,  with  St.  Paul,  to  "hold  fast  the  form  of  sound  words
which  you  have  heard  of  us  in  faith  and  love."  But  whilst  we  see  in  the  writings
of  St.  Paul  an  authority  for  forms,  we  are  far  from  attaching  any  imi'ortance  to  a
form  as  such.  To  recommend  itself  to  the  heart  and  conscience  of  a  believer,  it
must  not  be  a  mere  form  of  words,  but  it  must  be  a  "  form  of  sound  words  "—


OHAP.  I.]  II.  TIMOTHY.  101

"  sound  speech  that  cannot  be  condemned. "  In  different  places,  and  at  different
times,  forms  have  been  obtruded  on  the  Church,  framed  according  to  man's  device,
and  some  peculiar  interpretations  of  God's  truth.  But  for  a  form  to  be  worthy  of
being  called  "  sound,"  it  must  be  of  sound  words.  We  set  up  no  standard  of  truth
but  the  pure  Word  of  God ;  but  we  do  think  that  a  form  of  doctrine  taken  from
that  Word  is  the  readiest  mode  of  preserving  the  faith  ;  and  the  best  and  most
precious  legacy  we  can  leave  to  our  children  is  that  sound  form  of  words,  in  which
we  have  been  instructed — that  soand  form  of  worship,  which,  after  all,  is  the  glory
of  our  land,  and  a  powerful  means  of  upholding  Christianity  amongst  us.     II.  On

WHAT  PKINCIPLE,  AND  IN  WHAT  SPIRIT  OUE  ADHEEENCE  TO  ODR  FORMS  IS  TO  BE  MAIN-
TAINED. Timothy  was  to  "hold  fast  the  form  of  sound  words"  heard  of  Paul,  on
the  principle  of  faith,  and  in  the  spirit  of  love,  "  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus."  The
strongest  objection  we  have  ever  heard  against  forms,  even  admitting  them  to  be
of  "  sound  words,"  is,  that  they  are  liable  to  impart  a  false  security  to  the  worship-
per, and  to  become  lifeless  to  the  greater  number  of  those  who  profess  adherence  to
them.  We  cannot  deny  but  that  there  is  a  danger  here  :  we  must  admit,  that  the
very  best  system  which  could  ever  be  devised  for  maintaining  God's  truth  will  be
sure  to  have  something  in  it  to  object  to.  But  this  is  not  owing  to  the  form  :  we
are  always  too  ready  to  find  the  blame  that  belongs  to  us  in  anything  but  our  own
hearts.  A  man  who  holds  fast  a  form,  merely  because  it  is  respectable,  and  that
other  persons  may  be  assured  of  his  orthodoxy,  does  not  hold  fast  the  form  on  a
right  principle.  He  should  hold  it  in  faith.  It  should  be  something  that  has  hfe,
and  not  a  mere  body  without  a  form.  Unless  we  get  to  that  which  is  within  the
ark,  it  matters  but  little  to  look  at  the  bending  cherubim.  Unless  our  faith  is
exercised  upon  the  object  of  all  our  hope,  namely,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  our  forms
will  but  serve  to  condemn  us.  But,  lastly,  we  speak  of  the  spirit  in  which  we  should
adhere  to  our  forms.  They  are  not  to  be  beld  fast  in  the  spirit  of  bigotry  and  ex-
clusion. This  is  not  the  spirit  in  which  St.  Paul  taught  Timothy  to  "  hold  fast  the
form  of  sound  words  "  :  he  was  to  maintain  his  principles  and  his  system  of  doctrine
"  in  love  " ;  in  love  no  doubt  to  his  Saviour  who  had  loved  him  to  the  death,  but  of
charity  towards  all  those  who  might  differ  from  him  on  certain  points.  {R.  Burgess,
B.D.)  The  Prayer-book  a  ready  help  in  drawing  near  to  God : — The  Book  of  Common
Prayer,  which  has  guided  the  devotions  of  .so  many  millions,  in  all  lands,  to-day,
and  which  has  been  the  comfort  of  a  great  multitude  which  no  man  can  number,
in  ages  past,  has  been  well  described  as  "  The  Sanctuary  of  our  Faith  and  our
Language."  Its  words  are  familiar  in  every  ear,  and  its  ancient  forms  hallow  our
daily  life.  The  Prayer-book  speaks  to  us  most  tenderly  of  birth,  baptism,  marriage,
and  death.  Forms  of  prayer  and  praise  were  used  in  the  Jewish  Church,  by  God's
own  appointment,  and  liturgies  have  given  shape  and  permanence  to  the  worship
of  the  Christian  Church  since  apostolic  times.  Our  own  Prayer-book  is  especially
rich  in  its  ancient  treasures,  from  the  fact  that  it  embraces  the  choicest  selections
from  those  heirlooms  of  the  past.  It  was  not  the  work  of  a  day,  nor  of  a  genera-
tion, but  the  legacy  of  saints  and  martyrs  and  confessors ;  and  the  words  now
uttered  by  God's  children  in  this  distant  age  were  once  spoken  by  those  who  faced
the  rack  and  the  devouring  flames,  and  whose  only  abiding-places  were  the  dens
and  caves  of  the  earth.  The  Communion  Service,  by  itself,  is  a  compact  and  com-
plete summary  of  the  Christian's  belief,  and  a  powerful  and  persuasive  sermon
enforcing  holiness  of  life.  In  our  every-day,  struggling,  checkered  existence,  the
Prayer-book  bears  an  important  part.  When  Archbishop  Cranmer  had  resumed
his  manly  courage,  and  was  ready  to  seal  with  his  blood  his  faithfulness  to  the
truth  of  God,  he  reverently  began  his  dying  testimony  by  reciting  the  Apostles'
Creed.  John  Eogers,  as  he  was  led  in  handcuffs  through  weeping  crowds,  to  be
burned  at  the  stake,  chanted,  with  loud  and  unfaltering  voice,  the  thrilling  words
of  the  Miserere.  The  gentle  and  gifted  Lady  Jane  Gray  nerved  herself  to  lay  her
head  upon  the  fatal  block  by  reciting  the  same  sweet  words,  exchanging,  in
a  moment,  the  earthly  crown,  with  its  tborns  and  trials,  for  an  immortal  diadem  of
glory.  St.  Augustine  and  St.  Ambrose  rise  up  before  us  when  the  grand  Te  Deum
recalls  the  memorable  baptism  at  Milan.  Kecent  as  are  the  historical  records  of
the  Church  in  this  Western  world,  they  are  by  no  means  lacking  in  interest  and
significance.  On  the  sultry  August  day  in  1583,  when  Sir  Humphrey  Gilbert
landed  on  the  craggy  shores  of  Newfoundland,  to  take  possession  of  the  continent
for  England's  queen,  the  Cross  of  Christ  was  set  up,  and  the  solemn  offices  of  the
Prayer-book  were  duly  celebrated.  Well  may  we  rejoice  that  this  Book  of
Common  Prayer,  so  powerful  for  good,  has  been  preserved,  by  God's  kind  provi-


102  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  «.

dence,  as  the  heritage  of  His  people  I  The  morning  sun,  as  he  rises  snccessively
on  the  nations  of  the  earth,  is  ever  followed  by  these  prayers  and  praises  of
martyred  saints,  and  he  sinks,  at  close  of  day,  behind  no  mountain  nor  plain  nor
ocean  wave  where  these  holy  oflBces  are  not  heard.  After  even  so  brief  a  summary
of  what  might  be  said  concerning  this,  the  only  meet  companion  volume  for  the
Holy  Bible,  does  not  every  one  among  us  feel  disposed  to  yield  cheerful  obedience
to  the  apostle's  direction  concerning  the  preservation  of  the  casket  of  sacred  truth,
"  Hold  fast  the  form  of  sound  words  "  ?  The  dying  Hammond,  amidst  the  most
excruciating  pains,  stopped  his  friends,  who  were  praying  for  him  in  irregular  and
unpremeditated  words,  saying,  "Let  us  call  on  God  in  the  voice  of  His  Church  !  "
When  the  saintly  George  Herbert  was  asked  what  prayers  should  be  offered  in  his
death-chamber,  he  answered,  with  waimth,  "  The  prayers  of  my  mother,  the
Church  of  England ;  there  are  no  prayers  like  them  1 "  Hannah  Moore  records
her  testimony  that  "never,  in  the  most  rapturous  moments  of  the  saintliest
minds,  have  they  failed  to  find  in  the  Prayer-book  their  most  soaring  and  sustaining
wings."  The  most  devoted  Churchman  is  not  disposed  to  place  the  Prayer-book
above  the  Bible,  but,  like  the  moon  in  the  heavens,  it  is  only  a  satellite  of  the
Church,  borrowing  all  its  light  from  Christ,  the  Sun  of  Eighteousness.  (J.  N.
Norton.)  The  Thirty-Nine  Articles  of  the  Church  of  England  : — The  words  which
I  have  chosen  for  the  text  intimate  to  us  the  great  importance  of  the  words  by
which  our  religious  ideas  are  expressed.  The  Scriptures,  indeed,  as  indited  by  the
Spirit  of  God,  contain  words,  of  all  others,  the  soundest  and  the  best,  by  which  to
express  such  truths  as  are  necessary  for  mankind  to  believe  or  know.  The  great
God  being  the  author,  He  has,  without  doubt,  expressed  everything  there,  in
a  manner  of  all  others  the  most  fit  and  proper.  Nothing  else  would  be  consistent
with  infinite  wisdom  and  goodness,  and  whatever  words  we  employ,  are  either  true
or  false,  sound  or  corrupt,  as  they  agree  or  disagree  with  the  words  of  the  Scrip-
tures. But  still  there  never  has  been  any  error,  or  heresy,  or  schism  in  the  Church,
but  its  authors  have  pretended  to  ground  it  on  the  Scriptures.  In  this  all  heretics,
Greek  and  Latin,  old  and  new,  agree.  They  all  plead  Scripture  for  what  they  say,
and  each  one  pretends  that  his  opinion,  be  it  never  so  absurd  and  ridiculous,  is  in
accordance  with  the  words  there  used.  This  at  first  may  seem  strange,  but  on
further  reflection  it  is  not  to  be  so  much  wondered  at ;  it  arises  partly  from  the
Scriptures  being  written  in  different  languages  to  those  with  which  most  men  are
familiar;  so  that,  if  in  the  translation  (admirable  as  that  translation  on  the  whole
is)  there  be  any  word  that  seems  to  favour  an  erroneous  opinion  to  which  men
may  be  inclmed,  it  is  too  readily  concluded  that  the  Scriptures  favour  it.  This
arises  partly  again  from  the  circumstance,  that  though  others  are  acquainted  with
the  original  languages  in  which  the  Scriptures  are  written,  they  .^et  are  not  so  fully
acquainted  with  them  as  to  clearly  understand  the  full  meaning  of  every  expression.
Then  again,  the  rites  and  customs  of  countries  far  distant,  and  ages  far  remote,
were  so  different  to  our  own,  that  they  occasion  difficulties  and  obscurities.  A  large
part  of  the  Bible  is  also  written  in  the  highest  poetical  language,  and  abounds  with
metaphors  and  figures.  All  classes  of  individuals  have  therefore  been  agreed  on
the  desirableness  of  some  form  of  sound  words,  based  on  the  Scriptures.  Every
one  of  the  foreign  churches,  I  believe,  possesses  such  a  form  of  its  own  ;  and  those
who  in  our  own  country  left  our  own  Church,  also  had  such  a  form  drawn  up  for
themselves  by  the  assembly  of  divines  at  Westminster,  and  still  employ  it  as  their
catechism.  There  is,  therefore,  no  difference  of  opinion  as  to  the  propriety  of  this
— the  necessiiics  of  the  Church  have  established  the  approval  of  it.  There  are
three  especial  excellencies  in  the  articles,  which  deserve  to  be  noticed,  and  which,
perhaps,  render  them  pre-eminent  among  all  formularies  of  faith  which  have  yet
been  drawn  up.  They  are  most  eminently  evangelical,  moderate,  and  protestant.
Evangelical  in  doctrine,  moderate  in  discipline,  and  protestant  in  ceremonials.
(J.  Garwood,  M.A.)  The  morning  exercise  methodised: — "Hold  fast" — Greek,
E^e.  The  word  hath  a  double  signification,  namely,  "  to  have,"  and  "  to  hold,"
and  both  of  these  the  apostle  commends  to  Timothy,  namely — 1.  To  have  such
a  form  or  collection  of  gospel-doctrines,  as  a  type  or  exemplar  to  which  he  should
conform  in  his  ministry.  2.  To  hold  it,  that  is,  to  "  hold  it  fast,"  not  to  swerve
from  it  in  the  course  of  his  ministry,  but  pertinaciously  to  adhere  to  it,  not  to
suffer  it  to  be  corrupted  by  men  of  erroneous  principles,  nor  to  part  with  it  upon
any  terras  in  the  world,  but  to  stand  by  it,  and  own  it,  against  all  opposition  and
persecution  whatsoever.     Doctrine  L  Methodical  systems  of  the  main  and  special

POINTS    OF    the   ChRISTUN    EELIGION    ARE    VERY    USEFUL    AND    PROFITABLE     BOTH      FOB


eHAP.  I.]  n.  TIMOTHY.  103

MiNiSTEBS  AND  PKOFLS.  In  the  managing  of  the  doctrinal  part  of  this  observation,
I  shall  only  give  you  two  demonstrations :  1.  Scripture-pattern ;  2.  The  usefulness
of  such  modules.  Demonstration  1.  Scripture-pattern.  The  whole  Scripture  is
a  large  module  of  saving  truth.  The  Word  of  God  is  full  of  such  maps  and
modules  of  Divine  truths  necessary  to  salvation.  The  whole  gospel,  in  general,  is
nothing  but  the  great  platform  or  standard  of  saving  doctrine.     But  now,  more

Sarticularly,  we  may  observe  that,  beside  this  great  universal  map  or  synopsis  of
ivine  truth,  there  are  to  be  found  in  Scripture  more  compendious  abstracts  con-
taining certain  of  the  main  heads  and  points  of  saving  doctrine,  methodised  int<  i
lesser  bodies  and  tables,  for  the  help  of  our  faith  and  knowledge ;  and  we  find  them
accommodated,  by  the  penmen  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  to  two  special  ends  and  purposes.

1.  To  inform  the  Church  in  the  principles  of  religion.  The  Ten  Commandments,
a  brief  abstract  of  the  whole  law.  Three  modules  delivsred  by  Christ  in  His  first
sermon.  The  first  module  contains  the  beautitudes;  a  list  of  particulars  wherein
man's  true  and  chiefest  happiness  doth  consist  (Matt.  v.  3-11).  The  second
module  contains  a  list  of  duties ;  things  to  be  done  by  every  one  that  would  be
saved.  This  our  Saviour  doth  by .  asserting  and  expounding  the  moral  law
(Matt.  v.  17-48),  confuting  and  reforming  the  false  glosses  which  the  scribes  and
Pharisees  had  put  upon  the  Ten  Commandments,  thereby  "  making  the  law  of
God  of  none  effect."  (Matt.  xv.  6).  And  these  we  may  call  ih.e  facienda,  "  things
to  be  done."  The  third  module  contains  a  list  of  petitions,  which  (Matt.  vi.  9-15)
He  commends  to  His  disciples,  and  in  them  to  all  succeeding  generations  of  the
Church,  as  a  form  or  directory  of  prayer.  The  holy  apostles  tread  in  our
Saviour's  steps.  You  may  observe  in  all  their  epistles,  that  in  the  format-
part  of  them  they  generally  lay  down  a  module  of  gospel-principles,  and  in
the  latter  part  a  module  of  gospel-duties.  2.  A  second  sort  of  modules,  or  a
second  end  and  design  of  such  modules,  is  to  obviate  errors,  and  to  antidote
Christians  against  the  poison  and  infection  of  rotten,  pernicious  principles :
for  no  sooner  had  the  good  husbandman  sowed  his  field  with  good  seed,  but
the  envious  man  went  out  after  him,  and  began  to  scatter  tares  (Matt.  xiii.  25).
In  opposition  whereunto,  the  apostles  in  their  several  epistles  were  careful  to
famish  the  Churches  with  such  modules  and  platforms  of  truth  as  might  discover
and  confute  those  "damnable  heresies"  (2  Peter  ii.  1).  Demonstration  2.  The
advantages  of  such  modules.  Advantage  1.  For  the  ornament  of  the  truth.
Whether  it  be  delivered  from  the  pulpit  or  from  the  press,  in  such  systems  and
platforms  the  bearer  or  reader  may,  as  in  a  map  or  table  (sometimes  of  one  sort,
sometimes  of  another)  behold  Divine  truths  standing  one  by  another  in  their
method  and  connection,    mutually  casting  light  and  lustre  upon    each    other.

2.  Such  types  and  exemplars  of  Divine  truths  are  of  great  help  to  the
understanding.  As  the  collection  of  many  beams  and  luminaries  makes  the  greater
light,  so  it  is  in  the  judgment,  a  constellation  of  gospel-principles  shining  together
into  the  understanding,  fills  it  with  distinct  and  excellent  knowledge.  3.
Such  patterns  and  platforms,  whether  of  larger  or  of  lesser  compass,  are  a  great
help  to  memory.  In  all  arts  and  sciences,  order  and  method  is  of  singular
advantage  unto  memory.  We  do  easily  retain  things  in  our  mind,  when  we  have
once  digested  them  into  order.  4.  Such  modules  serve  to  quicken  affection.
Sympathy  and  harmony  have  a  notable  influence  upon  the  affections.  5.  It
is  a  marvellous  antidote  against  error  and  seduction.  Gospel-truths  in  their  series
and  dependence  are  a  chain  of  gold  to  tie  the  truth  and  the  soul  close  together.
6.  Growth  in  grace  is  one  blessed  fruit  of  such  systems  and  tables  of  Divine
truths.  When  foundations  are  well  laid,  the  superstructures  are  prosperously
carried  on.  Uses.  1.  In  the  first  place,  it  serves  to  justify  the  practice  of  the
Churches  of  Jesus  Christ,  which  have  their  pubUc  forms  and  tables  of  the
fundamental  articles  of  the  Christian  faith  drawn  up  by  the  joint  labour  and
travail  of  their  learned  and  godly  divines,  after  much  and  solemn  seeking  of  God
by  fasting  and  prayer;  in  the  solemn  profession  whereof  they  all  consent  and  agree.
2.  It  serves  to  show  us  the  benefit  and  advantage  of  public  catechisms.  3.  Hebce
also  I  might  commend  to  young  students  in  divinity  the  reading  of  systems  and
compendious  abstracts  and  abridgments.  4.  It  serves  to  commend  methodical
preaching.  5.  It  commends  (not  least)  constant  and  fixed  hearing.  Especially
when  people  sit  under  a  judicious  and  methodical  ministry.  "Loose  hearing  may
please,  but  the  fixed  will  profit." ;  skipping  hearing,  for  the  most  part,  makes  but
sceptical  Christians.  6.  From  hence  give  me  leave  to  commend  to  you  the  benefit  and
advantage  of  "  the  morning  exercise."    (T.  Case,  M.A.)     Keep  : — There  is  a  fourfold


104  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  U

keeping  of  this  pattern,  and  all  here  meant.     The  first,  in  memory,  not  forgetting.
Secondly,  in  faith,  not  doubting.     Thirdly,  in  affection,  not  hating.     Fourthly,  in
practice,  not  disobeying.     And  there  can  be  none  of  the  four  without  the  first.
Some  read  have ;  others,  hold  the  pattern  :  all  one  in  effect.     {J.  Barlow,  D.D.)
The  pattern: — It  is  by  some  termed  the  true  pattern,  or  perfect  pattern,  or  form.
It  seems  to  be  a  word  borrowed  from  a  painter,  who  first  draws  but  after  a  pattern,
or  from  a  cai-penter  that  works  by  rule.     (Ibid.)         Of  sound  words  : — A  thing  may
be  said  to  be  wholesome  or  sound  four  ways.    First,  when  it's  sound  in  itself.
Secondly,  when  it  works  soundness  in  another  thing  ;  or  thirdly,  preserves  it  being
•wrought ;  and  fourthly,  when  it  is  a  sign  of  soundness  (John  iii.  12).     And  all  these
be  in  the  words  of  this  pattern.    (Ibid. )       Wholesome  doctrine : — For  if  the  words  be
not  sound,  the  pattern  cannot  but  be  unsound.     When  poison  is  mixed  with  good
meats  and  wines  it  spoils  all ;  so  when  the  words  be  not  wholesome,  the  pattern  and
form  of  doctrine  is  defective.     One  rotten  post  maketh  a  weak  building.     We  must
be  transformed  into  the  doctrine ;  and  as  the  spirit  in  the  meat  we  eat  is  turned  into
ours,  so  must  the  word  we  read  or  hear  be  converted  into  us  (Eom.  vi.  17).    And  if  our
spiritual  food  be  not  wholesome,  our  souls  wiU  grow  sick  and  die.     (Ibid).         "  I
pray  you  to  fasten  your  grips  " : — This  sentence  I  met  with  in  one  of  those  marvellous
letters  which  Samuel  Rutherford  left  as  a  priceless  legacy  to  the  Church  of  God  in
all  ages.     Truly  he  hath  dust  of  gold.     I  thought  it  would  make  a  capital  text  for
a  prayer-meeting  address,  and  so  I  jotted  it  down.     It  gripped  me,  and  so  I  gripped
it,  in  the  hope  that  it  might  grip  you,  and  lead  you  "  to  fasten  your  grips."     But
do  not  imagine  that  I  have  taken  a  text  from  Rutherford  because  I  could  not  find
one  in  the  Bible,  for  there  are  many  passages  of  Scripture  which  teach  the  same
lesson.     As  for  instance,   that  exhortation,   "  Lay  hold  on  eternal  life,"  or  that
other,  "Hold  fast  that  thou  hast,"  or  that  other,  "  Hold  fast  the  form  of  sound
words."    The  things  of  God  are  not  to  be  trifled  with,  "  lest  at  any  time  we  let
them  slip."     They  are  to  be  grasped,  as  Jacob  seized  the  angel,  with  "I  will  not
let  thee  go."     Faith  is   first  the  eye  of  the  soul  wherewith  it  sees  the  invisible
things  of  God,  and  then  it  becomes  the  hand  of  the  soul,  with  which  it  gets  a  grip
of  the  substance  of  "  the  things  not  seen  as  yet."     A  man  has  two  hands,  and
I  would  urge  you  to  take  a  double  hold  upon  those  things  which  Satan  will  try  to
steal  from  you.     Take  hold  of  them  as  the  limpet  takes  hold  upon  the  rock,  or  as
the  magnet  takes  hold  of  steel.     Give  a  life  grip — a  death  grip.     "  I  pray  you  to
fasten  your  grips."     (C.  H.   Spurgeon.)         Faith  in  the  minister  : — Whatever  is
held  forth  in  the  palsied  hand  of  unbelief  is  itself  made  to  quiver.      Scepticism  ia
a  smoking  lamp,  which,  while  it  gives  no  light,  loads  the  atmosphere  with  a  thick
darkness,  if  not  with  a  stench.     (Ibid.)         Creed  and  life  : — I  have  heard  people
say  that  it  cannot  matter  much  what  a  man  believes,  so  long  as  he  lives  up  to  right
moral  principles.     They  might  as  well  remark  that  it  does  not  matter  if  the  beams
of  a  house  are  rotten,  so  long  as  the  door-plate  is  bright.     Where  will  be  the  door-
plate  when  the  house  falls  ?     A  hazy  creed  means  a  mazy  life.     A  man's  faith  is
the  mainspring  of  his  actions.     He  who  believes  nothing  will  do  nothing,  till  the
devil  finds  him  work.     I  record  as  my  own  experience  that  when  the  foundations
of  faiih  rocked  the  superstructure  of  practice  reeled.     (FAhrd.  Garrett.)        Men  of
unsettled  creed  : — "  I  shape  my  creed  every  week,"  was  the  confession  of  one  to  me.
Whereunto  shall  I  liken  such  unsettled  ones  ?     Are  they  not  like  those  birds  which
frequent  the  Golden  Horn,  and  are  to  be  seen  from  Const.aiitinople,  of  which  it  ia
to  be  said  that  they  are  always  on  the  wing,  and  never  rest  ?     No  one  ever  saw
them  alight  on  the  water  or  on  the  land  ;  they  are  for  ever  poised  in  mid-air.     The
natives  call  them   "lost  souls,"  seeking  rest  and  finding  none.     Assuredly  men
who  have  no  personal  rest  in  the  truth,  if  they  are  not  unsaved  themselves,  are,  at
least,  very  unlikely  to  save  others.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)        Faith  and  love  : — So  that
faith  is  necessary  to  keep  the  pattern  ;  for  it  purifieth  the  heart  inwardly,  and  is  the
true  ground  of  all  outward  and  acceptable  obedience.     And  for  love,  that's  needful
also.     For  love  helpeth  attention,  strengtheueth  the  memory,   setteth  the  will  at
work,  uniteth  to  God  and  man,  and  therefore  it  is  rightly  said  that  by  love  we  fulfil
the  law,  for  without  this  affection  our  best  actions  neither  please  the  Creator,  nor  be
profitable  to  the  creature.     Would  we  then  practise  the  apostle's  doctrine?  then  let
us  strive  for  faith  and  love.     These  two  support  the  estate  of  a  Christian,  as  the  two
pillars  did  the  house  of  the  Philistines,      If  these  be  removed,  the  foundation  of  our
obedience  and  salvation  fail  and  fall.      He  that  would  soar  to  heaven  wanting  either
of  these  may  as  soon  see  a  bird  mount  on  high  and  take  her  stand  who  wanteth  one
wing.     Faith,  Uke  the  hand,  takes  hold  on  Christ,  and  love,  like  the  feet,  must  carry


CHAP.  I.]  II.  TIMOTHY.  105

ns  to  Him.  Thou  wilt  say,  how  may  I  know  when  an  action  is  done  in  faith  and  love  ?
If  it  be  done  in  faith :  First,  Thou  must  be  in  the  faith,  that  is,  in  Christ,  and  Christ
in  thee  (2  Cor.  xiii.  5).  Secondly,  It  must  be  guided  by  the  rule  of  faith
{2  Pet.  i.  19).  Thirdly,  It  must  be  done  with  faith,  not  doubtingly  (Rom.  xiv.  23).
Fourthly,  It  must  be  done  to  the  object  of  our  faith,  viz.,  in  obedience  to  God
in  Christ,  and  for  His  glory  (1  Cor.  x.  31).  If  an  action  be  done  in  love :  First,
It  is  done  so  freely  that  there  is  not  the  least  expectation  of  any  future  recom-
pense (Gen.  xxiii.  15.)  Secondly,  So  secretly  that  (if  possible)  none  might  ever
come  to  the  knowledge  thereof.  Thirdly,  So  cheerfully,  as  there  is  equal  (or  rather
greater)  joy  in  the  doing,  than  receiving  of  the  like  favour.  Fourthly,  so  affec-
tionately, that  the  more  good  we  do  to  any,  the  more  we  find  our  hearts  enflamed  with
the  love  of  that  person.  Which  is  in  Christ  Jesus.  From  the  fourfold  interpreta-
tion we  may  note  so  many  doctrines.  I.  That  faith  and  love  are  given  to  man  of
God  through  Christ  Jesus.     II.  That  faith  and  love  in  Christ  should  stir  us

UP    TO     KEEP    THE    PATTERN.       III.     ThAT    THE    OBJECT    OF    FAITH    AND   LOVE    IS    ChRIST

Jesus.  IV.  That  faith  and  love  are  comprehended  in  Christ  Jesus.  And
whereas  our  apostle  hath  now  brought  in  this  phrase  five  several  times  in  this  short
chapter,  we  may  note  divers  things  worthy  our  instruction.    I.  That  we  are  hardly

BROUGHT    TO    BELIEVE     THAT    ALL    GRACE    AND    MERCY    COME    THROUGH     ChRIST    JeSUS.

Divine  truths  are  not  easily  believed.     II.  That  the  best  things  may  often,

FOR  GOOD  ends,  BE  MENTIONED.  III.  ThAT  WHEN  WE  SPEAK  OF  ANY  GRACE  OR  FAVOUR
BECEIVED,  we    SHOULD  CONSIDER   THROUGH    WHOM  IT   IS    CONVEYED    TO    US,  VIZ.,  ChRIST

Jesus.  IV.  That  the  often  repetition  of  the  same  thing  is  profitable.  V.
That  what  the  people  most  naturally  are  prone  to  doubt  of,_  that  is  princip.\lly

AND  often  to  be  PREACHED.  VI.  ThAT  A  HOLY  HEART  IS  NOT  WEARY  IN  WRITING  OB
SPEAKING  THE  SAME  THINGS  OFTEN.       (J.  BarloW,  D.D.)

Ver.  14.    That  good  thingwhich  was  committed  unto  thee. — The  sacred  trust : —

1.  The  CHARGE, — the  truth,  the  Word  of  God,  which — 1.  Unfolds  the  true  God.

2.  Proclaims  life  and  salvation  through  the  Eedeemer.  3.  Brings  life  and  immor-
tahty  to  light.  II.  The  duty.  We  should  have — 1.  A  correct  knowledge  of  the
Word.  2.  A  devoted  attachment  to  it.  3.  A  desire  to  preserve  it  in  its  integrity.
4.  A  willingness  to  communicate  it  freely  to  others.  5.  An  abiding  sense  of  its
responsibility.  III.  The  assistance.  1.  Our  necessities  are  connected  with  the
Holy  Spirit's  ability.  2.  Eejoice  in  His  readiness  to  help.  {A.  Reed,  D.D.)
Good  things : — Here  are  those  reprehended  who  never  had  any  care  to  possess  these
worthy  things.  Nothing  in  man,  or  out  of  him,  that  is  of  greater  worth,  and
nothing  less  regarded.  We  do  count  that  person  blessed  that  hath  his  house  hung
with  rich  arras,  his  chests  full  of  gold,  and  his  barns  stuffed  with  corn ;  and  yet  we
never  have  esteem  of  these  excellent  and  rare  things.  Truly,  the  least  degree  of
faith  is  more  worth  than  all  the  gold  of  Ophir  ;  a  remnant  of  true  love  than  aU  the
gay  garments  in  the  world.  Hope  of  heaven  will  more  rejoice  the  heart  of  David
than  his  sceptre  and  kingdom.  But  men  do  not  think  so,  neither  will  they  have  it
so  ;  yet  the  day  of  death,  like  an  equal  balance,  shall  declare  it  to  be  so.  Are  they
worthy  things  ?  Then  put  them  to  the  best  uses,  and  abuse  thpm  not.  And,  in
the  last  place,  seeing  these  be  worthy  things,  let  us  all  labour  to  possess  them  ;  for
of  how  much  more  value  a  thing  is,  by  so  much  the  more  we  should  strive  to  obtain
it.  (J.  Barlow,  D.D.)  Grace  once  gotten  is  to  be  preserved: — Because,  if  grace
grow  weak,  the  pattern  will  not  be  practised.  When  all  the  parts  of  the  natural
body  be  in  a  consumption,  can  we  walk  and  work  in  the  duties  of  our  particular
callings  ?  And  if  the  new  man  wax  pale,  and  pine  away,  the  paths  of  Gods  com-
mands will  not  be  run  or  trodden.  For,  as  all  natural  actions  proceed  from  the
body's  strength,  and  the  purest  spirit,  so  do  all  spiritual  from  the  vigour  of  grace
and  the  new  man.  When  men  have  got  some  competency  of  wealth,  they  lie
long  in  bed,  and  will  not  up  to  work,  and  so  their  riches  waste.  In  like  manner
it  falleth  out  with  God's  children ;  for  when  they  have  attained  to  some  competency
of  gifts,  they  are  highly  conceited,  grow  idle,  neglect  the  means,  and  so  are  over-
taken with  spiritual  poverty,  than  the  which  what  greater  loss  ?  We  must  then
learn  here,  not  only  to  get  grace,  but  to  keep  it.  We  will  mourn  if  we  lose  our
money,  grieve  if  we  be  deprived  of  our  corn,  natural  strength  and  earthly  com-
modities. And  shall  the  loss  of  grace  never  pinch  us,  pierce  us  ?  Shall  Jonah  be
so  dejected  for  his  gourd,  and  we  never  be  moved  when  grace  is  withered,  ready  to
perish  ?  Shall  the  earthworm  sigh  at  the  loss  of  goods,  and  we  never  shrink  at
the  shipwreck  of  heavenly  gifts  ?    No  greater  damage  than  this,  none  less  regarded,


106  TEE  BIBUOAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [OBii,  u

more  inseiiBible.  Let  oar  plants  begin  to  pine,  oar  hair  wax  grey  or  fall,  it  will
make  some  impression.  But  grace  may  decay,  the  spirit  faint,  and  few  be  wounded  in
heart.  Yet  to  such  a  time  shall  come  of  great  mourning.  Then  get  grace,  keep  grace  ;
BO  shall  corruption  be  expelled,  extenuated,  and  the  pattern  of  sound  words  observed,
practised.  (Ibid.)  The  Holy  Spirit  dwells  m  man : — But  He  is  infinite,  therefore
in  all  persons.  True,  yet  He  is  in  the  faithful  in  a  peculiar  and  special  manner,
both  by  His  working  and  presence.  Secondly,  He  is  incomprehensible,  not-
withstanding, as  we  may  say  the  sun  is  in  the  house,  though  a  part  of  the
beams  be  but  there ;  so  the  Spirit  is  said  to  be  in  man,  although  He  be  not
wholly  included  in  him.  We  account  it  a  fearful  thing  to  pull  down  or  batter
a  prince's  palace,  it  is  death  to  wash  or  clip  the  king's  coin,  and  shall  we  not
tremble  to  wrong  and  injure  this  building,  for  such  cannot  escape  the  damna-
tion of  hell.  This  is  for  the  comfort  of  the  faithful.  For  what  greater  honour
than  this,  to  have  the  high  God  to  dwell  in  our  hearts  ?  Should  our  sovereign
but  come  into  a  poor  man's  cottage,  he  would  rejoice,  and  good  reason,  for
that  all  his  life  long.  And  shall  the  King  of  Glory  dwell  with  the  sons  of  men,
make  His  chamber  of  presence  in  their  hearts,  and  they  want  hearts  to  solace
themselves  in  the  remembrance  of  that  ?  And  here  let  man  learn  a  lesson  and
wonder.  Is  it  the  spirit  of  God  in  Paul  and  others,  where  the  spirit  of  all  uncleanness
not  long  before  ruled  ?  Admire  His  humihty  that  would  descend  so  low  as  to  dwell
in  so  mean  a  habitation.  He  that  dwells  in  that  light  that  none  can  attain  unto,
now  dwelleth  where  was  a  palpable  darkness.  Thirdly,  where  He  takes  up  His
lodging  there  is  hoUness.  This  fire  purifieth  the  heart,  cleanseth  the  inward  man,
though  never  so  full  of  filthiness  in  former  time  (1  Cor.  vi.  11 ;  Ephes.  v.  18).
Thou  wilt  say.  Sir,  by  what  way  may  I  come  to  this  thing  ?  Why,  thou  must  get  a
new  heart,  for  He  will  never  lodge  in  the  old,  for  that's  naught.  (Ibid.)  The
indwelling  of  the  Holy  Spirit : — I.  The  author  op  life.  1.  Before  He  dwells  in  us
He  quickens  us  (Eph.  ii.  1 ;  John  iii.  5,  6 ;  vi.  63).  2.  Believers  are  temples  of
the  Holy  Ghost  (1  Cor.  iii.  16 ;  vi.  19 ;  2  Cor.  vi.  16).  3.  True  of  all  believers
(Bom.  viii.  9).  4.  Christ's  promise  respecting  it  (John  xiv.  16,  17).  II.  Tna
soDBCB  OF  UNITY.  1.  His  indwelling  makes  that  unity  a  fact  (Eph.  iv.  4 ;  1  Cor.
vi.  17 ;  xii.  18-20).  2.  That  fact  to  be  recognised  and  cherished  (Eph.  iv.  3).
3.  One  building  inhabited  by  one  Spirit  (Eph.  ii.  22.)  IH.  The  pledge  of  olobt.
1.  The  salvation  bestowed  and  the  salvation  yet  to  be  revealed.  Grace  and
glory  (2  Tim.  i,  9;  1  Pet.  i.  6;  Psa.  Ixxxiv.  2).  2.  The  indwelhng  Spirit  the
earnest  of  our  inheritance  (2  Cor.  i.  22;  v.  5;  Eph.  i.  14).  3.  Eecognise  Hia
presence.  4.  Honour  and  obey  Him  (Eph.  iv.  30).  {E.  H.  Hopkins.)  Real
Christianity  : — The  providence  of  God  requires  all  Christians  and  all  Churches  to
show  what  Christianity  really  is.  Christianity  is  a  larger  and  better  thing  than
Christendom  yet  knows.  Still  the  Holy  Spirit  dwells  in  the  apostoUc  succession  of
the  whole  true  Church  of  Christ,  showing  it  what  the  things  of  Christ  are,  and
helping  it  realise  them  in  Christianity.  How,  then,  are  we  to  understand  what  the
Christianity  is,  which  we  are  still  called  to  make  real  on  earth  ?  I.  The  Christianity
which  the  world  nebds  probably  transcends  any  single  definition  of  it  which
WE  SHALL  BE  LIKELY  TO  GIVE.  Philosophcrs  havo  tried  many  times  to  define  the
simple  word  "  life,"  and  at  best  they  have  had  only  clumsy  success  with  their  defini-
tions of  what  every  one  knows  by  his  own  healthy  pulse-beatings.  The  definition
is  not  made  easier  when  we  prefix  the  adjective  Christian  to  the  word  "  life."  If  we
labour  to  define  in  words  so  large  and  divine  a  reality  as  Christianity,  we  shall  be
sure  to  narrow  it  in  our  verbal  enclosures,  and  we  can  hardly  fail  to  leave  whole
realms  of  Christianity  out  when  we  have  finished  our  fences  of  system  and  denomi-
nation. II.  ChRISTUNITY  IS  A  LARGER  THING  THAN  ANY  ONE  PARTICULAB  A8PB0I
OB  EXEMPLIFICATION  OF  IT  WHICH  MEN   MAY  BE   TEMPTED  TO   PUT   IN   THE   PLAOB   OF  IT.

Christianity,  as  a  whole,  is  greater  than  the  parts  of  it  which  men  have  hastily
seized  upon,  and  contended  for  as  the  faith  of  the  saints,  Christianity  is  that  good
thing  which  all  the  Churches  hold  in  common,  and  it  is  greater  than  all.  The  Chris-
tianity of  Christ  is  that  good  thing  committed  unto  us,  which  is  large  enough  to
comprehend  all  the  ideals  of  Christian  prophets,  and  prayers  of  devout  hearts,  aa
well  as  the  works  of  faith  which  have  been  done  on  earth.  It  would  be  easy  to
illustrate  from  current  life  and  literature  the  natural  tendency  of  the  human  heart
to  substitute  some  favourite  part  of  Christianity  for  the  divine  whole  of  it.  And
the  unfortunate  contentions  and  hindrances  to  the  gospel  which  follow  from  this
mistake  are  all  around  us.  Thus  one  class  of  persons  are  called  to  benevolent  works
by  the  Divine  charity  of  Christ,  but  in  thuir  zeal  for  man  they  may  not  realise  sui-


OHA».  I.]  U.  TIMOTHY,  107

ficiently  that  the  charity  of  God  is  the  benevolence  of  aniversal  law,  and  the  GhriBt
is  the  Life  becanse  He  is  also  the  Truth.  Others,  on  the  contrary,  impressed  by  the
order  and  grandeur  of  the  truths  of  revelation,  repeatedly  fall  into  merely  doctrinal
definitions  of  Christianity ;  and,  even  while  defending  from  supposed  error  the  faiUi
once  delivered  to  the  saints,  they  narrow  that  faith  into  a  theological  conception
of  Christianity  which  may  have  indeed  much  of  the  truth,  but  little  of  the  Spirit  of
Christ.  III.  Chkistunitt  is  that  good  thing  which  we  bate  eecikved  fbom  Chbist.
In  other  words,  Christianity  is  not  a  spirit  merely,  or  idea,  or  influence,  which  we
still  call  by  the  name  of  Christ,  but  which  we  may  receive  and  even  enhance  with-
out further  reference  to  the  historic  Christ.  Christianity  is  more  than  a  spirit  of
the  times,  more  than  a  memory  of  a  life  for  men,  more  than  a  distillation  in
modem  literature  of  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  more  than  a  fragrance  of  the  purest
of  lives  pervading  history  and  grateful  still  to  our  refined  moral  sense.  Jesus  once
said  before  the  chief  among  the  people,  "  I  receive  not  honour  from  men  " ;  and  the
patronage  of  culture  cannot  make  for  our  wants  and  sins  a  Christ  from  the  Father.
Christianity  is  the  direct  continuation  of  the  life  and  the  work  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth
in  the  world.  Hence,  it  would  be  a  vain  expectation  to  imagine  that  the  world
can  long  retain  the  influence  of  Christ,  the  healing  aroma  of  Christianity,  and  let
the  Jesus  of  the  Gospels  fade  into  a  myth.  Christianity,  uprooted  from  its
source  in  Divine  facts  of  redemption,  would  be  but  as  a  cut  flower,  still  pervading
for  a  while  our  life  with  its  charity,  but  another  day  even  its  perfume  would
have  vanished.  The  Christianity  of  Christ  is  a  living  love.  IV.  Cheistianity
IS  A  changed  relationship  of  human  souls  to  God  thbouoh  Chbist.  Go  back
to  the  beginning  of  Christianity  to  find  out  what  it  is.  It  began  to  exist  on  earth
first  upon  the  afternoon  of  a  certain  day  when  the  last  of  the  Hebrew  prophets,
looking  upon  Jesus  as  He  walked,  said,  "Behold  the  Lamb  of  God."  And  two  of
his  disciples  heard  him  speak,  and  they  followed  Jesus.  These  men  are  now  like  new
men  in  another  world ;  in  Christ's  presence  all  Divine  things  seem  possible  to  them ;
they  are  changed  from  the  centre  and  core  of  their  being ;  they  are  verily  bom
again,  for  they  live  henceforth  lives  as  different  from  their  former  lives  before  they
came  to  Christ  as  though  they  had  actually  died  out  of  this  world,  and  come  back
to  it  again  with  the  memory  in  their  hearts  of  a  better  world.  After  a  few  years  in
Jesus'  companionship,  after  all  that  they  had  witnessed  of  His  death  and  resurrec-
tion, they  are  themselves  as  men  belonging  to  another  world,  citizens  of  a  better
country,  sojourning  for  a  brief  season  here.  "  Old  things  are  passed  away,"  says
the  last-bom  of  the  apostles ;  "  Behold,  all  things  are  become  new."  This,  then,
is  Christianity — Peter,  and  John,  and  other  men,  living  with  Christ  in  a  new  re-
lationship to  God.  It  is  a  happy,  hopeful,  all-transfiguring  relationship  of  human
Bouls  to  God.  Christ  giving  His  Spirit  to  the  disciples,  disciples  witnessing  of  the
Christ — this,  this  is  Christianity.  What,  then,  is  Christianity?  It  is,  we  say,  the
doctrine  of  Christ.  What  is  the  doctrine  of  Christ  ?  Men  sound  in  the  faith ;  men
made  whole,  men  living  according  to  Christ.  The  doctrine  of  Christ  is  not  a  word,
or  a  system  of  words.  It  is  not  a  book,  or  a  collection  of  writings.  He  wrote  Hia
doctrine  in  the  book  of  human  life.  He  made  men  His  Scriptures.  His  doctrine
was  the  teaching  of  the  living  Spirit.  The  doctrine  of  Christ — lo !  Peter,  the  tem-
pestuous man,  strong  one  moment  and  weak  another,  become  now  a  man  of  steady
hope,  confessor,  and  martyr — he  is  the  doctrine  of  Christ  I  The  son  of  thunder
become  the  apostle  of  love — he  is  the  doctrine  of  Christ !  The  persecutor  becomes
one  who  dies  daily  for  the  salvation  of  the  Gentiles — he  is  the  doctrine  of
Christ  1  V.  Cheistianity  is  thb  company  of  disciples  in  new  belationship
with  one  anotheb,  and  towabds  all  men,  through  Chbist.  The  new  redeemed
society  is  Christianity.  A  man  cannot  be  a  Christian,  at  least  not  a  whole  Chris-
tian, by  himself  alone.  To  seek  to  live  a  Christian  life  by  one's  self,  in  the  secrecy
of  one's  own  heart,  is  an  endeavour  foreign  to  the  original  genius  of  Christianity.
Christianity,  when  it  is  finished,  will  be  the  best  society  gathered  from  all  the  ages,
the  perfect  society  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  How  can  a  man  expect  to  fit  himself
for  that  blessed  society  by  neglecting  here  and  now  to  enter  into  the  fellowship  of
believers  who  seek  to  prepare  themselves  for  that  final  society  of  the  Lord  by
meeting  and  breaking  bread  together  at  His  table  ?  To  be  a  Christian,  therefore,
is  to  be  actually  a  follower  of  Christ  with  His  disciples.  And  to  make  real  and  not
merely  nominal  work  of  it  we  shall  need  often  with  deliberate  resolution  to  give
ourselves  up  to  our  own  faiths,  to  throw  ourselves  manfully  upon  their  current,
and  to  let  them  catch  us  up  and  bear  us  whither  they  wilL  (N.  Smyth,  D.D.)
A  sufficient  endowment: — "The    influence    of    Mr.    Moody  is  wonderful,"  said


lOe  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (oha».  i.

a  lady  to  her  minister;  "he  is  not  intelleotaal,  nor  eloquent,  nor  learned,
and  bis  appearance  is  not  prepossessing."  "  Ah  1 "  replied  the  minister,
"  but  he  has  the  Spirit  of  God  in  him."  Yes,"  she  responded,  "  and  that  is
all."  "All  I"  exclaimed  the  minister;  "is  not  that  everything?"  An  essential
provision  of  Christianity  .-—Is  not  this  power  of  God,  through  the  Holy  Ghost,  an
essential  provision  of  Christianity  ?  Could  the  Word  of  God  be  "  a  Uving  Word  "
without  it?  We  can  no  more  conceive  of  Christianity  as  destitute  of  this  Divine
influence  than  as  destitute  of  Christ.  We  look  upon  the  face  of  nature  and  per-
ceive that  all  its  external  forms  are  based  upon  one  common  principle  of  hfe ;  and
were  this  withdrawn  all  things  must  die.  So  in  like  manner,  looking  upon  external
Christianity — its  doctrines,  its  Sabbaths,  its  worship,  its  points  of  holiness,  joy,  and
moral  excellence,  produced  in  perfect  uniformity  in  all  ages  and  amongst  all
classes — we  perceive  that  there  must  exist  beneath  the  surface  some  uniform  power  ;
and  what  can  this  be  but  the  power  of  God  through  His  Holy  Spirit  ?  And  this
belongs  to  the  system,  is  inherent,  permanent,  certain.  By  the  impulses  of  this
power  the  "  Word  of  God  "  effects  its  glorious  triumphs  ;  and,  when  it  is  withdrawn,
Christianity  sinks  into  the  condition  of  an  empty  form.     (J.  Dixon,  D.D.)

Yer.  15.  All  they  which  are  In  Asia  be  turned  away  f^om  me. — To  revolt  and
turn  from  our  former  profession  is  a  foul  fault  and  great  offence : — For  Paul  doth
complain  against  it,  and  sets  it  down  as  a  sin  to  be  abandoned  of  all  men
{John  vi.  66 ;  1  Tim.  i.  19,  v.  11,  12).  For  in  so  doing  we  dishonour  God ;  yea,
no  way  more.  For  will  not  profane  men  judge  that  there  is  no  profit  or  comfort  in
serving  the  Almighty  when  such  forsake  their  profession?  For  thus  they  will
reason  :  if  that  religion  had  been  good,  they  and  they  would  never  have  cast  it  off.
Again,  we  weaken,  as  much  as  in  us  lies,  the  Church  of  Christ ;  for  cut  off  a  mem-
ber, \dll  not  the  body  be  the  less  powerful  ?  And  it  gives  the  devil  and  his  instru-
ments the  more  encouragement.  What?  and  may  such  cedars  shake,  totter,  and
fall  ?  Then  let  the  weak  willows  and  poplar  take  heed  of  the  wind.  For  blessed
is  he  whom  other  men's  harms  do  make  to  beware.  And  it  shall  not  be  amiss  here
to  lay  down  some  causes  of  falling  away.  And  they  be  either,  first,  inward,  or,
secondly,  outward.  The  inward  be  four  especially.  1.  Weakness.  Thus  many  have
fallen  of  infirmity.  2.  Some  affection  not  mortified.  For  one  such  a  Jonah  in  the
ship  will  unsettle  alL  3.  Infidelity.  When  men  want  faith,  they  are  unstable  in
all  their  ways.  4.  Want  of  experience  of  that  secret  comfort  which  the  Lord
enfuseth  into  the  hearts  of  such  as  stand  resolutely  for  His  truth  in  an  evil  time.
The  outward  causes  are  principally  these:  1.  Persecution.  This  hath  turned
millions  backward,  who  in  the  days  of  peace  had  their  faces  to  Sion-ward.  2.
Some  wrongs  or  injuries.  3.  Scandal,  or  offences  taken  at  some  doctrine.  "  From
that  time  many  of  His  disciples  went  back,  and  walked  no  more  with  Him  "  (John
vi.  66).  4.  The  example  of  great  men.  Doth  any  of  the  rulers  or  pharisees
believe  in  Him  ?  This  is  a  cord  that  pulleth  thousands  from  the  true  path  and
rule  (John  vii.  48).  5.  When  men  have  expected  great  promotion,  but  seeing  their
hopes  frustrate,  they  turn  aside.  This  is  a  great  loadstone  to  draw  an  iron  heart
from  the  path  to  heaven.  6.  Too  much  familiarity  with  men  unsettled  in  the
truth.  Fearfully  have  some  fallen  by  this  stumbling-block.  These  be  some  of  the
main  causes,  both  inward  and  outward,  that  have  moved  many  to  become  back-
sliders. So  that  he  that  vsrill  go  on  constantly  and  with  resolution  must  have  an
eye  to  all  these  things.  (J.  Barlow,  D.D.)  Fickle  friendship  : — What  is  sweeter
than  a  well-tuned  lute,  and  what  more  delightful  than  a  faithful  friend — one  who
can  cheer  us  in  sorrow  with  wise  and  affectionate  discourse  ?  Nothing,  however,  is
sooner  untuned  than  a  lute,  and  nothing  is  more  fickle  than  human  friendship.
The  tone  of  the  one  changes  with  the  weather,  that  of  the  other  with  fortune.
With  a  clear  sky,  a  bright  sun,  and  a  gentle  breeze,  you  will  have  friends  in  plenty;
but  let  fortune  frown  and  the  firmament  be  overcast,  and  then  your  friends  will
prove  hke  the  strings  of  the  lute,  of  which  you  will  tighten  ten  before  you  will  find
one  that  will  bear  the  tension  and  keep  the  pitch.     (Christian  Age.)        Turncoats  :

The  flounder  is  an  ill-looking,  dark-coloured,  flat  fish,  which  creeps  close  along

the  bottom,  and  frequents,  for  the  most  part,  banks  of  mud,  from  which  it  is
almost  indistinguishable.  Mr.  Agassiz  has  experimented  upon  young  flounders
and  their  power  of  changing  colour.  Placing  them  upon  blackish  tUes,  they  quickly
turned  mud-colour;  moved  thence  to  the  ''  sand "  tiles,  only  a  few  minutes  elapsed
before  their  leaden  skins  had  paled  to  dull,  yellowish  white ;  transferred  to  the
mimic  "  sea-weeds,"  in  less  than  five  minutes  a  greenish  hue  overspread  their


au».  I.]  n.  TIMOTHY,  109

slcms,  whicli  would  have  served  well  in  their  native  element  to  keep  them  unobserved
against  a  mass  of  algse.     (H.  0.  Maekey.^  Neeetsity  of  constancy: — "Without

constancy  there  is  neither  love,  friendship,  nor  virtue  in  the  world.  {Addison.)
<h-eat  wicked  men  fall  by  cmiples  (1  Tim.  i.  20 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  17) : — For  the  devil  in
all  things  seeks  to  imitate  the  Lord.  If  God  have  a  Mosea  and  an  Aaron,  he  will
have  a  Jannes  and  a  Jambres.  If  Christ  send  out  His  true  disciples  by  two  and
by  two,  Antichrist  will  do  the  like.  We  read  of  Joshua  and  Caleb,  and  of  San-
ballat  and  Tobiah  ;  of  Paul  and  Timothy,  and  of  Philetus  and  Alexander.  Because
one  wUl  toU  on  and  tempt  another;  for  sin  uniteth  sinners,  as  grace  doth  the
godly ;  and  by  couples  they  seem  to  be  the  less  faulty,  the  more  able  to  defend  their
false  cause.  Learn  we  hence  to  rise  by  couples  ;  turn  we  and  allure  others  to  return.
For  woe  to  him  that  is  alone  when  two  strong  men  oppose  him  or  a  true  cause.
{J,  Barlow,  D.D.)

Ver.  16.  The  Lord  give  mercy  unto  the  house  of  Oneslphorus.— Onesipftoru*
of  Ephesus: — The  man  who  now  steps  upon  the  scene  does  not  reappear.
One  Epistle  only  mentions  him,  and  in  the  Acts  his  very  name  is  unrecorded.
Let  us  mark,  however,  what  letter  it  is  which  contains  these  references.  It
is  the  last  of  all  the  Epistles  of  Paul,  written  during  his  second  imprison-
ment, and  not  long  before  his  death.  He  is  again  at  Home,  but  not,  as  on
the  former  occasion,  in  his  own  hired  house,  with  liberty  to  receive  whom  he  will,
and  to  speak  all  that  is  in  his  heart.  Cold,  and  worn,  and  ill,  Paul  the  aged  lies
in  his  prison  cell ;  and,  of  all  his  many  companions,  only  Luke  is  with  him  now.
So  it  happens  that  the  very  epistle  which  is  full  of  the  most  heroic  confidence  in
Divine  protection,  is  marked  by  the  tenderest  yearnings  after  human  sympathy ;
and  the  heart  of  the  apostle  is  swayed  like  the  sea  before  the  rough  wind  of  unkind
desertion,  and  again  under  the  soft  breeze  of  faithful  solicitude  and  care.  Onesi-
phorus,  it  is  clear,  was  an  Ephesian ;  for  Timothy  was  at  this  time  resident  at
Ephesus,  and  there  this  man's  household  dwelt.  There,  then,  Paul  and  he  had
made  acquaintance,  during  the  long-continued  campaign  of  the  apostle  in  the  city,
now  ten  years  ago.  That  earlier  time  is  not  forgotten.  Every  one  knew,  and
Timothy  had  often  heard,  of  what  value  his  friendship  had  been.  His  house  was
one  of  the  many  which  had  opened  to  Paul  and  made  him  welcome.  Children
were  there,  now  grown  to  manhood,  who  were  taught  to  run  to  the  door  at  his
approach  and  to  draw  him  joyfully  in.  Tears  passed,  and  they  had  not  met.
Business  of  some  kind  briugs  Onesiphorus  at  last  to  Eome.  Paul  is  at  Bome  too,  a
prisoner,  in  close  confinement,  and  it  is  not  easy  to  get  access  to  him.  "  No  man  stood
by  me,  but  all  men  forsook  me  :  I  pray  God  that  it  be  not  laid  to  their  charge."  This
good  Ephesian,  however,  is  made  of  sterner  stuff.  He  applied  to  the  brethren,  and,
to  his  astonishment,  they  have  nothing  to  tell  about  the  apostle.  He  goes  to  the
government  ofiSces  and  inquires  there;  there  information  is  scornfully  refused.
He  makes  his  way,  nothing  daunted,  to  the  prisons,  and  gets  referred  from  one
jailer  to  another,  till  he  is  almost  tired  out ;  but  he  perseveres,  and  at  last  here  is
a  man  who  can  tell  him.  But  does  he  know  the  risk  to  his  own  liberty,  perhaps  to
his  own  life?  He  knows ;  he  is  prepared  to  face  it,  if  only  he  may  see  Paul.  "  He
sought  me  out  very  diligently,  and  found  me" — found  the  solitary  old  man,  with
the  chains  on  his  hands,  and  the  damp,  dark  prison  walls  round  him.  What  a
meeting  must  that  have  been  1  Sunshine  pouring  into  the  mouth  of  a  cave  is  a
poor  emblem  of  what  the  sight  of  that  brave  and  cheerful  countenance  must  have
been  to  Paul.  It  was  not,  then,  in  vain,  that  Jesus  had  left  the  word  on  record  for
His  disciples,  "I  was  in  prison,  and  ye  came  unto  Me."  Christian  sympathy  will
find  a  way  through  every  difficulty,  and  a  key  for  every  prison  door.  Paul  has  no
silver  or  gold  to  give  ;  he  is  so  poor  that  he  cannot  buy  a  cloak  to  keep  off  the  cold ;
but  he  has  something  to  be  prized  far  more — a  good  man's  prayers.  Those  prayers
he  offers  both  for  Onesiphorus  himself  and  his  family.  "  The  Lord  give  mercy
unto  the  house  of  Onesiphorus."  "The  Lord  grant  it  unto  him."  Nor  is  it
Onesiphorus  alone  for  whom  Paul  would  pray.  Let  his  household,  too,  be  saved.
Those  sweet  children,  to  whom  he  had  so  often  spoken  of  the  love  of  Jesus  ;  those
faithful  servants,  who  had  their  master's  example  to  guide  them ;  the  kinsfolk,  who
came  to  visit  him  ;  may  they  all  be  bound  in  the  bundle  of  life  with  the  Lord  their
God  1  See  how  great  the  blessing  is  of  belonging  to  a  godly  home.  Onesiphorus
has  been  abundantly  recompensed  in  time  and  in  eternity  for  all  that  he  had  done
and  dared  for  Paul.  Need  we  fear  to  be  overlooked?  We  have  the  servants'
prayers.     We  have  the  Master's  promise.    "  Whosoever  shall  give  to  drink  onto


110  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (chap.  i.

one  of  these  little  ones  a  cnp  of  cold  water  only  in  the  name  of  a  disciple,  verily  I
say  unto  you,  he  shall  in  no  wise  lose  his  reward."    {W.  Brock.)  The  brother

bom  for  adversity : — A  good  man  in  these  verses  counts  up  what  his  friend  had
done  for  him,  and  then,  to  the  best  of  his  ability,  he  makes  a  payment.     I.  What
HAD  Onesiphobus  DONE  FOB  Pauij  ?    1.  "  When  he  was  in  Bome  he  sought  me  out
very  diligently."     We  cannot  tell  what  it  was  that  took  Onesiphorus  to  Borne.
Perhaps  he  was  a  merchant,  and  went  there  to  buy  and  sell.    Perhaps  he  was  a
scholar,  and  went  there  to  listen  to  its  poets  and  orators,  and  to  acquaint  himself
with  its  works  of  art.    But  whatever  he  went  for,  he  resolved  to  see  his  friend.    It
is  possible  that  he  was  not  at  once  successful.    But  he  grudged  no  time,  he  spared
no  effort.    And  at  length  he  succeeded.     He  found  Paul.     Some,  perhaps,  had
they  been  in  the  place  of  Onesiphorus,  would  have  been  equally  well  pleased  not  to
have  found  Paul.    They  would  have  reported  to  the  Church,  at  their  return  home,
that  they  had  made  various  efforts,  and  had  failed,  and  that  probably  the  apostle
was  either  dead  or  had  been  removed  to  another  city.    Their  consciences  would
have  been  quieted,  and  perhaps  their  friends  satisfied.    Bat  Onesiphorus  was  not
anxious  merely  to  quiet  his  conscience.     What  had  Onesiphorus  done  for  Paul  ?
He  had  gone  to  see  him  not  once,  but  many  times.    "  He  oft  refreshed  me."    Per-
severance in  sympathy  or  in  active  kindness  is  more  difficult  than  the  being  once
sympathising,  or  once  kind.     Yet,  though  difficult,  how  valuable  it  is  I    2.  There
is  one  characteristic  of  Onesiphorus'  visits  to  Paul  which  is  well  worth  noticing.
The  apostle  was  refreshed  by  them.    "  He  oft  refreshed  me."    Visits  to  the  sick
and  the  poor  may  be  very  depressing.    We  may  go  to  tell  them  our  own  troubles
instead  of  listening  to  theirs,  or  we  may  go  to  chide  and  scold — to  tell  how  that,  if
we  had  been  in  their  places,  debts  would  not  have  been  contracted,  nor  sicknesses
taken,  or  we  may  go  and  *•  talk  good,"  and  that  by  the  hour,  while  the  weary  or
the  bereaved  one  listens  in  submission.    And  the  intention  in  all  this  may  have
been  very  kind.    We  went — for  we  felt  it  was  our  duty  to  go — and  we  did  our  best.
But,  alas  I    our  visits  healed  no  wound — they  brought  no  sunshine.     Yet  how
refreshing  are  the  visits  of  some,  and  among  them  those  of  Onesiphorus.     "  He  oft
refreshed  me."    Do  the  words  suggest  to  us  any  other  visitant  who  comes  in  dark
moments  with  "  thoughts  of  peace  and  not  of  evil  "  ?    Is  there  not  One  who  says,
"  Come  unto  Me,  all  ye  that  travail,  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  refresh  you."
3.  Further,  says  the  apostle,  "  he  was  not  ashamed  of  my  chain."    If  our  friends
are  under  reproach,  our  going  to  visit  them,  or  in  any  manner  permitting  their
names  to  be  associated  with  our  own,  is  a  proof  of  our  constancy.    Most  men  are
willing  enough  to  worship  the  rising  sun.    If  we  hear  of  any  one,  with  whom  we
have  a  casual  acquaintance,  becoming  suddenly  distinguished  by  a  Uterary  produc-
tion, or  a  work  of  art,  or  an  act  of  heroism,  we  are  very  swift  to  put  forth  our
claims  to  recognition  or  companionship.    But  if  a  friend  become  poor,  how  prone
we  are  to  "  cut "  him,  or,  if  he  be  dishonoured,  to  deny  him.    Onesiphorus  despised
the  shame.     4.  And  be  it  observed  that  what  was  now  done  at  Bome  had  been  done
elsewhere.    For,  says  the  apostle,  "  In  how  many  things  he  ministered  unto  me  at
Ephesus,  thou  knowest  very  well."    Perhaps  at  Ephesus  the  apostle  had  slept  under
his  roof,  had  eaten,  and  that  oft,  at  his  table,  had  been  helped  by  his  purse,  his
time,  his  money.    And  now  be  shows  that  he  had  not  become  wearied  in  well-doing.
And  so  he  illustrated  Solomon's  proverb,  "  A  friend  loveth  at  all  times,  and  a
brother  is  born  for  adversity."    II.  And  now  we  will  look  at  the  payment  the
APOSTLE  BENDEBED.     "  The  Lord,"  says  he,  "  give  mercy  unto  the  house  of  Onesi-
phorus."   May  children,  and  wife,  and  servants — all  who  dwell  within  the  house
or  cluster  round  it — share  the  Divine  bounty.    May  mercy  engirdle  its  walls  and
canopy  its  roof.    May  it  fall  each  night  upon  them  that  dwell  therein  as  the  soft
dew.     May  it  rise  on  them  each  morning  as  the  blessed  sun.     In  each  breast  may
it  settle  like  a  gentle  bird ;  in  each  ear  may  it  ring  like  the  chime  of  church  bells.
May  mercy  take  the  hand  of  each  and  guide  him,  and  watch  over  the  plans  of  each
and  prosper  him,  and  light  up  tlie  prospects  of  each  and  cheer  him.    And,  at  last,
may  mercy  make  the  pilJow  of  each  soft  and  easy,  and  enable  each  to  close  his  eyes
in  the  conviction  that  all  beyond  is  well ;  that  the  strange  land  to  which  he  is  going
is  still  a  land  of  mercy,  and  that  in  it  there  is  a  welcome  waiting  from  Him  who  is
the  "  Father  'of  mercies  and  the  God  of  all  consolation."    But  a  particular  period
ia  named  to  which  the  apostle's  prayers  pointed.     "  The  Lord  grant  that  he  may
find  mercy  of  the  Lord  in  that  day."     How  blessed  will  it  be  to  find  mercy  of  the
Lord  in  that  day,  and  to  find  it  as  the  kindly  recompense  for  deeds  done  in  days
gone  by.    Who  would  have  thought  that  there  was  any  connection  between  those


OBAV.  I.]  n.  TIMOTHY.  Ill

Tisits  paid  by  Onedphorns  to  a  lonely  man  in  irons  in  a  gloomy  prison,  in  a  gloomy
street,  in  the  capital  of  the  Cfflsars,  and  the  transactions  of  that  period  when  the
throne  should  be  set  and  the  books  opened  ?  What  thread  of  connection  is  there
between  these  ?  Only  this :  that  seed  bears  its  appropriate  crop,  that  certain  con-
seqaences  follow  certain  antecedents  to  the  end  of  time — ^yes,  and  after  time !
(J.  F.  Serjeant,  M.A.)  Onesiphonu : — Onesiphorus  comes  into  view  as  a  ship

appears  upon  the  ocean  when  she  crosses  the  pathway  of  the  moon.  Very  little  is
known  of  his  life  before  or  after  this  brief  contact  with  the  life  of  Panl.  The
radiance  which  the  apostle  casts  apon  the  page  of  history  makes  Onesiphoms
yisible.  In  this  light  the  beauty  of  a  noble  character,  whose  gentle  ministrations
were  the  solace  of  one  of  God's  servants,  is  evident.  The  moon  discovers  the
model  of  a  ship,  and  also  her  course;  and  an  acquaintance  is  formed  with  a
stranger  of  the  ancient  time  because  he  stands  near  to,  and  sympathises  with,  a
notable  man.  So  true  is  it  that  life  depends  for  its  efficiency  and  its  estimate  upon
the  relations  which  it  sustains,  and  that  obscurity  and  fame  are  determined  by  the
perspective.  The  apostle  was  a  prisoner  in  a  Boman  dungeon.  The  comforts  of
"  his  own  hired  house  "  were  no  longer  his.  Nero  was  the  Emperor.  Christianity
had  been  charged  with  political  designs.  The  sword  of  the  persecutor  was  red
with  blood.  There  was  little  hope  of  a  favourable  verdict  at  the  bar  of  Caesar.
One  companion  after  another  had  found  it  convenient  to  leave  Paul.  "  Only  Luke
is  with  me,"  was  the  sad  announcement  which  Timothy  read  when  he  opened  the
last  letter  of  his  honoured  friend.  It  was  not  safe  to  visit  such  a  prisoner.  He
was  a  marked  man.  The  caprice  of  the  Emperor  was  ready  to  seize  upon  any  pro-
test. His  spies  filled  the  citv.  A  single  word  from  his  lips  meant  instant  death.
He  had  determined  to  hold  Christianity  responsible  for  a  great  disaster  which  befell
Borne  upon  the  19th  of  July,  in  the  year  64.  For  then  a  fire  broke  out  in  a  valley
between  the  Palatine  and  Cselian  Hills,  and  marched  steadily  on  its  downward  course
for  six  days  and  seven  nights.  Some  one  must  be  punished,  and  Nero  selected  the
Christians  as  the  victims  of  his  wrath.  While  Christianity  was  thus  enduring
persecution,  Onesiphorus,  an  Ephesian,  who  had  befriended  Paul  in  his  own  city,
reached  Bome.  He  learned  that  the  apostle,  aged  now  and  infirm,  was  in  prison
and  in  chains.  He  determined  to  go  to  his  reUef.  His  courage  was  equal  to  his
sympathy.  As  we  read  these  few  sentences  of  Paul's  letter  to  Timothy,  we  are
impressed  wit>i  the  unfaihng  courtesy  of  the  apostle.  He  appreciates  the  attentions
of  his  friends,vand  he  never  fails  to  acknowledge  them  with  great  delicacy.  His
letters  are  models  of  correspondence,  so  dignified,  so  sincere,  so  frank,  so  affec-
tionate !  They  are  filled  with  personal  allusions,  which  exhibit  the  social  character
of  this  eminent  man.  •'  The  Lord  grant  unto  him  that  he  may  find  mercy  of  the
Lord  in  that  day  1 "  How  heart-felt  1  How  genuine  I  How  deUcate !  This  sturdy
soldier  of  the  cross,  whose  valour  has  been  displayed  upon  many  a  battlefield,  com*
mends  the  truth  of  the  gospel  by  his  courtesy.  He  does  not  repel  men,  but  wins
them.  One  of  the  wise  sayings  of  Hillel,  the  distinguished  Jewish  Babbin,  was
this :  "  Be  thou  of  Aaron's  disciples,  loving  peace  and  seeking  for  peace,  loving  the
creatures  and  attracting  them  to  the  Law ! "  Hillel  himself  was  a  beautiful  illus-
tration of  his  own  teaching.  His  gentleness  of  manner  was  associated  with  firm-
ness  of  principle  and  strength  of  conviction.  Paul,  as  a  Pharisee,  must  have  been
familiar  with  the  many  traditions  which  were  current  among  the  Jews  concerning
the  renowned  teacher,  and  his  own  character  must  have  been  somewhat  affected
by  his  admiration  for  one  whose  virtues  were  praised  in  the  schools  of  Jerusalem.
•'  Let  a  man  be  always  gentle  like  HiUel,  and  not  hasty  like  Shammai,"  was  an  oft-
repeated  injunction.  Gamaliel,  the  teacher  of  Saul  of  Tarsus,  was  the  grandson  of
Hillel,  and  the  school  which  the  future  apostle  entered  was  pervaded  with  an
atmosphere  of  courtesy.  Then,  when  our  Lord  taught  that  zealous  Pharisee,  and
led  him  to  realise  the  sinfulness  of  his  mistaken  ze^  which  had  made  him  a  perse-
cutor, and  gave  him  a  new  appreciation  of  the  excellence  of  humble  service  and
gentle  ministrations,  he  advanced  to  a  new  recognition  of  the  duty  and  the  oppor-
tunity of  courtesy.  I  regard  courtesy  as  one  of  the  eflScient  graces  of  the  Christian
life.  It  is  the  polished  mirror  which  reflects  the  most  hght.  Bluntness,  coarse-
ness, rudeness,  are  not  evidences  of  strength.  The  courtesy  of  Lord  Chesterfield  is
not  the  courtesy  of  Paul.  For  Chesterfield,  in  his  letters  to  his  son,  exhibits  his
lack  of  sincerity,  his  want  of  principle.  His  courtesy  is  only  a  thin  veneer,  which
has  received  constant  rubbing  until  it  is  worn  out.  Paul's  courtesy  is  the  real
wood,  which  is  solid  down  to  the  heart.  The  Christian  heart  is  always  ready  to
sustain  the  Christian  manner  ;  and  the  Christian  manner  is  Christ's  manner.    He


IW  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (cha».  t

commended  truth  by  his  address.  Can  you  wonder  that  such  courtesy  as  his
secured  him  many  friends  among  the  poor  and  suffering  ?  Does  it  seem  strange
that  a  similar  courtesy  has  led  mankind  as  with  magnetic  power  ?  And  yet  we
carry  too  little  of  it  with  us  into  the  practical  work  of  daily  life.  There  is  many  a
man  whose  business  hours  never  hear  a  single  kind  word — a  "thank  you,"  an  "  it
you  please."  Service  becomes  drudgery.  The  rich  and  the  poor  draw  apart.
Hostile  camps  are  organised.  Men  who  should  be  friends  look  angrily  at  one
another.  There  is  a  better  way  for  the  home,  the  shop,  and  the  counting-room.
It  is  Christ's  way,  and  Paul's  way,  and  the  way  of  all  who  manifest  with  them  the
true  spirit  of  love.  There  is  something  very  fine  about  this  conduct  of  the  large-
hearted  Ephesian.  He  was  evidently  a  man  of  substance,  for  he  had  the  means  at
his  command  which  enabled  him  to  help  Paul  in  Ephesus  and  in  Rome.  Yet,  when
he  visited  the  imperial  city,  where  a  money  value  was  placed  upon  almost  every,
thing,  he  went  about  through  the  streets  and  among  the  prisons  to  find  a  despised
Jew — one  Saul  of  Tarsus — whose  name  had  become  a  by-word  and  a  reproach.
Social  life  needs  an  illustration  such  as  this.  We  are  apt  to  forget — alas  !  we  are
apt  to  despise — ^the  poor.  Yet  but  for  the  poor — God's  own  poor — social  life  would
perish  in  its  corruption.  It  is  well  for  us  to  appreciate  the  intimacy  of  this  depend-
ence which  it  obtains.  Spiritual  treasures  are  to  be  regarded  as  wealth.  We  must
traffic  more.  Gold  and  silver  must  be  exchanged  for  sympathy  and  prayer.  The
material  blessings  of  this  life  are  to  be  distributed  just  as  the  spiritual  blessings
are.  The  rich  are  to  live  for  the  poor,  and  the  poor  are  to  live  for  the  rich.  The
man  whose  talents  qualify  him  to  command  armies  is  to  be  the  protector  of  the
weak,  and  the  man  whose  appreciation  is  sensitive  is  to  be  the  teacher  of  the
ignorant;  the  man  who  has  this  world's  goods  is  to  supply  his  brothei's  need,  and
the  man  who  can  prevail  with  God  is  to  realise  his  responsibility  iu  prayer.  The
ministrations  of  Onesiphorus  exhibit  the  watchfulness  of  God,  which  is  exercised
through  His  servants.  The  poor  saints  understand  this  better  than  the  rich  saints
can.  Their  poverty  affords  many  occasions  for  the  manifestation  of  special  pro-
vidences. And  in  their  lives  these  special  providences  are  very  numerous.  God
feeds  them,  as  He  did  Elijah  by  the  brook  Cherith.  There  is  a  wonderful  adapta-
tion of  supply  and  demand.  Nor  should  we  fail  to  discover  the  dignity  which  is
ours  when  we  are  selected  by  God  as  His  messengers.  Subjects  always  appreciate
the  preference  of  a  sovereign.  God  honours  us  if  He  makes  us  His  almoners.  Let
us  appreciate  the  honour,  and  let  us  seek  to  discharge  such  duties  with  considerate
love.  "Blessed,"  says  the  Psalmist,  " is  he  that  considereth  the  poor."  This  is
something  more  than  giving ;  for  it  includes  the  manner  of  the  giving.  England
has  forgotten  many  of  the  leaders  of  fashion  who  were  in  favour  thirty  years  ago,
but  she  will  never  forget  that  cultured  woman  who  went  as  nurse  to  the  soldiers  of
the  Crimea.  Florence  Nightingale  once  wrote  that  "  the  strong,  the  healthy  wills
in  any  life  must  determine  to  pursue  the  common  good  at  any  personal  cost,  at
daily  sacrifice.  And  we  must  not  think  that  any  fit  of  enthusiasm  will  carry  us
through  such  a  life  as  this.  Nothing  but  the  feeling  that  it  is  God's  work  more
than  ours — that  we  are  seeking  His  success,  and  not  our  success — and  that  we  have
trained  and  fitted  ourselves  by  every  means  which  He  has  granted  us  to  carry  out
His  work,  will  enable  us  to  go  on."  Christianity  waits  for  such  service.  When
Onesiphorus  came  into  helpful  contact  with  the  life  of  Paul,  he  secured  an  uncon-
scious immortality.  His  is  not  a  principal  figure  in  the  Scriptures.  He  is  of
secondary  rank  or  importance.  But  he  has  secured  a  grand  immortality,  while
other  men,  greater,  wiser,  more  conspicuous  then  than  he,  are  forgotten ;  and  this
immortality  was  secured  by  self-forgetfulness  on  the  part  of  Onesiphorus.  If  we
cannot  work  unless  we  are  sure  of  a  recopnition,  we  shall  have  no  part  in  the  sweet
charities  which  make  life  tolerable.  We  must  learn  of  the  coral  insect,  whose
instinct  teaches  it  to  build  until  it  dies,  and  which,  by  building,  slowly  lifts  an
island  out  of  the  seas,  upon  which  flowers  may  bloom,  and  trees  may  wave,  and
man  may  find  a  home.  This,  my  friends,  is  our  immortahty,  sure  and  blessed.
"  We  are  labourers  together  with  God."  It  may  be  that  we  can  do  but  little.
Never  mind.     We  will  do  what  we  can.     (H.  M.  Booth,  D.D.)  Was  Onesi-

phorus dead  ? — The  only  ground  for  the  hypothesis  of  the  death  of  Onesiphorus
appears  in  the  further  reference  to  his  household,  rather  than  to  himself,  in  the
final  salutations  (chap.  iv.  19).  This  might  easily  be  explained  on  another  sup-
position, as  well  as  on  that  made  by  the  advocates  of  the  "prayer  for  the  departed."
If  Onesiphorus  of  Ephesus  had  business  in  Rome,  he  may  have  had  reasons  for
visiting  Corinth,  or  Thessalonica,  or  Alexandria,  or  Spain,  and  may  have  been  at


mAT.  t]  It  TIMOTHT,


too  great  »  distance  to  receive  personally  the  apostle's  salntations.  (H.  R.  Rey-
nold$,  D.D.)  The  balance  of  probabilitj  is  decidedly  in  favour  of  the  view  that
Onesiphorus  was  already  dead  when  St.  Paol  wrote  these  words.  There  is  not  only
the  fact  that  he  speaks  here  of  "  the  hoase  of  Onesiphorus  "  in  connection  with  the
present  and  of  Onesiphorus  himself  only  in  connection  with  the  past ;  there  is  also
the  still  more  marked  fact  that  in  the  final  salutations,  while  greetings  are  sent  to
Prisoa  and  Aquila,  and  from  Eubulus,  Fudens,  Linus,  and  Claudia,  yet  it  is  once
more  "  the  house  of  Onesiphorus,"  and  not  Onesiphorus  himself,  who  is  saluted.
This  language  is  thoroughly  intelligible  if  Onesiphorus  was  no  longer  alive  but  had
a  wife  and  children  who  were  still  living  in  Ephesus  ;  but  it  is  not  easy  to  explain
this  reference  in  two  places  to  the  household  of  Onesiphorus,  if  he  himself  was  still
alive.  In  all  the  other  cases  the  individual,  and  not  the  household,  is  mentioned.
Nor  is  this  twofold  reference  to  his  family,  rather  than  to  himself,  the  only  fact
which  points  in  this  direction.  There  is  also  the  character  of  the  apostle's  prayer.
Why  does  he  confine  his  desires  respecting  the  requital  of  Onesiphorus'  kmdnesa
to  the  day  of  judgment?  Why  does  he  not  also  pray  that  he  may  be  requited  in
this  life  ?  that  he  "  may  prosper  and  be  in  health,  even  as  his  soul  prospereth,"
as  St.  John  prays  for  Gaius  (3  John  2)  ?  This,  again,  is  thoroughly  intelligible  if
Onesiphorus  is  already  dead.  It  is  much  less  intelligible  if  he  is  still  alive.  It
seems,  therefore,  to  be  scarcely  too  much  to  say  that  there  is  no  serious  reason  for
questioning  the  now  widely  accepted  view  that  at  the  time  when  St.  Paul  wrote
these  words  Onesiphorus  was  among  the  departed.  (A.  Plummer,  D.D.)  Sympathy :
— ^Like  the  sea  anemone,  which  feels  the  first  returning  wave  upon  the  rock,  and
throws  out  all  its  tendrils,  so  the  tender  nature  of  some  individuals  will  give  forth
all  its  sympathies  at  the  slightest  intimations  of  woe.  {J.  Everett.)  SympathetUs
men : — What  a  blessing  are  rest-giving  men  and  women  I  People  upon  whose
strong  sense  and  deep  and  delicate  sympathy  we  can  fiing  ourselves  as  on  to  a
welcome  couch  I  People  into  whose  presence  the  worries  and  irritabilities  of  life  seem
afraid  to  enter  I  Cathediral-like  souls,  full  of  softened  Ughts  and  restful  shadows  I
Oh,  what  a  refreshment  to  meet  with  such  I  Large,  deep  natures  which  have  found
for  themselves  rest  in  God,  and  whose  very  presence  brings  over  others  what  Christ's
word  brought  over  the  Sea  of  Galilee — a  great  calm.  Souls  that  are  like  a  vast
forest,  rich  and  cool,  filled  with  speaking  silences  and  peopled  solitudes,  where  one
can  recline  for  hours  or  wander  for  days  a  stranger  to  the  heat  that  wearies  and
withers  outside  I  Such,  in  some  measure,  we  can  all  be,  and  the  need  for  such
service  to  humanity  is  not  sufficiently  insisted  on.  (J.  Dawson.)  Prison  fellow-
ship : — Who  has  not  read  the  story  of  Picciola ;  how  the  prisoner  knelt  down  and
nursed  the  little  flower  which  sprung  up  between  the  flagstones  in  his  walk — how,
in  his  loneliness,  he  talked  to  it  as  though  it  had  a  soul  that  could  speak
back  to  him — and  how,  at  length,  the  strong  heart  was  broken  within  him,
when,  with  the  heat  of  the  sun,  it  at  last  withered  and  died?  Or  that
stranger  illustration  of  the  prisoner  of  the  Bastille  who  knit  his  affections  to  a
spider,  weaving  his  web  in  a  comer  of  the  cell,  and  then  wept,  as  one  weeps
for  his  first-born,  when  it  was  killed  through  the  wanton  cruelty  of  the
gaoler  ?  Far  beyond  this  is  the  joy  we  have  in  the  fellowship  of  our  own  kind.
Religious  friendship: — Onesiphorus  means  "bringing  profit."  The  man's  life
was  true  to  his  name.  He  brought  profit  to  himself,  others,  God.  A  model
minister's  friend.  I.  Eeligious  fbiendship  is  eminently  practical  in  its  service,
1.  Invigorating.  "  Eefreshed  me."  Like  dew  to  shrivelled  grass  and  drooping
flower.  2.  Painstaking.  "Sought,"  &c.  3.  Courageous.  "In  Eome."  'Not
ashamed  of  my  chain."  False  friends  are  swayed  by  the  signs  of  the  times.  Like
a  shadow,  they  leave  us  when  we  pass  out  of  the  sunshine.  True  friendship,
based  on  character,  not  circumstances,  hence  unalterable.  4.  Continuous.  5.  Per-
sonaL  6.  Proverbial.  "Thou  knowest  very  weU."  The  true  man  loves  to  re-
count deeds  of  kindness.  7.  ImmortaL  Kindness  is  undying.  II.  EELioioca
friendship  IB  HIGHLY  DiSTiNQOTSHED  IN  ITS  REWARD.  1.  It  gained  for  him  the  influ-
ence of  the  mightiest  Christian  power.  2.  It  gained  for  him  the  influence  of  prayer
for  the  best  blessing.  "  Mercy."  (1)  The  most  needed  blessing.  (2)  Involves
every  other.  3.  It  gained  for  biTn  the  influence  of  prayer  for  the  best  blessing  on
the  most  momentous  occasion.  "  That  day" — the  judgment — the  day  of  destiny —
the  final  day  of  mercy.  (B.  D.  Johns.)  Refreshing  the  poorest: — And  here  the
best  may  be  taxed  for  omitting  of  the  present  occasion,  or  poor  man's  necessity.
We  are  prone  to  commit  sin  instantly,  and  to  put  off  good  and  charitable  duties
from  time  to  time,  and  to  do  them  lingeringly.   Bat,  beloved,  this  should  not  be  so;

8


114  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  u


■we  gather  fruit  when  it  is  the  ripest ;  out  down  com  when  it  is  the  hardest ;  let
blood  when  it  groweth  rankest ;  and  shall  we  not  refresh  oar  brethreu  being  poorest?
(J.  Barlow,  D.D.)    The  needy  not  to  be  neglected : — We  may  run  from  the  poor,  and
his  homely  bed  and  cottage ;  bnt  God  and  His  swift  curse  will  one  day  overtake  us.
(Ibid.)        A  welcome  visitor : — "  I  have  read  recently  that  in  one  of  the  English
prisons  there  was  at  one  time  an  underground  cell,  which  was  used  as  a  place  of
punishment.      Its  remoteness,  loneliness,  and  darkness  made  it  a  place  greatly
dreaded.    Among  the  prisoners  there  was  a  man  of  refinement  and  nervous  tem-
perament, to  whom  the  horror  of  this  penalty  was  a  fright  that  haunted  him  day
and  night.    At  length  there  was  some  alleged  offence  against  the  prison  discipline,
for  which  he  was  sentenced  to  four  and  twenty  hours  in  this  dungeon.    He  was  led
by  the  wardens  to  the  place ;  the  door  was  opened  and  he  had  to  go  down  the
stairs  into  its  depths.    The  door  was  shut.    The  steps  of  the  wardens  died  away  in
the  distance ;  the  outermost  door  was  heard  as  its  slamming  echoed  in  the  hoUow
places.    Then  all  was  still — a  stillness  that  oppressed  with  terror  amidst  a  darkness
that  could  be  felt.     Nervous  and  full  of  imagination,  the  man  sank  down  paralysed
with  fear.    Strange  and  hideous  shapes  came  out  of  the  gloom,  and  pointed  at  him.
His  brain  throbbed  as  with  fever,  and  mocking  voices  seemed  to  come  from  all  sides.
He  felt  that  before  long  the  terror  must  drive  him  mad.  Then  suddenly  there  came
the  sound  of  steps  overhead ;  and  in  a  quiet  tone  the  chaplain  called  him  by  name.
Oh,  never  was  any  music  so  sweet !    '  God  bless  you,'  gasped  the  poor  fellow.  •  Are
you  there  ?  '    '  Yes,'  said  the  chaplain,  *  and  I  am  not  going  to  stir  from  here  until
you  come  out.'    The  poor  man  could  not  thank  him  enough.    '  God  bless  you,'  he
cried.     '  Why,  I  don't  mind  it  a  bit  now,  with  you  there  like  that.'    The  terror  was
gone ;  the  very  darkness  was  powerless  to  hurt  while  his  friend  was  so  near — un-
seen, but  just  above."    And  so  beside  us  all  ever  is  the  unseen  yet  loving  presence
of  our  Master  and  Friend,  and  darkness  and  danger  have  no  longer  any  power  to
frighten  us.     (G.  J2.  Dickemon.)        Was  not  ashamed  of  my  chain. — Chains  worth
wearing : — Here  was  Paul,  in  that  large,  grand  company  of  men  who,  in  all  the
ages,  have  been  the  victims  of  great  ideals,  of  noble  inspirations,  of  truth,  of
virtuous  impulses,  of  high  and  generous  purposes  that  reach  out  and  beyond  him  ;
and  there  were  a  thousand  men  of  all  sorts  coming  against  Paul's  life,  who  ap-
preciated his  nobility,  his  gifts,  his  eloquence,  his  scholarship,  his  Judaism ;  and
they  saw  nothing  else  in  Paul  or  upon  Paul  but  his  chain,  and  then  they  walked
away  half  ashamed  and  so  sorry  that  so  good  a  man  as  Paul  had  to  wear  a  chain.
There  never  was  such  jewellery  in  all  the  ages  as  that  chain  of  Paul's.    Never  did
any  goldsmith  melt  together  the  rarest  pieces  from  the  mines  and  put  them  in
such  delicate  and  beauteous  relationships  with  one  another,  as  did  the  Providence
of  God,  when,  through  countless  years  and  by  various  circumstances,  the  prophecies
worked  out  that  chain  for  Paul.    Here  is  a  mother,  and  if  she  is  reaUy  a  mother
she  is  far  more  certainly  chained  than  the  woman  by  her  side  who  tosses  her  little
head,  for  such  heads  are  always  small,  and  has  no  thought  of  responsibilities  and
cares ;  no  thought  about  those  relationships  of  life  which  ought  to  be  the  most
sacred  in  the  world.     Here  is  a  young  man  who  has  started  out  to  make  himself
intelligent.     He  has  only  a  few  hours  in  which  to  do  it.    He  takes  those  hours  and
by  all  the  severe  exactions  of  his  noble  spirit  he  is  bound  so  to  that  ideal  that  he
cannot  do  this,  and  he  has  not  an  evening  for  that,  and  he  hurries  to  his  work  a
chained  man,  but  oh,  how  grand  I    Here  is  a  girl  who  thinks,  perhaps,  that  to-
morrow she  vrill  begin  to  sew  again,  wearily  but  happily,  chained  to  her  work,
because  yonder  in  some  lowly  place  in  this  city  her  mother  is  working  and  waiting,
prayerfully  doing  what  she  can,  for  death  to  take  her.    But  this  brave  girl  is
carrying  that  aged  mother  upon  those  weary  arms  as  once  the  mother  carried  her,
chained,  but  not  with  a  chain  bought  at  a  jewellery  store.     She  has  not  the  kind
of  jewellery  upon  her  that  sparkles  upon  you  at  the  great  reception.     No,  her
jewellery  is  made  by  Almighty  God ;  it  was  mined  in  the  vast  secrets  of  goodness  ;
it  was  brought  out  by  the  heat  and  fire  of  that  eager  life ;  and  God  has  given  her
this  chain  as  the  mark  that  she  belongs  to  that  grand  race  of  aristocrats.     And  I
care  not  whether  that  girl  lives  in  a  garret,  or  lives  in  a  mansion,  she  belongs  to
the  aristocracy  of  heaven.    In  what  contrast  to  these  chains  appear  the  chains
that  have  rattled  as  you  came  here,  my  friend ;  for  there  are  other  chains  of  the
most  coarse  and  ignoble  kind  that  bind  us.    Here  is  a  man  who  comes  and  feels,
when  he  sees  the  picture  of  that  young  man  earnestly  trying  to  become  intelligent,
that  he  is  ignorant,  and  he  never  knows  how  much  of  a  chain  there  is  attaching
itself  to  him.    Other  people  do.    His  smartnesses  are  simply  exhibits  of  his  chain ;


CTir.  I.]  IL  TIMOTHY.  116

every  time  he  tries  to  perpetrate  a  joke  the  chain  rattles  and  people  see  how  bound
he  is  to  ntter  ignorance.  Here  are  men  and  women  bound  by  chains  of  sel&shneas.
To  save  your  life  you  cannot  conceive  of  a  noble  inspiration,  The  other  day,  when
somebody  told  you  of  some  one  giving  some  money  to  a  great  cause,  you  sneeringly
measured  your  own  soul  when  you  thought  you  were  measuring  his,  and  you  said :
"  Well,  he  wanted  to  be  advertised !  "  You  know  that  is  the  way  you  would  feel
tinder  the  circumstances.  Tour  chain  rattled,  and  it  rattled  so  awfully  that  those
who  were  round  about  yon  saw  the  awful  depths  of  selfishness  into  which  you  were
about  to  fall.  Here  are  men  who  are  chained  by  habit.  To  save  your  life,  you
can't  get  home  without  feeling  the  pulling  of  a  chain  which  you  would  rather  break
than  to  accomplish  anything  else  in  the  world.  But  how  different  are  these  chains
from  the  ones  which  Paul  wore,  as  he  stood  there  in  the  face  of  Israel  and  the
whole  world  I  That  chain  was  rattling  when  he  spoke,  and  he  uttered  that  word
with  such  eloquence  that  it  has  resounded  through  the  centuries.  "  For  the  hope
of  Israel,"  he  said,  "  I  am  bound  with  this  chain.  Other  men  have  been  bound  to
the  past ;  I  am  bound  to  the  future.  Other  men  have  been  bound  to  iniquity ;  I
am  bound  to  righteousness.  Other  men  have  been  bound  to  low  ideals ;  I  am
bound  to  lofty  ideals.  Other  men  are  in  slavery,  abject  slavery,  to  those  carnal
purposes  of  life  that  debase ;  I  am  in  slavery  which  is  sublime,  to  the  true  and
lofty  ideals  that  exalt.  For  the  hope  of  Israel,  I  am  bound  with  that  chain."
{F.  W,  Gunsaulus,  D.D.)

Ver.  18.  The  Lord  grant  onto  him  that  he  may  find  mercy  of  the  Lord  In  that
day. — St.  Paul's  prayer  for  Oriesiphorus : — I.  Meecy  is  a  word  we  are  often  using,
especially  in  our  prayers.  But  there  are  some  of  us,  perhaps,  who  have  no  very
clear  ideas  of  what  mercy  is.  I  must  remind  you  again,  that  it  is  not  mere  kind-
ness or  goodness.  To  ask  God  to  show  us  mercy  is  not  simply  to  ask  God  to  do  us
good.  Such  a  petition  includes  in  it  a  confession  of  our  wretchedness  and  our
guiltiness ;  for  observe,  misery  is  the  proper  object  of  mercy.  Mercy,  in  the  strict
sense  of  the  word,  is  kindness  exercised  towards  the  wretched ;  but  then  there  is
another  use  of  the  term  and  a  more  commou  one.  Because  our  guilt  is  our  greatest
misery,  mercy  often  signifies  in  Scripture  pity  shown  to  the  guilty ;  in  other  words
the  forgiveness  of  our  sins.  In  some  respects  mercy  resembles  goodness.  It  is
indeed  the  very  same  thing,  only  its  object  is  different.  God  is  good  to  all,  and
always  has  been  so ;  but  He  was  never  merciful,  till  misery  appeared  needing  His
compassion.  He  is  good  in  heaven ;  every  angel  there  feels  and  proclaims  Him
such :  but  there  is  no  mercy  in  heaven,  for  there  is  no  guilt  there  or  wretchedness.
And  then  again  mercy  is  closely  allied  to  grace.  If  it  differs  from  it  at  all,  it  is
in  this — when  we  speak  of  grace,  we  have  respect  chiefly  to  the  motive  of  the  giver ;
when  of  mercy,  to  the  condition  or  character  of  the  receiver.  Look  at  God,  and
then  we  call  mercy  grace ;  look  at  a  man,  poor,  abject,  guilty  man,  and  then  we  call
grace  mercy.  You  see,  then,  that  mercy  is  the  perfection  of  the  Divine  goodness.
It  is  that  branch  or  exercise  of  it,  which  goes  the  farthest  and  does  the  most.  It  is
goodness  blessing  us  when  we  merit  cursing,  and  saving  us  when  we  are  well-nigh  lost.
Hence,  God  is  said  in  the  Scripture  to  "  delight  in  mercy."  His  goodness  can  ex»
pand  itself  in  it.  He  finds  in  it  the  freest  scope,  the  largest  indulgence,  of  His
benevolence.  It  is  not  merely  the  work,  it  is  the  enjoyment,  the  feast  and  triumph,
of  His  love.  And  you  see  also  here  another  fact,  that  no  man  can  ever  deserve
mercy.  We  often  put  these  two  words  together,  but  we  ought  not  to  do  so ;  there
is  a  positive  contradiction  between  them.  Mercy  is  grace.  It  is  kindness  towards
one  who  has  no  claim  whatever  to  kindness  and  is  totally  undeserving  of  it.  II.
Let  us  pass  on  now  to  the  day  the  apostle  speaks  of.  And  observe — he  does  not
describe  this  day ;  he  does  not  even  tell  us  what  day  he  means :  but  there  is  no
misunderstanding  him  :  he  means  the  last  great  day,  the  day  when  God  will  raise
the  dead  and  judge  the  world.  1.  The  apostle's  thoughts  were  often  dwelling  on  this
day ;  it  was  a  day  very  frequently  in  his  contemplation.  His  mind  had  evidently
become  familiar  with  the  prospect  of  it,  and  so  familiar,  that  he  could  not  help
speaking  of  it  as  he  would  of  any  well-known  and  much  thought  of  thing.  And  so
it  seems  really  to  have  been  in  the  early  ages  of  the  Christian  Church.  We  put  the
day  of  judgment  far  from  us  ;  we  regard  it  as  a  day  that  will  certainly  come,  but
after  so  great  an  interval  of  time,  that  the  thought  of  it  need  not  press  on  us ;  but
not  so  the  first  beUevers.  The  ir  minds  were  fastened  on  this  day.  They  "  looked
for  "  it ;  that  is,  they  were  like  men  looking  out  anxiously  in  the  east  for  the  first
dawn  of  some  long  wished  for  day,  like  men  climbing  the  lofty  mountain  to  get  tha


lie  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  t.


first  Bight  of  the  rising  son  on  Bome  festal  morning.  They  "  hastened  anto  "  it ;
that  is  again,  they  would  have  met  it  if  they  could.  But  there  is  something  else
implied  in  this  expression.  2.  It  intimates  also  that  this  day  is  a  moat  important
one.  There  is  the  idea  of  pre-eminence  contained  in  his  language.  We  feel  as
Boon  as  we  begin  to  think,  that  we  cannot  estimate  as  we  ought  the  importance
of  this  day.  It  will  affect  every  body  and  every  thing  on  the  face  of  the  earth,
and  to  the  greatest  possible  extent.  Other  days  are  important  to  some,  but  this
will  be  important  to  all.  III.  Turn  now  to  his  pratkb.  He  brings  together  in  it,
yon  observe,  the  mercy  and  the  day  we  have  been  considering.  We  camiot  enter
into  the  spirit  of  this  prayer,  unless  we  keep  in  mind  throughout  the  character  of
this  Onesiphorus.  He  was  evidently  a  real  Christian.  And  these  kind  offices,  we
may  fairly  presume,  he  rendered  to  the  apostle  for  his  Master's  sake.  This  kind-
ness under  such  trying  circumstances,  this  steadfastness  and  boldness  in  the  face
of  shame  and  danger,  were  the  fruits  of  his  faith  in  Jesus.  They  are  evidences
that  he  was  not  only  a  sincere  believer  in  the  gospel,  but  a  man  of  extraordinary
faith  and  love.    The  inference,  then,  that  we  draw  from  this  prayer  is  this  obvious

one our  final  salvation,  the  deliverance  of  even  the  best  of  men  in  the  great  day

of  the  Lord,  will  be  an  act  of  mercy.  It  is  sometimes  spoken  of  as  an  act  of
justice,  and  such  it  really  is,  if  we  view  it  in  reference  to  the  Lord  Jesus.  Before
be  made  His  soul  an  offering  for  sin,  it  was  promised  Him  that  this  stupendous
sacrifice  should  not  be  made  in  vain.  And  the  Scripture  speaks  of  our  salvation  as
a  righteous  thing  in  another  sense — the  Lord  Jesus  has  led  His  people  to  expect  it.
But  look  to  the  text.  The  apostle  implores  in  it  mercy  m  that  day  for  his  godly
friend ;  and  what  does  he  mean  ?  If  he  means  anything,  he  means  this— that
after  all  it  must  be  mercy,  free  and  abounding  mercy,  that  must  save  that  friend,  if
he  is  ever  saved.  He  can  talk  of  justice  and  of  righteousness  as  he  looks  at  his
Master  on  His  throne,  and  remembers  what  He  has  done  and  promised  ;  but  when
he  looks  on  a  fellow-sinner,  he  loses  sight  of  justice  altogether,  and  can  speak  of
mercy  only.  And  observe,  too,  how  this  is  said.  It  is  not  cold  language.  It  is
language  coming  warm  from  a  most  tender  and  deeply  grateful  heart.  _  The  good
works  of  this  man  were  all  before  Paul  at  this  time — his  boldness  in  Christ's
cause,  his  steadfastness,  his  kindness  ;  the  apostle's  mind  was  evidently  filled  with
admiration  of  him,  and  his  heart  glowing  with  love  towards  him  ;  yet  what  in  this
ardour  of  feeling  does  he  say  ?  The  Lord  recompense  him  after  his  works  ?  No  ;
he  sees  in  this  devoted  Christian  of  Ephesus  a  miserable  sinner  like  himself,  one
going  soon  to  Christ's  judgment-seat,  and  his  only  prayer  for  him  is,  that  he  may
find  mercy  there.  1.  We  all  still  need  mercy.  There  is  a  notion  that  a  sinner
once  pardoned,  has  done  with  this  blessed  thing ;  that  he  may  cease  to  seek  it,  and
almost  cease  to  think  of  it.  It  is  error,  and  gross  error.  We  can  never  have  done
with  mercy  as  long  as  we  are  in  the  way  to  heaven ;  or  rather,  naercy  will  never
have  done  with  us.  And  notice  also  this  remarkable  fact — ^in  all  his  other  epistles,
the  salutation  of  this  apostle  to  his  friends  is,  "  Grace  unto  you  and  peace  "  ;  but
when  he  writes  to  Timothy  and  Titus,  men  like  himself,  faithful  and  beloved,
eminent  in  Christ's  Church,  he  alters  this  salutation.  As  though  to  force  on  our
minds  the  point  I  am  urging — a  conviction  that  the  holiest  of  men  stiU  need  God^s

mercy he  adds  this  word  "  mercy  "  to  the  other  two.    In  each  of  these  epistles  his

salutation  runs,  "  Grace,  mercy,  and  peace."  (C.  Bradley,  M.A.)  PauV$  prayer
for  his  friend : — To  the  Christian  mind  the  painful  feelings  occasioned  by  the  recol-
lection of  violated  friendship  become  unspeakably  more  poignant  and  intense,
when  we  discover  that  the  claims  of  friendship  and  the  obligations  of  religion  have
been  cast  off  together — that  he  whom  we  loved  has  made  shipwreck  at  once  of  his
faith  and  of  his  affection —  of  his  duty  to  his  God  and  to  his  friend.  An  affecting
instance  of  this  kind  is  recorded  at  the  fifteenth  verse  of  the  chapter.  Was  it
wonderful,  therefore,  that  from  the  cold,  cruel,  and  treacherous  conduct  of  these
men,  he  should  turn  with  such  a  glow  of  kind  and  grateful  emotion  to  the  faithful
and  *  affectionate    Onesiphorus  ?     I.   There    is    a    day    cominq    which,    fbom

ITS     TRANSCENDENT     IMPORTANCE,     MERITS     THE     EMPHATIC      DESIGNATION     OF     "  THAI

DAY."  And  does  not  this  day  deserve  the  emphatic  mention  which  is  here  made
of  it?  Compared  with  every  other  period  in  the  history  of  the  universe,
does  it  not  stand  out  in  unparalleled  importance?  There  are  days  in  the  life
of  every  one  which,  from  the  events  that  transpire  in  them,  are  invested  with  great
and  merited  importance  to  the  individual  himself— such  as  the  day  of  his  birth,  and
of  his  death.  But  there  is  something  in  the  day  of  final  and  universal  retribution
that  sinks  into  obscurity  any  other  eventful  period  in  the  history  of  man.    The  day


.  I.J  n.  TIMOTHY.  U7

ol  onr  birth  introduces  us  into  a  scene  empty  and  shadowj,  both  in  its  joys  and
sorrows,  and  proverbially  brief  and  transitory  in  its  duration  ;  that  day  ushers  us
into  a  state  of  being,  in  which  we  shall  be  conversant  no  more  with  the  dreams
only,  but  with  the  living  realities  of  perfect  felicity  or  woe,  and  conversant  with
them  through  a  duration  endless  as  the  reign  of  the  Eternal  itself.  The  day  of  our
death  is  chiefly  interesting  to  ourselves,  and  to  the  little  circle  who  have  been  con-
nected with  U8  by  the  ties  of  kindred  or  love ;  the  day  of  judgment  is  supremely
interesting  to  any  rational  being  who  has  lived  and  breathed  on  the  face  of  our
world — a  day  when  the  eternal  destiny  of  the  whole  human  race  shall  be  deter-
mined vrith  unparalleled  publicity  and  solemnity.  How  important  are  those  days,
in  the  opinion  of  men,  which  have  witnessed  the  fall  or  the  rise  of  empires.  How
important  was  the  day  that  dawned  on  the  tribes  of  Israel  marching  from  under  th&
yoke  of  their  Egyptian  bondage — a  day  that  ever  afterwards  was  held  sacred  to
commemorate  their  deliverance  1  How  eventful  that  day  that  rose  on  the  fall  of  the
Assyrian  monarchy,  and  beheld  the  empire  of  the  East  pass  from  Belshazzar  and
his  impious  race  into  the  hands  of  the  mild  and  virtuous  Cyrus  !  How  painfully
memorable,  at  least  to  the  nation  immediately  concerned,  was  the  day  that  beheld
the  final  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  and  the  rejection  and  dispersion  of  its  devoted
race !  How  important  to  these  lands  of  our  nativity,  and  how  worthy  to  be  held  in
grateful  remembrance,  that  day  which  witnessed  the  consummation  of  the  glorious
struggle  that  terminated  in  the  vindication  and  establishment  of  our  civil  and
religious  liberties !  But  do  you  not  feel  that  all  these  days,  whether  of  transient  or
permanent  importance,  are  so  utterly  insignificant,  when  viewed  in  relation  to  that
day,  that  the  comparison  involves  in  it  a  kind  of  incongruity,  and  is  truly  a  lower-
ing of  the  awful  dignity  of  the  subject  ?  There  are  but  two  periods  in  the  history
of  the  world  that  can  be  consistently  compared,  in  point  of  importance  to  men,
with  that  day — the  day  that  dawned  on  the  creation  of  our  race,  which  was  hailed
by  the  sweet  acclaim  of  the  angelic  hosts  and  the  day  that  shone  on  the  birth  of  the
Son  of  God.  In  every  aspect  in  which  we  can  view  them,  these  were  days  big  with
consequence  to  the  human  family ;  but  they  were  only  the  introductory  scenes
to  the  consummation  of  the  mightiest  drama  that  ever  was,  or  will  be,  per-
formed on  the  theatre  of  the  world.  II.  On  that  day  the  mercy  of  the  Lord  wili^
BE  KEGARDED  BY  ALL  AS  UNSPEAKABLY  PRECIOUS.  The  mcrcy  of  the  Lord  is,  in  this
world,  regarded  in  a  very  different  light  by  the  various  classes  of  men,  if  we  may
judge  of  their  sentiments  and  opiuions  from  their  uniform  practice.  The  great
mass  of  mankind  demonstrate  by  their  conduct  that,  whatever  may  be  their  occa-
sional fears  and  desires,  the  prevailing  habit  of  their  mind  is  an  utter  indifference
either  to  the  mercy  or  vengeance  of  God.  But  there  are  a  few  who  are  honourably
distinguished  by  different  sentiments,  who  avow  it  as  their  opinion,  and  evince  their
sincerity  by  a  corresponding  practice,  that  they  esteem  everything  under  heaven  as
utter  vanity  compared  with  the  mercy  of  the  Lord.  And  they  who  have  practically
esteemed  the  mercy  of  the  Lord  so  highly  in  this  world,  will  value  it  the  more  at
that  terrible  day.  With  all  their  successful  efforts,  by  the  grace  of  God,  to  prepare
their  souls  to  meet  the  Lord  in  peace,  and  to  be  found  without  spot  and  blameless
at  His  coming,  they  will  impressively  feel  themselves  still  to  be  the  objects  of  His
mercy.  Yes,  and  at  that  day  Paul  and  his  fellow-believers  will  not  be  singular
in  prizing  the  mercy  of  the  Lord.  Much  as  sinners  have  despised  the  mercy  of
the  Lord  here,  they  will  then  despise  it  no  more.     III.  In  the  mind  of  a  Christian,

THAT  DAY  POSSESSES  TREMENDOUS  CONSEQUENCE,  AND  TOWARDS  IT  HIS  EYE  IS  HABITUALLY

•ieected.  Such  consequence  did  this  day  possess  in  St.  Paul's  view,  that  the  impor-
tance of  everything  on  earth  was  estimated  by  its  remote  or  immediate  relation  to  it.
Did  he,  from  the  hour  of  his  conversion,  despise  all  distinctions  of  wealth  and  honour
when  brought  into  competition  with  the  knowledge  of  Christ  ?  It  was,  that  by  any
means  he  might  attain  to  a  blessed  resurrection  on  that  day.  Did  he  practise  the
most  painful  and  persevering  self-denial ;  or,  to  use  his  own  words,  did  he  keep
under  his  body  and  bring  it  into  subjection  ?  It  was,  that  he  might  not  be  found
disapproved  on  that  day.  Was  he  not  ashamed  of  the  sufferings  he  endured  for
the  gospel  ?  It  was  because  he  knew  in  whom  he  had  believed,  and  was  persuaded
that  He  was  able  to  keep  that  which  He  had  committed  unto  him  against  that  day.
Did  he  labour  in  season  and  out  of  season,  warning  every  man,  and  teaching  every
man  ?  It  was  that  he  might  present  every  man  perfect  in  Christ  on  that  day.  Did
he  muse  on  the  number  and  steadfastness  of  his  converts  ?  He  thought  of  them  as
his  hope  and  joy  and  crown  of  rejoicing  in  the  presence  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ
at  His  coming  at  that  day.    Did  he  engage  in  prayer  for  his  converts  ?    It  was  that


UB  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  i.

the  Lord  might  make  them  to  increase  and  abound  in  love,  to  the  end  that  Ha
might  establish  their  hearts  nnblameable  in  holiness  at  the  coming  of  our  Lord
Jesas  Christ,  with  all  His  saints,  on  that  day.     lY.    Enliohtenbd   Chbistiam

AITBCTION  18  KSPECIALLT  SOLICITOUS  ABOUT  THE   ETKKNAIi  WELL  BEINQ   OF   ITS   OBJECTS.

Deeply  did  the  grateful  and  generous  heart  of  Paul  feel  the  kindness  of  Onesipborus.
There  is  no  doubt  he  loved  him  before  as  a  disciple,  and  very  likely  as  a  personal
friend ;  but  his  conduct,  when  he  visited  Borne,  awakened  stiU  deeper  emotions  of
gratitude  and  affection  towards  him  in  the  bosom  of  the  apostle.  And  how  did
he  express  this  sense  of  the  kindness  of  Onesiphorus?  Did  he  employ  all  his
influence  to  improve  the  temporal  fortune  of  his  benefactor  ?  Did  he  request  his
noble  converts  in  the  palace — for  some  such  there  were  of  the  emperor's  housbold
— to  exert  their  power  to  procure  for  Onesiphorus  some  post  of  honour  and  emolu-
ment in  the  civil  or  military  establishment  of  Borne  ?  Or  did  he  write  to  the  Ephesian
Church,  to  which  this  person  probably  belonged,  enjoining  them  to  prepare  some
temporal  reward,  to  be  given  to  their  deserving  countryman  for  his  kindness  to  him-
self ?  No  ;  Paul  attached  too  much  importance  to  the  solemnities  of  the  last  day
and  its  immediate  consequences ;  he  was  too  much  influenced  by  the  scenes  of  the
world  to  come,  to  ask  for  his  beloved  comforter  so  poor,  so  miserable  a  recompense.
He  loved  him  too  well  to  solicit  for  him  a  fading,  when  he  might  ask  for  him  an
unfading  crown.  He  knew  too  well  the  worth  of  his  soul,  the  importance  of  an
eternal  well-being,  to  overlook  these  for  the  trifles  for  an  hour,  in  his  desire  to  re-
ward him.  V.  Genuine  saints  have  it  ever  in  theib  power  to  reward  thbib
BENETACTOBS.  Lookiug  at  Paul  as  a  poor  despised  prisoner  in  Bome,  accused  before
the  emperor  of  heresy  and  sedition,  befriended  by  none  but  by  a  proscribed  and
despised  sect,  which  was  everywhere  spoken  against,  with  all  the  prejudice  of  the
eanperor,  and  the  influence  of  the  Jewish  nation  strenuously  exerted  against  him —
looking  at  Paul  in  this  light  one  would  speedily  conclude,  on  the  principles  of  the
world,  that  he  was  a  very  unlikely  person  richly  to  reward  his  benefactors.  Button
thousand  times  rather  would  I  have  laid  this  poor  and  apparently  helpless  captive
nnder  obligations  to  me  by  kindness  to  him,  than  have  merited,  by  the  most
splendid  civil  or  military  services,  the  gratitude  and  reward  of  him  who  wore  the
imperial  purple.  What  could  Nero,  even  with  a  world  at  his  nod,  have  conferred
upon  me  ?  He  might  have  lavished  upon  me  all  the  favours  of  the  imperial  court.
He  might  have  made  me  the  idol  of  fortune,  and  the  envy  of  the  proudest  of  the
Boman  nobility.  He  might  have  given  me  the  conduct  of  the  most  honourable  ex-
peditions. He  might  have  invested  me  with  the  command  of  the  richest  of  the
provinces.  Paul  had  no  imperial  power  or  influence ;  he  had  even  no  imperial
favour ;  but  he  was  a  favourite  in  a  higher  court,  where  he  was  every  day,  almost
every  hour,  an  acceptable  visitant.  He  was  one  of  those  whose  effectual  fervent
prayer  reached  the  heavenly  temple,  and,  through  the  channel  of  the  atonement,
drew  down  eternal  blessings  on  his  soul,  and  on  the  souls  of  those  for  whom  he  in-
terceded. In  conclusion,  there  is  one  inference  very  naturally  suggested  by  the  last
remarks  :  If  these  statements  are  true,  how  wise  it  is,  setting  aside  the  pure  love  cf
benevolence  altogether,  to  be  kind  to  the  people  of  God,  especially  to  the  pious
poor !  (J.  Mc  Gilchrist.)  Mercy  in  that  day  : — 1.  That  there  is  a  day  coming,
in  which  to  find  merct  of  the  Lord,  will  be  our  only  consolation  and  security.
1.  The  day  here  meant  is  the  day  so  frequently  mentioned  in  Scripture  ;  and  in
which  we  are  all  most  deeply  concerned.  It  is  described  by  many  different  names,
as  ••  the  Day  of  Judgment,"  "  the  Day  of  the  Lord,"  "  the  Last  Day,"  "  the  Day  of
Wrath,"  "  tiie  Day  in  which  God  will  judge  the  world."  In  that  day,  then,  what  will
be  our  only  consolation  and  security  ?  The  text  reminds  us, "  To  find  mercy  of  the
Lord."  Mercy  is  another  word  for  grace.  It  is  an  act  of  free  and  unmerited  favour.
Men  sometimes  say  that  such  a  person  deserves  to  have  mercy  shown  to  him !  But  this
is  a  very  incorrect  and  careless  way  of  speaking.  A  man  can  never  deserve  mercy.
There  may  be  some  circumstances  in  his  case,  which  may  make  him  more  particularly
an  object  of  compassion.  When  a  criminal  by  his  offence  has  forfeited  his  life,  and
is  condemned  to  die;  the  king,  from  pity  to  the  offender,  or  from  some  other  con-
sideration best  known  to  himself,  may  grant  a  pardon  and  remit  the  sentence.  Here
is  mercy,  an  act  of  free,  unmerited  grace  to  the  undeserving  and  the  guilty.  But  to
say  that  there  could  be  anything  in  the  criminal  which  pave  him  a  claim  to  mercy,
would  be  to  talk  absurdly.  The  very  idea,  then,  of  mercy  naturally  shuts  out  all  idea
of  merit.  These  two  things  are  totally  contrary  to  each  other,  and  can  never  exist
together.  It  is  to  be  feared  that  many,  when  they  talk  of  hoping  to  find  mercy,
mean  in  fact  to  say  that  they  hope  to  find  justice  in  that  day ;  and  that  their  hopes


CHAP.  I.]  IT.  TIMOTHY.  U9

of  being  favourably  received  tben  are  built  not  on  God's  free  mercy,  bat  on  their
own  merits,  and  on  their  secret  claims  to  reward.     II.  That  thebe  will  be  some
WHO  IN  THAT  DAY  WILL  NOT  FIND  MEBCY  OF  THE  LoRD.    St.  Pc  ul,  when  he  prays  that
Onesiphorus  may  find  mercy  in  that  day,  clearly  intimates  it  io  be  possible  that  he
may  not  find  it.    And  if  it  were  not  certain  that  Onesiphorus  would  find  it,  it  is  not
certain  that  others  will  find  it.    Indeed,  the  Scriptures  plainly  tell  us  that  all  will
not  find  it.    We  are  expressly  told  that  in  that  day  some  will  say,  "  Lord,  Lord,
open  to  us  " ;  to  whom  He  will  say,  "  Verily,  I  know  you  not."    Let  us  see  what  the
Scriptures  teach  us  concerning  those  who  will  find  mercy  of  the  Lord  in  that  day.
1.  They  are  now  seeking  mercy,  and  seeking  it  in  that  one  way,  in  which  alone
God  has  promised  to  bestow  it.     2.  They  are  duly  affected  and  properly  influenced
by  the  views  and  hopes  which  they  have  of  the  rich  mercy  of  God  in  Christ.  There
is  a  sad  propensity  in  man  to  abuse  the  Divine  mercy,  and  to  take  occasion,  from
this   most   glorious  perfection  of   the  Almighty,  to    run    the   farther  and  con-
tinue the  longer  in  sin.     How  differently  did  a  sense  of  God's  mercy  work  on  the
pious  Savid  1    Hear  what  he  says,  "  0  Lord,  there  is  forgiveness  with  Thee,  that
Thou  mayest  be  feared. "    He  felt  that  the  goodness  of  God  led  him  to  repentance.
The  rich  mercy  of  the  Lord,  far  from  hardening  his  heart,  softened  and  overcame
it.    (E.Cooper.)        Mercy  in  that  day  : — Let  us  consider  the  language  of  the  text
as  showing  that  the  exercise  of  mercy  towards  us,  especially  in  the  proceedings  of
the  final  day,  is  an  object  of  highest  desire  and  hope.      1.  The  very  nature  of  the
occasion  shows  it  to  be  so :  the  day  of  the  end  of  the  world.    This  will  differ  from
all  other  days.    On  numbers  of  the  days  that  are  past,  our  eyes  were  never  opened ;
they  appeared  to  our  forefathers,  but  fled  away  ere  we  had  our  being ;  while  the
days  which  we  behold,  they  do  not  witness,  for  the  darkness  of  death  and  the  grave
overshadows  them.    Thus  different  in  their  importance,  ordinary  days  may  be  to
different  persons.    The  day  of  one  man's  prosperity  may  be  the  day  of  another
man's  adversity.    For  ancient  dajs  we  are  not  responsible,  and  yet  those  days  were
concerned  in  the  accountabihty  of  millions  who  have  no  concern  with  our  own.
But  the  day  referred  to  in  the  text  will  be  common  to  all  the  sons  of  Adam,    If,
then,  we  consider  the  period  which  it  occupies,  both  as  to  what  it  follows  and  what  it
precedes,  how  manifest  the  need  of  mercy  at  that  day.     What  recollections  of  time,
what  apprehensions  of  eternity  will  fill  the  mind !     2.  As  it  will  be  the  period  when
God  wUl  display  the  effects  of  His  probationary  dispensations,  the  worth  of  mercy
will  then  particularly  appear.    Such  effects  will  be  strictly  discriminative  of  charac-
ter and  condition.    Events  will  have  reached  their  issues ;  moral  consequences  will
be  brought  together  in  vast  accumulation,  and  will  bear  with  all  their  weight  upon
the  mind.    Fruits  will  be  reaped  in  kind  and  in  degree,  according  to  what  we  have
sown.    And  while  these  effects  will  be  so  concentrated  at  that  day,  they  will  also  be
looked  upon  in  their  character  of  perpetuity.     3.  As  it  will  be  the  period  when  the
Lord  will  reward  His  servants  for  all  they  have  done  in  His  name,  the  apostle  could
entreat  mercy  for  his  friend  at  that  day.    4.  It  is  also  to  be  observed  that  the  im-
portance of  an  interest  in  Divine  mercy  at  that  day  appears  in  the  fact  that  if  it
be  not  then  enjoyed  the  hope  of  it  can  be  cherished  no  more.  (Essex  Remembrancer.)
Mercy  in  **  that  day  " ; — I.  Whence  arises  oub  need  of  mebct  ?     1.  Our  need  of
mercy  arises  from  our  guilt,  for  mercy  is  kindness  or  favour  shown  to  those  who
are  undeserving  of  it.     Our  guilt  arises  from  our  personal  disobedience  to  the  Divine
law.      We  inherit  a  depraved  nature,  but  it  is  not  for  this  that  God  holds  us
responsible.     Wa  are  responsible  not  for  what  we  have  inherited,  but  for  what  we
have  done,  and  therefore  it  is  not  by  our  depraved  nature  but  by  our  actions  we
shall  be  judged.     2.  Guilt  exposes  to  the  retributive  justice  of  God.     There  is  always
the  feeling  that  sin  deserves  punishment  at  the  hands  of  God.     We  know  indeed
from  Scripture  that  it  does  so.    Nothing  could  be  plainer  or  more  solemn  than  its
statements,  than  the  sinner  is  even  now  under  the  curse  of  the  law  which  he  has
broken,  and  that  hereafter  he  will  come  under  a  righteous  retribution.     But  it  is  not
to  Scripture  that  I  would  now  appeal.    A  man  who  has  violated  the  laws  of  his
country  knows  that  he  deserves  to  suffer  their  penalties.    It  is  right,  he  says,  I  have
sinned,  and  must  bear  the  punishment.     So  the  sinner  against  God  feels  that  he
deserves  to  be  condemned,  and  that  if  God's  justice  were  to  deal  with  him  he  could
not  escape.     From  this  indissoluble  connection  between  sin  and  punishment  arises
our  need  of  mercy.     Therefore  it  is,  that  the  prayer  of  the  publican  is  the  universal
prayer  of  poor,  sinful,  and  perishing  humanity.     Therefore  it  is,  that  in  the  presence
of  God's   holiness,   or  confronted  with  His  law,  or  in  the  near  prospect  of  an
eternal  world,  we  shrink  back  appalled  at  the  consciousness  of  our  guilt.     II.


im  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [obav.  i.

Whbthbb  it  18  possxBui  TO  OBTAiH  MBBCT  ?  This  is  a  qnestion  of  grave  importan** ;
easily  answered  with  the  Eible  in  oar  hands,  bat,  apart  from  it,  filling  as  with
strange  perplexity.  1.  Without  a  Divine  revelation,  we  do  not  know  that  God  im
merciful  at  all.  Granting  that  there  is  much  to  excite  our  hopes,  there  is  as  mneh
to  awaken  oar  fears.  We  are  ready  to  say,  "  God  is  good — His  tender  mercies  ar*
over  sJl."  But  when  the  pestilence  is  abroad  in  the  city,  and  the  tempest  in  th«
field — when  the  rivers  overflow  their  banks,  and  the  mildew  blights  the  preciooB
fruits  of  the  earth — when  the  crimson  tide  of  war  roUs  through  a  land — when  men's
faces  are  black  with  famine — when  the  sea  is  strewn  with  wrecks — then  we  are  filled
with  alarm,  and  say,  "When  I  consider,  I  am  afraid  of  Him."  Think  again:
What  are  the  conceptions  which  have  been  formed  of  God  by  those  who  are  destitute
of  revelation  ?  One  of  the  best  and  wisest  of  the  heathen  doubted  whether  it  waa
possible  for  "  God  to  forgive  sin."  The  sceptre  of  the  Supreme  God  was  a  thunder-
bolt— He  was  cruel,  harsh  and  vindictive  Again :  When  we  reflect  on  the  natura
of  moral  government,  we  perceive  serious  difficulties  in  the  way  of  the  exercise  dt
mercy.  Certainly  this  is  not  the  end  of  government.  The  great  object  for  which
it  exists  is  the  adininistration  of  justice  ;  that  it  may  "  render  to  every  man  accord-
ing to  his  works."  If  mercy,  not  justice,  be  its  ruling  principle,  it  is  not  easy  to
understand  why  it  should  exist  at  all.  The  highest  praise  that  can  be  given  to  an
earthly  ruler  is,  that  he  is  *'  the  terror  of  evil-doers  and  the  praise  of  them  that  do
well. "  Now  apply  this  to  the  Divine  government.  Why  does  it  exist  ? — whence  ita
language  and  its  laws  ?  Is  it  not  for  the  maintenance  of  order  ? — for  the  well-being
of  the  creatures  whom  God  has  made?  And,  as  far  as  we  have  an  opportunity  of
observing,  are  not  the  laws  of  this  government  strictly  carried  out — in  every  case,
sooner  or  later,  exacting  penalties  from  the  disobedient  ?  If  you  violate  a  physical
law,  there  is  no  mercy  for  you.  2.  But  when  we  turn  to  the  Scriptures,  the  subject
is  presented  before  us  in  a  different  light.  (1)  We  learn,  in  the  first  place,  that
God  is  merciful  in  Himself.  (2)  We  learn  that  this  mercy  is  displayed  to
sinners  through  the  atonement  of  Christ.     III.  Why  is  it  that  at  the  day  of  JTn>»-

MENT    WE    SHALL    ESPECIALLY    BEQDIBE    THE    EXERCISE    OF     MEBCY  ?        It    is    the    dftj

that  wUl  terminate  this  world's  history.  Whenever  it  dawns,  time  will  cease,  the
world  will  be  burnt  up,  the  heavens  will  pass  away,  there  will  be  "  no  more  sea."
Wonderful  was  the  day  of  creation,  when  God  called  things  that  were  not  as  though
they  were,  and  His  Spirit  moved  over  the  cbaos,  and  light  dawned,  and  the  earth
appeared.  But  more  wonderful  still  will  be  that  day  when  the  purpose  for  which
the  world  has  been  created  ehall  have  been  accomplished,  and,  like  a  faded  vesture,
it  shall  be  folded  up.  Then  the  world's  history  will  end — its  sad  tragedies  ot
sorrow,  its  scenes  of  suffering ;  and  its  works  of  nature,  its  wonders  of  art,
the  monuments  of  God's  power,  the  trophies  of  man's  skill,  shall  pass  away.
1.  Its  absolute  certainty.  2.  Its  scrutiny  wiU  be  so  strict.  God  will  set  oar
iniquities  before  Him — our  secret  sins  in  the  light  of  His  countenance.  And
that  which  we  had  forgotten  shall  be  remembered;  that  which  appeared  to  as
but  trivial  shall  assume  a  magnitude  which  will  fill  us  with  profound  alarm;
that  which  we  supposed  none  had  witnessed  shall  be  proclaimed.  8.  The
award  will  be  just  and  final,  4.  It  will  come  unexpectedly.  AU  the  represen-
tations given  of  the  judgment-day  describe  it  as  a  sudden  and  unlooked-for
event.  But  what  shall  we  say  of  the  worldly,  the  ungodly,  the  profane  ?  What
sudden  destruction  will  overtake  them  1  When  Pompeii  was  disinterred,  there  was
discovered  in  the  buried  city  the  remains  of  those  who  still  preserved  the  very
attitude  in  which  death  had  overtaken  them.  There  was  a  skeleton  before  a  mirror,
another  behind  a  counter ;  in  the  theatre,  in  the  forum,  in  the  temples,  at  a
banquet,  in  every  attitude  and  position  they  were  found.  It  was  the  work  of  a
moment,  the  burning  lava  fell,  and  they  died.  You  are  locking  forward  to  many
years  of  life,  but  the  Judge  may  even  now  be  standing  at  the  door.  Who  then  will
find  mercy  ?  Those  who  have  sought  it  and  found  it  now — those  who  have  con-
fessed and  forsaken  sin — those  who  humbly  rest  on  the  merits  of  the  Saviour's
sacrifice.  (H.  J.  Gamble.)  Paul's  good  wish  on  behalf  of  Onesiphorus : — L
Men  abb  all  AnvANCiNO  towards  a  solemn  and  momentous  period.  II.  At
THAT  period  MEN  WILL  STAND  IN  NEED  OF  MERCY.  When  the  apostlc  cxpresses
a  wish  that  his  friend  may  receive  mercy,  it  must  be  evident  to  every  one  that
of  course  he  needs  it — that  without  its  communication  it  is  impossible  that  he
can  be  happy.  Another  inference  to  be  drawn  from  this  principle  is,  that,  in
consequence  of  this  transgression  by  which  we  are  characterised,  we  are,  of  course,
in  danger  of  punishment  by  that  great  Almighty  Being  wh3m,  in  this  manner,  we


CHAP.  I.]  n.  TIMOTHT.  '  Ul

have  offended.    Bat  now,  yoa  must  at  onoe  perceive  the  whole  force  of  the  state-
ment from  which  these  particulars  have  been  deduced.    For  the  purpose  of  escap-
ing the  condemnation  of  the  last  great  daj,  there  must  be  a  communication  of  the
mercy  of  the  Lord.     III.  Thb  uebct  or  Qod  is  dilioently  to  bb  sought  in  thb
PBKBENT  WORLD.     1,  A  portioH  Lq  the  provision  of  Divine  grace  ought  to  be  sought
by  you  as  a  matter  of  intense  and  impassioned  desire.    2.  A  portion  in  the  full
provision  of  Divine  grace  should  be  sought  in  the  spirit  of  fervent  and  importunate
prayer.    We  must  remark — IV.  To  ebckive  mebct  is  to  possess  thb  enjoyment  or
A  VAST  AND  iNOALCUiiABLE  BLES8INO.    I  Scarcely  dare  venture  for  a  single  moment
to  occupy  your  time  by  attempting  to  describe  the  blessed  consequences  of  having
the  Judge  for  your  friend  on  that  day  of  eternal  retribution,  feeling,  as  I  do,  that
the  grandeur   of    the  property  may    appear  diminished   by   the    feebleness   of
the  description.      V.  Those  who  have  the  hope   of  mbbct  should  desibe  its
"9ABTicrPATioN  BY  OTHERS.    It  has  already  been  observed,  that  the  prayer  of  the
apostle  is  that  peculiar  form  of  prayer  which  is  known  by  the  name  of  intercession.
Here  is  a  beautiful  example  of  that  spirit  which  we,  as  the  possessors  and  heirs  of
mercy,  should  cultivate  towards  those  in  whom  we  feel  an  interest.    {Jamea  Parsons.)
Mercy  in  the  day   of  judgment : — L   "  That  day."      Its   date  is  not   given.    It
would  but  gratify  curiosity.    Its  length  is  not  specified.    It  will  be  long  enough
for  the  deliberate  judgment  of  all  men.     Its  coming  will  be  solemnly  proclaimed.
Ushered  in  with  pomp  of  angels,  sound  of  trumpet,  <fec.,  none  will  be  ignorant  of  it.
Its  glory,  the  revelation  of  Jesus  from  heaven  upon  the  throne  of  judgment.
This  will  make  it  most  memorable.     Its  event,  the  assembly  of  quick  and  dead,  and
the  last  assize.    Its  character,  excitement  of  joy  or  terror.    Its  personal  interest  to
each  one  of  us  will  be  paramount.     U.  The  mebcy.    To  arouse  us,  let  us  think  of
those  who  will  find  no  mercy  of  the  Lord  in  that  day : — Those  who  had  no  mercy
on  others.    Those  who  lived  and  died  impenitent.    Those  who  neglected  salvation.
How  shall  they  escape  ?    Those  who  said  they  needed  no  mercy  :  the  self-righteous.
Those  who   sought  no  mercy:  procrastinators,  and  the  indifferent.     Those  who
scoffed  at  Christ,  and  refused  the  gospeL   Those  who  sold  their  Lord,  and  apostatised
from  Him.     Those  who  made  a  false  and  hypocritical  profession.    IIL  To-day.
Bemember  that  now  is  the  accepted  time;  for  you  are  not  yet  standing  at  the
judgment  bar.    You  are  yet  where  prayer  is  heard.     You  are  where  faith  will  save
all  who   exercise   it  towards  Christ.    You   are   where    the   Spirit  strives.     You
are  where  sin  may  be  forgiven,  at  once,  and  for  ever.      You  are  where  grace
reigns,  even    though   sin  abounds.      To-day  is  the  day  of    grace;    to-morrow
may  be  a  day  of  another  sort,  for  yon  at  least,  and  possibly  for  all  mankind.
The  Judge  is  at  the  door.     Seek  mercy  immediately,  that  mercy  may  be  yours
for  ever.     (C  H.  Spurgeon.)        Going  to  receive  mercy  : — When  Thomas  Hooker
was  dying,  one  said  to  him,  "Brother,   you  are  going  to  receive  the  reward
of  your  labours."    He  humbly  replied,  "Brother,  I  am  going  to  receive  mercy."
The  Christian  manner  of  expressing  gratitude  : — The  enemies  of  Christianity,  while
stating  its  supposed  defects,  have  asserted  that  it  recognises  neither  patriotism  nor
friendship  as  virtues  ;  that  it  discountenances,  or  at  least  does  not  encourage,  the
exercise  of  gratitude  to  human  benefactors ;  and  that  its  spirit  is  unfriendly  to
many  of  the  finer  feelings  and  sensibilities  of  our  nature.     But  these  assertions
prove  only  that  those  who  make  them  are  unacquainted  with  the  religion,  which
they  blindly  assail.    Nothing  more  is  necessary  to  show  that  they  are  groundless
than  a  reference  to  the  character  of  St.  PauL     We  readily  admit,  however,  or  rather
we  assert  it  as  an  important  truth,  that  his  religion,  though  it  extinguished  none
of  these  feelings,  modified  them  all.    It  infused  into  them  its  own  spirit,  regulated
their  exercises  and  expressions  by  its  own  views,  and  thus  stamped  upon  them  a
new  and  distinctive  character.     It  baptized  them,  if  I  may  be  allowed  the  expres-
sion, with  the  Holy  Ghost,  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ.     Hence,  the  apostle  ex-
pressed neither  bis  patriotism,  nor  his  friendship,  nor  his  gratitude,  precisely  as  he
would  have  done,  before  his  conversion  to  Christianity.     These  remarks,  so  far  at
least  as  they  relate  to  gratitude,  are  illustrated  and  verified  by  the  passage  before
ns,  in  which  he  expresses  his  sense  of  obligation  to  a  human  benefactor.    He  did
not  idolise  his  benefactor ;  he  did  not  load  him  with  flattering  applauses  ;  but  from
the  fulness  of  his  heart  he  pouied  out  a  prayer  for  him  to  that  God  who  alone
oould  reward  him  as  the  apostle  wished  him  to  be  rewarded.    It  is  more  than
possible,  that  to  some  persons  this  mode  of  expressing  gratitude  will  appear  frigid,
onmeaning,  and  unsatisfactory.    They  will  regard  it  as  a  very  cheap  and  easy
method  of  requiting  a  benefactor ;  ^d  were  the  case  their  own,  they  would  probably


12>  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chip.  i.

prefer  a  small  pecuniary  recompense,  or  an  honorary  reward,  to  all  the  prayers
which  even  an  apostle  coald  offer  on  their  behalf.  It  is  certain,  however,  that  such
persons  estimate  the  value  of  objects  very  erroneously,  and  that  their  religious
views  and  feelings  differ  very  widely  from  those  which  were  entertained  by  St.  Paul.
But  what  is  the  precise  import  of  the  petition — that  he  might  then  find  mercy — and
what  did  it  imply  ?  To  pray  that  any  one  may  find  mercy  of  him  at  the  judgment
day,  is  to  pray  that  he  may  then  be  pardoned,  or  saved  from  deserved  punishment,
and  accepted  and  treated  as  if  he  were  righteous.  St.  Paul,  when  he  prayed  thai
Onesiphorus  might  find  mercy  of  his  Judge  at  that  day,  must  then  have  believed,
that  he  would  at  that  day  need  mercy  or  pardon.  And  if  so,  he  must  have  believed
that,  in  the  sight  of  God,  he  was  guilty ;  for  by  the  guilty  alone  can  pardoning  mercy
be  needed.  The  innocent  need  nothing  but  justice.  A  distinguished  modern  philo-
sopher, Adam  Smith,  well  known  by  his  celebrated  treatise  on  the  Wealth  of
Nations,  has  some  remarks  relative  to  this  subject,  which  are  so  just  and  apposite,
that  you  will  readily  excuse  me  for  quoting  them.  "  Man,"  says  this  writer, "  when
about  to  appear  before  a  being  of  infinite  perfection,  can  feel  but  little  confidence
in  his  own  merit,  or  in  the  imperfect  propriety  of  his  own  conduct.  To  such  a
being  he  can  scarce  imagine  that  his  littleness  and  weakness  should  ever  seem  to
be  the  proper  object  either  of  esteem  or  regard.  But  he  can  easily  conceive  how
the  numberless  violations  of  duty  of  which  he  has  been  guilty  should  render  him
the  object  of  aversion  and  punishment ;  nor  can  he  see  any  reason  why  the  Divine
indignation  should  not  be  let  loose  without  any  restraint  upon  so  vile  an  insect  as  he
is  sensible  that  he  himself  must  appear  to  be.  If  he  would  still  hope  for  happi-
ness he  is  conscious  that  he  cannot  demand  it  from  the  justice,  but  that  he  must
entreat  it  from  the  mercy  of  God.  Bepentance,  sorrow,  humiliation,  contrition  at
the  thought  of  his  past  conduct,  are,  upon  this  account,  the  sentiments  which
become  him,  and  seem  to  be  the  only  means  which  he  has  left  of  appeasing  that
wrath  which  he  has  justly  provoked.  He  even  distrusts  the  efficacy  of  all  these,
and  naturally  fears,  lest  the  wisdom  of  God  should  not,  like  the  weakness  of  man,
be  prevailed  upon  to  spare  the  crime  by  the  most  importunate  lamentations  of  the
criminal.  Some  other  intercession,  some  other  sacrifice,  some  other  atonement,  he
imagines,  must  be  made  for  him,  beyond  what  he  himself  is  capable  of  making,
before  the  purity  of  the  Divine  justice  can  be  reconciled  to  his  manifold  offences."  It
may  perhaps  be  said,  if  the  apostle's  views  were  such  as  have  now  been  described,
if  he  believed  that  justice  must  pronounce  a  sentence  of  condemnation  on  all  with-
out exception,  on  what  could  he  found  a  hope  that  either  himself,  or  his  benefactor,
or  any  other  man,  will  find  mercy  of  the  Lord  at  that  day  ?  These  questions  are
perfectly  reasonable  and  proper,  and  it  would  be  impossible  to  answer  them  in  such
a  manner  as  to  justify  the  apostle,  were  not  a  satisfactory  answer  furnished  by  the
gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.  That  gospel  reveals  to  us  a  glorious  plan,  devised  by  infinite
wisdom,  in  which  the  apparently  conflicting  claims  of  justice  and  mercy  are  perfectly
reconciled.  {E.  Payson,  D.D.)  Remember  the  reckoning  day  : — "What  shall  we
think  of  such  who  never  mind  this  day?  Verily,  they  are  much  affected  with  earthly
pleasures  and  profits,  and  have  Uttle  regard  of  the  greatest  good.  Many  men  in
the  inn  of  this  world  are  like  the  swaggerers  and  prodigals  in  a  tavern,  who  call
freely,  eat  and  drink,  laugh  and  are  fat,  but  never  mind  either  the  reckoning  or  the
time  of  harvest ;  for  they  have  sown  no  good  seed,  neither  have  wherewith  to  dis-
charge the  shot :  therefore  suffer  these  things  willingly  to  slip  and  absent  them-
selves out  from  their  minds,  because  they  have  or  can  expect  no  commodity  by
either.  But  the  faithful  man  is  of  a  contrary  mind  ;  for  he  is  sparing  in  expense,
and  hath  scattered  much  good  grain,  the  which  will  bring  a  goodly  crop  at  his
Master's  appearing,  the  great  day  of  reaping,  both  of  which  cause  him  often  to  look
opward.     (J.  Barlow,  D.D.)  Mercy  on  the  judgment  day  : — I.  An  important

SEASON.  "That  day."  The  day  is  that  which  is  elsewhere  called  "  the  last  day,"
because  then  the  end  of  this  world's  history,  as  a  place  of  trial  at  least,  will  be
come  ;  it  is  called  also  "  the  great  day,"  because  then  scenes  unparalleled  before  in
grandeur  will  be  unfolded,  and  affairs  that  have  never  been  surpassed  in  magnitude
will  be  transacted — such  scenes  and  affairs  as  will  throw  into  the  shade  the  most
splendid  spectacles  and  momentous  transactions  of  time.  II.  An  important
BLESSiNO.  For  a  man  to  find  mercy  even  now,  amid  the  trials  and  changes  and
imperfections  of  this  present  life,  is  to  be  truly  blessed.  It  is  to  have  guaranteed
to  him  all  that  is  included  in  eternal  life— that  gift  of  God — that  munificent  dona-
tion of  infinite  mercy.  Nor  will  the  largness  be  diminished,  or  the  security  invali-
dated, on  the  day  of  judgment.    1.  There  are  many  considerations  besides  which


CHAP.  I.]  IT.  TIMOTHY.  12i

go  to  illustrate  the  high  importance  and  exceeding  desirableness  of  mercy  on  that
day ;  and  one  of  these  is,  that  it  will  then  be  felt  to  be  peculiarly  needful.  2.
Another  consideration,  tending  to  enhance  the  value  of  the  blessing,  is  that  it  will
not  be  shared  in  by  aU.  This  is  obviously  implied  in  the  apostle's  intercessory  peti-
tion. K  the  mariner  who  is  saved  from  the  wreck,  when  ail  his  shipmates  are  lost,
estimates  his  preservation  more  highly  than  he  who  has  returned  to  the  desired
haven  with  them  all  in  safety,  must  it  not  seem  a  glorious  benefit  to  appear  as
•'  vessels  of  mercy  prepared  unto  glory,"  when  many  feUow-sinners  are  found  to  be
"  vessels  of  wrath  fitted  to  destruction  "  f  3.  Another  consideration  still,  which
may  well  exalt  the  blessing  in  our  eyes,  is  that  if  mercy  be  not  found  then,  it  will
never  be  found.  4.  And  yet  another  circumstance  which  magnifies  the  value  of  the
blessing  is,  that  the  condition  of  those  by  whom  mercy  shall  not  then  be  found  will
be  pre-eminently  wretched.  Not  to  find  mercy  on  that  day  is  to  be  undone,  alto-
gether and  eternally  undone.  Lessons  :  1.  If  mercy  is  to  be  found  at  last,  it  must
be  sought  now.  2.  Again,  if  mercy  is  to  be  found  at  all,  it  must  be  sought  through
the  mediation  of  Christ.  3.  And,  in  fine,  if  mercy  is  to  be  found  of  the  Lord,  it
must  be  sought  in  His  service.  (D.  Davidson.)  The  requital  of  friendship : —
Paul  was  the  friend  of  Onesiphorus,  and  how  did  he  manifest  his  friendship  ?  In-
carcerated and  enchained,  poor  and  destitute,  he  could  not  requite,  in  kind,  his
benefactor's  generosity.  But  another  mode  of  expressing  friendship  was  left  him,
and  as  he  was  shut  up  to  it  by  circumstances,  so  he  turned  to  it  with  fondness.  As
the  waters  of  a  spring,  when  prevented  from  flowing  forth  in  their  natural  channel,
mount  forcibly  up  towards  heaven — as  the  portion  that  is  prevented,  by  exhalation,
from  diffusing  fertility  along  the  coiurse  of  the  stream,  descends  afterwards  in  fertiU-
Bing  showers  ;  so  the  emotions  of  his  overflowing  heart,  being  pent  up  in  one  direc-
tion by  the  tyranny  of  man,  ascended  in  devout  aspiration  to  God,  and  though  seeming
to  vanish  in  the  vapour  of  fruitless  wishes,  entailed  the  communication  of  invaluable
blessings.       (Ibid. )  The  value  of  a  good  man's  prayers  : — I  would  rather

have  the  gift  of  a  brother's  faithful  prayers  than  of  his  plentiful  substance.  And  1
feel  that  when  I  have  given  to  a  brother  my  faithful  prayers  I  have  given  him  my  best
'  and  greatest  gift.  (Edward  Irving.)  Prayers  for  the  dead  : — That  Onesiphorus
was  dead  is  a  gratuitous  assumption.  The  fact  that  Paul  nowhere  else  prays  for  the
dead  is  fatal  to  the  notion  here.  (J.  Bryce,LL.D.)  In  case  even  that  Onesiphorus
were  reaUy  dead  at  the  time  of  the  writing  of  this  Epistle,  still  the  Boman  Gatholio
interpreters  are  in  error  when  they  find  in  ver.  18  a  proof  of  the  lawfulness  and  obliga-
tion for  intercessory  prayers  for  the  dead.  The  case  here  was  altogether  special,  and
carmot,  without  great  wilfulness,  be  applied  as  the  foundation  of  a  general  rule  for  all
the  dead.  On  the  other  side,  it  is  often  forgotten  that  the  gospel  nowhere  lays  down
a  positive  prohibition  to  follow  with  our  wishes  and  prayers,  if  our  heart  impel  us
thereto,  our  departed  while  in  the  condition  of  separation ;  and  hence,  in  any  case,
it  is  well  to  distinguish  between  the  Christian  idea  which  lies  at  the  foundation  of
such  inward  needs,  and  the  form  of  later  Church  rite  and  practice.  (Dr.  Van
Oosterzee. )  Beneficent  wishes  for  the  dead  : — On  the  assumption  already  men-
tioned as  probable  (that  Onesiphorus  was  dead),  this  would,  of  course,  be  a
prayer  for  the  dead.  The  reference  to  the  great  day  of  judgment  falls  in  with
this  hypothesis.  Such  prayers  were,  as  we  know  from  2  Mace.  xii.  41-45,
common  among  the  Jews  a  century  or  more  before  St.  Paul's  time,  and  there  is
good  ground  for  thinking  that  they  entered  into  the  ritual  of  every  synagogue
and  were  to  be  seen  in  the  epitaphs  in  every  Jewish  burial-place.  From  the  con-
troversial point  of  view  this  may  appear  to  favour  the  doctrine  and  practice  of  the
Church  of  Rome,  but  facts  are  facts  apart  from  their  controversial  bearing.  It  is,
at  any  rate,  clear  that  such  a  simple  utterance  of  hope  in  prayer,  like  the  Shaldm
(peace)  of  Jewish,  and  the  Requiescat  or  Refrigerium  of  early  Christian  epi-
taphs, and  the  like  prayers  in  early  liturgies,  though  they  sanction  the  natural  oat-
pouring  of  affectionate  yearnings,  are  as  far  as  possible  from  the  full-blown  Bomiah
theory  of  poxgatory.    (£.  H.  Flumptre,  DJ>.)


114  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [ou».  a.


CE[AFTEB  n.

Ybu  L  Thon  therefore,  my  son,  be  strong  in  the  grace  that  Is  In  Christ  Jeras.^

The  eoniwetion : — Ovv  points  back  to  the  defection  of  others,  contrasting  it  with  what
8t.  Paul  is  satisfied  will  prove  the  faithfulness  of  Timothy,  (if.  B.  Reynolds,  D.D.)
Imitate  the  loyal: — It  is  as  though  he  said.  Imitate  the  one  loyal  follower  (One-
aiphorus),  and  make  up  to  me  for  the  faithless  conduct  of  so  many  false  friends.
{H.  D.  M.  Spence,  M.A.)  Strength  through  partnership  with  Christ : — Steren
Gerard  once  told  a  poor  cartman  to  purchase  a  cargo  of  sugar,  promising  to
back  him.  From  that  moment  the  cartman's  wisdom  and  credit  were  equal  to
Gerard's,  for  Gerard  was  his.  If  the  cartman  had  forgotten  his  wise,  rich  friend,
and  acted  on  his  own  judgment  and  credit,  he  would  have  been  weak  again,  and
as  foolish  as  weak.  The  cartman  alone  was  nothing  without  wisdom  or  credit,
but  the  cartman  and  Gerard  were  strong.  Our  strength  is  in  partnership  with
Christ.        Christians  strong  in  Christ  Jesus: — I.  Consideb  thb  ddtt  inccmbeni

ON   ALL   WHO    HATB  A   MOO)  FOB   HEAVEN,   NAUELT,   TO   BE   STBONO.      What   is    it   tO   bO

strong  in  the  sense  of  the  tezt  ?  It  presupposeth  one  thing,  namely,  they  must  be
spiiitually  alive.  To  be  strong  imports  three  things.  1.  To  be  ready  for  action,
according  to  the  difficulties  you  may  meet  with  in  your  way.  2.  That  you  be
resolved.  Thus  David  exhorts  Solomon,  *'  Take  heed  now,"  Baidhe,  "for  the  Lord
hath  chosen  thee,  to  build  an  house  for  the  sanctuary :  be  strong  and  do  it."  That
is,  be  fully  resolved  and  peremptory,  so  as  not  to  be  diverted  by  any  emerging
diMculties.    8.  That  you  be  of  good  courage.    What  need  is  there  to  be  strong  ?

1.  You  have  much  work  before  you.  The  work  of  your  own  salvation  is  upon  your
hand  (Phil.  ii.  12).    You  have  also  to  serve  yoor  generation,  by  the  will  of  God.

2.  You  will  meet  with  much  opposition  in  your  work.    I  now  proceed — II.  To

CONSmEB  THE  DIBECTION,  NAMELT,  THAT  THOSE  WHO  WOULD  BE  STBONO,  UUST  BE  STBONO

IN  THE  OBACE  THAT  IS  IN  Chbist  Jesds.  What  Is  the  grace  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus  ?
1.  Belative  grace,  that  is  the  free  favour  of  God  to  poor  sinners,  by  which  they  are
embraced  in  the  arms  of  His  love  unto  salvation.  2.  Beal  grace,  that  is  the  fulness
of  the  Spirit,  and  His  graces,  lodged  in  Jesus  Christ,  as  the  fountain  and  head  of
influences,  from  which  they  are  to  be  derived,  into  all  His  members.  "  For  it  hath
pleased  the  Father,  that  in  Him  should  all  fulness  dwell.  And  out  of  His  fulness
have  all  we  received,  and  grace  for  gracer'  What  is  it  to  be  strong  in  the  grace
that  is  in  Christ  Jesus?  1.  It  is  to  be  animated  to  duty  by  the  faith  of  that  grace
that  is  in  Christ  Jesus  for  us,  both  relative  and  real.  2.  It  is  to  be  strengthened  to
duty  by  supplies  of  grace  derived  from  Christ  Jesus  by  faith.  Why  must  those  that
would  be  strong  be  strong  in  the  grace  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus  ?  1.  Because  all
those  that  would  be  strong  must  be  strong  as  members  of  Christ,  as  branches  of  the
vine.  2.  Because  the  grace  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus  is  only  sufficient  to  bear  us  through.
(T.  Boston,  D.D.)  Strength  of  grace : — I.  Multiplicity  of  abouments  should
PBOVOEE  TO  OBEDIENCE.  "  Thou,  therefore."  II.  Men  eegabd  those  most  who  abb
the  likest  minded  to  themselves.  "  My  son.''  HI.  Steength  of  grace  is  necessaby
FOB  A  Chbistian.  1.  ComeUness  pleads  for  it.  For  is  not  Christ  the  root,  we  the
branches?  He  the  foundation,  we  the  building  ?  Our  head,  and  we  His  members  <
And  betwixt  these  ought  there  not  to  be  an  analogy,  a  just  proportion,  otherwise,  would
it  not  be  unseemly!?  Should  one  finger  stand  still,  would  we  not  repute  it  a  blemish  ?
and  shall  we  not  do  the  same  in  this  mystical  body  ?  2.  Necessity  requires  it.  We
mast  fast,  watch,  and  pray,  fight  with  principalities,  powers,  and  spiritual  enemies,
which  are  in  high  places.  And  will  not  crosses  come,  thick  and  threefold — tempta-
tions, desertions,  sickness,  and  death,  too  ?  What  can  or  will  do  these,  suffer  these
things,  anything  but  strength  of  grace,  spiritual  power  ?  What  manner  of  men
ought  ministers  to  be,  thundering  in  preaching,  fervent  in  prayer,  shining  in  hfe,
burning  in  spirit  ?  And  what  is  necessary  for  a  preacher  is  required  of  every
Christian,  strength  of  grace.  Strength  is  tried — (1)  In  prosperity :  art  thou  humble
in  thine  own  eyes  7  Is  thy  heart,  with  the  remembrance  of  the  Lord's  mercies,
made  hot  ?  and  is  it  thy  greatest  care,  how  to  promote  his  glory  t  When  the  rain
falls,  the  waters  swell :  the  sua  shines,  the  sweetest  flowers  smell :  the  spring
approacheth,  all  creatures  revive.  So  when  grace  grows,  our  joy  is  full ;  our
mouths  are  trumpets  sounding  aloud,  and  every  member  of  the  body  is  an  active
instrument,  a  never-wearied  agent  to  fight  the  battles,  and  finish  the  great  works
of  our  Lord  and  Master.  A  willow  bows  with  a  small  blast :  an  oak  endures,
stands  upright  in  a  storm.    (2)  In  adversity:  art  thoa  patient?  &o.    The  horse


CHAT,  n.]  II.  TIMOTHY.  125

neighs  at  the  trampet ;  the  leviathan  langhs  at  the  spear :  so  a  strong  man
in  grace,  slights  crosses,  &q.  Helps  to  grow  strong  in  grace.  1.  Hast  thou,  in
thy  apprehension  some  seed  of  sanctification?  then  seriously  think  of  it,  highly
esteem  of  it,  and  bless  thou  the  Lord  for  it.  2.  Besolve  with  thyself  the  highest  period
of  grace,  whereof  a  created  nature  is  capable.  Scholars  aim  at  the  highest  degree ;
citizens,  at  the  most  honoorable  office ;  and  all  tradesmen,  at  the  increase  of  goods:
BO  should  weak  Christians  to  be  rich  in  the  grace  of  God  :  strong  in  the  Lord.  3.
Add  to  these  two,  practice  :  exercise  thy  talent ;  put  it  forth,  for  thy  own,  and  thy
Master's  advantage.  Is  it  not  written  that  many  acts  produce  an  habit,  and  to  him
that  hath  shall  be  given?  4.  Neglect  no  means  whereby  grace  is  begun,  or
increased.  IV.  All  obacb  is  fbou  Chbist  Jesus.  Whether  we  consider  the  begin-
ning, kinds,  or  degrees ;  all  grace  is  in  Him,  and  by  Him.  Is  it  not  written,  that
Christ  ascended  on  high  ;  gave  gifts  unto  men  ?  Of  His  fulness,  are  we  not  said  to
receive  grace  for  grace  ?  that  is  of  aU  the  kinds  which  are  in  the  Head,  the  same  be
derived  to  His  members.  {J.  Barlow,  D.D.)  Moral  energy  : — I.  Moral  enebqt
A  DrviNB  GIFT.  This  verse  deals  with  the  great  motive  power  of  the  Christian
religion,  what  imparts  inward  strength  to  frail  humanity.  Much  besides  is,  so  to
speak,  machinery,  and  this — the  grace  of  Christ,  is  the  steam,  the  driving  force,
without  which  the  most  perfect  machinery  is  useless.  Paul  enjoins  Timothy  to
obtain  this  force,  this  inward  energy  of  the  soul ;  and  by  calling  it  "  grace  "  the
apostle  teaches  that  it  is  not  like  the  unconscious  forces  of  nature — the  power  of
wind,  or  water,  or  fire,  or  gravity — which  human  skill  can  have  at  command  and
direct ;  but  a  power  of  a  different,  a  spiritual  order,  and  bestowed  on  other  conditions.
For  it  flows  from  the  grace  or  kindness  of  God,  and  it  is,  therefore,  called  "  grace,"
just  as  an  act  prompted  by  kindness  is  called  a  kindness,  and  the  same  with  a
favour.  II.  Christ  the  source  of  moral  energy.  The  Christian  faith  is  that  the
Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  fountain  of  all  power,  and  the  tire  of  all  love,  dwelling  in
the  heart,  as  well  as  in  heaven :  "  Who  of  God  is  made  unto  us  wisdom,  and
righteousness,  sanctification,  and  redemption."  That  is  the  faith  of  Christ ;  and  it
cannot  be  said  of  it  that  it  is  a  weak,  unsubstantial,  and  merely  sentimental  religion.
It  is  based  on  the  most  sublime  facts,  for  which  it  offers  appropriate  evidence ;  and
the  power  of  those  facts  to  arrest,  attract,  rivet,  and  renew  the  hearts  of  weak  and
sinful  men,  and  awaken  in  them  an  enthusiasm  of  trust,  and  gratitude,  and  devotion
— the  history  of  our  religion  for  eighteen  hundred  years  must  declare,  for  no  mere
language  can.  HI.  The  coMMAin>  to  be  strong  in  Christ.  It  is  very  charaoteristio
of  Scripture,  and  of  its  close  conformity  to  human  nature,  even  in  its  problems,  that
this  great  central  thought,  of  the  Divine  source  of  moral  energy,  should  be  put  into
the  form  of  a  command  to  be  obeyed — an  injunction,  for  the  observance  of  which
man  is  responsible.  It  is  not  said  to  us,  "Lie  helpless  till  the  Divine  energy  of
Christ  flows  into  your  soul  "  ;  but,  "  Be  inwardly  strengthened  in  the  grace  that  is
in  Christ  Jesus."  "  I  charge  you  to  become  empowered  with  that  energy."  Such  is
our  strange  life,  our  mysterious  nature.  Dependent  on  God  yet  responsible  to  Him  t
••  It  is  God  that  worketh  in  you."  "  Work  out  your  own  salvation."  ••  I,  yet  not
I,"  says  Paul.  "  By  grace  ye  are  saved  "  and  healed  ;  and  this  grace  has  its  centre
and  fount  in  Christ.  But  it  is  your  duty  to  have  much  of  it.  (T.  M.  Herbert,  M.J.)
Our  true  strength : — ^Luther  relates  concerning  one  Staupicius,  a  German  divine,
that  he  acknowledged  that  before  he  came  to  understand  the  free  and  powerful
grace  of  Christ,  he  resolved  and  vowed  a  hundred  times  against  a  particular  sin ;
yet  could  never  get  power  over  it,  nor  his  heart  purified  from  it,  till  he  came  to  see
that  he  trusted  too  much  to  his  own  resolutions,  and  too  little  to  Jesus  Christ ;  but
when  his  faith  had  engaged  against  his  sin,  he  obtained  the  victory.  {J.  L.  Nye.)
Christ  qualifies  His  servants  : — We  are  His  "  servants, "  A  master  does  more  than
engage  a  servant :  he  also  gives  him  the  means  whereby  he  may  work.  The  trades-
man does  not  put  his  servants  into  a  shop  wherein  there  are  no  goods  to  sell ;  the
farmer  does  not  send  his  servants  into  the  field  without  plough,  harrow,  or  spade ;
the  surgeon  does  not  withhold  drugs  ;  nor  the  lawyer  parchment  and  pens  from  his
servant.  It  is  even  so  with  our  great  Master.  He  calls  us  to  work,  and,  if  we  ask
Him,  He  will  qualify  us  for  it.  (T.  R.  Stevenson.)  Self-sufficiency: — A  certain
alchemist  who  waited  upon  Leo  X.  declared  that  he  had  discovered  how  to  trans-
mute the  baser  metals  into  gold.  He  expected  to  receive  a  sum  of  money  for  his
discovery,  but  Leo  was  no  such  simpleton ;  he  merely  gave  him  a  huge  purse  in
which  to  keep  the  gold  which  he  would  make.  There  was  wisdom  as  well  as
sarcasm  in  the  present.  That  is  precisely  what  Ck>d  does  with  proud  men,  he  lets
them  have  the  opportunity  to  do  what  thej  boasted  ol  being  able  to  do.     I  never


126  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n;

beard  that  so  much  as  a  solitary  gold  piece  was  dropped  into  Leo's  purse,  and  I  am
sure  you  will  never  be  spiritually  rich  by  what  you  can  do  in  your  own  strength.
Be  stripped,  brother,  and  then  God  may  be  pleased  to  clothe  you  with  honour,  but
not  till  then.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Strong  in  Christ  Jesus  : — When  Wingfield
expressed  his  pity  for  Kirby,  who  was  condemned  to  die  for  the  truth,  the  undaunted
martyr  replied,  "Fire,  water,  and  sword  are  in  His  hands,  who  will  not  suffer  them
to  separate  me  from  Him."  Here  was  power  from  on  high  perfected  in  human
weakness.  Nor  was  it  less  manifested  in  another  who  exclaimed,  "  If  every  hair  on
my  head  were  a  man,  they  should  suffer  death  in  the  faith  in  which  I  now  stand."
It  was  in  the  exhaustion  of  age,  and  after  long  imprisonment,  hardship,  and  ill-
treatment,  that  Latimer,  when  brought  out  to  be  burnt  at  Oxford,  lifted  his  wrinkled
hands  towards  heaven,  and  cried,  "O  God,  I  thank  Thee  that  Thou  hast  reserved
me  to  die  this  death."  (C  Graham.)  ChrisVs  sufficiency  never  failing  : — In
travelling  through  the  West  of  England,  you  come  ever  and  anon  upon  large  tracts
of  country,  bleak,  barren,  and  desolate ;  no  tree,  no  flower,  no  blade  of  grass,  no
habitation  of  man.  In  these  wild  and  dreary  wastes  you  find  proofs  in  abundance
that  the  spots  were  not  always  desert.  The  deep,  black,  yawning  shaft  of  many  a
mine ;  the  broken  or  decaying  timbers  which  still  stand  around,  or  over  the  mouth
of  those  mines ;  the  remains  of  cottages ;  all,  all  tell  you  that  the  place  was  not
always  a  wilderness.  But  the  mines  have  been  rifled  of  their  treasures,  the  last  vein
has  been  opened,  the  last  bucket  of  precious  ore  has  been  drawn  up  to  the  surface
of  the  ground ;  there  is  nothing  more  to  be  gotten  from  the  once  rich  earth ;  and
BO  the  miners  have  all  departed  to  seek  a  supply  elsewhere.  Now,  as  you  stand  there,
in  that  solitude  and  desolation,  hearing  no  more  the  miner's  song,  and  missing  the
busy  hum  of  labour,  which  perhaps  years  before  had  greeted  you  as  you  walked  over
those  Cornish  lands,  you  can  scarcely  help  contrasting  those  empty  mines  with  that
ever  rich  and  overflowing  treasury  of  blessing  which  a  gracious  God  has  opened
to  all  His  people  in  Jesus  Christ.  {A.  C.  Price,  B.A.)  Strong  through  faith  : —
On  an  occasion  of  great  drought,  which  the  rain-makers  attributed  to  the  mis-
sionaries, a  Bechuana  chief  with  twelve  spears  came  to  command  Eobert  Moffat  to
leave  the  territory  on  pain  of  death ;  but  he  said,  "  You  may  shed  my  blood,  you
may  burn  my  dwelling ;  but  my  decision  is  made  :  I  do  not  leave  your  country."
^nd  the  cause  of  all  this  was  his  faith.  He  was  a  man  of  wonderful  faith ;  he
believed  the  Gospel  was  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation,  through  faith  in  Christ
Jesus.  He  felt  that  his  Master  was  ever  as  near  to  him,  and  as  full  of  love,  as  the
wife  of  his  bosom  ;  he  felt  that  Christ  must  reign  until  He  should  put  all  things
beneath  His  feet ;  and  just  because  he  was  so  strong  in  faith,  he  was  so  strong
altogether.  (J.  C.  Harrison.)  The  conflict  and  the  strength  (vers.  1-7) : — In  these
seven  verses  I  see — I.  The  apostle  encmebatino  the  sort  of  i^aboubs  and  buffer-
ings WHICH  HIS  TODNG  DISCIPLE  TiMOTHY  WOULD  HAVE  TO  ENDUBE.  II.  ThE  GBACB
WHICH  IS  SUGGESTED  TO  TiMOTHY  AS  SUFFICIENT  TO    SUPPOBT  HIM.      (D.    WilsOn,  M.A.)

The  holy  calling  of  the  minister  of  the  Lord: — ^L  The  extent  of  this  calling
(vers.  1-7).  Presented  under  figures  1.  Of  the  soldier.  2.  Of  the  athlete.  3.  Of
the  husbandman.  II,  Motives  fob  the  exercise  of  this  calling  (vers.  8-13).  1.
A  look  backwards  (ver.  8).  2.  A  look  around  about  one  (vers.  9,  10).  3.  A  look
orwards  (vers.  11-13).    {Van  Oosterzee.)

Ver.  2.  The  things  that  thou  hast  heard  of  me  among  many  witnesses
commit  to  foithful  men,  able  to  teach  others  also. — How  the  Church  is  to  be
continued : — I.  Caee  is  to  bb  had  that  the  Church  may  be  continued.  Art
thou  a  ruler  in  Christendom,  like  Jehosaphat  ?  Send  Levites  into  the  dark
comers  of  the  land.  Eich?  Found  colleges,  relieve  the  sons  of  the  prophets,
and  repair  the  decayed  walls  of  Jerusalem.  Hast  thou  children?  Nurse  them
np  in  the  fear  of  God,  teach  them  the  principles  in  the  holy  letters,  and,
with  Hannah,  dedicate  thy  firstborn  to  the  Lord.  If  thou  be  poor,  yet  pray  for
Jerusalem.     II.  By  the  Word  preached  the  Church  is  continued.     IU.   The

UOBE  witnesses,  THE  GREATER  ENCOURAGEMENT  TO    WELL-DOING.      IV.    At.T.  MINISTEBS

ABE  TO  TEACH  THE  SAME  THINGS.  As  there  is  but  onc  true  God,  one  Saviour,
Eedeemer,  Faith,  Love,  Ac,  so  but  one  law,  gospel,  doctrine,  baptism,  which  is  to
be  preached  for  their  glory  and  our  salvation.  Thrash  thy  com  out  of  God's  bam,
beat  it  forth  of  the  apostolical  rick  of  the  holy  letters ;  bring  thy  grain  into  the
market  of  the  Church,  which  prophetical  spirits  have  in  former  ages  set  to  sale ;
and  it  shall  feed  thee  and  thine  to  life  eternal,  for  be  tbou  assured  that  the  soundest
teitimouy  ii  this,  that  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  hath  spoken  it.    Y.  Minibikbs  kusz


<«HAP.  n.]  n.  TIMOTHY,  127

BB  »AiTHrnL.  And  thia  faithfulness  is  in — 1.  Doctrine.  2.  Life.  Thou  hast
known,  saith  Paul  to  Timotheus,  my  doctrine,  manner  of  living.  To  be  faithful
in  doctrine,  the  matter  what,  and  the  manner  how,  to  be  delivered  are  both  to  be
regarded.  For  matter,  it  must  be  what  we  have  received  from  the  Lord.  For  the
manner,  a  double  condition  is  to  be  observed.  First,  that  the  word  of  truth  be
divided  aright ;  each  person  have  his  portion,  according  to  his  spiritual  estate  and
disposition.  And  secon#y,  the  doctrine  must  be  intelligible,  else  how  should  the
people  be  edified  ?  Now,  as  faithfulness  in  doctrine,  so  in  life  is  required  of  a
minister.  "What  they  preach  they  are  to  practice,  for  the  vulgar  sort  be  more  led
by  examples  than  rules,  patterns  than  precepts.  Should  ministers  be  faithful  ?
Then  let  such  as  have  in  their  power  ordination,  and  induction,  lay  hands  rashly
on  no  man ;  make  choice  of  faithful,  able  persons.  VI.  Abilitt  to  teach  is
NECESSARY  FOB  A  MINISTER.  1.  Some  knowledge  of  the  tongues  and  arts  is  necessary.
For  as  the  form  lieth  closely  couched  in  the  matter,  the  kernel  in  the  shell,  so  doth
the  truth  in  the  several  languages.  2.  To  be  an  able  man  requires  a  sound
memory.  For  the  truth  being  invented,  orderly  disposed,  is  then  firmly  to  be
retained.  3.  A  door  of  utterance  is  also  necessary.  When  we  have  invented,
judged,  and  methodically  disposed  of  Divine  truths,  then  we  must  clothe  them  with
the  garment  of  apt  words.  4.  And  to  omit  many  ;  an  able  minister  must  have  his
whole  carriage  in  the  delivery  of  his  doctrine,  suitable  and  correspondent  to  it.
His  countenance,  elevation,  pronunciation,  gesture,  and  action,  are  to  vary  and  be
altered  as  the  matter  in  handling  requireth.  And  let  aU  men  make  mention  of
them  in  their  prayers.  VII.  The  same  truth  shall  be  continued  unto  the  end  of
THE  WORLD.  For  Christ  received  it  from  the  Father,  the  Holy  Ghost  from  Christ,
the  apostles  from  Him,  faithful  men  from  them ;  and  so  by  a  successive  communi-
cation it  shall  continue  for  ever.  As  one  sun  shall  enlighten  the  world,  so  one
gospel  the  minds  of  men,  until  Jesus  returns  to  judge  all  the  posterity  of  Adam.
(J.  Barlow,  D.D.)  Able  teachers  : — The  apprentice,  who  has  just  entered  the
blacksmith's  shop,  may  wear  a  leathern  apron,  and  blacken  his  hands  and  face,
but  though  he  may  try  to  make  other  boys  think  he  is  a  blacksmith,  everybody
knows  that  it  requires  years  of  hard  labour  to  make  him  an  able  workman  ;  and
«ven  after  an  apprenticeship,  some  men  are  but  very  poor  hands  at  their  trade.
So,  the  having  one's  name  entered  as  a  certified  instructor  does  not  certify  that  a
man  is  an  able  teacher.  Is  not  goodness  higher  than  arithmetic,  and  is  not  virtue
nobler  than  grammar?  Is  it  not  a  glorious  position  to  be  a  teacher  of  httle
children  ?  A  certain  philosopher  was  often  talking  about  the  garden  in  which  he
studied  and  recreated,  and  one  day  a  friend  calling  to  see  it,  was  surprised  to  find
it  consisted  of  only  a  few  square  yards.  The  friend  said,  "  Why  this  is  a  very
small  place ;  it  is  only  a  few  strides  across  I  "  The  philosopher  replied,  "  Small  I
Ah,  you  only  look  at  the  ground ;  but  if  you  look  up,  you  will  see  that  it  reaches  to
the  sky  I  "  So  it  is  with  a  little  child.  It  may  be  small ;  you  have  power  to  break
its  back  across  your  knee,  as  well  as  break  its  heart ;  but  in  this  little  child  there
is  a  pathway  to  the  heart  of  God,  and  angels  walk  therein.  Lord  Beaconsfield
said  of  Greece,  "  Let  it  be  patient ;  it  has  a  great  future  "  ;  so  I  say  that  you  must
be  patient  with  every  child,  for  it  has  a  great  future.  Let  us  be  gentle  in  the
teaching  of  little  children.  Do  you  know  how  barbarous  men  teach  bears  to  dance  ?
Let  me  tell  you.  They  play  a  flute,  and  put  the  bear  on  a  hot  iron.  Do  not  let  us
teach  children  as  if  they  were  bears.  Children  have  to  be  •'  trained."  You  know
how  a  crooked  plant  is  trained.  It  is  held  in  its  place  by  a  soft  band  that  will  not
hurt  it,  until  it  grows  in  the  right  direction.  So  children  should  be  trained  in
mind  and  body,  gently  yet  firmly,  to  be  good  and  strong.  No  two  children  are
alike  either  in  body  or  mind,  and  individual  peculiarities  must  be  studied  and
accommodated.  We  should,  one  and  all,  become  teachers  of  children  by  our
example,  which  is  far  more  powerful  than  precept ;  and  we  should  take  care
that  our  faults  do  not  turn  them  against  the  religion  we  profess.  {W.
Birch.)  A  faithful  custodian  : — The  grand  battlefield  of  Drumclog  is  where
the  hardy,  faithful  Covenanters  routed  the  cruel  Claverhouse.  I  have  stood
upon  that  battlefield  and  looked  upon  a  schoolhouse  erected  there  by  a
Scotchman,  though  there  was  not  a  house  to  be  seen  near  it,  because  he
wanted  the  faith  and  the  zeal  of  his  forefathers  to  dwell  in  those  that  might
oome  afterwards.  I  went,  after  looking  at  that  field,  into  the  house  of  a
poor  weaver.  I  heard  he  had  a  relic  of  the  great  fight  in  his  possession,  and  I
thought  I  should  hke  to  purchase  it.  He  unfurled  a  fiag  that  had  been  held  by  his
forefathers  on  the  great  day  of  the  fight,  and  on  that  flag  were  these  words,  "  God


128  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  a

and  oar  Bvrom  covenant.**  I  asked  him  if  he  would  sell  the  flag.  "  I  will  never
Bell  the  flag,"  said  he,  "  except  with  my  own  life.  I  hold  it  as  an  heirloom,  and,
however  poor  I  may  be,  I  will  hand  it  down  to  my  children ;  and  I  hope  they  will
hand  it  down  to  their  children."  The  incident  reminds  us  that  Christians  carry
a  banner,  and  are  pledged  by  their  covenant  relationship  to  Christ  to  seek  the
salvation  of  sinners,  and  thus  be  true  to  the  memory  of  those  who  preceded
them  in  the  holy  warfare.  {A.  McAulay.)  The  undying  energy  of  truth  : — Sir
Bernard  Borke  thus  touchingly  writes  in  his  "  "Vicissitudes  of  Families  " :  "  In
1850  a  pedigree-research  caused  me  to  pay  a  visit  to  the  village  of  Fyndem,
about  five  miles  south-west  of  Derby.  I  sought  for  the  ancient  hall.  Not  a
stone  remained  to  tell  where  it  had  stood !  I  entered  the  church.  Not  a  single
record  of  a  Findeme  was  there  I  I  accosted  a  villager,  hoping  to  glean  some
stray  traditions  of  the  Findemes.  *  Findemes  1 '  said  he, '  we  have  no  Findemes
here,  but  we  have  something  that  once  belonged  to  them :  we  have  Findemes'
flowers.*  '  Show  them  me,'  I  replied,  and  the  old  man  led  me  into  a  field
which  still  retained  faint  traces  of  terraces  and  foimdations.  •  There,'  said  he,
pointing  to  a  bank  of  garden  flowers  grown  wild,  'there  are  the  Findemes'
flowers,  brought  by  Sir  Geoffrey  from  the  Holy  Land,  and,  do  what  we  will,
they  will  never  die  I '"  So  be  it  with  each  of  us.  Should  our  names  perish,  may
the  truths  we  taught,  the  virtues  we  cultivated,  the  good  works  we  initiated,
live  on  and  blossom  with  undying  energy.     (C  H.  Spurgeon.)        Setting  others

to  work: Nasmyth  says  that   when  he  introduced  lus  great  steam-hammer,  it

not  only  itself  produced  marvellous  results,  but  •♦  its  active  rhythmic  sound,  by
some  sympathetic  agency,  quickened  the  strokes  of  every  hammer,  chisel,  and
file  in  his  workmen's  hands,  and  nearly  doubled  the  output  of  work."  And  is
not  this  true  of  some  noble  workers  whom  we  could  name?  More  than  half
jlr.  Moody's  power  consists  in  his  capacity  of  setting  other  people  to  work  by
his  own  earnestness.  {W .  Fuller  ton.)  The  genius  of  the  trv£  teacher : — Speak-
ing of  art  training,  Mr.  Ruskin  says:  "Until  a  man  has  passed  through  a
course  of  academy  studentship,  and  can  draw  in  an  improved  manner  with
French  chalk,  and  knows  foreshortening  and  perspective,  and  something  of
anatomy,  we  do  not  think  he  can  possibly  be  un  artist.  What  is  worse,  we
are  very  apt  to  think  that  we  can  make  him  an  artist  by  teaching  him  anatomy,
and  how  to  draw  with  French  chalk;  whereas  the  real  gift  in  him  is  utterly
independent  of  all  such  accomplishments."  So  the  highest  powers  of  the  teacher
or  preacher,  the  power  of  interpreting  the  Scriptures  with  spiritual  insight,  of
moving  the  hearers  to  earnest  worship  and  decision,  may  exist  with  or  without
the  culture  of  the  schools.  Learned  Pharisees  are  impotent  failures  compared
with  a  rough  fisherman  Peter  anointed  with  the  Holy  Ghost.  Inspiration  is
more  than  education.  (H.  0.  Mackey.)  The  worth  of  colleges: — The  great
importance  of  the  work  done  in  our  educational  institutions  for  young  ministers
was  never  more  strikingly  emphasised  than  by  the  missionary  Judson,  who
said,  as  he  was  approaching  Madison  University,  "  If  I  had  a  thousand
dollars,  do  you  know  what  I  would  do  with  it  ?  "  The  person  asked  supposed
he  would  invest  it  in  Foreign  Missions.  "  I  would  put  it  into  such  institutions
as  that,"  he  said,  pointing  to  the  college  buildings.  "  Planting  colleges,
and  filling  them  with  studious  young  men,  is  planting  seed  com  for  the
world."  An  ignorant  preacher  : — Of  the  late  Bishop  Ames  the  following  anecdote
is  told.  While  presiding  over  a  certain  conference  in  the  West,  a  member  began
a  tirade  against  the  universities  and  education,  thanking  God  that  he  had  never
been  corrupted  by  contact  with  a  college.  After  proceeding  thus  far  for  a  few
minutes,  the  bishop  interrupted  with  the  question,  •'  Do  I  understand  that  the
brother  thanks  God  for  his  ignorance  ?  "  Well,  yes,"  was  the  answer ;  "  you  can
put  it  that  way  if  yon  want."  "  Well,  all  I  have  to  say,"  said  the  bishop,  in  his
sweetest  musical  tone — "  all  I  have  to  say  is,  that  the  brother  has  a  good  deal  to
thank  God  for."  Collfge  life  : — He  whose  spiritual  life  evaporates  under  pro-
cesses of  ministerial  culture  could  hardly  resist  the  temptations  of  any  other  form
of  life.     (H.  Allan,  D.D.)

Ver.  3.  Endure  hardness  as  a  good  soldier. — The  Christian  soldier: — Every
Christian,  and  especially  every  Christian  minister,  may  be  regarded  as  a  soldier,  as
an  athlete  (ver.  5),  as  a  husbandman  (ver.  6) ;  but  of  the  three  similitudes  the  one
which  fits  him  best  is  that  of  a  soldier.  Even  if  this  were  not  so,  St.  Paul's  fond-
ness  for  the  metaphor  would  be  very  intelligible.    1.  Military  eerrioe  was  verj


ciu».  n.]  IL  TIMOTHY,  129

familiar  to  him,  especially  in  hii  imprisonments.     He  must  frequently  have  seen
Boldierg  under  drill,  on  parade,  on  guard,  on  the  march ;  must  have  watched  them
cleaning,  mending,  and   sharpening    their  weapons ;   putting    their  armour   on,
putting  it  o£E.    Often,  during  hours  of  enforced  inactivity,  he  must  have  compared
these  details  with  the  details  of  the  Christian  life,  and  noticed  how  admirably  thej
corresponded  with  one  another.     2.  Military  service  was   also  quite  sufficiently
famihar  to  those  whom  he  addressed.    Boman  troops  were  everywhere  to  be  sees
throughout  the  length  and  breadth  of  the  empire,  and  nearly  every  member  of
society  knew  something  of  the  kind  of  Hfe  which  a  soldier  of  the  empire  had  to
lead.     3.  The  Boman  army  was  the  one  great  organisation  of  which  it  was  still
possible,  in  that  age  of  boundless  social  corruption,  to  think  and  speak  with  right-
minded  admiration  and  respect.    No  doubt  it  was  often  the  instrument  of  whole-
sale cmelties  as  it  pushed  forward  its  conquests,  or  strengthened  its  hold,  over
resisting  or  rebelling  nations.    But  it  promoted  discipline  and  esprit  de  corps.
Even  during  active  warfare  it  checked  individual  license,  and  when  the  conquest
was  over  it  was  the  representative  and  mainstay  of  order  and  justice  against  high-
handed anarchy  and  wrong.     Its  officers  several  times  appear  in  the  narrativ*
portions  of  the  New  Testament,  and  they  make  a  favourable  impression  upon  us.
If  they  are  fair  specimens  of  the  military  men  in  the  Boman  Empire  at  that  period,
then  the  Boman  army  must  have  been  indeed  a  fine  service.    But  the  reasons  for
the  apostle's  preference  for  this  similitude  go  deeper  than  all  this.    4.  Military
service  involves  self-sacrifice,  endurance,  discipline,  vigilance,  obedience,  ready  co-
operation   with    others,    sympathy,    enthusiasm,    loyalty.      5.    MiUtary    service
implies  vigilant,  miwearying  and  organised  opposition  to  a  vigilant,  unwearying,
and  organised  foe.    It  is    either   perpetual    warfare    or    perpetual  preparation
for  it.    And  just  such  is  the  Christian  life;  it  is  either  a  conflict  or  a  pre-
paration  for  one.       (A.    Plummer,    D.D.)         The   ministi'r   a    good  soldier: —
Ministers  above  all  should  be  leaders  and  exemplars  in  this  contest.    For  the
apostle's  fear  of  disapproval  at  last  relates  to  him  as  a  herald  or  preacher  to  others,
calling  them  to  the  spiritual  warfare.     They  should  be  like  the  statues  oi  ancient
heroes  in  the  Palcestra,  which  the  Boman  youth  were  sent  to  admire  and  emulate,
while  they  recounted  the  history  of   their  achievements.     (J.  LeifcMld,  D.D.)
The  good  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ : — Fight,  not  as  Joash,  who  smote  the  ground  with
the  arrows  thrice  and  stayed  before  he  was  bidden,  for  which  he  was  denied  a  full
yictory.    Fight,  not  as  Israel  in  Canaan,  who,  instead  of  seeking  the  decreed  exter-
mination of  all  the  ancient  inhabitants,  suspended  their  conquests,  and  allowed
many  of  them  to  remain  in  their  immediate  neighbourhood  and  intercourse ;  for
which  they  received  not  the  promise  of  full  rest  and  enjoyment.     But  fight  as
Joseph,  who  said,  "  How  can  I  do  this  great  wickedness  and  sin  against  God !  "
Fight  as  Paul  did,  when  he  laboured  to  bring  under  his  body  and  keep  it  in  sub-
jection.   Fight  as  Christ  told  His  disciples  to  fight,  by  cutting  off  the  right  hand
and  plucking  out  the  ri^ht  eye  that  causes  them  to  offend.    Fight  as  did  your
great  Lord  and  Master  Himself  with  the  arch- traitor,  when  he  sought  to  inject
into  His  mind  thoughts  of  discontent,  of  ambition,  and  of  a  debasing  servility  of
Boul :  repelling  him  with  a  holy  indignation,  and  saying,  "  Get  thee  hence,  Satan,
for  it  is  written.  Thou  shalt  worship  the  Lord  thy  God,  and  Him  only  shalt  thou
serve."     {Ibid.)         Aggressive  goodness : — The  Saviour  expects  true   saintliness
will  always  be  an  aggressive  thing.     Where  it  is  such,  its  activities  rouse  enmity.
We  have  different  views  from  the  Saviour  on  this  subject  of  aggressive  goodness.
We  think  saintliness  is  at  liberty  to  be  an  unobtrusive,  self-saving  thing:  carefully
restricting  its  service  to  the  quiet  influence  of  its  example,  content  to  develop  its
own  hfe  sweetly.    But  the  Saviour  calls  for  something  more  vigorous  than  passive
piety.    Prince  of  Peace  as  He  was,  He  proclaims :  "  I  came  not  to  send  peace  on
earth,  but  a  sword  " — to  set  a  man  at  variance  with  those  around  him.    He  defines
His  object  to  be  to  "  send  fire  on  the  earth,"  and  tarries  only  until  it  is  kindled.
He  assumes  that  evil  must  be  assailed,  that  falsehood  will  be  contradicted,  and  sin
denounced.     He  intends  a  true  peace  to  be  reached  by  the  disturbance  of  the  false.
He  expects  sanctity  ever  to  have  something  of  the  soldierly  quality,  and  that  the
life  will  be  a  fight  of  faith.     He  did  not  contemplate  sanctity  adopting  a  live-and-
let-hve  policy  in  the  presence  of  falsehood  and  evil.     Silence  is  the  earth  in  which
the  talent  of  truth  is  buried.     He  expects  us  to  be  His  witnesses ;  bids  us  say,
"Bepent  1  "  not  merely  to  men  in  general,  but  to  sinners  in  particular  ;  expects  ug
to  reprove  all  evU,  as  well  as  to  point  to  Him  who  is  the  source  and  pattern  of  all
good.     WJierever  love  is  thus  aggressive,  truth  thus  bold,  meroy  thus  active  —

o


180  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  it,

hatred  of  the  intensest  kind  mnst  rise.  For  who  can  bear  to  have  his  ways  de-
nounced as  evil ;  his  views  as  false ;  his  destiny — perdition  ;  his  duty — repentance?
Moreover,  the  Christian  has  to  be  the  reformer  in  a  world  of  vested  interests.  And
there  is  no  evil  under  heaven,  from  idolatry  to  drunkenness,  from  gambling  to
gaiety,  from  heresy  to  vice,  but  some  have  an  interest  in  maintaining  it.  You  will
not  achieve  any  usefulness  of  any  sort  without  the  cry,  "  This  our  craft  is  in
danger !  "  rising  to  the  lips  of  those  profiting  by  others  ignorance,  or  servitude,  or
evil.  In  these  circumstances,  however  meek  and  peace-making  the  saint  of  God
may  be,  if  he  is  faithful  to  his  Saviour,  and  to  the  interests  of  men,  he  will  suffer
from  the  bitter  speech  or  the  deed  of  hatred  of  those  who  resent  his  whole  spirit
and  activity.  (B.  Glover.)  Earnestness  demanded : — During  the  Crimean  War
a  young  chaplain,  newly  arrived  in  camp,  inquired  of  a  Christian  sergeant  the  best
method  for  carrying  on  his  work  among  the  men.  The  sergeant  led  him  to  the  top
of  a  hill,  and  pointed  out  the  field  of  action.  "  Now,  sir,"  said  he,  "  look  around
you.  See  those  batteries  on  the  right,  and  the  men  at  their  guns.  Hear  the  roar
of  the  cannon.  Look  where  you  will,  all  are  in  earnest  here.  Every  man  feels
that  this  is  a  life  and  death  struggle.  If  we  do  not  conquer  the  Bussians  the
Bussians  will  conquer  us.  We  are  all  in  earnest  here,  sir ;  we  are  not  plajing  at
soldiers.  If  you  would  do  good,  you  must  be  in  earnest ;  an  earnest  man  always
wins  his  way."  Such  was  the  advice  of  Queen  Victoria's  servant  to  the  servant  of
King  Jesus.  [A.  A.  Harmer.)  A  recruiting  sergeant : — In  writing  the  life  of
Uncle  John  Vassar,  Dr.  Gordon  has  so  dealt  with  the  materials  at  command  that
the  successive  chapters  are  made  to  pourtray  the  "  good  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ,"
and  to  enforce  the  injunction — "  Fight  the  good  fight  of  faith."  Uncle  John  not
only  deserves  to  be  called  a  "  good  soldier."  He  was  something  more,  for,  while
fighting  the  Lord's  battles  himself,  he  was  an  active  recruiting  sergeant,  and  never
seems  to  have  missed  a  chance  of  pressing  home  the  question,  •'  Who  is  on  the
Lord's  side  ?  "  Accosting  a  gentleman  on  one  occasion  with  the  familiar  question,
"  My  dear  friend,  do  you  love  Jesus  ?  "  he  was  met  with  the  rejoinder,  '*  I  do  not
know  that  that  concerns  you,  sir."  Uncle  John  was  too  shrewd  a  tactician  to  be
disconcerted,  and  at  once  followed  up  the  assault  with  the  remark,  "  Oh,  ycB  it
does.  In  these  days  of  rebellion  does  it  not  concern  every  citizen  as  to  which  side
every  other  citizen  may  take  ?  How  much  more  when  a  world  is  in  rebellion
against  God,  should  we  be  concerned  to  know  who  is  on  the  Lord's  side  1  "  In
this  way  he  fenced  the  resentment  which  the  obtrusion  seemed  likely  to  provoke,
and  justified  his  advance  as  the  anxious  inquiry  of  an  interested  friend.  Resisted
or  repulsed  in  his  spiritual  warfare,  Uncle  John  never  appears  to  have  been  van-
quished. The  word  defeat  was  not  found  in  his  vocabulary.  Every  Christian  a
soldier : — Not  only  ministers,  but  laymen,  should  be  Christ's  ambassadors.  Must
a  soldier  be  an  officer  in  order  to  fight  well  ?  By  no  means.  Minus  gold  lace  and
cocked  hat,  he  may  do  good  service.  Hard  blows  may  be  given,  or  a  sure  aim  may
be  taken,  by  him  who  is  quite  destitute  of  ribbon  and  medal.  Thus  is  it  spiritually.
Eminent  talent  and  honourable  position  are  non-essentials  in  benevolent  effort.
The  humblest  warrior  in  the  Saviour's  army  can  be  valiant  and  victorious.  And
he  ought  to  be.  Excuse  here  is  quite  vain.  None  that  are  saved  have  a  right  to
be  idle ;  all  are  to  evangelise.  The  work  is  not  to  be  delegated  to  one  order  or
class.  Each  is  expected  to  take  his  share.  What  should  we  think  of  him  who
refused  to  rescue  a  drowning  man  because  he  was  not  connected  with  the  Boyal
Humane  Society  ?  "  Let  him  that  heareth,"  as  well  as  him  that  preacheth,  "  say
Come."  (r.  R.  Stevenson.)  Enemies  not  to  be  despised : — It  is  said  that  the
Duke  of  Wellington  on  one  occasion,  when  asked  why  it  was  that  he  was  so  gener-
ally on  the  side  of  victory,  replied  that  he  never  despised  an  enemy.  Every  cou'
vert  a  recruit : — As  the  young  Hannibal  was  brought  by  his  father  to  the  altar  of
his  country,  and  there  sworn  to  life-long  hatred  of  Bome,  so  should  wa  be,  from
the  hour  of  our  spiritual  birth,  the  sworn  enemies  of  sin,  the  enlisted  warriors  of
the  Cross  ;  to  fight  on  for  Jesus  till  life's  latest  hour,  when  we  shall  be  '•  more  than
conquerors  through  Him  that  hath  loved  us."  The  Spartan  mother,  as  soon  as
her  child  was  bom,  looked  upon  the  babe  as  having  in  it  the  possibilities  of  a  hero ;
and  the  whole  training  of  the  Lacedemonians  aimed  solely  at  producing  good
soldiers,  who  would  honour  the  race  from  which  they  sprung.  So  should  we  look
upon  every  young  convert  as  a  recruit ;  not  merely  as  one  who  has  been  himself
saved,  but  as  having  within  his  new-born  nature  the  possibihties  of  a  good  soldier
of  Jesas  Christ.  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  "  In  my  shirt  sleeves  " : — I  am  much  of  the
opinion  ol  the  soldier  who,  being  brought  before  the  Duke  of  WeUington  and  a


<JHAP.  II.J  n.  TIMOTHY,  181

committee  of  the  Honse  of  Lords,  on  being  asked  if  he  had  to  fight  the  battle  of
Waterloo  over  again  how  he  would  like  to  be  dressed,  said,  "  Pleasj,  your  Lord-
ship, I  should  hke  to  be  in  my  shirt  sleeves."  And,  depend  upon  it,  the  freest
dress  is  the  right  costume  of  war.  There  is  nothing  like  the  shirt  sleeves  for  hard
gospel  work.  Away  with  that  high  stock  and  the  stiff  coat,  in  which  you  find  it
difficult  to  fight  when  you  come  to  close  contact  with  the  enemy.  You  must  dis-
pense with  pipeclay  and  bright  buttons  when  it  comes  to  blood,  fire,  and  vapour  of
smoke.  (Ibid.)  Christ  provides  for  His  soldiers  : — Our  filthy  garments  are  to  be
taken  off ;  we  are  to  go  to  the  Boyal  Fountain  and  wash ;  we  are  to  go  to  the  Eoyal
Wardrobe  to  be  clothed ;  we  are  to  go  to  the  Royal  Armoury  for  our  equipment ;
we  are  to  go  to  the  Royal  Banqueting  House  to  be  fed ;  we  are  to  go  to  the  Royal
Treasury  to  be  paid.  Christ's  soldiers  have  no  reason  to  care  about  the  future.
(C.  Garret.)  A  soldier  always  : — You  cannot  be  a  saint  on  Sundays  and  a  sinner
in  the  week  ;  yon  cannot  be  a  saint  at  church  and  a  sinner  in  the  shop ;  you  can-
not be  a  saint  in  Liverpool  and  a  sinner  in  London.  You  cannot  serve  God  and
Mammon.  You  are  a  soldier  everywhere  or  nowhere,  and  woe  to  you  if  you  dis-
honour your  King.  (Ibid.)  The  inspiration  of  a  true  leader  : — The  personal
magnetism  of  General  McLellan  over  his  soldiers  in  the  Civil  War  was  a  constant
experience.  Once  when  the  tide  of  success  seemed  to  go  against  the  Union  forces,
and  dismay  was  gradually  deepening  into  despair,  his  arrival  in  the  camp  at  night
worked  a  revolution  among  the  troops.  The  news  "  General  McLellan  is  here  "
was  caught  up  and  echoed  from  man  to  man.  Whoever  was  awake  roused  his
neighbour,  eyes  were  rubbed,  and  the  poor  tired  feUows  sent  up  such  a  hurrah  as
the  army  of  the  Potomac  never  heard  before.  Shout  upon  shout  went  out  into  the
stillness  of  the  night,  was  taken  up  along  the  road,  repeated  by  regiment,  brigade,
division,  and  corps,  until  the  roar  died  in  the  distance.  The  effect  of  this  man's
coming  upon  the  army — in  sunshine  or  in  rain,  darkness  or  day,  victory  or  defeat
— was  ever  electrical,  defying  all  attempts  to  account  for  it.  (H.  0.  Mackey.)
Enduring  hardness: — It  behoves  thee  not  to  complain  if  thou  endure  hardness;
but  to  complain  if  thou  dost  not  endure  hardness.  (Chrysostom.)  The  Christian
must  be  prepared  for  trial  and  conflict: — Some  of  God's  people  seem  to  forget  this.
They  think  they  are  soldiers  on  pay  days  and  at  reviews  :  but  as  soon  as  the  fiery
darts  begin  to  fall  around  them,  and  the  road  gets  rough  and  rugged,  they  fancy
they  are  deserters.  A  strange  mistake  this.  You  are  never  so  much  a  soldier  as
when  you  are  marching  or  fighting.  I  fear  the  fault  of  this  mistake  lies  very  much
with  some  of  us  who  may  be  called  recruiting  sergeants.  In  persuading  men  to
enlist  we  speak  much  more  of  the  ribbons,  the  bounty  money,  and  the  rewards,
than  we  do  of  the  battle-field  and  the  march.  Hence,  perhaps,  the  error.  But  if
we  are  to  blame  in  this  respect  our  great  King  is  not.  The  whole  of  His  teaching
is  in  the  other  direction.  He  puts  all  the  difficulties  fairly  before  us,  and  we  are
exhorted  to  count  the  cost,  so  that  we  may  not  be  covered  with  shame  at  last
(C.  Garrett.)  Christian  courage  : — Thomas  Garrett,  of  America,  when  he  was
tried  and  heavily  fined  for  concealing  fugitive  slaves,  and  his  judge  said  he  hoped
it  would  be  a  warning  to  him  to  have  nothing  to  do  with  runaway  slaves  for  the
future,  replied :  "  Friend,  if  thou  knowest  of  any  poor  slave  who  is  coming  this
way,  and  needs  a  friend,  thou  canst  tell  him  I  shall  be  ready  to  help  him."  (Ibid.)
Enduring  hardness : — The  old  wrestlers  did  not  decline  ten  months  of  laborious
and  abstemious  training  to  make  their  bodies  supple  and  their  will  indomitable  ;
BO  much  so,  that  "  a  wrestler's  health  "  became  a  proverb.  If  Plato  challenged
his  disciples — "  Shall  our  children  not  have  energy  enough  to  deny  themselves  for
a  much  more  glorious  victory  ?  "  ("  De  Leg.,"  vii.  840),  a  greater  man  than  Plato
urged,  "  Now  they  do  it  for  a  corruptible  crown,  but  we  for  an  incorruptible  " ;  and
our  ardour,  self-denial,  and  moral  training,  or,  as  St.  Paul  calls  it,  our  spiritual
gymnastics,  should  exceed  theirs,  in  some  such  ratio  as  our  prize  exceeds  theirs ;
and  thus,  "  if  ye  through  the  Spirit  do  mortify  the  deeds  of  the  body,  ye  shall
live."  {J.  B.  Owen,  M.A.)  No  feather-bed  soldiers  : — A  young  Christian  officer
said,  "  Our  heavenly  Captain  wants  no  feather-bed  soldiers.  He  wants  those  who
are  not  afraid  of  camp  bed  and  marching  orders,  who  don't  mind  *  roughing  it  a
little '  by  the  way,  because  they  know  that  perfect  rest  awaits  them  when  their
home-call  sounds,  and  their  race  here  is  ended."  A  sham  battle : — At  the
festival  of  Treviso,  to  which  the  neighbouring  towns  were  invited,  the  chief
feature  was  the  storming  of  a  fortress,  defended  by  the  most  beautiful  ladies
and  their  servants,  by  noblemen  who  made  war  with  fruits,  flowers,  sweet-
meats, and  perfumes.     (H.  0.  Mackey.)        A  good  soldier:—!  rememboj-  a  stor/


18S  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.  u.

of  a  French  grenadier,  who,  in  a  war  with  the  Aastrians,  was  in  charge  of  a  small
fort  commanding  a  naiTow  gorge,  up  which  only  two  of  the  enemy  could  climb  at  a
time.    When  the  defenders  of  the  fort  heard  that  the  enemy  were  near,  being  few
in  number,  they  deserted,  and  left  the  brave  grenadier  alone.     But  he  felt  he  could
not  give  np  the  place  without  a  struggle,  so  he  barred  the  doors,  raised  the  draw-
bridge, and  loaded  all  the  muskets  left  behind  by  his  comrades.    Early  in  the
morning,  with  great  labour,  the  enemy  brought  up  a  gun  from  the  valley,  and  laid
it  on  the  fort.     But  the  grenadier  made  such  good  use  of  his  loaded  muskets  that
the  men  in  charge  of  the  gun  could  not  hold  their  position,  and  were  compelled  to
retire ;  and  he  kept  them  thus  at  bay  all  day  long.    At  evening  the  herald  came
again  to  demand  the  surrender  of  the  fort,  or  the  garrison  should  be  starved  oat.
iTie  grenadier  asked  for  a  night  for  consideration,  and  in  the  morning  expressed
the  willingness  of  the  garrison  to  surrender  if  they  might  "  go  out  with  all  the
honours  of  war."     This,  after  some  demur,  was  agreed  to,  and  presently  the
Austrian  army  below  saw  a  single  soldier  descending  the  height  with  a  whole  sheaf
of  muskets  on  his  shoulder,  with  which  he  marched  through  their  lines  and  then
threw  them  down.     "  Where  is  the  garrison  ?  "  asked  the  Austrian  commander,
astonished.     "  I  am  the  garrison,"  replied  the  brave  man,  and  they  were   so
dehghted  with  his  plucky  resistance  that  the  whole  army  saluted  him,  and  he  was
afterwards  entitled  the  "  First  Grenadier  of  France."     {3Iajor  Sviith.)        Luxury
unfits  far  soldiership: — The  Commons  of  England  being  very  importunate  witn
Edward  IV.  to  make  war  with  France,  he  consented  to  satisfy  their  importunity,
though  willing  rather  to  enjoy  the  fruits  of  his  wars  and  toils,  and  spend  the  rest
of  his  days  in  peace.     When  he  took  the  field  he  ordered  to  accompany  him  a  dozen
of  fat,  capon-eating  burgesses,  who  had  been  most  sealous  for  that  expedition.
These  he  employed  in  all  military  services,  to  lie  in  the  open  fields,  stand  whole
nights  upon  the  guard,  and  caused  their  quarters  to  be  beaten  up  with  frequent
alarms,  which  was  so  intolerable  to  those  fat  gentry  accustomed  to  lie  on  soft  down,
and  that  conld  hardly  sit  on  a  session's  bench  without  nodding,  that  a  treaty  being
desired  by  King  Louis,  none  were  so  forward  to  press  the  acceptance  of  his  offers,
or  to  excuse  so  little  done  by  the  king  with  so  great  preparations.     (C.  H.  Spur-
geon.)        A  war  for  fireside: — "Home  guards  to  the  front  1 "  was  the  cry  of  '65.
Look  at  them,  slight  lads  stooping  under  their  heavy  muskets,  decrepit  men  totter-
ing on  with  cane  in  one  hand  and  gun  in  the  other ;  convalescent,  furloughed
soldiers  rising  like  a  wounded  war-horse.     And  has  war  come  to  this  ?    Yes,  and
worse.     It  has  seen  the  nursing  mother,  and  feeble,  aged  women,  and  delicate
girls,  defending  the  parapet.    The  hearth  must  be  protected,  and  the  husband,  the
little  lad,  and  the  white-haired  father  are  gone,  dead,  dead  in  their  blood !     Women
are  to  the  front  only  because  there  are  no  men,  none  at  all.    But  wait ;  there  is  a
war  for  home  and  fireside,  a  war  for  rights  more  dear,  and  from  foes  more  cruel,
in  which  women  face  its  fury,  not  because  the  men  have  fallen  first,  but  because
men  shirk.     Yes,  men  shirk  the  discipline,  the  hardships,  the  responsibihty  of  this
war.     Not  aU  men,  thank  God !  yet  many  do.     Happy  in  their  homes,  receiving
the  blessings  of  Christianity,  they  are  willing  to  see  the  wives  and  mothers  fight
the  battle.     The  hosts  of  hell,  with  black  flag  unfurled,  surround  us,  menacing  the
peace  of  home,  threatening  slavery  and  death.     With  dreadful  mahce  and  cruelty
they  contend  for  every  inch  of  ground.    It  is  a  battle  remorseless,  ceaseless,  mo-
mentous.    It  appeals  to  all  that  is  manly  in  men  to  take  their  places  in  it,  to  submit
to  its  discipline,  to  endure  its  hardships,  to  shoulder  its  responsibility.  {R.  S.  Barrett. )
A  good  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ: — I.  A  soldier  must  be  enlipted.    II.  The  soldiee
AJTCER  HAVING  BEEN  ENLISTED  HAS  TO  BE  DRILLED — that  is  to  Say,  he  has  to  learn
his  business.    A  good  soldier  is  not  to  be  made  in  a  day  ;  there  must  be  time  and
pains  spent  upon  him ;  he  must  be  trained  and  taught,  and  that  very  ciivefully,
before  he  is  fit  to  fight  against  the  enemies  of  his  country.    And  it  is  just  the  same
with  Christian  soldiers.     They  have  to  learn  to  act  together,  so  as  to  support  and
belp  one  another  in  the  conflict  with  evil.     And  then  they  have  to  learn  the  use  of
their  weapons — of  one  more  especially,  which  is  called  the  "  sword  of  the  Spirit."
III.  We  have  ENEMIES  TO  FiOHT  WITH — real  enemies,  not  imaginary  ones  :   "  the
world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil."    In  order  to  enable  you  to  understand  what  is
meant  by  fighting  against  the  "  flesh  "  and  "  the  devil,"  I  will  tell  you  a  story,  or
rather,  two  stories,  both  of  them  true.     Some  years  ago  there  lived  a  good  and
holy  man,  who  was  a  most  useful  minister  of  the  gospel.    This  good  man's  Christian
name  was  William.    Now  when  he  was  a  little  boy,  about  four  or  five  years  old,  he
one  day  was  left  in  the  dining-room  alone,  and  on  the  table  was  a  plate  of  sweet


em*.  11.3  n,  TIMOTHY.  1S»

cakes,  of  whieb  be  was  particularly  fond,  but  wbicb  be  bad  been  forbidden  to  tonck.
Somebody  coming  quietly  into  tbe  room  found  tbe  boy  looking  at  tbe  cakes,  bis
little  bands  tigbtly  clasped  togetber  behind  bis  back,  and  saying  to  bimself  over
and  over  again,  as  if  be  were  saying  a  lesson,  "  Willie  mustn't  take  tbem,  'cause
tbey  are  not  Willie's  own."  Now  tbis  was  a  victory  over  the  "  flesh."  Tbe  flesh
said,  "These  cakes  are  very  nice,  Willie ;  just  smell  tbem.  No  one  will  see  you,
Willie,  if  yon  do  take  one.  Mamma  will  not  miss  tbe  cakes,  Willie,  there  are  so
many  of  them."  But  little  Willie  would  not  do  wrong,  although  he  was  sorely
tempted  to  it.  He  fought  vnth  the  "  flesh,"  and  came  off  conqueror.  But  there
was  one  sad  occasion  on  which  Willie,  now  grown  up  to  be  a  tall,  handsome  lad  of
seventeen,  was  beaten  by  the  enemy.  There  was  a  servant  in  the  family  who  was
a  wicked  man ;  and  wicked  men,  whether  tbey  know  it  or  not,  are  agents  for  the
devil,  and  do  his  work.  This  servant,  annoyed  at  his  young  master's  goodness,
said  once,  in  a  sneering  sort  of  way,  and  in  William's  bearing,  "  Oh  !  as  for  Master
William,  he's  not  man  enough  to  swear."  The  taunt — it  was  just  like  a  fiery  arrow
shot  from  Satan's  bow — stung  the  young  lad  beyond  endurance ;  and  for  the  only
time  in  his  life,  I  believe,  he  took  God's  holy  name  in  vain,  and  swore  a  terrible
oath.  Whenever  William  spoke  of  the  matter — years,  long  years,  after — it  was
with  expressions  of  the  bitterest  regret,  though  he  felt  in  bis  heart  that  God  bad
forgiven  him.  Well,  that  was  a  fight  with  the  devil  in  which  the  devil  was  the
▼ictor.  The  Christian  soldier  was  beaten,  for  tbe  moment.  Satan,  through  the
mouth  of  one  of  bis  servants,  triumphed  over  him.     IV.  The  apostle  tells  cs

THAT   WE   ABB   TO    BE    GOOD    80LDIEBS   OF   JeSUS    ChBIST.      A   "  gOOd "   BOldicr    obcyB

orders  strictly ;  does  not  get  tired  of  bis  duty,  but  sticks  to  it ;  and  never  dreams
of  turning  bis  back  and  running  away  when  the  enemy  is  coming,     V.  And  now

LET    MB    TELL  TOU   BY  WHAT    MEANS    WE    ARE    TO    BECOME    OOOD    SOLDIERS.      A   gOOd

general  makes  good  soldiers.  He  infuses  his  own  spirit  into  them,  and  leads  them
to  victory.  And  we  have  a  good  general,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Put  yourselves,
then,  into  His  hands,  and  He  will  make  you  what  you  ought  to  be.  I  wish  you
especially  to  notice  that  you  cannot  be  a  true  Christian  warrior  without  possessing
that  loyal  devotion  to  Christ  which  springs  from  love.  (G.  Calthrop,  M.A.)  A
good  soldier : — Much  as  war  is  at  variance  with  the  spirit  of  Christianity,  there  are
few  things  to  which  the  Scriptures  more  frequently  allude  when  treating  of  the
spiritual  life.  There  is  reason  for  this ;  for,  notwithstanding  all  that  is  objectionable
in  the  soldier's  occupation,  there  are  many  things  in  tbe  personal  qualities  of  tbe
man  which  pertain  to  the  very  noblest  type  of  character.  That  which  makes  him  a
good  soldier  would  also,  if  combined  with  other  elements,  make  him  a  higher  style
of  man.  I.  The  first  thing  required  of  a  good  soldier  is  hearty  service.
"  One  volunteer  is  worth  many  pressed  men."  The  adage  was  singularly  verified
during  the  war  between  Austria  and  Prussia.  Tbe  Austrian  soldiers  fought  well,
but  not  with  the  enthusiasm  of  men  who  cordially  approve  of  the  object  for  which
they  fight.  Drawn  from  various  nationalities — believing,  some  of  them,  that  the
war  was  hostile  to  the  dearest  interests  of  their  country — they  were  not  so  much
free  agents  as  machines  forced  into  the  strife ;  and  this  fact,  perhaps,  more  than
bad  generalship  or  insufficient  equipment,  accounted  for  their  signal  defeat.
Whereas  the  Prussians,  although  not  enlisted  voluntarily  in  the  first  instance,
nevertheless  entered  voluntarily  into  tbe  conflict.  With  an  appreciation  of  tbe
purposes  of  the  war  which  few  gave  them  credit,  believing  that  it  was  to  promote
the  much-coveted  unity  of  the  Fatherland,  they  fought  with  an  enthusiasm  which
is  the  surest  pledge  of  victory ;  and  to  this,  quite  as  much  as  to  the  superiority  of
their  arms  and  their  leaders,  did  tbey  owe  their  splendid  triumphs.  And  so  to  be
good  soldiers  of  Jesus  Christ,  we  must  freely  and  enthusiastically  engage  in  His
service.  U.  The  second  thing  required  of  a  good  soldier  is  implicit  obedience  to
his  commandeb's  orders.  Much  has  been  said  of  the  drill  and  discipline  of  tbe
Prussian  soldiers  as  accounting  for  that  marvellous  succession  of  victories  which,
culminating  in  Sadowa,  changed  the  map  of  Europe.  The  far-seeing  men  who
contemplated  and  conducted  the  war,  with  a  keen  appreciation  of  the  means  by
which  their  end  was  to  be  gained,  had  been  drilling  most  severely  for  years,  until
tbe  soldier  had  become  a  kind  of  living  machine.  And  that  is  really  what  is  required
in  order  to  good  soldiership.  III.  A  third  quality  esRential  to  the  good  soldier  is
faith  in  his  leader.  In  the  war  to  which  we  have  referred,  the  Austrian  soldiers,
after  two  or  three  defeats  attributable  to  mismanagement,  lost  all  faith  in  the
capacity  of  their  general,  and  not  only  ceased  to  fight  with  spirit,  but  were  forth-
with changed  into  a  panic-stricken  rabble.    Even  tbe  brave  Italians,  with  all  theii


184  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  (oha».  n.

enthusiasm,  recovered  slowly  from  their  defeat  at  Custozza,  becanse  of  the  manifest
bungling  which  brought  about  the  disaster.  Whereas  the  Prussians,  having  in
their  leaders  men  whose  clearness  of  vision  and  capacity  for  command  were  equal
to  their  own  fighting  efficiency  and  power  of  endurance,  do  not  seem  ever  to  have
faltered  in  their  victorious  career.  Such  confidence  is  manifestly  indispensable.
The  private  soldier  knows  little  or  nothing  of  the  plan  of  the  battle  in  which  he  is
an  actor,  knows  not  why  he  is  led  into  this  position  or  that,  or  how  he  is  to  be  led
out  of  it,  knows  not  why  he  is  required  to  do  this  or  that ;  but  his  general  knows,
and  unless  he  has  full  confidence  in  the  men  who  are  directing  the  movements  of  the
troops  he  will  fight  with  very  little  courage,  and  prove  himself  but  a  poor  soldier.
And  in  our  warfare  we  are  equally  required  to  have  faith  in  our  King.  IV.  A  fourth
quality  is  caeefol  training.  In  the  war  referred  to,  the  best  trained  and  most
intelligent  men  proved  the  best  fighters.  Intelligence  consists  with,  and  is  con-
ducive to,  the  highest  state  of  discipline ;  and  of  the  human  machine,  which  the
soldier  must  needs  become,  the  thinking  is  by  far  the  moet  efficient  specimen.  So
in  our  warfare  the  best  soldier,  other  things  being  equal,  is  the  man  whose  mind  is
most  thoroughly  trained.  The  servants  of  Christ  should  seek  to  understand  the
requirements  of  their  time,  and  prepare  to  meet  them.  The  conditions  of  warfare
and  the  works  required  of  the  Christian  soldier  now  are  not  what  they  were  once ;
and  unless  men  have  understanding  of  the  times,  they  may,  though  with  the  best
intentions,  render  very  bungling  service.  The  worthier  the  master,  the  more
efficient  should  his  servants  be.  V,  Heroic  effort  and  patient  endurance  abb
NECESSARY.  We  canuot  understand  in  what  sense  they  are  soldiers  of  Christ  who
enter  His  service  simply  with  a  view  to  their  own  comfort.  Their  notion  is  that
they  are  to  have  a  nice  pleasant  time,  plenty  of  sweet  experiences,  and  no  trials,
with  temporal  comforts  to  match  the  unruffled  smoothness  of  their  spiritual  course.
So  much  has  been  said  of  making  the  best  of  both  worlds,  that  the  highest  con-
ception which  many  form  of  Christianity  is  that  it  is  a  system  which  rewards  men
in  the  next  world  for  seeking  to  be  comfortable  in  this.  Young  men  should  under-
stand  that  a  soldier's  life  is  one  of  warfare  and  endurance.  In  order  to  your  being
good  soldiers  of  Jesus  Christ,  there  must  be — VI.  Concerted  action.  Union  is
strength,  insomuch  that  one  small  band  of  men,  acting  together  for  one  purpose
and  under  one  head,  will  scatter  thousands  who  have  neither  leader  nor  organisation.
{W.  Landels,  D.D.)  A  good  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ: — Many  men,  many  minds.
In  reference  to  what  a  Christian  is  there  have  been  very  many  and  diverse  opinions.
Paul's  description  of  a  Christian  in  the  text  is  that  of  a  soldier,  and  that  means
something  very  far  different  either  from  a  religious  fop,  whose  best  delight  is  music
and  millinery,  or  a  theological  critic  who  makes  a  man  an  offender  for  a  word,  or  a
spiritual  glutton  who  cares  for  nothing  but  a  lifelong  enjoyment  of  the  fat  things
full  of  marrow,  or  an  ecclesiastical  slumberer  who  longs  only  for  peace  for  himself.
The  Christian  is  a  self-sacrificing  man  as  the  soldier  must  be.  A  soldier  is  a  serving
man.  A  soldier  is  full  often  a  suffering  man.  Once  again,  the  true  soldier  is  an
ambitious  being.  Paul  does  not  exhort  Timothy  to  be  a  common,  or  ordinary
soldier,  but  to  be  a  "good  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ";  for  all  soldiers,  and  all  true
soldiers,  may  not  be  good  soldiers.  David  had  many  soldiers,  and  good  soldiers
too,  but  you  remember  it  was  said  of  many,  "  These  attained  not  unto  the  first
three."  Now  Paul,  if  I  read  him  rightly,  would  have  Timothy  try  to  be  of  the  first
three,  to  be  a  good  soldier.  I.  We  shall  endeavour  to  describe  a  good  soldier  ow
Jesus  Christ.  1.  We  must  begin  with  this  fundamental — he  must  be  loyal  to  hia
King.  2.  He  is  obedient  to  his  Captain's  commands.  3.  To  conquer  will  be  his
ruling  passion.  Wellington  sent  word  to  his  troops  one  night,  "  Ciudad  Rodrigo
must  be  taken  to-night."  And  what  do  you  think  was  the  commentary  of  the  British
soldiers  appointed  for  the  attack?  "Then,"  said  they  all,  "we  will  do  it."  So
when  our  great  Captain  sends  round,  as  he  doth  to  us,  the  word  of  command,  "Go
ye  into  all  the  world  and  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature,"  if  we  were  all  good
soldiers  of  the  cross,  we  should  say  at  once,  "  We  will  do  it."  The  passion  for
victory  with  the  soldier  often  makes  him  forget  everything  else.  Before  the  battle
of  Waterloo,  Picton  had  had  two  of  his  ribs  smashed  in  at  Quatre  Bras,  but  he
concealed  this  serious  injury,  and,  though  suffering  intensest  agony,  he  rode  at  the
head  of  hia  troop,  and  led  one  of  the  greatest  charges  which  decided  the  fortunes
of  the  day.  He  never  left  his  post,  but  rode  on  till  a  ball  crushed  in  his  skull  and
penetrated  to  the  brains.  Then  in  the  hot  fight  the  hero  fell.  In  that  same  battle
one  of  our  lieutenants,  in  the  early  part  of  the  day,  had  his  left  fore-arm  broken
by  a  shot ;  he  could  not,  therefore,  hold  the  reins  in  his  hand,  but  he  seized  them


dUP.  n.]  U.  TIMOTHY,  186

with  his  mouth,  and  fought  on  till  another  shot  broke  the  upper  part  of  the  arm  to
splinters,  and  it  had  to  be  amputated  ;  but  within  two  days  there  he  was,  with  his
arm  still  bleeding,  and  the  wound  all  raw,  riding  at  the  head  of  his  division.    Brave
things  have  been  done  amongst  the  soldiers  of  our  country — Oh,  that  such  brave
things  were  common  among  the  armed  men  of  the  Church  militant  1     4.  A  good
soldier  is  very  brave  at  a  charge.    6.  A  good  soldier  is  like  a  rock  under  attack.
6.  He  derives  his  strength  from  on  high.    This  has  been  true  even  of  some  common
soldiers,  for  religious  men  when  they  have  sought  strength  from  God  have  been  all
the  braver  in  the  day  of  conflict.     I  like  the  story  of  Frederick  the  Great ;  when  he
overheard  his  favourite  general  engaged  in  prayer,  and  was  about  to  utter  a  sneering
remark,  the  fine  old  man,  who  never  feared  a  foe,  and  did  not  even  fear  his  majesty's
jest,  said,  "  Tour  Majesty,  I  have  just  been  asking  aid  from  your  Majesty's  great
sdly."   He  had  been  waiting  upon  God.     In  the  battle  of  Salamanca,  when  Welling-
ton bade  one  of  his  ofScers  advance  with  his  troops,  and  occupy  a  gap,  which  the
Duke  perceived  in  the  lines  of  the  French,  the  general  rode  up  to  him,  and  said,
"  My  lord,  I  will  do  the  work,  but  first  give  me  a  grasp  of  that  conquering  right
hand  of  yours."    He  received  a  hearty  grip,  and  away  he  rode  to  the  deadly
encounter.     Often  has  my  soul  said  to  her  Captain,  "  My  Lord,  I  will  do  that  work
if  Thou  wilt  give  me  a  grip  of  Thy  conquering  right  hand."     Oh,  what  power  it
puts  into  a  man  when  he  gets  a  grip  of  Christ,  and  Christ  gets  a  grip  of  him  I    II.
Thus  I  have  described  a  good  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ.     Give  me  a  few  minutes
while  I  EXHORT  Tou  TO  BE  SUCH.    1.  I  exhort  you  who  are  soldiers  of  Christ  to  be
good  soldiers,  because  many  of  you  have  been  so.     Dishonour  not  your  past,  fall
not  from  your  high  standing.    "  Forward  "  be  your  motto.    2.  Be  good  soldiers,
for  much  depends  upon  it.     3.  Good  soldiers  we  ought  to  be,  for  it  is  a  grand  old
cause  that  is  at  sta^e.    4.  I  implore  you  to  be  good  soldiers  of  Jesus,  when  yon
consider  the  fame  that  has  preceded  you.     A  soldier  when  he  receives  his  colours
finds  certain  words  embroidered  on  them,  to  remind  him  of  the  former  victories  of
the  regiment  in  which  he  serves.    Look  at  the  eleventh  chapter  of  Hebrews,  and
Bee  the  long  list  of  the  triumphs  of  the  faithful.    Eemember  how  prophets  and
apostles  served  God ;  recollect  how  martyrs  joyfully  laid  down  their  lives ;  look
at  the  long  line  of  the  reformers  and  the  confessors;  remember  your  martyred
sires  and  covenanting  fathers,  and  by  the  grace  of  God  I  beseech  you  walk  not
unworthy  of  your  noble  lineage.    6.  Be  good  soldiers  because  of  the  victory  which
awaits  you.    6.  Besides,  and  lastly,  if  I  want  another  argument  to  make  you  good
^  soldiers,  remember  your  Captain,  the  Captain  whose  wounded  hands  and  pierced
•-^  feet  are  tokens  of  his  love  to  you.    Eedeemed  from  going  down  to  the  pit,  what  can
jrou  do  sufficiently  to  show  your  gratitude  ?    Assured  of  eternal  glory  by-and-by,
now  can  you  sufficiently  prove  that  you  feel  your  indebtedness.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)
Fellow  Boldiers  : — ^Iiet  no  one  say  that  he  has  no  taste  for  warfare.    Each  one  of  us
_\is  pledged  to  fight.    Each  one  of  us  bears  the  sign  of  the  Cross,  which  binds  him
to  be  Christ's  soldier  till  his  life's  end.   Once,  in  the  old  wars,  an  English  drummer*
boy  was  taken  prisoner  by  the  French.     They  amused  themselves  by  making  the
lad  play  on  his  instrument,  and  presently  one  asked  him  to  sound  the  retreat.   The
drummer  answered  proudly  that  he  had  never  learnt  how  to  do  that !  So  in  our  war-
fare there  is  no  retreating.    It  was  the  boast  of  Napoleon's  soldiers — the  guard
dies,  but  never  yields  1    We  Christians  are  bidden  to  be  faithful  unto  death,  and
Jesus  promises  us  a  crown  of  life.     When  Maximian  became  Emperor  of  the  West
he  did  his  utmost  to  destroy  Christianity.     There  was  in  the  Eoman  army  a
famous  legion  of  ten  thousand  men,  called  the  Thebian  Legion.     It  was  formed
entirely  of  Christians.     Once,  just  before  going  into  battle  with  the  enemy,  the
Emperor  commanded  the  Thebian  Legion  to  sacrifice  to  idols.     Their  leader,  in
the  name  of  his  ten  thousand  soldiers,  refused.    The  Emperor  then  ordered  them
to  be  decimated — that  is,  every  tenth  man  to  be  killed.    Still  they  were  firm,
and  again,  the  second  time,  the  cruel  order  was  given  for  every  tenth  man  to  be
slain.     Fully  armed,  with  their  gUttering  eagles  flashing  on  their  helmets,  the
Christian  soldiers  stood  in  the  perfect  discipline  of  Borne,  ready  to  die,  but  not  to
yield.     Again  they  were  ordered  to  sacrifice,  and  the  brave  answer  was  returned,
"  No ;  we  were  Christ's  soldiers  before  we  were  Maximian's."    Then  the  furious
Emperor  gave  the  order  to  kill  them  all !     Calmly  the  remaining  soldiers  laid
down  their  arms,  and  knelt  whilst  the  other  troops  put  them  to  the  sword.    So
died  the  Thebian  Legion,  faithful  unto  death !    Each  one  of  as  is  in  one  sense
a  martyr,  a  witness  for  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.    Those  of  as  who  bear  hard  words,
and  cruel  judgments,  and  harsh  treatment,  patiently,  rendering  not  evil  for  myil,.


136  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [cha».  n.

are  martyrs  for  Jeans.  Again,  as  fellow  soldiers,  let  as  remember  the  Nams  ander
which  we  serve.  To  a  Boman  soldier  of  old  the  name  of  Caesar  was  a  watchword,
which  made  him  ready  to  do  or  die.  In  the  wars  of  the  middle  ages,  when  onr
countrymen  went  into  battle  the  cry  was,  •*  St.  George  for  Merry  England,"  and
every  soldier  was  ready  to  answer  with  his  sword.  They  tell  us  that  the  nams
of  the  great  Duke  of  Welhngton  was  alone  enoagh  to  restore  courage  and  spirit  to
the  flagging  troops.  Once  when  a  regiment  was  wavering  in  the  fight,  the  message
was  passed  along  the  ranks,  "  The  Duke  is  coming,"  and  in  an  instant  the  men
stood  firm,  whilst  one  old  soldier  exclaimed,  "  The  Duke — God  bless  him  I  I  had
rather  see  him  than  a  whole  battalion."  The  name  of  our  Leader  is  one  indeed
to  inspire  perfect  faith,  courage,  and  hope.  In  all  ages  certain  regiments  have  had
their  distinguishing  names.  Among  the  Bomans  of  old  time  there  was  one  famoua
band  of  warriors  known  as  the  Thundering  Legion.  In  later  times  there  have  been
regiments  known  as  the  "  Invincibles,"  the  "  Die-harda."  One  famous  corps  has
for  its  motto  a  Latin  sentence  meaning  "  By  Land  and  Sea,"  and  another  has  ODw
word  for  its  badge,  meaning  "  Everywhere."  These  mottoes  remind  the  soldier  that
the  regiment  to  which  he  belongs  has  fought  and  conquered,  served  and  suffered,
aU  over  the  world.  The  proud  badge  of  the  county  of  Kent  is  "  Invicta" — uncon-
quered ;  that  of  Exeter  is  "  The  Ever-faithful  City."  All  these  titles  belong  of  right
to  our  army,  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  said  that  in  New  Zealand,  some  years
ago,  many  of  our  troops  were  mortally  wounded  by  concealed  natives,  who  hid  them-
selves in  holes  in  the  earth,  and  thence  darted  their  deadly  spears  upward  against
the  unsuspecting  soldier.  So  our  spiritual  enemy,  Satan,  hides  himself  in  a
thousand  different  places,  and  wounds  us  with  some  sudden  temptation  when  we
are  least  aware.  {H.  J.  Wilmot-B^ixton,  M.A.)  The  children's  crusade : — I
suppose  many  of  you  have  read  of  those  strange  wars  called  the  Crusades  ?  They
were  undertaken  to  deliver  the  Holy  Sepulchre  of  Jesus  at  Jerusalem  out  of  the
hands  of  the  heathen.  Thousands  of  brave  men,  besides  their  friends  and  followers,
went  to  the  Holy  Land,  at  different  times,  to  fight  in  the  Crusades.  The  warriors
wore  a  blood  red  cross  on  their  clothing,  from  which  they  got  their  name  of
Crusaders,  and  their  motto  was,  "  The  Will  of  Ood."  It  was  a  very  good  motto,  but
not  a  very  true  one  for  them,  for  I  am  afraid  they  did  many  cruel  and  wicked
things  which  certainly  were  not  the  will  of  God ;  and  thousands  of  people  perished
miserably  abroad,  who  might  have  been  doing  useful  work  at  home.  Well,  amongst
these  Crusades  there  was  one  called  the  Children's  Crusade.  A  boy  in  France  went
about  singing  in  his  own  language —

**  Jesus,  Lord,  repair  our  loss.
Restore  to  us  Thy  Holy  Cross."

Crowds  of  children  followed  him,  singing  the  same  words.  No  bolts,  no  ban,  no
fear  of  fathers,  or  love  of  mothers,  could  hold  them  back,  they  determined  to  go  to
the  Holy  Land,  to  work  wonders  there  1  This  mad  crusade  had  a  very  sad  ending;
of  course  young  children  could  do  nothing,  being  without  leaders,  or  experience,  or
discipline,  and  they  all  perished  miserably  either  by  land  or  sea.  Now  I  want  you
to  think  about  another  Children's  Crusade,  in  which  you  are  all  engaged.  What
do  you  think  is  required  of  a  good  soldier  ?  I.  First  of  all  he  must  be  bravb.  We  all
like  to  hear  about  acts  of  bravery,  like  that  of  the  little  midshipman  who  spiked  the
Russian  guns  in  the  Crimean  war ;  or  of  the  boy  Ensign,  Anstruther,  who  at  the
battle  of  the  Alma  planted  the  colours  of  the  23rd  Regiment  on  the  wall  of  the
great  Redoubt,  and  then  fell,  shot  dead,  with  the  colours  drooping  over  him  like  a
pall.  But  the  courage  which  is  thought  most  of  in  heaven  is  the  courage  to  do
right.  I  have  read  a  story  of  a  wounded  soldier  lying  on  a  battlefield,  whose  mouth
had  been  struck  by  a  shot.  When  the  doctor  placed  a  cup  of  water  to  his  mouth,
the  man  was  eagerly  going  to  drink,  when  he  stopped  and  said,  "  My  mouth  is  all
bloody,  it  will  make  the  cup  bad  for  the  others."  That  soldier,  in  giving  up  self  for
the  sake  of  others,  was  more  of  a  hero  then  than  when  charging  against  the  foe.
Try  to  remember  that  story,  children,  and  if  you  are  tempted  to  do  anything  selfish
or  wrong,  stop  and  think,  "  It  will  make  it  bad  for  the  others."  U.  Yoc  must  expect

TO  FIND  ENEMIES  AND  DIFFICtJI/TIES   IS"  TOD  DO  WHAT  18  RIGHT.      EvCry  OUe  WaS  agaiust

Daniel  because  he  prayed  to  God.  Every  one  was  against  Shadrach,  Merfiaoh,
and  Abeilnego,  because  they  would  not  bow  down  to  an  idol.  But  God  was  on  their
side.  There  was  once  a  famous  man  of  God  named  Athanasins.  He  was  bold
enough  to  maintain  the  true  faith  of  Christ  against  Emperors,  and  Bishops,  and  he


<mi».  n.]  IL  TIMOTHY,  137

was  driven  into  banishment  over  and  over  again.  Some  of  his  friends  advised  him
to  give  in,  for,  said  they,  the  world  is  against  700 ;  "  Then,**  answered  Athanasias,
"  I  am  against  the  world."  Now  you  must,  as  Christ's  soldiers,  "  learn  to  suffer  and
be  strong."  To  win  a  victory  we  must  fight,  to  get  to  the  end  of  a  journey  we  must
bear  fatigue.  Let  me  tell  you  a  fable  about  that.  Three  animals,  an  ermine,  a
beaver,  and  a  wild  boar,  made  up  their  minds  to  seek  a  better  country,  and  a  new
home.  After  a  long  and  weary  journey,  they  came  in  sight  of  a  beautiful  land  of
trees  and  gardens,  and  rivers  of  water.  The  travellers  were  delighted  at  the  sight,
but  they  noticed  that  before  they  could  enter  this  beautiful  land,  they  must  pass
through  a  great  mass  of  water,  filled  with  mud  and  slime,  and  all  kinds  of  snakes
and  other  reptiles.  The  ermine  was  the  first  to  try  the  passage.  Now  the  ermine
has  a  very  delicate  fur  coat,  and  when  he  found  how  foul  and  muddy  the  water  was,
he  drew  back,  and  said,  that  the  country  was  very  beautiful,  but  that  he  would
rather  lose  it  than  soil  his  beautiful  coat.  Then  the  beaver  proposed  that  as  he  was
-a  good  architect,  as  yon  know  beavers  are,  he  should  build  a  bridge  across  the  lake,
and  so  in  about  two  months  they  might  get  across  safely.  But  the  wild  boar
looked  scornfully  at  his  companions,  and  plunging  into  the  water,  he  made  his  way,
in  spite  of  mud  and  snakes,  to  the  other  side,  saying  to  his  fellow-travellers,
"Paradise  is  not  for  cowards,  but  for  the  brave."  Dear  children,  between
you  and  the  Paradise  of  God  there  lies  a  long  journey,  the  enemy's  country,
where  the  devil  and  his  angels  will  fight  against  you,  where  there  are  deep  pools
of  trouble  to  be  gone  through,  rough,  stony  roads  of  temptation  to  be  tra-
versed,  hip^  rocks  of  difficulty  to  be  climbed  :  but  don't  be  afraid,  only  be
brave,  and  go  forward,  and  follow  Jesas  your  leader,  and  you  will  be  able  to
say,  as  St.  Paul  said,  "  Thanks  be  to  God,  who  giveth  us  the  victory,  through
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  III.  Well,  we  have  seen  that  soldiers  must  be  brave,
what  else  must  they  be  ?  Obedient.  God  told  Saul  to  do  a  certain  thhig,  and
he  did  not,  and  God  would  no  longer  have  him  as  a  soldier.  Do  yon  remember
what  was  said  to  him  ?  "  Behold,  to  obey  is  better  than  sacrifice."  {Ihid.)
The  good  soldiers : — The  question  before  us  is, — How  may  we  become  good  soldiers
of  Jesus  Christ  ?  I.  Wb  must  weak  the  xmtFOBM  or  Chkist.  This  uniform  is  not
made  up  of  different-coloured  cloth,  such  as  we  see  other  soldiers  wear.  No;
but  it  is  made  up  of  the  tempers,  or  dispositions,  which  form  their  character.
To  wear  the  uniform  of  Jesus,  then,  is  to  have  the  same  mind,  or  spirit,  or
temper  that  He  had.  U.  The  second  thing  for  us  to  do,  if  we  would  be
good  soldiers  of  Jesus  Christ,  is  to^OBET  the  obders  of  Jesus.  Some
time  ago,  a  large  ship  was  going  from  England  to  the  East  Indies.  She  was
carrying  a  regiment  of  soldiers.  When  they  were  about  half-way  through  their
voyage,  the  vessel  sprang  a  leak,  and  began  to  fill  with  water.  The  lifeboats  were
launched  and  made  ready,  but  there  were  not  enough  of  them  to  save  all  on  board
the  ship.  Only  the  officers  of  the  ship,  the  cabin  passengers,  and  some  of  Ihe
crew,  could  be  taken  in  the  boats.  The  soldiers  had  to  be  left  on  board,  to  go  down
with  the  ship.  The  officers  determined  to  die  with  their  men.  The  colonel  was
afraid  the  men  would  get  unruly  if  they  had  nothing  to  do.  That  he  might  prevent
this  he  ordered  them  to  prepare  for  parade.  Soon  they  all  appeared  in  full  dress.
He  set  the  regimental  band  on  the  quarter-deck,  with  orders  to  keep  on  playing
lively  airs.  Then  he  formed  his  men  in  close  ranks  on  the  deck.  With  his  sword
drawn  in  bis  hand,  he  took  his  place  at  their  head.  Every  officer  and  man  is  at
his  post.  The  vessel  is  gradually  sinking ;  but  they  stand  steady  at  their  post,  each
man  keeping  step.  And  then,  just  as  the  vessel  is  settling  for  its  last  plunge,  and
death  is  rushing  in  upon  them,  the  colonel  cries, — * 'Present  arms  1 "  and  that  whole
regiment  of  brave  men  go  down  into  their  watery  grave,  presenting  arms  as  death
approached  them.  Those  were  good  soldiers.  They  had  learned  to  obey  orders.
But  this  is  a  hard  lesson  to  learn.  Several  boys  were  playing  marbles.  In  the
midst  of  their  sport  it  began  to  rain.  One  of  the  boys,  named  Freddie,  stopped  and
said,  "  Boys,  I  must  go  home.  Mother  told  me  not  to  stay  out  in  the  rain."  "Your
mother — fudge !  "  said  two  or  three  of  the  boys.  "  The  rain  won't  hurt  yon  any
more  than  it  will  us."  Freddie  turned  on  them  with  a  look  of  pity,  and  yet  with
the  courage  of  a  hero,  while  he  calmly  said,  •*  I'U  not  disobey  my  mother  for  any  of
yon."  That  was  the  spirit  of  a  good  soldier.  After  a  great  battle  once,  the  general
was  talking  to  his  officers  about  the  events  of  the  day.  He  asked  them  who  had
done  the  best  that  day.  Some  spoke  of  one  man  who  had  fought  very  bravely,  and
some  of  another.  "  No,"  said  the  general,  "  you  are  aU  mist^^en.  The  best  man
in  the  field  to-day  was  a  soldier  who  was  just  lifting  ap  his  arms  to  strike  an  enemy.


188  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOB.  [cha*.  n.

but  when  he  heard  the  trumpet  sound  a  retreat,  he  checked  himself,  and  dropped  his
arm  without  striking  tbe  blow.  That  perfect  and  ready  obedience  to  the  will  of  his
general  is  the  noblest  thing  that  has  been  done  to-day."  III.  We  must  follow  the
EXAMPLE  OF  Jesus.  When  Alexander  the  Great  was  leading  his  army  over  some
mountains  once,  they  found  their  way  all  stopped  up  with  ice  and  snow.  His
soldiers  were  tired  out  with  hard  marching,  and  so  disheartened  with  the  difficulties
before  them,  that  they  halted.  It  seemed  as  if  they  would  rather  lie  down  and  die
than  try  to  go  on  any  farther.  When  Alexander  saw  this,  he  did  not  begin  to  scold
the  men,  and  storm  at  them.  Instead  of  this,  he  got  down  from  his  horse,  laid
aside  his  cloak,  took  up  a  pickaxe,  and,  without  saying  a  word  to  any  one,  went
quietly  to  work,  digging  away  at  the  ice.  As  soon  as  the  officers  saw  this,  they  did
the  same.  The  men  looked  on  in  surprise  for  a  few  moments,  and  then,  forgetting
how  tired  they  were,  they  went  to  work  with  a  wiU,  and  pretty  soon  they  got  through
all  their  difficulties.  Those  were  good  soldiers,  because  they  followed  tbe  example
of  their  leader.  {Richard  Newton,  D.D.)  A  good  soldier : — I.  What  is  implier
IN  BEING  A  soLDiEB  ?  I.  A  Eoldier  is  a  person  who  has  enlisted  in  an  army.  Had
looked  at  the  reasons  for  and  against  entering  the  army,  and  at  last  he  enlisted.
2.  He  is  the  property  of  the  king.  Gives  up  his  free  agency.  Gives  up  his  very
name.  Known  and  called  by  the  number  he  bears.  3.  He  is  provided  for  by
the  king.  Must  take  off  his  own  clothes,  whether  of  best  broadcloth  or  corduroy.
Must  be  clothed,  and  fed,  and  armed  by  the  king.  4.  He  must  always  wear  his
regimentals.  A  soldier  can  alwa.^s  be  recognised  as  such.  6.  He  is  prepared  for
trial  and  conflict.  Soldiers  are  the  result  of  war,  and  if  there  were  no  war,  there
would  be  no  soldiers.  He  enlisted  to  fight.  For  this  purpose  he  is  armed,  and
trained,  and  drilled.  II.  What  is  implied  in  being  a  soldiee  of  Christ  ?  It  is  im-
plied  that  Christ  is  a  King,  that  He  has  enemies,  that  He  has  an  army,  and  that  the
person  spoken  of  belongs  to  this  army.  I  have  to  glance  at  the  ground  we  have
already  passed — ^You  have  enlisted,  &c.  III.  What  is  implied  in  being  a  good
BOLDiEB  OF  Cheist  f  There  are  soldiers  and  soldiers.  There  are  some  who  are  idle
and  dissipated :  a  disgrace  to  the  profession  to  which  they  belong.  Others  only
swell  the  numbers  and  fill  up  the  ranks,  they  look  very  well  at  reviews,  but  don't
count  for  much  in  the  battle-field.  Others  are  so  true  and  faithful  that  they  cover
the  army  to  which  they  belong  with  glory.  1.  A  good  soldier  is  thoroughly  lojaL
Not  a  mercenary,  fighting  for  pay.  Proud  of  his  uniform,  his  name,  his  king.  2.
Patriotic.  Loves  his  country.  Every  soldier  is  his  comrade.  The  defeat  of  the
army  is  his  sorrow  ;  its  success  his  joy.  3.  Obedient.  He  may  be  at  home  in  the
midst  of  his  family — a  telegram  comes  ;  by  the  next  train  he  leaves  to  join  the  army,
perhaps  to  cross  the  seas  and  perish  in  a  distant  land.  4.  Earnest.  5.  Brave.  6.
Patient.  Not  enlisted  for  a  day,  but  for  life.  Often  put  where  there  is  nothing  tc
excite  or  gratify  ambition.  There  will  be  the  long  wearisome  march,  or  the  still
more  wearisome  halt.  While  his  comrades  are  assaulting  cities  and  winning  victories,
he  has  to  stand  and  watch,  or  lie  and  suffer.  7.  Self-denying.  8.  Modest.  His
motto.  Deeds  not  words.  It  is  said  that  the  word  "glory"  is  not  found  in  the
despatches  of  the  Duke  of  Wellington.  He  merely  states  what  the  army  had  done.
So  with  the  Christian.  What  are  you  ?  A  rebel  ?  Your  defeat  is  certain.  A
deserter?  Eeturn.  A  penitent,  longing  to  be  enUsted  in  Christ's  army  ?  Come.
A  soldier?  Be  "  a  good  soldier."  (C.  Garrett.)  A  good  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ : —
The  contrast  between  the  saints  of  the  Old  Testament  and  of  the  New  Testament  is
very  great,  especially  in  the  relation  which  they  bore  to  war.  No  great  saint  or
apostle  of  the  New  Testament  was  a  soldier.  But  in  the  Old  Testament  we  read  of
the  faith  of  Abraham,  of  the  wisdom  of  Moses,  of  the  courage  of  Joshua,  of  the
nobility  of  David,  of  the  piety  of  Josiah,  of  the  zeal  of  Nehemiah ;  and  all  these
had  at  some  parts  of  their  lives  to  go  forth  to  the  battle-field.  But  it  was  not  so
with  Peter,  James,  John,  Paul,  and  the  rest  of  the  early  disciples.  The  distinction
is  to  be  accounted  for  partly  by  the  circumstances  in  which  they  severally  lived.  In
Old  Testament  and  primitive  times  men  had  to  obtain  a  footing  for  their  very  life,
and  to  contend  for  national  existence.  But  in  the  time  of  Christ  the  Eoman
Government  secured  the  safety  of  person  and  property,  and  within  certain  limits
left  the  Jew  to  indulge  in  his  national  customs.  So,  in  the  history  of  our  own
country,  we  see  how  greatly  circumstances  have  changed.  In  the  time  of  Queep
EUzabeth  Englishmen  of  every  creed  were  compelled  to  have  the  soldierly  spirit
unless  they  wished  to  succumb  to  the  Spaniard.  And  in  the  time  of  the  Stuarts
men  were  obliged  to  keep  their  armour  bright  unless  they  were  prepared  to  put  their
liberties  at  the  mercy  of  a  tyrant.    Thus  we  have  in  both  periods  of  English  history.


CHA».  n.]  n.  TIMOTHY.  189

and  also  dniing  the  struggles  of  Jewish  history,  saints  who  were  also  and  literally
soldiers.  But  there  is  a  deeper  reason  for  the  change  which  has  come  about.  And
that  reason  is  to  be  seen  in  the  gentle  and  forgiving  spirit  which  is  inculcated  by
the  Christian  religion.  The  religion  of  Christ  banishes  war  by  taking  away  its
occasions  and  its  causes.  It  bids  its  adherents  still  enter  on  a  battle.  It  utilises
those  pugnacious  principles  which  exist  in  us  all,  by  confronting  us  with  the  great
moral  struggle  between  good  and  evil,  -where  every  man  must  choose  his  side.
There  are  certain  plain  and  palpable  qualifications  of  a  good  soldier  of  Christ  which
we  will  point  out.  I.  A  good  boldieb  xjndekstands  his  captain.  II.  UNi>EBSTAia>a
HIS  WEAPONS.  III.  Understands  his  place  in  the  battle.  IV.  Loves  thb  cause  in
WHICH  he  fights.  (S.  Pearson,  M.A.)  Christianity  and  soldiers : — The  metaphor
which  the  apo=tle  here  chooses  to  describe  the  work  of  a  primitive  Christian  bishop
cannot  but  stuke  us  as  remarkable.  Himself  a  servant  of  the  Prince  of  Peace,  and
writing  to  another  servant  of  the  Prince  of  Peace,  he  might,  we  may  think,  have
gone  somewhere  else  for  his  metaphor  than  to  the  profession  of  arms.  How  are  we
to  explain  the  honour  which  the  apostle  puts  upon  the  military  profession  when  he
points  to  a  soldier  as  embodying,  at  any  rate,  some  of  the  qualities  which  he  desires
to  see  in  a  ruler  of  the  Church  of  God  ?  We  cannot  say,  by  way  of  reply,  that  the
metaphor  is  so  accidental  or  so  singular  that  stress  ought  not  in  fairness  to  be  laid  on
it,  for  there  is  a  great  deal  more  religious  language  with  a  military  colour  or  flavour
about  it,  not  merely  in  the  Old  Testament,  but  in  the  New.  The  relation  between  the
military  profession  and  religion  thus  traceable  in  Scripture  reappears  in  the  history
of  the  Church.  If,  in  her  higher  moments,  the  Church  has  done  her  best  to  check
or  condemn  bloodshed,  as  when  St.  Ambrose  excommunicated  the  Eoman  Emperor
Theodosius,  at  the  very  height  of  his  power,  for  the  slaughter  of  Thessalonica,  she
has  distinguished  between  the  immediate  instruments  in  such  slaughter  and  the
monarchs  or  the  captains  who  were  really  responsible  for  it.  If,  in  the  first  cen-
turies of  the  faith.  Christians  were  often  unwilling  to  serve  in  the  Boman  ranks,
and  in  some  cases  preferred  martyrdom  to  doing  so,  the  reason  was  that  such  service
was  then  so  closely  bound  up  with  pagan  usages  that  to  be  an  obedient  soldier  was  to
be  a  renegade  from  the  Christian  faith.  When  this  difficulty  no  longer  presented  itself,
Christians,  like  other  citizens,  were  ready  to  wear  weapons  and  to  serve  in  the  wars,
and  so  long  as  warfare  is  defensive — devoted,  not  to  the  aggrandisement  of  empire,
but  to  maintaining  the  peace  and  the  police  of  the  world — the  Christian  Church,
while  deploring  its  horrors,  cannot  but  recognise  in  it  at  times  a  terrible  necessity.
When  the  great  Bishop  Leo  of  Bome  or  the  great  soldier  Charles  Martel  set  their
faces  against  the  destructive  inroads  of  barbarism,  they  had  behind  them  all  that
was  best  and  purest  in  Christendom;  and  the  rise  of  the  military  orders,  the
Knights  of  the  Temple  and  the  Knights  of  St.  John  of  Jerusalem,  marks  a  yet
closer  intimacy,  the  form  of  which  was  determined,  no  doubt,  by  the  ideas  of  the
twelfth  century  rather  than  of  our  own,  between  a  soldier's  career  and  the  profession
of  religion.  We  cannot  pass  that  noble  home  of  the  law,  as  it  is  now,  the  Temple,
without  remembering  that  it  was  once  tenanted  by  an  Order  of  soldiers,  bound  by
religious  obligations,  devoted  to  the  rescue  and  the  care  of  those  sacred  spots  which
must  always  be  dearest  to  the  heart  of  Christendom.  Here,  then,  let  us  ask  our-
selves the  question.  What  are  the  qualities  which  are  common  to  a  good  soldier  and
to  a  good  Christian?  The  answer  will  explain  and  will  justify  the  language  of
the  apostle.    L  The  fiest  is,  that  each,  the  Cheistian  and  the  soldieb,  does

HIS  WOBK  WELL  IN   THE   EXACT   DE6BEB    OF  HIS    DEVOTION   TO    HIS   COMMANDEB.      ThC

greatest  generals  have  been  distinguished  by  the  power  of  inspiring  an  unbounded
confidence  in  and  attachment  to  their  persons.  This  is  true  in  different  senses  of
Alexander,  of  Hannibal,  of  Csesar,  of  Napoleon.  And  what  is  the  deepest  secret  of
the  Christian  life  if  it  be  not  an  unbounded  confidence  in  the  Captain  of  our  salva-
tion, Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  devotion  to  His  person,  undoubting  belief  in  His  Word,
readiness  to  do  and  to  endure  whatever  He  may  order?  II.  And  the  second  vraxra
IN  A  SOLDIEB  IB  couRAQB.  In  the  Conventional  language  of  the  world,  a  soldier  is
always  gallant,  just  as  a  lawyer  is  learned,  just  as  a  clergyman  is  reverend.  What-
ever be  a  man's  real  character,  the  title  belongs  to  him  by  right  of  his  profession.
There  are  virtues  in  which  a  soldier  may  be  wanting  vrithout  damage  to  his  profes-
sional character,  but  courage  is  not  one  of  these.  HI.  And  a  thibd  excellence  nc
k  BOLDIEB  IB  THB  SENSE  OF  DisciPLiNB.  Without  discipline  an  army  becomes  an
unmanageable  horde,  one  part  of  which  is  as  likely  as  not  to  txan  its  destructive
energies  against  another,  and  nothing  strikes  the  eye  of  a  civilian  as  he  watches  a
regiment  making  its  my  through  one  of  our  great  thoroughfares  in  London  more


140  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n.

than  the  contrast  which  is  presented  by  the  unvarying,  I  had  almost  said  the
majestic,  regularity  of  its  onward  movement  and  the  bewildering  varieties  of  pace,
gesture,  direction,  costume  of  the  motley  crowd  of  curious  civilians  who  flit  spas-
modically around  it.  Discipline  in  an  army  is  not  merely  the  perfection  of  form,
it  is  an  essential  condition  of  power.  Numbers  and  resources  cannot  atone  for  its
absence,  but  it  may  easily  with  small  resources  make  numbers  and  greater  resources
powerless.  IV.  And  one  moee  chabactekistic  of  the  militaey  spibit  is  a  sense
or  coMKADESHiP.  All  over  the  world  a  soldier  recognises  a  brother  in  another  soldier.
Not  only  members  of  tbe  same  regiment,  of  the  same  corps,  of  the  same  army  and
country,  but  even  combatants  in  opposing  armies  are  conscious  of  a  bond  which
unites  them,  in  spite  of  their  antagonism  ;  and  the  officers  and  men  of  hostile
armies  have  been  known  to  engage  in  warm  expressions  of  mutual  fellowship  as
soon  as  they  were  free  to  do  so  by  the  proclamation  of  peace.  This  generous  and
chivalrous  feeling  which  survives  the  clash  of  arms  confers  on  a  soldier's  bearing
an  elevation  which  we  cannot  mistake.  When,  in  the  later  years  of  his  life,  Marshal
Soult,  who  had  been  in  command  in  the  Peninsula,  visited  this  country,  he  came
to  St.  Paul's  Cathedral,  and  the  monument  which  most  interested  him,  and  which
then  had  been  recently  erected  in  the  South  Transept,  was  that  of  Sir  John
Moore,  the  hero  of  Corunna.  "  Soult,"  says  one  who  witnessed  it,  "  stood  for  some
time  before  the  monument ;  he  could  not  speak ;  he  could  hardly  control  himself ;  he
dissolved  in  a  flood  of  tears."  Certainly  it  was  meant  to  be  so  m  the  Church.  "  By
this  shall  all  men  know  that  ye  are  My  disciples,  if  ye  have  love  one  towards  another."
But  there  is  an  important  difference  between  the  services.  The  one  terminates,  if  not
before,  yet  certainly  and  altogether  at  the  moment  of  quitting  this  eartbly  scene.  The
last  possible  point  of  contact  that  even  a  Wellington  can  have  with  the  profession  of  his
choice  is  seen  in  the  device  on  his  coffin,  in  the  epitaph  on  his  grave.  The  other  service

that  of  Jesus  Christ — although  under  changed  conditions  lasts  on  into  that  world

to  which  death  is  but  an  introduction,  and  which  He,  our  Captain,  has  opened  to
us  by  His  death  on  the  cross,  by  His  resurrection  from  the  dead.  (Canon Liddon.)
Endurance  :—'E.eTe  the  apostle  is  not  thinking  of  the  soldier  on  the  field  of  battle
engaged  in  conflict  with  the  enemy.  His  exhortation  to  Timothy  is  not  to  fight
•well,  but  to  endure,  or,  as  the  same  word  is  rendered  elsewhere  (chap.  i.  8),  to  suffer
affliction  well.  He  thinks  of  the  soldier  being  drilled  and  disciplined  for  the  fight.
As  a  prisoner  at  Eome  he  would  be,  very  probably,  a  daily  eye-witness  of  the  severe
training  through  which  the  emperor's  troops  had  to  pass.  These  were  good  soldiers
of  Cffisar.  They  were  true  patriots,  laying  upon  the  altar  of  their  country  their
very  lives.  Now  Timothy  was,  Uke  the  apostle  himself,  a  soldier  ;  but  the  soldier
of  a  very  different  King  from  Csesar,  and  had  a  very  different  warfare  to  wage  than
Buch  wars  as  the  Roman  soldiery  were  so  frequently  engaged  in.  He  was  the  soldier
of  Jesus  Christ.  I.  Let  me  remind  you  that  there  is  haedness  to  be  endubed
BT  ALL  OF  DS.  Christiai  i  y  means  to-day  as  it  always  did,  continual  cross-bearing.
The  word  "duty"  has  still  a  rough  edge.  For  example,  here  is  a  Christian
merchant  who  has  so  many  shares  in  a  concern  which  he  has  for  some  time  back
had  good  reason  for  thinking  is  in  a  rather  shaky  condition,  and  an  opportunity
occurs  for  his  selling  out,  and  that  at  a  good  price.  Just  at  present  a  few  hundred
pounds  in  hard  cash  would  be  of  immense  service  to  him  in  his  business.  But  no,
he  won't  sell.  He  means  to  be  the  true  Christian  gentleman,  and  he  feels  that  that
he  caimot  be  and  sell  as  good  that  what  he  has  his  doubts  about.  Yet  it  is
hard,  especially  if  one  can  see  at  his  back  a  wife  and  so  many  daughters
inclining  rather  to  be  extravagant,  and  who  cannot  appreciate  "father's  scruples."
This  is  his  cross,  and  as  a  good  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ  he  bears  it.  Come
what  may,  he  will  be  honest — will  not  finger  a  shilluig  that  does  not  come  to
him  lawfully.  I  think,  then,  that  in  the  region  of  commercial  morality  those
of  us  who  belong  thereto  will  find  occasion  for  the  exercise  of  the  precept,
"Thou,  therefore,  endure  hardness  as  a  good  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ."  H.  Let
me  see  if  I  can  give  the  true  word  of  direction ;  if  I  can  at  least  indicate  to  you
THE  BPiBiT  IN  WHICH  WE  ABE  TO  ENDUBE.  I  think  Paul  docs  this  himsclf  for  US-
We  are  to  endure  hardness  as  good  soldiers  of  Jesus  Christ.  Tfawt  is,  we  also,
like  Timothy— and  like  t'  '^'^e  good  soldiers  at  Rome  which  Paul  saw— are  to
take  lo  our  task  kindly.  Wj  are  not  to  despise  the  cross  that  is  laid  upon  us.
We  are  not  to  run  out  of  ihe  way  of  duty.  We  are  not  to  rebel  when  our
Master  chastens.  III.  Let  me  see  if  I  can  say  anything  that  mat  help  to
STIMULATE  D8  TO  DARE  AND  DO  THE  BIGHT,  60  that  wc  may  uot  repeat  the  mistakes
of  the  past  which  have  brought  to  us  so  much   misery  and  unrest.     Observe,


CHAP,  n.]  U.  TIMOTHY.  141

then,  what  Paul  says — "  As  a  good  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ."  That  is,  as  a
soldier  under  Jesus  Christ.  Think  of  that  name — Jesus  Christ.  Can  we  for  a
moment  suppose  that  He  would  give  an  unkind  command  or  put  upon  us  an
unnecessary  burden  ?  Jesus !  Why  the  name  suggests  all  that  is  kindest,  and
noblest,  and  gentlest,  and  truest.  But  there  is  one  other  thought  here  I  should
like  to  take  up  and  lay  upon  your  hearts,  "  As  a  good  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ  " —
that  is,  of  Jesus  Christ  as  our  Leader.  He  is  not  the  Master  to  say  "Go."
His  way  is  always  to  say  "Come."  The  heaviest  cross  ever  borne  was  that
which  He  bore.  (Adam  Scott.)  Moral  soldiership  : — I.  Let  us  understand
THE  MEANING  OF  THE  INJUNCTION,  "  ENDUBE  HABDNESs."  The  reference  Is  to  the
life  of  privation  and  suffering  which  a  soldier,  far  more  in  those  times  than
now,  had  to  undergo,  and  which  in  all  times  he  is  expected  to  bear  without
murmuring,  to  endure  willingly,  as  a  part  of  that  profession  which  he  has
voluntarily  embraced.  Endurance  is  not  merely  bearing  suffering,  but  bearing  it
manfully.  To  bear  hardship  with  the  spirit  of  a  hero  is  to  "  endure  hardness
as  a  good  soldier."  Samuel  Rutherford,  when  in  prison,  used  to  date  his  letters
from  "  Christ's  Palace,  Aberdeen,"  and  when  Madam  Guyon  was  confined  in  the
castle  of  Vincennes,  she  said,  '♦  It  seems  as  if  I  were  a  little  bird  whom  the  Lord
has  placed  in  a  cage,  and  that  I  have  nothing  now  to  do  but  sing."  Paul,  too,
did  not  tell  his  son  in  the  faith  to  do  more  than  he  had  done  himself.  H.  The
Christian's  profession,  as  a  soldier,  implies  a  voluntaby  change  of  position  in
LIFE.  III.  It  is  now  nearly  universally  allowed  that  an  intelligent  acquaintance
with  the  plans  of  the  genebal,  and  with  the  pubposes  foe  which  THE  battle  is

FOUGHT,  OB  THE  CAMPAIGN  UNDEBTAKEN,  BY  BEGETTING  CONFIDENCE  IN  HIS  LEADEB,
ENABLES   THE   SOLDIER   TO   BENDEB  MOBE   EFFICIENT   SEBVICE.      So  in   proportion  aS  a

Christian  grows  in  the  knowledge  of  God  and  of  His  plans  for  the  redemption  of
our  world  as  revealed  in  the  person  of  Jesus  Christ,  in  that  proportion  he  throws
his  whole  soul  into  the  fight.  Four  special  conditions  in  which  a  soldier  is  called
upon  to  "  endure  hardness."  1.  In  standing  his  ground.  Wellington  brought
peace  to  Europe  by  his  stand  at  Waterloo.  To  retire  would  have  been  disgrace,  to
advance  would  have  been  destruction.  Holding  his  position  brought  victory.  The
battle  of  Inkermann  was  won  by  an  eight  hours'  resistance  of  six  thousand  men
to  sixty  thousand.  So  a  Christian  soldier  often  finds  himself  so  hotly  assaulted  by
the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil,  that  he  is  unable  to  advance  a  foot.  But  a
firm,  resisting  stand  is  conquest.  2.  A  soldier  must  endure  hardness  in  marching.
The  chief  care  of  one  who  has  a  long  march  before  him  is  to  be  well  shod.  If
this  be  not  attended  to,  even  things  so  insignificant  as  thorns  and  briars  will
occasion  suffering,  and  may  unfit  the  soldier  for  the  fight.  So  the  lesser  vexations
and  petty  cares  and  trials  of  patience  in  everyday  life,  if  not  guarded  against,
will  weary  and  wound  the  "  feet  of  the  soul,"  as  Bishop  Home  calls  the  affections,
and,  footsore  and  wearied,  he  will  be  ill-prepared  for  those  special  encounters  with
the  enemy  to  which  he  is  always  liable.  3.  The  soldier  must  endure  hardness  in
action.  4.  Although  many  an  earthly  soldier  endures  who  is  never  crowned,  no
soldier  of  Christ  is  overlooked  in  the  day  of  victory.  The  only  condition  is
endurance.  (W.  Harris.)  Soldiers  of  Christ: — It  sometimes  happens  that  a
verse  in  our  English  Bible  contains  a  Scriptural  rule  of  the  utmost  value,  though
it  represents  neither  the  best  reading  nor  the  accurate  translation.  Such  is  the
case  with  this  text.  The  true  translation  in  reading  it  is  :  "  Share,  my  son,  in  my
suffering  as  a  fair  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ  "  ;  and  yet  the  words  "  endure  hardness '"
convey  a  most  valuable  general  lesson,  and  involve  the  exhortation  of  the  entire
context.  Perhaps  some  careless  epicurean  man  of  the  world,  perhaps  some  envious
fashionable  woman  of  the  world,  perhaps  some  easy,  self-indulgent,  godless  youth
asks  me,  "  Why  should  I  endure  hardness ?  Life  has  troubles  enough  in  store;
why  should  I  add  to  them  ?  There  is  no  religion  in  making  myself  uncomfort-
able ;  how  can  God  be  pleased  by  self-denials  which  will  only  be  a  burden  to  me?  "
1.  My  first  answer  to  your  question  is.  Do  it  for  your  own  sakes  because  we  men
cannot  live  like  beasts  to  be  cloyed  with  honey  ;  because  sickness  and  satiety  are
the  just  nemesis  of  self-indulgence  ;  because,  by  the  very  constitution  of  the
nature  God  has  given  you,  it  is  a  bad  thing  as  well  as  ruinous  to  all  earthly
happiness  that  the  body  should  be  pampered,  since  where  the  body  is  pampered
the  spirit  is  almost  necessarily  starved.  We  have  bodies ;  but  we  are  spirits.
He  who  would  truly  live  must  walk  in  the  Spirit,  and  he  who  would  walk  in  the
Spirit  must  keep  the  body  under  stern  control.  2.  But  we  go  further  and  say,
endure  hardness  also  because  it  is  the  manifest  will  of  God.     See  what  pains


148  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  {anu.  n.

Qod  tabes  to  teach  ns  that  it  is  His  will.  The  everlasting  hills  are  fall  of  theit
mineral  riches,  but  to  get  them  men  mast  drive  the  tunnel  and  sink  the  shaft.
The  soil  teems  with  golden  harvests,  but  to  win  them  man  most  scatter  his  BCNsds
into  the  furrow,  and  breathe  hard  breath  over  the  plough.  Nature  has  priceless
secrets  in  her  possession ;  but  she  holds  them  oat  to  as  clenched  in  a  granite  hand,
which  sheer  labour  must  unclasp.  Everywhere  in  nature  God  teaches  us  the  same
great  lesson.  Anything  worth  having  is  not  to  be  had  for  nothing.  8.  Endure
hardness  also  because  it  is  the  training-school  of  worth.  When  God  wants  a
nation  to  do  Him  high  service,  to  fight  His  battles,  to  wrestle  in  His  arenas,  then
He  gives  that  nation  labours  and  sorrows  too.  He  takes  them  out  of  the  sluggish
levels  of  Egypt,  and  makes  them  climb  His  granite  mountains  and  listen  to  the
wild  music  of  His  desert  winds.  A  nation  of  greedy  slaves  might  have  been  con-
tented to  live  and  die  in  gluttonous  animalism  ;  but  when  God  wants  heroes,  then
out  of  His  house  of  bondage  He  calls  His  sons.  Bead  God's  lessons  written  on
the  broad  page  of  history.  The  type  of  Egypt's  centuries  of  sluggish  placidity  is
but  the  cruel,  motionless,  staring  Sphinx ;  but  the  type  of  immortal  Greece  and
the  brave  flash  of  her  glory  is  the  Apollo  launching  at  the  Python  with  his  arrows.
"What  would  Sparta  have  been  had  she  never  had  Thermopylae?  What  would
Athens  have  been  but  for  Salamis  and  Marathon  ?  4.  Endure  hardness,  scorn
sloth,  embrace  labour,  despise  sham,  practise  self-denial  in  the  path  of  duty,
because  Christ  did  it.  It  is  the  will  of  Christ;  because  there  is  no  virtue
and  there  is  no  holiness  possible  without  it.  The  word  "  virtue "  occurs  bat
once  in  the  whole  of  the  New  Testament;  because  the  pagan  world  has  made
of  it  too  dwarfed  an  ideal,  and  Christianity  had  better  words  than  that;  but
even  the  pagan  world  saw  that  broad  is  the  path  of  evil — broad,  and  straight,
and  smooth  to  ruin  by  the  steps  of  sin.  The  type  of  nobleness,  even  to  the
pagan  world,  was  not  Sardanapalus,  but  Hercules ;  not  Apicius,  the  glutton,
but  Leonidas,  the  king.  They  knew  it  was  difficult  to  be  a  good  man— difficult,
and  not  so  easy  as  it  seems ;  they  knew  that  any  fool  could  be  a  money-getter,
or  a  drunkard,  or  a  debauchee ;  that  out  of  the  very  meanest,  vilest  clay  that
ever  was  you  can  make  an  effeminate  corrupter,  or  selfish  schemer,  or  a  slanderer,
or  a  thief ;  but  that  it  takes  God's  own  gold  to  make  a  man,  and  that  it  wants  the
furnace  and  the  toil  to  make  of  that  gold  and  fine  gold  ;  and  it  is  strange  how
unanimous  all  nations  have  been  on  this  point.  David  Hume  has  a  passage  in  hia
writings  about  virtue,  and  her  affability,  and  her  engaging  manners,  nay,  even,  at
proper  intervals,  her  frivohty  and  gaiety,  and  her  parting  not  willingly  with  any
pleasure,  and  requiring  a  just  calculation,  and  her  ranking  us  as  enemies  to  joy
and  pleasure,  as  hypocrites,  or  deceivers,  or  the  less  favoured  of  her  votaries ;
whereupon  one  of  our  men  of  science,  far  from  being  a  dogmatist,  says  that  in  this
psan  of  virtue  there  is  more  of  a  dance  measure  than  will  sound  appropriate  in
the  ears  of  most  of  the  pilgrims  who  toil  painfully,  not  without  many  a  stumble,
along  the  rough  and  steep  road  that  leads  to  the  higher  life.  But  if  virtue  be
difficult  of  acquirement,  far  more  is  holiness.  (F.  W.  Farrar,  D.D.)  Enduring
hardness  as  a  soldier : — The  apostle  Paul,  a  true  and  valiant  hero,  gives  counsel
in  the  text  to  each  minister  of  God  who  stands  up  in  any  age  to  do  battle  for  the
Lord.  He  must  not  only  understand  the  art  of  war  as  a  theory,  but  put  his  know-
ledge into  practice,  going  before  the  mighty  host  of  God's  elect  in  order  that  they  may
triumph  gloriously — "  Endure  hardness  as  a  good  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ."  The
apostles  all  set  this  example  to  the  world.  The  advice  of  St.  Paul  in  the  text  had
reference  in  its  original  application  to  the  clergy,  but  it  is  no  less  a  rule  which  is
binding  on  all  Christians.  The  fact  that  we  are  Christian  soldiers  suggests  three
corresponding  duties.  I.  Thb  will  of  thb  soldibb  shodli)  bb  wholly  abbobbed
IN  THAT  OF  HIS  coMMANDEB.  "  My  life  consists  in  being,  rather  than  in  doing,"
said  a  good  Christian  woman,  when  cut  off  from  active  work  by  long-continued
sickness.  "  I  cannot  fight  much,  but  if  I  can  hold  the  standard  for  other  eyes,  I
may  inspire  tired  soldiers  with  fresh  courage,  and  so,  if  nothing  but  a  colour-
bearer,  help  in  the  good  cause  1 "  Yes,  brave  and  devoted  woman,  many  a  jaded
and  disheartened  one  will  take  heart  and  hope,  as  you  thus  bear  aloft  with  unflinch-
ing hand  the  standard  of  faith  and  patience  I  II.  A  soldier,  to  deserve  the  name,
most  possess  tbub  coubaob.  III.  A  soldibb  uust  bb  ready  to  bnddbb  habd-
HEss.  {J.  N.  Norton.)  The  good  soldier  of  Jems  Christ : — Suppose  a  young
man  went  of  his  own  will  for  a  soldier,  was  regularly  sworn  in  to  serve  the  Queen,
took  his  bounty,  wore  the  Queen's  uniform,  ate  her  bread,  learnt  his  drill  and  all
that  a  soldier  need  learn,  as  long  as  peace  lasted.    But  suppose  that  as  soon  as  war


CHAP,  n.]  11.  TIMOTHY.  143

came  and  his  regiment  was  ordered  on  active  service,  he  deserted  at  once  and  went
off  and  hid  himself.  What  should  you  call  such  a  man  ?  You  would  call  him  a
base  and  ungrateful  coward,  and  you  would  have  no  pity  on  him  if  he  was  taken
and  justly  punished.  But  suppose  that  he  did  a  worse  thing  still.  Suppose  that
the  enemy,  the  Bussians  say,  invaded  England,  and  the  army  was  called  out  to
fight  them ;  and  suppose  this  man  of  whom  I  speak,  be  he  soldier  or  sailor,  instead
of  fighting  the  enemy,  deserted  over  to  them,  and  fought  on  their  aide  against
his  own  country,  and  his  own  comrades,  and  his  own  father  and  brothers,  what
would  you  call  that  man?  No  name  would  be  bad  enough  for  him.  If  he
was  taken  he  would  be  hanged  without  mercy,  as  not  only  a  deserter  but  a
traitor.  And  who  would  pity  him  or  say  that  he  had  not  got  his  just  deserts  ?
Are  not  all  young  people,  when  they  are  old  enough  to  choose  between  right  and
wrong,  if  they  choose  what  is  wrong  and  live  bad  lives  instead  of  good  ones,  very
like  this  same  deserter  and  traitor  ?  For  are  you  not  all  Christ's  soldiers,  every  one
of  you  ?  Did  not  Christ  enlist  every  one  of  you  into  His  army,  that,  as  the  baptism
service  says,  you  might  fight  manfully  under  His  banner  against  sin,  the  world,  and
the  devil — in  one  word,  against  all  that  is  wrong  and  bad  ?  And  now  when  you  are
old  enough  to  know  that  you  are  Christ's  soldiers,  what  will  you  deserve  to  be
called  if,  instead  of  fighting  on  Christ's  side  against  what  is  bad,  you  forget  you
axe  in  His  service.  But  some  may  say,  "  My  case  is  not  like  that  soldier's.  I
did  not  enter  Christ's  service  of  my  own  free  will.  My  parents  put  me  into  it
when  I  was  an  infant  without  asking  my  leave.  I  was  not  christened  of  my
own  wilL"  Is  it  so  ?  Do  you  know  what  your  words  mean  ?  If  they  mean
anything,  they  mean  that  you  had  rather  not  have  been  christened,  because  you
are  now  expected  to  behave  as  a  christened  man  should.  Now  is  there  any  one
of  you  who  dare  say,  "  I  wish  I  had  not  been  christened  "  ?  Not  one  I  Then
if  you  dare  not  say  that ;  il  you  are  content  to  have  been  christened,  why  are
you  not  content  to  do  what  christened  people  should?  But  why  were  you
christened  ?  not  merely  because  your  parents  chose,  but  because  it  was  their
duty.  Every  child  ought  to  be  christened,  because  every  child  belongs  to  Christ.
You  have  now  no  right  to  choose  between  Christ  and  the  devil,  because  Christ  has
chosen  you  already — no  right  to  choose  between  good  and  bad,  because  God,
the  good  God  Himself,  has  chosen  you  already,  and  has  been  taking  care  of  you,
and  heaping  you  with  blessings  ever  since  you  were  born.  And  why  did  Christ
choose  you  ?  As  I  have  told  you,  that  you  may  fight  with  Him  against  all  that  is
bad.  But  if  we  go  on  doing  bad  and  wrong  things,  are  we  fighting  on  Christ's
side  ?  No,  we  are  fighting  on  the  devil's  side,  and  helping  the  devil  against  God.
Do  you  fancy  that  I  am  saying  too  much?  I  suspect  some  do.  I  suspect
some  say  in  their  hearts,  "He  is  too  hard  on  us.  We  are  not  like  that
traitorous  soldier.  If  we  do  wrong,  it  is  ourselves  at  most  that  we  harm.
We  do  not  wish  to  hurt  any  one ;  we  do  not  want  to  help  the  devil."  (Chas.  Kingsley.)
Fortitude : — Weakness  and  effeminacy  have  ever  accompanied  the  latter  stages  of
all  human  civilisation.  Either  society  actually  rottens  and  falls  to  pieces  by  the
dissolving  influence  of  its  own  vices,  or,  weakened  by  indulgence,  it  faUs  a  ready
prey  in  its  turn  to  the  sword  of  some  ruder  but  manlier  enemy.  In  the  ancient
nations  of  the  world  such  has  been  the  invariable  process.  The  question  has  often
been  asked,  Does  the  law  still  hold  good,  and  must  the  nations  of  modern  Europe
decay  and  die,  as  the  great  nations  of  antiquity  have  done  ?  If  we  had  nothing  but
human  nature  to  look  to  the  reply  would  be  an  unhesitating,  Yes.  But  we  have
another  element  in  our  case,  what  our  Lord  calls  the  leaven,  to  spread  its  own
healthy  influence  through  the  otherwise  fermenting  mass  of  humanity ;  and  upon
its  regenerating  force  all  our  hopes  of  a  happier  future  must  rest.  If  Christianity
keeps  U8  from  effeminacy,  it  will  keep  us  from  ruin.  I  cannot  for  a  moment  doubt
its  power,  because  it  is  the  power  of  God.  But  it  therefore  follows  that,  if  it  is  to
save  us,  it  must  be  a  real  Christianity — a  Christianity  such  as  God  originated  and
fluch  as  God  will  work  by.  Now  it  is,  I  think,  the  most  serious  thing  in  the  present
condition  of  the  world  that,  not  only  has  a  luxurious  civilisation  weakened  the
domestic  virtues,  especially  among  some  women,  whose  extravagances  have  become
almost  a  satire  upon  womanhood — I  say  among  women,  because  the  love  of
athletic  sports  to  a  considerable  degree  checks  the  tendency  among  men ;  but  that
our  Christianity  itself  has  caught  the  infection  and  is  demoralised  by  self-indul-
gence. The  effeminacy  has  reached  even  our  religion.  Words  and  sentiments
take  the  place  of  deeds.  The  charm  of  the  eye  and  the  ear  are  substituted  for  great
inward  principles  ;  the  grandest  truths  are  welcomed,  admitted,  admired,  but  not


144  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOB.  (chap.  h.


acted  upon  in  daily  life.  The  Church  is  enormously  below  her  own  standard.  A
refined  self-indulgence  spreads  everywhere,  and  if  it  continues  to  spread  till  it
touches  the  very,  heart  of  the  Church  and  nation,  then  indeed  there  can  be  no  hope
for  us.  I  cannot  doubt  that  it  is  the  providential  object  of  the  struggles  of  faith
belonging  to  our  day  to  revive  the  manliness,  the  independence,  the  reality,  and
power  of  our  religion,  just  as  nations  amid  sufferings  and  disaster  recover  the
manly  virtues  which  have  rusted  in  prosperity  and  ease.  There  are  many  obvious
reasons  for  cultivating  a  more  robust  and  manly  earnestness  in  our  religion.    I.  It

18  DUE  TO  THE  CHABACTEB  OF  THE  GREAT  MASTER  WHOM  WE  SERVE.      We  lOok  Up  to  the

Captain  of  our  salvation,  and  every  imaginable  motive  which  can  nerve  the  human
heart  combines  to  inspire  us  with  dauntless  courage  and  unflinching  fortitude.     II.

A  ROBUST  EARNESTNESS  18  DUE  TO   THE   NECESSITIES   OF  THE   WORK.      God   takes   CVery

possible  precaution  in  His  Word  that  we  should  count  the  cost,  before  we  enUst
under  our  Captain's  banner.  We  have,  indeed.  Divine  strength  to  help  us ;  but  it
is  given  to  help,  not  to  supersede.  Our  battle  requires  all  our  strength,  and  nothing
less  will  suffice.  The  very  saints  hardly  press  into  the  kingdom  :  they  take  it  by
violence,  and  enter  like  soldiers  after  a  hard-fought  fight — wounded,  bleeding,  and
weary,  but  conquering.  And  this  endurance  of  hardness  is  the  more  necessary
because,  not  only  are  habits  of  personal  self-denial  and  self-restraint,  watchful
devotion  and  earnest  effort,  the  conditions  of  victory,  but  they  are  actual  parts  of
the  victory  themselves.  III.  Manly  vigour  is  due  to  the  abundance  of  the
BEWARD.  _  Salvation  itself  is  not  of  reward ;  it  is  all  of  grace.  But  once  let  the  soul
find  Christ,  let  it  be  accepted  within  the  family  circle,  let  it  fairly  take  service
beneath  the  banner  of  Christ  as  the  faithful  soldier  and  servant  of  a  crucified
Master,  and  then  God  deals  with  it  by  rewards.  (E.  Garbett,  M.A.)  The  Christian
a  soldier : — I.  The  soldier  giving  up  the  direction  of  his  own  actions  and  exer-
tions, GIVES  HIMSELF  UP  TO  THE  SERVICE  OF  ANOTHER.  The  Eomau  soldier,to  whose
case  St.  Paul  must  be  supposed  particularly  to  refer,  was  nothing  but  a  soldier.  So
it  is  with  the  Christian  :  he  may  not  serve  the  world  and  his  God  together.  He
must  either  be  all  Christ's  or  none  of  His.  11.  The  service  into  which  the  soldier

ENTERS  IS  FOR  THE  MOST  PART  A   SERVICE   ACCOMPANIED   BY  PERIL  AND  PRIVATION.       III.

The  third  point  of  similarity  observed  in  the  conditions  of  the  soldier  and  the  Chris-
tian is,  that  EACH  IS  BOUND  TO  BE  FAITHFUL   IN   THE   DISCHARGE   OF  THE  DUTIES  OF  HI3

PROFESSION  BY  THE  OBLIGATION  OF  A  SOLEMN  OATH.  At  the  time  St.  Paul  wrotc,  the
Roman  soldier,  when  first  enrolled,  took  an  oath  to  obey  the  commands  of  his
emperor,  and  never  to  forsake  his  standard  :  and  this  oath  was  yearly  renewed.  A
Christianised  imagination  found  a  parallel  to  this  in  the  solemn  engagement  entered
into  at  baptism,  and  renewed  in  the  holy  communion  of  the  supper  of  the  Lord,
"obediently  to  keep  God's  holy  will  and  commandments,  and  to  walk  in  the  same
all  the  days  of  our  life."  For  this  very  reason  those  two  awful  rites  of  our  religion
received  from  the  primitive  Church  the  name  which  they  yet  bear,  the  name  of
sacraments.  Sacrament  was  the  usual  term  for  the  soldier's  military  oath,  and  it
was  transferred  by  the  ancients  to  baptism  and  the  eucharist,  because  in  them  the
believer,  as  it  were,  binds  himself  by  solemn  compact  faithfully  to  serve  in  the
spiritual  armies  under  the  orders  of  the  King  of  heaven.    {W.  H.  Marriott.)

Ver.  4.  No  man  that  warreth  entangleth  himself  with  the  affairs  of  this  life.
— Boman  soldiers  were  not  allowed  to  marry  or  to  engage  in  any  husbandry  or
trade ;  and  they  were  forbidden  to  act  as  tutors  to  any  person,  or  curators  to  any
man's  estate,  or  proctor  in  the  cause  of  other  men.  The  general  principle  was,  that
they  were  excluded  from  those  relations,  agencies,  and  engagements,  which  it  was
thought  would  divert  their  minds  from  that  which  was  to  be  the  sole  object  of  pur-
suit. {A.  Barnes.)  The  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ,  enduring,  and  unentangled  (vers.
3,  4) : — Soldiers  read  and  scan  attentively  the  military  orders  which  are  put  forth
from  time  to  time  by  their  commanding  officers.  Let  us  see  what,  in  the  articles  of
Christian  warfare,  are  placed  here  for  our  instruction  to-day.  I.  The  Christian
SOLDIER  IS  TO  ENDURE  SUFFERING  FOR  Christ.  This  Is  the  truc  rendering  of  the
expression,  "  Endure  hardness."  It  means,  suffer  or  endure  for  Christ's  sake.  The
faithful  soldier  never  deserts  his  duty.  The  hardships  on  the  battle-field  are  fear-
ful, but  never,  in  his  thought,  unendurable.  Officers  in  the  Crimean  war  (as  they
themselves  have  told  me)  had  for  weeks  nothing  else  than  the  hard  rock  for  their
pillow,  and  the  sky  (often  obscured  by  deluging  rain  clouds)  for  their  ceiling.  Yet
they  "  endured "  it,  and  the  soldiers  "  endured "  it  with  them,  and  thus  they
"  Buffered  "  or  endured  hardness  together,  as  "  good  soldiers  "  under  a  gracious


CHAP,  n.]  II.  TIMOTHY.  145

qneen  I  1.  The  good  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ  will  often  "  endure "  suffering  hy
reproaches  for  Christ's  name.  2.  And  you  must  not  wonder,  if  you  have  to  endure
persecution  also,  by  taunts  openly  spoken  in  your  hearing.    II.  That  Christian

SOLDIEES  ABB  NOT  TO  "ENTANGLE   THEMSELVES   WITH  THE   AFTAIB8  OP   THIS  LIFE."      1.

The  Christian  is  a  warrior — is  a  "  man  that  warreth."  There  is  the  daily  watch  to
be  kept  over  yourself,  and  to  bar  out  Satan,  and  to  keep  out  the  world.  Ay,  and  all
is  not  done  even  then,  for  there  are  those  occasional  surprises,  when  the  enemy
would  pounce  upon  us  from  an  ambush  ;  for  the  Christian  knows  that  sometimes
he  is  vigorously  assaulted  at  the  time,  and  from  the  point  where  he  thought  injury
impossible,  and  when  he  deemed  himself  quite  secure.  Then,  too,  there  is  the  well-
planned  attack,  when  Satan  brings  all  his  legionaries  to  the  fight,  and  the  hosts  of
temptations  are  directed  against  you  with  unceasing  violence.  2.  Well,  then,  be
mindful  you  do  not  entangle  yourself.  You  need  not  be  entangled — if  you  become
so,  you  entangle  yourself.  (1)  You  may  entangle  yourself  by  a  worldly  spirit.  (2)
Or,  you  may  become  entangled  by  evil  company.  (3)  Or,  you  may  become  en-
tangled by  any  business  or  any  pleasure.  How,  then,  are  these  dangers  to  be
avoided  ?  I  answer — 1.  By  watchfulness  against  first  dangers.  You  know  in  an
army,  "  pickets  "  are  sent  to  the  very  outskirts  of  the  camp,  who  give  signal  of  the
earliest  beginning  of  any  attack.  Be  you  always  on  your  guard ;  let  conscience
have  fideUty  and  watchfulness,  ever  on  the  alert  to  give  notice  of  the  least  cause  of
danger.  2.  Then,  next,  daily  prayer  is  as  needful  to  a  Christian  soldier  as  daily
food  is  to  the  winner  of  the  earthly  fight.  3.  And,  lastly,  you  will  do  well  to  make  a
profession.  A  man  is  just  as  brave  in  fustian  as  in  full  regimentals,  but  it  is  a  fact
long  ago  established,  that  the  ornament  and  distinctive  dress  are  extremely  useful.
IGeo.  Venables.)  The  military  discipline : — 1.  I  begin  with  the  particular  matter
suggested  by  the  apostle  ;  viz.,  the  putting  off  or  excision  of  the  world,  as  an  inter-
ruptive  and  disquaUfying  power.  The  only  way  to  make  great  soldiership,  as  the
mUitary  commander  well  understands,  is  to  take  his  men  completely  out  of  the
home  world  and  have  them  circumscribed  and  shut  in  by  drill,  as  being  mortgaged
in  body  and  life  for  their  country.  Trained  to  fiinch  at  nothing,  and  suffer  any-
thing, he  makes  them  first  impassive,  and  so,  brave.  And  under  this  same  law  it
is  that  all  Christian  disciples  are  required  to  strip  for  the  war,  throwing  off  all  their
detentions,  all  the  seductions  of  business,  property,  pleasure,  and  affection.  All
such  matters  must  now  drop  into  secondary  places,  for  the  understanding  is,  that
no  one  gets  the  great  heart,  or  becomes  in  any  sense  a  hero,  till  his  very  life  is  drunk
up  in  his  commander,  and  his  supreme  care  to  please  him  that  hath  chosen  him
to  be  a  soldier.  2.  Consider  next  how  the  military  discipUne  raises  spirit  and  high
impulse  by  a  training  under  authority,  exact  and  absolute.  Does  it  reduce  the
soldiers  and  all  the  subordinate  commanders  of  an  army  to  mere  cyphers,  when
they  are  required  to  march,  and  wheel,  and  lift  every  foot,  and  set  every  muscle  by
the  word  of  authority ;  when  even  the  music  is  commandment,  and  to  feed,  and
sleep,  and  not  sleep  are  by  requirement?  Why,  the  service  rightly  maintained
invigorates  every  manly  quality  rather ;  for  they  are  in  a  great  cause,  moving  with
great  emphasis,  having  thus  great  thoughts  ranging  in  them  and,  it  may  be,  great
inspirations.  God's  all  dominant,  supreme  authority  is  our  noblest  educator.  3.
How  often  is  it  imagined  by  outside  beholders,  or  felt  by  slack-minded,  self-indul-
gent disciples,  that  the  military  stringency  of  the  Christian  life  is  a  condition  of
bondage.  Liberty  is  not  the  being  let  alone,  or  allowed  to  have  everything  our  own
way.  If  it  were,  the  wild  beasts  would  be  more  advanced  in  it  than  all  states  and
peoples.  No,  there  is  no  proper  liberty  but  under  rule,  and  in  the  sense  of  rule.  It
holds  high  sisterhood  with  law,  nay,  it  is  twin-born  with  law  itself.  4.  Ungenial
and  repulsive  as  the  law  of  the  camp  may  be,  there  is  no  such  thing  in  it  as  enduring
hardness  for  hardness'  sake,  no  peremptory  commandment  for  commandment's
sake.  Such  kind  of  discipline  would  not  be  training,  but  extirpation  rather.  And
yet  how  many  of  us  Christian  disciples  fall  into  notions  of  Christian  self-denial
that  include  exactly  this  mistake.  As  if  it  were  a  proper  Christian  thing  to  be
always  scoring,  and  stripping,  and  mortifying  ourselves.  The  truth  is,  that  our
human  nature  is  made  to  go  a  great  deal  more  heroically  than  some  of  us  think ;
and  our  soldiers  in  the  field  are  just  now  making  this  discovery.  Why,  if  the  fires
of  patriotic  impulse  can  help  our  sons  and  fathers  in  the  field  to  rejoice  in  so  great
sacrifice  for  their  country,  what  pain  can  there  be  to  us  in  our  painstakings,  what
loss  in  our  losses,  when  the  love  of  God  and  of  His  Son  is  truly  kindled  in  us  ?  6.
The  military  discipline  has  as  little  direct  concern  to  beget  happiness,  as  it  has  to
compel  self-abnegation.    It  is  never  altogether  safe  for  such  as  we  to  be  simply

10


146  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n.

happy,  and  that  may  be  the  reason  why  the  best  and  solidest  of  us  never  are.    6.
There  is  yet  one  other  point  of  this  military  analogy,  where  in  fact  it  is  scarcely  any
proper  analogy  at  all,  bat  a  kind  of  oniversal  law,  running  through  all  kinds  of
mortal  endeavour,  secular,  moral,  mental,  and  spiritual ;  viz.,  that  whatever  we
get,  we  must  somehow  fight  for  it.     What  begins  in  the  conflicts  of  tribes  and  em-
pires  nms  down  through  all  kinds  of  experience.    Fighting  a  good  fight  is  the  only
way  to  finish  the  course,  and  the  crown  of  glory  comes  in  nowhere,  save  at  the  end.
(H.  Bushnell,  D.D.)        The  Christian  warfare : — What  are  the  things  with  which
we  are  in  danger  of  entangling  ourselves  ?    1.  Doubtless  we  are  in  the  greatest
danger  from  our  sins  and  especially  from  our  besetting  sin,  i.e.,  that  peculiar  sin  to
which  each  one  is  liable  either  from  some  natural  bias,  or  from  acquired  habit
arising  out  of  the  evil  within.     We  are  in  danger  of  entangling  ourselves  with  our
sins — (1)  From  their  deceitfulness.    (2)  From  the  power  and  force  of  habit.  (3)
Because  we  cannot  be  the  slaves  of  sin  and  be  the  servants  of  God.    2.  But  the
Christian's  dangers  arise  not  only  from  his  sins,  but  also  from  the  ordinary  affairs
of  daily  life.    These  are  more  especially  meant  in  the  text.    And  what  snare  can
be  greater?    Actual  sin  we  may  generally  know  to  be  sin.   But  in  the  affairs  of  this
life,  our  daily  occupations  and  our  lawful  enjoyments,  it  is  often  hard  to  find  where
the  entanglement  begins.     If  as  moralists  say  and  as  experience  proves,  the  differ-
ence between  things  lawful  and  unlawful  is  frequently  one  of  degree,  it  must  require
both  an  enlightened  conscience  and  much  self-examination  to  ascertain  the  middle
path  of  safety.    Then  keep  as  your  safeguard  the  motive  the  text  supplies :  "  to
please  Him  who  hath  chosen  you  to  be  a  soldier."    It  is  possible,  we  may  think  we
do  God  service  by  acts  which  a  more  enhghtened  judgment  would  convince  as  do
not ;  we  cannot  mistake  a  sincere  desire  to  please  Him.    The  old  Crusader  who,  his
heart  aroused  by  the  preaching  of  a  Bernard  or  a  Peter,  laid  his  hand  on  his  breast
and  swore  to  scare  away  the  infidel  from  the  holy  sepulchre  by  his  good  broadsword,
needed  more  light  to  learn  that  "  our  weapons  are  not  carnal " ;  and  yet  who  can
doubt  his  desire  to  please  his  Saviour  2    Let  us,  then,  see  to  it  that  we  have  this
motive — Am  I  desirous  to  please  Him  who  hath  chosen  me  to  be  a  soldier  ?    (G.
Huntingdon,  M.A.)        The  affairs  oj  this  life  may  entangle  us: — 1.  From  weakness
of  judgment.    2.  From  inordinate  affection.    3.  From  the  rebellion  of  the  will.
Let  us  use  all  helps  to  avoid  the  danger ;  and  (1)  We  must  get  a  sound  judgment,  to
understand  what  is  the  chiefest  good,  and  now  we  are  to  dispose  of  all  inferior
things,  for  the  procuring  of  it.    (2)  Labour  to  see  the  vanity  of  all  earthly  and
sublunary  things,  what,  and  wherein  their  natural  worth  oonsisteth.    (3)  Make  the
Lord  thy  portion,  and  be  thou  assured  that  He  only  can  content  thy  heart.    (4)
Befrain  things  indifferent  {if  in  thy  choice),  and  watch  over  thy  outward  senses.  (6)
Strive  for  a  taste  of  spiritual  things.    They  who  tasted  of  the  grapes  which  came
from  Canaan,  desired  to  see  the  land :  coveted  more.   So  will  it  be  in  better  things.
(6)  Beat  Satan  with  his  own  weapons,  outshoot  him  in  his  own  bow.   Doth  he  show
thee  the  glory  of  this  world  ?    Tell  him,  it  is  thy  Father's ;  and  in  serving  of  Him
He  will  give  thee  a  better.     Tempts  he  thee  to  wear  two  swords  ?    Say  that  thou
art  weak,  and  one  sufficeth.     Art  thou  enticed  by  Rebecca's  beauty  ?    Consider  the
king's  daughter,  who  is  all  glorious  within.    Saith  he,  thou  art  a  siimer  7    Beply,
else  what  needed  I  a  Saviour  ?    {J.  Barlow,  D.D.)        Not  entangled  with  the  world :
— St.  Paul  does  not  suggest  that  Christians  should  keep  aloof  from  the  affairs  of
this  life,  which  would  be  a  flat  contradiction  of  what  he  teaches  elsewhere  (1  Thess.
iv.  11,  12).    He  has  a  duty  to  perform  "  in  the  affairs  of  this  life,"  but  in  doing  it
he  is  not  to  be  entangled  in  them.     They  are  means,  not  ends  ;  and  must  be  made
to  help  him  on,  not  suffered  to  keep  lum  back.    If  they  become  entanglements
instead  of  opportunities,  he  will  soon  lose  that  state  of  constant  preparation  and
alertness  which  is  the  indispensable  condition  of  success.     {A.  Plummer,  DJD.)
Carnal  ease  not  becoming  a  soldier : — Milton  excuses  OUver  Cromwell's  want  of
bookish  application  in  his  youth  thus :  "  It  did  not  become  that  hand  to  wax  soft
in  literary  ease  which  was  to  be  inured  to  the  use  of  arms  and  hardened  with
asperity ;  that  right  arm  to  be  softly  wrapped  up  amongst  the  birds  of  Athens,  by
which  thunderbolts  were  soon  afterwards  to  be  hurled  among  the  eagles  which
emulate  the  sun."    Carnal  ease  and  worldly  wisdom  are  not  becoming  in  the
soldier  of  Jesus  Christ.    He  has  to  wrestle  against  principalities  and  powers,  and
has  need  of  sterner  qualities  than  those  which  sparkle  in  the  eyes  of  fashion  or
adorn  the  neck  of  elegance.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)        Wholly  a  soldier : — ^Let  not  the
minister  of  the  gospel  have  one  foot  in  the  temple  and  the  other  in  the  euria.
{Melancthon.)        Military  service  : — Those  who  regard  relationship  are  not  fit


cua.  n.]  IL  TIMOTHY,  UT

for  military  eervice.  {Tamil  Proverb.)  Devotion  to  duty: — The  Coantess  of
Aberdeen,  speakiog  at  Millseat,  said,  "If  yoa  have  noticed  Mr.  Gladstone  a»
I  have  done,  he  considers  it  a  sacred  duty  never  to  think  any  part  of  his  time
his  own  while  he  is  in  office.  He  considers  he  has  no  right  to  have  anything
to  do  with  his  own  private  affairs.  He  has  told  me  himself  that  he  never  reada
a  book  which  he  does  not  think  will  help  in  some  way  to  prepare  his  mind  for
tile  work  which  he  has  to  do  for  the  country.  He  never  takes  any  relaxation,
any  recreation,  but  what  he  thinks  is  just  necessary  to  prepare  him  in  doing  the
work  of  his  country.  It  is  a  life  of  hard  and  continuous  work,  and  yet  we  all  look
upon  that  as  the  most  honourable  place  in  the  country,  that  of  being  absolutely
the  servants  of  the  country."  (British  Weekly.)  That  he  may  please  Him
who  hath  chosen  him  to  be  a  soldier. — That  I  may  please  Him : — As  we  read
his  epistles,  we  feel  that  we  know  St.  Paul  better  even  than  those  who  saw
his  face  or  heard  his  voice  ;  and  more  and  more  the  consciousness  of  his
greatness  becomes  impressed  upon  us.  There  are  two  things  in  this  greatness
of  his  which  strike  us  most  forcibly.  The  first  is  his  success  in  living  the
Christian  life.  What  was  the  secret  of  this  strength  and  success,  making
St.  Paul's  life  so  different  from  the  lives  of  other  men?  Another  thing  which
strikes  us,  as  we  read  his  writings,  is  his  deep  spirituality.  What  was  the
secret  of  this  spirituality?  Perhaps  the  text  will  furnish  us  with  an  answer.
There  you  have  the  ringing  key-note  of  St.  Paul's  whole  life,  the  one  thought  that
was  ever  uppermost  in  his  mind,  "  That  I  may  please  Him."  There  are  three
aims,  or  motives,  under  which  men  act,  and  these  three  give  birth  to  three  different
kinds  of  lives.  Each  of  these  principles  of  action  is  exclusive.  I.  LiviNa  to  plbasb
BELT.  This  is  the  keynote  of  most  lives — the  central  force  into  which  they  resolve
themselves  when  they  are  analysed  and  dissected.  The  principle  first  manifests
itself  when  the  unconscious  life  of  childhood  passes  into  the  conscious  life  of
manhood  or  womanhood.  U.  The  second  type  of  life  is  that  in  which  the  fibst
AiH  IS  TO  please  othebs.  The  highest  good,  some  say,  is  to  sacrifice  all  for  selfish
pleasure.  The  highest  good,  say  others,  is  to  sacrifice  all  to  gain  the  approbation
and  admiration  of  the  world.  Some  men  will  give  honour  and  reputation  for  gold.
Others  vrill  give  gold  for  honour  and  reputation.  Here  you  have  the  distinction
between  these  two  motives.  III.  From  the  slavery  of  these  two  motives — living  to
please  self,  and  living  to  please  others— let  us  now  turn  to  the  glorious  liberty  of
the  third — St.  Paul's  motive — living  to  please  Christ.  The  Cturistian  religion  la
different  from  all  other  religions  in  this  one  respect :  it  is  founded,  not  upon  a
system,  but  upon  a  person.  Bemember  that  this  is  not  a  dead  person  who  lived
eighteen  hundred  years  ago,  and  then  went  back  to  heaven.  It  is  not  the  memory
of  a  life.  It  is  a  present  life.  It  is  a  living  person — "  Jesus  Christ,  the  same
yesterday,  and  to-day,  and  for  ever."  Here  is  the  fountain  of  spirituality — the
constant  contact  of  heart  and  soul  with  the  living  Christ.  We  Christians  are  men
of  but  one  principle.  We,  with  that  feeling  of  loyalty  in  our  hearts  to  Christ,  have
but  one  simple  rule  of  action :  Will  it  please  Him  ?  (H.  Y.  Satterlee,  D.D.)  One
mind  rules  the  army : — Nowhere  else  is  it  so  true  that  the  will  of  one  becomes  lost
in  that  of  another  as  in  the  case  of  the  soldier.  In  an  army  it  is  contemplated  that
there  shall  be  but  one  mind,  one  heart,  one  purpose — that  of  the  commander ;  and
that  the  whole  army  shall  be  as  obedient  to  that  as  the  members  of  the  human
body  are  to  the  one  will  that  controls  alL  The  application  of  this  is  obvious.  (A.
Barnes.)  Heart  devotion  to  Christ: — Ofttimes  a  commander  is  so  beloved  and
idolised  by  his  soldiers,  that  they  know  no  higher  wish  than  to  please  him  for  his
own  sake.  A  French  soldier  lay  sorely  wounded  on  the  field  of  battle.  When  the
Burgeons  were  probing  the  wound  in  the  breast  to  find  the  bullet,  the  soldier  said —
•'  A  little  deeper,  gentlemen,  and  you  wiU  find  the  emperor."  So  heart-deep  was
his  devotion  to  his  captain.  But  there  never,  never  was  a  captain  who  so  held  the
heart  and  charmed  the  love  of  His  soldiers  as  Immanuel  does.  For  Him  they
fight,  for  Him  they  hve,  for  Him  they  suffer,  and  for  Him  they  die !  if  only  they
may  *•  please  Him  who  hath  called  them  to  be  a  soldier."  This  Commander  loves
to  mention  His  beloved  "  braves  "  in  His  despatches,  and  these  are  kept  as  a  book
of  remembrance.  (J,  J.  Wray.)  Duty  more  than  safety : — In  evil  times  it
fares  best  with  them  that  are  most  careful  about  duty,  and  least  about  safety.
(J.  Hammond.)  Erratic  soldiers  ."—Erratic  Christians,  who  dash  about  like
Bashi-Bazouks,  working  according  to  no  law  save  the  bidding  of  their  own
caprice,  are  sorry  specimens  of  soldiers.  {W.  Landels,  D.D.)  Obey  orders  and
leave  results  .-—When  Stonewall  Jackson,  who  was  personally  a  very  tender  man.


148  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  a

was  asked  whether  he  had  no  compunctions  in  shelling  a  certain  town,  which  had
been  threatened  unless  it  surrendered,  he  replied, "  None  whatever.  What  business
bad  I  with  results  ?     My  duty  was  to  obey  orders."    {H.  0.  Mackey.)

Ver.  5.  Not  crowned,  except  he  strive  lawfully. — Lawful  striving : — The  athlete
who  competes  in  the  games  does  not  receive  a  crown,  unless  he  has  contended  law-
fully, i.e.,  according  to  rule  {vofiifi(os,  vofiog).  Even  if  he  seem  to  be  victorious,  he
nevertheless  is  not  crowned,  because  he  has  violated  the  well-known  conditions.
And  what  is  the  rule,  what  are  the  conditions  of  the  Christian's  contest?  "  If  any
man  would  come  after  Me,  let  him  deny  himself  and  take  up  his  cross  and  follow
Me."  If  we  wish  to  share  Christ's  victory,  we  must  be  ready  to  share  His  suffer-
ing. No  cross,  no  crown.  To  try  to  withdraw  oneself  from  all  hardship  and
annoyance,  to  attempt  to  avoid  all  that  is  painful  or  disagreeable,  is  a  violation  of
the  rules  of  the  arena.  This,  it  would  appear,  Timothy  was  in  some  respects
tempted  to  do ;  and  timidity  and  despondency  must  not  be  allowed  to  get  the  upper
hand.  Not  that  what  is  painful,  or  distasteful,  or  unpopular,  is  necessarily  right ;
but  it  is  certainly  not  necessarily  wrong ;  and  to  try  to  avoid  everything  that  one
dislikes  is  to  ensure  being  fatally  wrong.  (A,  Plummer,  D.D.)  Lawful  diet : —
The  phrase  "  lawfully  "  which  is  found  in  precisely  the  same  connection  in  Galen
(Comm.  in  Hippocrates  I.  15)  was  technical,  half -medical,  and  half  belonging  to  the
training  schools  of  athletes,  and  implied  the  observance  of  all  rules  of  life  prior  to  thii
contest  as  well  as  during  it.  Failure  to  keep  to  the  appointed  diet  and  discipline,
no  less  than  taking  an  unfair  advantage  at  the  time,  excluded  the  competitor  from
his  reward.  (E.  H.  Plumptre,  D.D.)  Regulations  for  athletic  contests: — The
following  were  among  the  regulations  of  the  athletic  contests.  Every  candidate
was  required  to  be  of  pure  Hellenic  descent.  He  was  disqualified  by  certain  moral  and
poUtical  offences.  He  was  obliged  to  take  an  oath  that  he  had  been  ten  months  in
training,  and  that  he  would  violate  none  of  the  regulations.  Bribery  was  punished
by  a  fine.  The  candidate  was  obliged  to  practise  again  in  the  gymnasium  immediately
before  the  games,  under  the  direction  of  judges  or  umpires,  who  were  themselves
required  to  be  instructed  for  ten  months  in  the  details  of  the  games.  (Conybeare  and
Howson.)  Lawful  striving  : — I.  A  Chbistian  is  a  btbiveb,  1.  In  the  breast  and
forefront  of  this  strife  thou  must  contend  with  ignorance,  which  adversary,  though
his  eyes  be  put  out,  and  he  be  as  blind  as  a  miU-horse,  yet  his  strength  is  like
behemoths,  his  weapons  Goliahs,  his  blows  the  batterings  of  a  tearing  cannon;
for  if  this  giant  be  not  quelled,  killed,  he  will  lead  you  into  mazes  of  error.  2.  This
monster  being  put  to  flight,  you  are  to  encounter  with  aged  superstition.  3.  Close
after  idolatry  follows  covetousness.  4.  At  the  heels  of  every  striver  you  shall  have
sloth  and  idleness.  II.  Etebnal  lifb  is  cailed  a  ceown.  For  the  worth  and
excellency  of  it.  III.  The  lawful  sTBrvEB  shall  be  ceowned.  (J.  Barlow,  D.D.)
The  lawful  strife : — Man  likes  to  choose  his  own  way ;  but  the  gospel  of  our  Lord
Jesus  Christ  has  marked  out  a  way  for  him :  hence  one  reason  at  least  of  his  un-
willingness to  go  along  it.  The  text  tells  us  that  we  must  put  off  this  perverseness
of  the  old  man,  and  put  on  all  the  obedience  of  the  new  man,  following  the  direction
which  the  Lord  hath  given.  Man's  will  is  to  have  no  change  of  his  ways,  no  sorrow
for  the  past,  no  amendment  (but  he  will  not  call  it  amendment)  for  the  future.
All  this  is  too  humbling  to  his  pride,  too  much  of  a  curb  upon  his  self-will.  But
our  Lord's  precept  is  repentance :  you  must  come  to  Me,  and  receive  that  which  I
give  along  the  road  of  repentance.  The  making  repentance  a  step,  and  not  a
course,  merely  a  gate  of  introduction,  and  not  a  road  also  of  daily  conduct,  is  one
of  the  short  cuts  by  which  men  think  to  arrive  at  the  prize,  without  going  through
aU  the  prescribed  rules  of  the  struggle.  And  not  only  must  we  bring  our  minds
to  submit  to  the  rules  which  our  Lord  hath  laid  down,  but  also  our  hearts  to
understand  them  :  indeed,  we  must  first  understand  them  before  we  can  truly
accept  them.  We  cannot  in  any  case  effectually  bind  ourselves  to  a  duty  of  which
we  know  not  the  extent ;  we  cannot  be  sure  of  accomplishing  a  thing  of  which  we
have  not  counted  the  cost.  Now  our  blessed  Lord  hath  set  before  us  our  course,
both  by  example  and  precept.  And  what  remains  is  to  make  up  our  minds  to  rise
and  follow.  In  His  trials  we  have  the  model  of  our  lawful  strife.  In  His  ascension
unto  glory  we  see  the  assurance  of  our  crown.  His  flesh  was  crucified:  so  must
we  crucify  the  flesh.  He  rose  again  ;  even  so  we  must  rise  again  unto  newness  of
life.  He  is  seated  in  heaven  :  so  we  must  set  our  affections  on  things  above.  The
rules  are  plain  ;  thev  cannot  be  confounded  with  the  rules  of  strife  for  any  worldly
mastery.    We  see,  then,  what  we  have  to  contend  against.    It  is  a  compliance  with


CHIP,  n,]  IL  TIMOTHY,  I49

the  course  of  a  sinful  world ;  a  reluctance  to  change  our  course  into  one  which  is
not  in  conformity  with  it,  but  even  in  a  contrary  direction.  It  is  putting  God's
end,  indeed,  before  as,  even  the  prospect  of  eternal  life,  but  not  using  His  means,
but  putting  our  own  in  their  place,  because  we  find  them  much  more  agreeable :  it
is,  in  short,  the  indulgence  of  our  nature.  {R.  W.  Evans,  B.B.)  Lawful  strife : —
We  gather  from  this  figure  that  in  spiritual  things  there  is  a  striving  lawfully  and
a  striving  unlawfully,  and  that  the  prize  is  not  necessarily  given  to  him  who  wins
the  race,  if  he  has  not  complied  with  certain  rules  laid  down.  I  think,  then,  we
may  say  that  there  are  three  distinct  ways  of  striving.  1.  There  is  an  unlawful
striving  after  unlawful  objects.  2.  An  unlawful  striving  after  lawful  objects.  3.  A
lawful  striving  after  lawful  objects.  I.  As  what  is  right  is  often  more  clearly  shown
by  holding  up  what  is  wrong,  I  shall  attempt  to  describe  what  it  is  to  stbive  un-
liAWFOiiLT  APTER  DNLAWFTO,  OBJECTS.  1.  To  strive,  then,  after  pre-eminence,  to  be
B  Diotrephes  in  a  church  (John  iii.  9).  2.  All  strife  about  vain  and  idle  questions
(ver.  14).  3.  To  seek  after  a  form  of  godliness,  whilst  secretly  denying  the
power  thereof,  or  to  have  a  name  to  live  when  dead  in  sin.  4.  To  strive  after
fleshly  holiness  and  creature  perfection.  5.  To  seek  to  find  an  easier  and  smoother
path  than  the  strait  gate  and  the  narrow  way.  II.  But  now  I  come  to  another
kind  of  striving,  which  is  unlawfuIj  striving  after  LAwruL  objects.  Now  God  has
laid  down  in  His  word  of  truth  three  solemn  rules,  laws  you  may  call  them  if  you
like,  which  constitute  lawful  striving.  1.  The  Holy  Ghost  must  begin,  carry  on,
and  finish  the  inward  work  of  grace.  2.  The  soul  must  be  brought  under  His  Divine
teaching  to  be  thoroughly  stripped  and  emptied  of  all  creature  wisdom,  strength,
help,  hope,  and  righteousness.  3.  The  glory  of  a  Triune  God  must  be  the  end  and
motive  of  all.  Any  departure  from  these  three  rules  of  striving  makes  a  man  strive
unlawfully.  III.  But  we  come  now  to  the  only  striving  which  the  Lord  crowns — ^a
liAWFUL  striving  AFTER  LAWFUL  OBJECTS.  1.  Now  wc  wiU  begin  with  the  first  rule,
which  is  this,  that  the  Holy  Spirit  must  work  in  us  all  the  power,  wisdom,  grace,
faith,  strength,  and  life,  that  we  strive  with.  2.  The  second  rule  of  lawful  striving
is,  that  the  runners  in  this  race  should  have  no  strength.  "He  giveth  power  to
the  faint,  and  to  them  that  have  no  might  He  increaseth  strength."  3.  And  this
enables  you  to  comply  with  the  third  rule  of  lawful  strife — to  give  God  all  the  glory.
Stirely  you  can  take  no  glory  to  self,  when  self  has  been  proved,  and  found  wanting.
Now  these  lawful  strivers  after  lawful  objects  are  crowned,  and  they  only.  This
crown  is  twofold — a  crown  here  and  a  crown  hereafter,  a  crown  of  grace  set  on  the
heart  below,  and  a  crown  of  glory  set  on  the  head  above.  (J.  C.  Pkilpot.)  Lawful
Btriving  (chap.  ii.  5  with  1  Cor.  ix.  25) ; — Let  us  glance  first  at — I.  The  fact  that
THE  Christian  life  is  a  warfare,  a  running  and  a  wrestling,  a  course  of  self-
bestraint,  and  of  earnest  labour  and  striving  after  a  great  end.  Let  us  consider —
II,  The  manner  of  the  strife.  There  are  two  words  which  describe  this,  both  of
which  are  significant.  "Lawfully"  is  the  one,  and  "certainly" — or  to  put  the
double  negative  as  the  apostle  has  it,  "  not  uncertainly  " — is  the  other ;  and  the
•'  not  as  one  that  beateth  the  air"  is  only  an  expletive,  or  repetition  of  that.  1.
This  "lawfully"  requires  that  all  our  effort  and  striving  should  be  in  accordance
with  Divine  rule.  And  this  implies  at  least  two  things — (1)  That  it  should  be
preceded  by  our  trust  in  Christ.  Nothing  we  can  do  is  acceptable  or  valuable  until
by  faith  in  Christ  we  have  been  reconciled  to  God,  (2)  In  the  efforts  we  put  forth
we  are  not  to  follow  our  own  impulses  or  inclination,  but  to  be  directed  by  the  will
of  Christ.  2.  "Certainly."  The  certainty  is  secured  by  the  lawfulness.  Those
who  are  guided  by  Christ's  will  are  not  in  any  doubt  either  as  to  what  they  ought
to  do,  or  as  to  the  result  of  doing  it.  Let  us  notice — III.  The  object  of  our  effort
jkND  striving.  The  apostle  defines  this  object  in  the  words,  "  I  keep  under  my
body,  and  bring  it  into  subjection,"  and  in  this  he  but  describes  the  warfare  of
the  spirit  against  the  flesh,  or  of  the  new  man  against  the  old,  which  is  character-
istic of  the  Christian  hfe.  And  this  leads  me  to  notice  in  the  fourth  and  last
place — IV.  The  motive  op  the  apostle's  strivino.  1.  That  he  might  not  be  a
castaway.  "A  castaway."  Try  to  realise  what  that  word  means,  if  you  would
understand  the  full  significance  of  the  text,  and  the  mighty  force  of  the  motive
by  which  the  apostle  was  actuated.  "  A  castaway."  There  was  a  picture  so  desig-
nated painted  some  years  ago,  and  engravings  of  it  were  frequently  met  with.  One
of  these  you  may  have  seen,  and  the  remembrance  of  it  will  help  yon  to  a  conception
of  what  the  apostle  dreaded.  In  that  picture  a  gaunt  figure  with  unsnaven  head  and
cnkempt  hair,  badly  clad  and  hunger-stricken,  is  seen  seated  on  a  raft  in  the  midst
of  a  raging  rainy  sea,  sheltering  his  face  with  his  arm  from  the  blinding  drift.


150  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  O.

Btraiiiing  his  hollow  ejes  to  descry  a  sail  in  the  far  distance.  He  is  the  very
picture  of  nnmitigated,  hopeless,  unpitied  misery.  He  is  not  only  alone  in  the
universe,  but  the  whole  universe,  so  far  as  it  is  visible,  seems  to  be  against  him.
The  sky  frowns  on  him ;  the  rain  descends  on  his  unsheltered  head ;  the  wind
smites  him ;  the  sea  dashes  over,  and  threatens  to  engulf  him ;  hungry  monsters
of  the  deep  are  waiting  to  make  him  their  prey.  There  is  no  ear  to  hear  his  cry,
no  eye  to  witness  his  miserable  and  forlorn  plight,  no  hand  to  help  him,  no
haven  near,  no  friendly  star  gleaming  through  the  darkness  to  show  him  where  he  is.
He  is  left  alone  of  men,  cast  out  by  the  world,  persecuted  by  the  elements.  The  only
thing  that  befriends  him  is  the  raft  to  which  he  clings.  Now  to  be  a  castaway  in  the
spiritual  sense  is  worse  even  than  that — unspeakably  worse.  The  word  is  fraught  with
all  kinds  of  imaginable  and  unimaginable  hoaors.  To  be  rejected  by  the  universe  of
being,  to  be  despised  and  spurned,  to  be  expelled  from  any  circle  into  which  it  is
desirable  to  enter,  to  be  disowned  by  all  the  good,  tormented  by  all  the  bad,  to  see
every  door  of  hope  closed,  to  find  everything  in  the  universe  hostile,  every  force
operating  unfavourably,  every  object  wearing  a  frown,  no  eye  to  pity,  no  hand  to
help,  no  ear  to  hear,  no  voice  to  utter  one  consoling  word,  no  means  of  mitigating,
no  friendly  raft  even  to  bear  up  amidst  the  enguMng  misery  1  What  conception
can  be  more  horrible  than  tbat  ?  2.  Paul  was  not  only  actuated  by  the  desire  to
escape  being  a  castaway,  but  also  by  the  desire  to  gain  a  crown.  "  They  do  it,"  he
says,  of  the  competitors  in  the  games,  "  to  obtain  a  corruptible  crown,  but  we  an
incorruptible."  {W.  Landels,  DJ).)  Law  : — As  the  chemist,  the  navigator,  the
naturalist  attain  their  ends  by  means  of  law,  which  is  beyond  their  power  to  alter,
which  tbey  cannot  change,  but  with  which  they  can  work  in  harmony,  and  by  so
doing  produce  definite  results,  so  may  we.  (Shorthoiae,  "John  Inglesant.")  Obe-
dience:— If  a  boy  at  school  is  bidden  to  cipher,  and  chooses  to  write  a  copy  instead,
the  goodness  of  the  writing  will  not  save  him  from  censure.  We  must  obey,
whether  we  see  the  reason  or  not;  for  God  knows  best.  {New  Cyclopcedia  of
niustratiom.)  Conquest  the  condition  of  entrance  into  heaven : — Many  years  ago
the  Turks  and  the  Christians  had  a  great  battle,  and  the  Christians  were  defeated,
and  with  Stephen,  their  commander,  they  fled  toward  a  fortress  where  the  mother
of  the  commander  was  staying.  When  the  mother  saw  her  son  and  his  army  flying
in  disgraceful  retreat,  she  ordered  the  gates  of  the  fortress  to  be  closed  against
them,  and  the  gates  were  closed,  and  then  the  mother  stood  on  the  battlement  and
cried  to  her  son,  "  You  cannot  enter  here  except  as  a  conqueror."  Then  the  com-
mander rallied  his  scattered  troops,  and  resumed  battle  and  won  the  day — twenty
thousand  scattering  like  flying  chaff  two  hundred  thousand.  Ah  1  my  friends,  de-
feated in  this  battle  with  sin  and  death  and  hell,  there  is  no  joy,  no  reward,  no
triumph  for  yon.  Only  shame  and  everlasting  conteuupt.  But  for  those  who
gained  the  victory  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  the  gates  of  the  New  Jerusalem
are  open,  and  you  will  have  abundant  entrance  into  the  everlasting  kingdom  of  our
Lord.  (T.  De  Witt  Talmage.)  Obedience  and  freedom: — The  truest  freedom  is
secured  by  the  most  implicit  obedience.  Those  who  profess  themselves  free  in  the
sense  of  being  superior  to  law  do  but  make  themselves  the  slaves  of  sin.  It  is  in
the  observance  of  rule  that  we  find  the  fullest  scope  for  the  development  of  our
individuality  and  the  improvement  and  elevation  of  all  our  natural  powers.  They
soar  highest,  and  act  with  the  greatest  vigour,  and  move  with  the  greatest  freedom,
who  keep  themselves  most  completely  subject  to  the  restrdnts  of  law.  Loyalty
elevates.  We  are  ensnared  and  deteriorated  when  we  follow  our  own  caprice ;  for
the  liberty  which  is  lawless  is  essentially  degrading.  The  worlds  describe  their
brilliant  course  over  the  dark  brow  of  night  because  of  the  force  which  binds  them
to  their  great  centre ;  let  that  force  be  destroyed,  and  they  are  free  to  rush  whither-
soever the  centrifugal  force  propels.  Their  movement  may  be  swifter  than  the
lightning,  and  their  track  more  dazzling  than  its  path,  but  it  will  soon  end  in
darkness  and  destruction.  Ana  so  it  is  with  the  mind  and  the  law  of  duty  which
binds  it  to  God.  The  freedom  which  comes  from  the  violation  of  that  law  is  a
freedom  which,  instead  of  securing  its  welfare  and  elevation,  only  lands  it  in
deeper  degradation  and  death.     (W.  LandeU,  D.D.)

Yer.  6.  The  husbandman  that  laboureth  most  be  first  partaker  of  the  fmlts.
— The  labouring  husbandman: — The  order  of  the  Greek  shows  that  the  emphatio
word  is  "  labours."  It  is  the  labouring  husbandman  who  must  be  the  first  to  par-
take of  the  fruits.  It  is  the  man  who  works  hard  and  with  a  will,  and  not  the  one
who  works  listlessly  or  looks  despondently  on,  who,  according  to  all  moral  fitness


«HAP.  n.]  n.  TIMOTHY.  161

and  the  nature  of  things,  ought  to  have  the  first  share  in  the  fruits.  This  inter-
pretation does  justice  to  the  Qreek  as  it  stands,  without  resorting  to  any  manipula-
tion of  the  apostle's  language.  Moreover,  it  brings  the  saying  into  perfect  harmony
with  the  context.  It  is  quite  evident  that  the  three  metaphors  are  parallel  to  one
another,  and  are  intended  to  teach  the  same  lesson.  In  each  of  them  we  have  two  things
placed  side  by  side — a  prize,  and  the  method  to  be  observed  in  obtaining  it.  Do
you,  as  a  Christian  soldier  on  service,  wish  for  the  approbation  of  Him  who  has
enrolled  you.  Then  you  must  avoid  the  entanglements  which  would  interfere  with
your  service.  Do  you,  as  a  Christian  athlete,  wish  for  the  crown  of  victory  ?  Then
you  must  not  evade  the  rules  of  the  contest.  Do  you,  as  a  Christian  husbandman,
wish  to  be  among  the  first  to  enjoy  the  harvest  ?  Then  you  must  be  foremost  in
toil.    {A.  Plummer,  D.D.)  The  minister  a  husbandman: — 1.  He  must  prepare

good  seed — i.e.,  sound  doctrine.  For  in  this  sense  we  may  truly  say :  what  a  man
Boweth,  he  shall  reap ;  such  as  thy  seed  is,  such  will  be  thy  harvest.  2.  Under-
stand  the  nature  of  tiie  soil,  the  spiritual  estate  of  thy  people,  and  let  the  seed  be
in  degree  and  measure  suitable.  Seed  that  is  hot  and  dry  must  be  sown  in  a  oold
and  moist  ground;  if  cold  and  moist,  in  a  land  that  is  hot  and  dry,  else  no
multiplication.  He  that  preaches  mercy  to  the  wicked  is  like  him  who  soweth
wheat  on  dry  sandy  mountains ;  judgment  to  the  righteous,  rye  in  wet  and  watery
valleys — neither  of  both  will,  can  prosper.  8.  Get  skill  in  the  manner  of  sowing.
4.  When  the  seed  is  sown,  weeds  will  grow  up  with  it.  These  must  be  plucked  up,
kept  under,  else  the  com  will  not  prosper.  5.  In  any  case,  go  not  thou  beyond  thy
bounds,  but  sow  in  that  Boil  where  God  commands  thee.  That  great  seedsman,
Paul,  had  ill  success  among  the  Jews,  being  chiefly  sent  to  teach  the  Gentiles.  6.
Cast  not  off  thy  calling ;  wax  not  weary  in  this  husbandry ;  and  to  encourage  thee,
consider  the  excellency  of  thy  function.  The  husbandman  waiteth  long ;  be  thou
also  patient,  for  a  time  of  gathering  will  come — shall  come.  \j.  Barlow,  D.D.)
What  the  Christian  teacher  can  learn  from  the  husbandman : — 1.  No  fruit  without
labour.  2.  No  labour  without  reward.  {Van  Oosterzee.)  The  minister  a  hus-
bandman : — 1.  He  must  cultivate  the  people,  and  sow  the  good  seed.  2.  He  must
not  be  discouraged  if  he  does  not  reap  fruit  at  once.  3.  As  the  fruits  of  the  ground
sustain  the  husbandman,  so  should  the  people  sustain  the  minister.  (W.  Burkitt,
M.A.)  Reward  of  work : — A  few  years  since.  Motley  shot  up  to  the  first  position
as  an  historian.  Many  wondered ;  but  it  was  no  wonder.  He  had  wrought  patiently
for  years  in  the  libraries  of  the  Old  and  New  Worlds,  unseen  of  men.  The  success  of
the  great  artist  Dor6  was  years  of  study  in  the  hospitals,  and  practice  in  the  studio
behind  it.  This  path  to  success  is  open  to  all.  (New  Cyclopcedia  of  Illustrations.)
No  work,  no  reward: — Gilbert  Wakefield  tells  us  that  he  wrote  his  own  memoirs,  a
large  octavo,  in  six  or  eight  days.  It  cost  him  nothing,  and,  what  is  very  natural,
is  worth  nothing.  You  might  yawn  scores  of  such  books  into  existence ;  but  who
would  be  the  wiser  or  better?  We  all  like  gold,  but  dread  the  digging.  The  cat
loves  the  fish,  but  will  not  wade  to  catch  them.  (J.  Todd,  D.D.)  The  pleasure  of  sloth
inconsistent  ivith  the  reward  of  toil : — They  are  utterly  out  that  think  to  have  the  plea-
sure of  sloth  and  the  guerdon  of  goodness.  (J.  Trapp.)  Work  and  joy : — Work  is
heaven's  condition  of  prosperity  and  enjoyment  in  everything.  A  workless  world
would  be  a  joyless  world.  (Homilist.)  Partaking  of  the  fruit : — A  young  man
came  to  a  man  of  ninety  years  of  age,  and  said  to  him,  "  How  have  you  made  out
to  live  so  long  and  be  so  well  t "  The  old  man  took  the  youngster  to  an  orchard,
and,  pointing  to  some  large  trees  fuU  of  apples,  said,  "  I  planted  these  trees  when
I  was  a  boy,  and  do  you  wonder  that  now  I  am  permitted  to  gather  the  fruit  of
them  ?  "  We  gather  in  old  age  what  we  plant  in  our  youth.  Sow  to  the  wind,  and
we  reap  the  wlurlwind.  Plant  in  early  life  the  right  kind  of  a  Christian  character,
and  yoa  will  eat  luscious  fruit  in  old  age,  and  gather  these  harvest  apples  in
eternity.  The  present  rewards  of  service : — Of  the  husbandman  it  is  said  that
he  first  shall  eat  of  the  fruit  of  his  labour.  Here  we  have  an  intimation  of  the
rewards  of  Christian  life  that  come  before  the  final  distribution.  The  soldier
mast  wait  nntil  the  war  is  over ;  the  contestant  shall  not  be  crowned  until  the  games
are  over ;  but  the  husbandman  has  continuous  incomings  of  the  fruits  of  his  labours
all  the  time.  He  first  partakes  of  the  fruit  of  his  labour.  The  loaf  on  his  table,
the  milk  in  his  dairy,  the  fruit  of  his  storehouse — these  are  kept  plenished  and
plentiful  all  the  time.  Then  comes  harvest  and  autumn,  with  their  laden  garners
and  their  orchard  spoih  So  it  is  with  the  rewards  of  the  Christian.  Let  him  be
as  a  soldier  brave,  as  contestant  striving,  as  a  husbandman  diligent  and  thrifty,  and
he  shall  have  the  reward  of  his  labours  even  now — in  grace  and  favour,  in  strength


152  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  n.

and  peace,  in  hope  and  heavenly  mindedness,  and  in  the  joy  of  doing  good.  Plenty
to  go  on  with,  and  a  harvest  to  follow — the  fruits  immortal,  that  await  the  plucking
from  the  bending  branches  of  the  trees  of  life  1    {J.  J.  Wray.)

Yer.  7.  Consider  what  I  say,  and  the  Lord  give  thee  understanding. — Reflection
aids  discernment : — The  better  rendering  gives,  "  For  the  Lord  will  give  thee."  Thia
gives  also  a  better  meaning :  "  Make  the  effort  to  reflect ;  for  if  thou  do,  the  Lord
wUl  give  thee  the  discernment  which  thou  needest."  [E.  H.  Plumptre,  D.D.)
Enlightenment  aids  personal  application  of  truth: — De  Wette  and  others  object  to  thia
verse,  that  it  is  impossible  to  suppose  that  St.  Paul  would  imagine  Timotheus  so
dull  of  apprehension  as  not  to  comprehend  such  obvious  metaphors.  But  they
have  missed  the  sense  of  the  verse,  which  is  not  meant  to  enlighten  the  under-
standing of  Timotheus  as  to  the  meaning  of  the  metaphors,  but  as  to  the  personal
application  of  them.  (Conybeare  and  Howson.)  Consideration: — I.  Consideratiom
IS  A  BUTy  TO  BE  PRACTISED.  1.  For  hath  not  God  given  man  a  discoursive  faculty  ?
What  creature  but  he  hath  understanding,  the  angels  only  excepted  ?  Were  it  not
vanity  to  have  an  eye,  and  close  it  ?  an  ear,  and  stop  it  ?  a  hand,  and  not  move  it  ?
And  is  it  not  wickedness  to  have  a  faculty  of  discourse  and  not  employ  it  ?  And
wherein  better  than  in  consideration  ?  2.  The  life  of  man  differs  little  from  a  beast
without  consideration  ?  This  soundly  lessons  those  that  approve  of  it  but  never
practise  it.  Will  you  hear  how  they  excuse,  clear  themselves  ?  (1)  It  is  a  difBcult
duty.  Grant  it  be  so,  what  then  ?  Is  it  to  be  rejected  ?  But  what  hard  things
dost  thou  use  for  the  love  of  this  world  f  Take  thou  the  like  pains  in  this  profit-
able action.  (2)  But  I  want  time.  Wonderful  1  Did  God  ever  command  a  duty
and  allow  no  time  to  effect  it  ?  What  1  None  to  consider  ?  to  confer  with  thy
Father  ?  Lay  thy  hand  upon  thy  mouth — say  no  more  ;  for,  for  what  end  is  the
Sabbath  ?  (3)  I  have  no  convenient  place.  Imitate  David,  commune  with  thyself
in  bed.  But  my  children  cry.  Then  with  Isaac,  to  the  field ;  Hannah,  to  the
Temple ;  or  get  thee  to  some  garden,  solitary  mount,  as  did  thy  Master.  (4)  I
cannot  bring  my  mind  to  it.  Is  it  so  with  thee  as  thou  sayest  ?  Be  the  mora
humbled  for  it,  and  make  that  matter  of  consideration.  Set  thou  thyself  about
this  necessary  duty ;  it  shall  recompense  all  thy  painstaking.  And — (a)  Wouldst
thou  love  God  ?  Then  consider  how  He  hath  chosen  thee,  redeemed  thee,  given
thee  a  being  in  these  glorious  days  of  the  gospel,  conferred  on  thee  many  earthly
favours.  Consider  the  many  sins  He  hath  pardoned,  prevented ;  the  evils  spiritual,
corporal.  He  hath  removed ;  the  petitions  He  hath  granted ;  and  of  what  great
things  thou  art  assured.  (6)  Is  thy  faith  feeble  ?  Consider  the  depth  of  God's
mercy,  the  firmness  of  His  promise,  the  might  of  His  power,  the  unchangeableness
of  His  nature.  Shall  not  these  relieve  thee  ?  (c)  Art  thou  impatient  ?  Do  afflic-
tions overlade  thee  ?  Consider  the  greatness  of  thy  sins,  whereby  thou  hast
deserved  far  worse  evils.  Think,  and  think  often,  that  they  come  from  the  hand  of
thy  heavenly  Father ;  how  He  hath  an  eye  to  thy  weakness,  that  they  shall  not
exceed  thy  ability ;  and  at  their  departure,  like  an  overflowing  river's  rich  mud,
leave  a  blessing  behind  them,  (d)  And  what  external  action  can,  without  con-
sideration, be  well  discharged?  Did  magistrates  take  up  their  minds,  exercise
themselves  in  this  duty,  would  it  not  make  them  resolute  for  the  execution  of  their
function  ?  (c)  Can  ministers  preach  and  neglect  this  action  ?  (/)  Why  do  men
hear  much,  understand  little,  and  practise  nothing?  It  is  want  of  consideration.
The  most  run  to  God's  house,  as  travellers  to  an  inn,  hear  the  Word  as  some  well-
told  tale,  not  knowing,  like  that  rude  company,  for  what  end  they  came  together.
{g)  In  a  word,  consideration  will  give  us  matter  of  prayer,  and  kindle  the  little
spark  of  grace  within  us,  put  us  in  mind  of  our  vow  in  baptism,  and  provoke  us  to
perform  it — yea,  all  our  promises,  II.  God's  Word  is  to  be  consldebed.  1.  For
the  Author's  sake.  Is  it  not  the  Book  of  God?  2.  And  is  not  the  matter  holy,
just,  good  ?  3.  What  admirable  effects  will  it  work  ?  David  hereby  became  wiser
than  his  teachers — a  man  according  to  God's  own  heart.     III.  Exhortation  is  to

BE    seconded    with    PRAYER.        IV.     GOD    GIVETH    MAN    UNDERSTANDING.        V  .    MeN   OF

MUCH  KNOWLEDGE  MAV  BETTER  THEIR  UNDERSTANDING.  Knowledge  in  a  threefold
respect  may  be  increased— 1.  In  the  faculty.  2,  In  the  object.  3.  In  the  medium
of  it.  VI.  In  all  Divine  truths  we  are  to  have  understanding.  Had  not
Moses  a  pattern  of  the  Tabernacle— to  a  broom,  a  snuffer,  a  curtain-ring?  Shall
we,  then,  be  ignorant  of  any  one  principle  in  the  whole  frame  of  religion?
(•/.  Barlow,  D.D.)  On  hearing  the  Word: — I.  Show  in  what  manner  w«  abb

TO  BSAB  THE  Word.     1.  Consider  well  the  matter  or  import  of  what  is  spoken.


CHAP,  u.]  II.  TIMOTHY.  153

2.  Attend  to  the  truth  and  propriety  of  what  is  delivered.  3.  Consider  the  weight
and  importance  of  what  is  delivered.  4.  Consider  the  personal  concern  you  have
in  the  truths  delivered.  11.  The  motites  which  should  induce  us  well  to  con-
8IDEB  WHAT  WE  HEAB.  1.  Think  in  whose  Name  the  ministers  of  the  gospel  speak,
and  whose  Person  they  represent.  2.  Consider  the  great  end  they  aim  at  in  their
ministrations.  3.  By  the  Word  that  we  hear  we  shall  be  judged  at  the  last  day.
(B.  Beddome,  M.A.)  The  young  invited  to  consider: — I.  I  begin  by  calling  your
attention  to  a  thought  which  you  should  never  have  wholly  absent  from  your  minds —
namely,  Fob  what  puepose  has  lite  been  given  tou  ?  For  what  other  purpose
than  to  prepare  for  eternity,  by  loving  and  serving  your  Creator  now,  that  you  may
serve  and  enjoy  Him  for  ever  ?  II.  From  this  thought,  then,  which  I  beg  you
seriously  to  lay  to  heart,  consider  what  pbovision  God  has  made  foe  toub  attaining
THIS  GLOBious  END  OF  YOUB  BEING.  III.  And  this  introduces  another  thought  of  vast
importance.  "  Consider,"  then,  ' '  what  I  say,"  as  to  the  fitting  pebiod  foe  making
this  suebendeb  of  youeselves  to  God.  When  should  it  be  done  ?  Our  answer
is,  it  cannot  be  done  too  early.  IV.  Consider  the  happiness  of  a  life  thus  eably
given  to  God,  to  be  spent  in  His  service,  to  end  in  His  glory.  {J.  Haslegrave,  M.A.)
Consideration : — Consideration  is  the  bed  where  the  incorruptible  seed  is  sown,  and
on  the  ground  thus  prepared  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  doth  shine,  and  by  His
warmth  produces  in  the  soul  all  manner  of  pleasant  fruits.  {Anthony  Horneck. )
Men  need  instruction:  —  A  man's  understanding  is  very  much  like  a  window.
The  sun-light  is  all  of  one  colour;  but  all  the  h'ght  that  goes  through  the
window  is  not.  Sometimes  the  audience  have  a  scarf  of  yellow  running  over
them,  sometimes  one  of  blue,  and  sometimes  one  of  red,  according  as  the
window  is  painted.  Man's  reason  being  like  a  painted  window,  the  light  that
goes  through  it  and  falls  upon  his  conscience  is  bizarre,  grotesque,  wrinkled,
bent,  or  distorted.  I  have  known  men  whose  understanding  had  in  it  hideous
saints,  crowned  monsters,  apocalyptic  visions,  and  what  not — things  that  took
the  colours  which  were  painted  on  the  window  of  that  reason.  It  is  very  im-
portant, therefore,  that  men  should  be  instructed.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  God's
teaching : — When  the  Prince  of  Wales  landed  at  Portsmouth,  after  his  tour  in
India,  I  was  in  the  crowd  with  my  httle  boys ;  and  as  the  Prince  and  his  Princess
and  children  drove  past,  I  lifted  my  younger  boy  on  my  shoulder,  and  this  enabled
him  to  see  better  and  further  than  the  tallest  person  around  us.  So  those  whom
God  teaches  and  helps  will  discern  better  and  further  than  those  who  just  look  out
for  themselves,  or  merely  get  information  from  others.  (H.  R.  Burton.)  Instruc-
tion from  God : — When  a  sceptic  once  went  to  a  Christian  minister  to  have  his
doubts  and  difficulties  solved,  the  minister  asked,  "  Have  you  gone  and  asked  God,
the  fountain  of  light  and  the  source  of  all  wisdom,  for  the  solution  of  your  diffi-
culties ?  "  On  the  perplexed  man's  replying  he  had  not,  the  minister  declined  to
try  and  assist  him  out  of  his  perplexities  till  he  had  attended  to  this  necessary  and
important  duty.  When  we  ask  wisdom  as  well  as  light  and  instruction  from  God,
He  will  give  us  mental  and  spiritual  capacities,  to  prepare  us  for  rightly  apprehend-
ing truths;  and  He  will  also  give  us  sufficient  opportunities  for  gaining  wisdom,
and  then  aid  and  prosper  us  in  our  effort  to  acquire  it.  Wisdom  is  to  knowledge
like  what  the  engineer  is  to  the  locomotive — a  director,  a  controller,  and  a  manager.
Religion  is  the  highest  wisdom  of  all.  (See  Prov.  iv.  7  ;  Deut.  xxxii.  29  ;  Psa.  xc.
12 ;  Prov.  ii.  6 ;  James  i.  5.)  {Ibid.)  Thinking  of  Christ : — Dr.  Cullis  tells,
in  one  of  his  reports,  of  an  aged  Christian  who,  lying  on  his  death-bed  in  the
Consumptives'  Home,  was  asked  the  cause  of  his  perfect  peace,  in  a  state  of
such  extreme  weakness  that  he  was  often  entirely  unconscious  of  all  around
him.  He  replied,  ♦'  When  I  am  able  to  think,  I  think  of  Jesus  ;  and  when
I  am  unable  to  think  of  Him,  I  know  He  is  thinking  of  me.''  Remem-
brance of  Christ : — There  is  no  Christianity  where  there  is  no  loving  remembrance
of  Christ.  If  your  contact  with  Him  has  not  made  Him  your  friend,  whom
you  can  by  no  possibility  forget,  you  have  missed  the  best  result  of  yom:  introduc-
tion to  Him.  It  makes  one  think  meanly  of  the  chief  butler  that  such  a  per-
sonality as  Joseph's  had  not  more  deeply  impressed  him — that  everything  he  heard
and  saw  among  the  courtiers  did  not  make  him  say  to  himself  :  There  is  a  friend
of  mine  in  the  prison  hard  by,  that  for  beauty,  wisdom,  and  vivacity  would  more
than  match  the  finest  i)f  you  all.  And  it  says  very  little  for  us  if  we  can  have
known  anything  of  Christ  without  seeing  that  in  Him  we  have  what  is  nowheie
else,  and  without  finding  that  He  has  become  the  necessity  of  our  life,  to  whom  we
turn  at  every  point.     {Marcus  Dods,  D.D.)


164  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [obup.  a.

Ver.  8.  Bemember  tbat  JesuB  Christ,  of  the  seed  of  David,  was  raised  fi:t)m  the  dead.

"Bear  in  mind,"  the  connection  seems  to  be.  But,  with  all  its  toils  and  sufferings,

the  gospel  has  also  its  stores  of  abounding  consolation.  The  remembrance  of  tJ^e
risen  and  victorious  Saviour  is  the  comfort  and  support  of  His  ministers.  {Speaker'i
Commentary.)  Remember  Jesus  Christ : — Every  Christian  who  has  to  endure  what
seems  to  him  to  be  hardships  will  sooner  or  later  fall  back  upon  this  remembrance.
He  is  not  the  first  and  not  the  chief  sufferer  in  the  world.  There  is  One  who  has
undergone  hardships,  compared  with  which  those  of  other  men  sink  into  nothing-
ness ;  and  who  has  expressly  told  those  who  wish  to  be  His  disciples  that  they  must
follow  Him  along  the  path  of  suffering.  But  merely  to  remember  Jesus  Christ  as
a  Master  who  has  suffered  and  who  has  made  suffering  a  condition  of  service  will
not  be  a  permanently  sustaining  or  comforting  thought  if  it  ends  there.  Therefore
St.  Paul  says  to  his  perplexed  and  desponding  delegate,  "  Eemember  Jesus  Christ
as  one  risen  from  the  dead."  Jesus  Christ  has  not  only  endured  every  kind  of
suffering,  including  its  extreme  form,  death,  but  He  has  conquered  it  all  by  rising
again.  Everywhere  experience  seems  to  teach  us  that  evil  of  every  kind — physical,
intellectual,  and  moral—  holds  the  field  and  appears  likely  to  hold  it.  To  allow  one's
self  to  be  mastered  by  this  thought  is  to  be  on  the  road  to  doubting  God's  moral
government  of  the  world.  What  is  the  antidote  to  it  ?  *•  Kemember  Jesus  Christ
as  one  risen  from  the  dead."  When  has  evil  ever  been  so  completely  triumphant
over  good  as  when  it  succeeded  in  getting  the  Prophet  of  Nazareth  nailed  to  the
tree,  like  some  vile  and  noxious  animal  ?  That  was  the  hour  of  success  for  the
malignant  Jewish  hierarchy  and  for  the  spiritual  powers  of  darkness.  But  it  was  an
hour  to  which  very  strict  limits  were  placed.  Very  soon  He  who  had  been  dismissed
to  the  grave  by  a  cruel  and  shameful  death,  defeated,  and  disgraced,  rose  again
from  it  triumphant,  not  over  Jewish  priests  and  Boman  soldiers,  but  over  death
and  the  cause  of  death ;  that  is,  over  every  kind  of  evil — pain  and  ignorance  and
Mn.  But  to  "remember  Jesus  Christ  as  one  risen  from  the  dead  "  does  more  than
this.  It  not  only  shows  us  that  the  evil  against  which  we  have  such  a  weary  struggle
in  this  Ufe,  both  in  others  and  in  ourselves,  is  not  (in  spite  of  depressing  appear-
anoes)  permanently  triumphant ;  it  also  assures  us  that  there  is  another  and  a
better  Ufe  in  which  the  good  cause  will  be  supreme,  and  supreme  without  the  pos-
sibility of  disaster,  or  even  of  contest.  What  the  Son  of  Man  has  done,  other  sons
of  men  can  do  and  will  do.  The  solidarity  between  the  human  race  and  the
Second  Adam,  between  the  Church  and  its  Head,  is  such  that  the  victory  of  the
Leader  carries  with  it  the  victory  of  the  whole  band.  Once  more,  to  "  remember  Jesus
Christ  as  one  risen  from  the  dead  "  is  to  remember  One  who  claimed  to  be  the
promised  Saviour  of  the  world  and  who  proved  His  claim.  And  this  leads  St.
Paul  on  to  the  second  point  which  his  downcast  disciple  is  to  remember  in  connec-
tion with  Jesus  Christ.  He  is  to  remember  Him  as  "  of  the  seed  of  David."  Heia
not  only  truly  God  but  truly  Man.  The  Resurrection  and  the  Incarnation — those
are  the  two  facts  on  which  a  faltering  minister  of  the  gospel  is  to  hold  fast,  in  order
to  comfort  his  heart  and  strengthen  his  steps.  This  is  the  meaning  of  "  according
to  my  gospel."  These  are  the  truths  which  St.  Paul  has  habitually  preached,  and
of  the  value  of  which  he  can  speak  from  full  experience.  He  knows  what  he  is
talking  about,  when  he  affirms  that  these  things  are  worth  remembering  when  one
is  in  trouble.  The  Eesurrection  and  the  Incarnation  are  facts  on  which  he  has
ceaselessly  insisted,  because  in  the  wear  and  tear  of  life  he  has  found  out  their
worth.  {A.  Plummer,  D.D.)  Our  Lord's  resurrection: — The  high  value  which
the  apostle  attributes  to  the  bodily  resurrection  of  the  Lord,  here  and  in  other
passages,  is,  m  a  remarkable  way,  in  contrast  with  the  spiritualistic  and  indifferent-
istic  evaporisation  of  this  chief  article  of  the  gospel,  on  the  side  of  the  modem
speculative  rationalism  of  onr  days.    (Van  Oosterzee.)       Remfmhrance: — I.  DiviNit

TBUTHB  ABE  TO  BE  REMEMBERED.  H.  BeMEMBERINO  IS  k  BEFLECTIMO  OF  THE  EYE  OF  OUB
HIND  ON  THAT  WHICH   BY  THE  SENSES  OB  THE   UNDERSTANDING   HATH   BEEN   PEROEIVED.

In  remembrance  are  four  things  to  be  considered.  1.  The  apprehension  of  aa
object  by  the  external  or  internal  senses.  2.  A  reposing  of  it  in  the  memory.  3.
A  retaining  of  it  there.  4.  A  reflecting  of  the  eye  of  the  understanding  on  it.  This
last  act  is  properly  called  remembrance.  Helps  follow.  1.  Get  a  true  understand-
ing of  things.  2.  Meditate  much  on  that  thou  wouldst  remember.  Boll  the  thing
to  and  fro  in  thy  mind,  look  often  at  it,  mark  it  well ;  so  shall  it,  like  a  bird  by
struggling  in  the  gin  or  lime  bush,  stick  faster.  3.  Labour  for  love.  Will  a  maid
forget  her  ornament?  a  bride  her  attire?  the  covetous  man  his  coin,  hid  long  ago
in  some  secret  corner  ?    Wherefore,  love  the  Word  once,  and  then  forget  it  if  thoa


CHIP,  n.]  11.  TIMOTHY.  159

eanst.  4.  Be  jealous  of  thy  remembrance.  He  who  carrieth  a  vessel  in  hia  hand
may  suddenly  let  it  fall ;  whereas  had  he  feared  he  would  have  held  it  faster.  For
jealousy,  though  a  bad  getter,  is  an  excellent  keeper.  5.  Use  repetition.  Have
that  oft  in  thy  tongue  thou  wouldst  hold  in  thy  mind .  For  repetition,  like  a  mallet,
will  cause  the  piles  of  Divine  truths  to  stick  fast  in  the  soil  of  man's  memory.  6.
Study  for  method.  Things  in  order  laid  in  the  head  will  with  the  more  facility  be
held.  Method  (say  some)  is  the  mother  of  memory.  III.  The  choicest  of  Divine
TBtiTHS  ABE  CHIEFLY  TO  BE  BEMEMBEBED.  Havc  thy  scnses  cxcrciscd,  through  long
custom,  to  discern  betwixt  things  that  differ — good  and  evil.  (J.  Barloiv,  D.D.)
An  appeal  to  the  pattern  : — In  the  words  preceding  this  text  the  apostle  Paul  has
been  speaking  of  the  labour  and  conflict  and  endurance  involved  in  a  true  profession
of  faith  in  Christ,  And  now  that  he  has  on  hand  to  prove  the  necessity  of  endur-
ing hardncBS  in  Christian  life,  he  is  ready  with  example  as  well  as  argument,
"  Eemember  that  Jesus  Christ,  of  the  seed  of  David,  was  raised  from  the  dead,
According  to  my  gospel."  But  there  is  more  in  these  words  than  a  mere  confirmation
of  what  has  gone  before.  They  are  a  fresh  batteiy  brought  up  to  the  siege,  adapted
especially  for  an  assault  upon  that  strong  citadel,  the  human  will.  But  we  have  not
yet  got  to  the  bottom  of  the  apostle's  meaning.  If  we  have  yielded  to  the  influence
of  his  words  they  have  carried  our  hearts  beyond  the  subject  they  were  first  intended
to  illustrate.  His  theme  was  the  endurance  of  hardship,  and  his  object  to  brace  up
the  soul  of  a  fellow  disciple  to  this  trial ;  but,  in  doing  so,  by  the  example  of  the
Master  Himself,  he  has  done  more;  for  he  has  reminded  Timothy  that  Jesus  Christ
not  only  suffered,  but  died ;  and  as  elsewhere  and  often  he  has  taught  the  necessity
of  our  'ying  by  union  with  Christ,  he  surely  means  no  less  than  to  put  as  face  to
face  with  the  truth  in  the  present  passage.  Christianity  is  the  masterpiece  of  God,
the  wonderful  fabric  into  which  He  has  woven  all  Divine  and  eternal  principles ;
and  there  is  no  principle  or  characteristic  of  Christianity  more  plain  or  more
abrmdantly  illustrated  than  the  appointment  and  use  of  death  for  the  production  of
a  higher  life  than  that  which  preceded  it.  It  would  be  strange,  indeed,  if  man,
whose  peculiar  honour  it  is  to  be  "  called  into  the  fellowship  of  God's  Son,"  were  an
exception  to  this  rule  of  death  and  life ;  or  if,  in  his  case,  it  were  only  to  be  known  by
the  dissolution  of  his  earthly  body.  But  Scripture  teaches  otherwise.  Christ  has  not
merely  given  His  life  a  ransom  for  ours.  He  has  done  this,  indeed,  and  this  is  the
great  news  of  the  gospel ;  but  He  has  done  more.  He  has  put  Himself  at  the  head
of  an  army  which  must  conquer  as  He  conquered  when  alone — by  suffering.  And
thus  only  can  we  understand  His  words,  *'  If  any  man  serve  Me  let  him  follow  Me  I  "
"  He  that  taketh  not  up  his  cross  and  followeth  not  after  Me  cannot  be  My  disciple  "  ;
"  He  that  loveth  his  life  shall  lose  it,  but  he  that  loseth  his  life  for  My  sake  the  same
shall  find  it."  {/.  F.  B.  Tinling,  B.A.)  Rememher  Jesus  Christ : — We  know  how  j
one  recollection,  distinct  and  dominant  in  the  mind,  has  often  been  the  decisive  force  1 1
at  a  critical  moment ;  how  upon  the  battlefield,  for  instance,  or  under  the  almost  over- ;  \
powering  pressure  of  temptation,  the  thought  of  a  man's  country,  of  his  home,  i  ^
of  his  ancestral  traditions,  has  reinforced,  as  with  a  fresh  tide  of  strength,  his  I
faltering  heart,  and  borne  him  on  to  victory,  whether  by  success  or  death.  We  may  j
recall  the  scene  in  one  of  our  Af  ican  campaigns,  the  scene  preserved  for  us  by  a
clever  artist,  where  the  thought  of  a  man's  old  school,  and  the  boyish  eagerness
anyhow  to  bring  it  to  the  front,  was  the  impulse  of  a  splendid  c  )urage.  Yes,  theref
are  images  in  most  men's  minds  which,  if  they  rise  at  the  right  moment,  will  do  mucht
to  make  them  heroes ;  a  word,  a  glance,  some  well-known  sight,  some  old  familiar
strain  of  music,  may  beckon  the  image  out  of  the  recesses  of  the  memory,  and  if  the;
man  has  in  bim  the  capacity  of  generous  action  he  will  use  it  then.  It  is  on  this
characteristic  of  human  nature  that  St.  Paul  relies  as  he  writes  to  Timotheus  the
wordsof  the  text.  He  would  avail  himself  of  this ;  he  would  raise  it  to  its  highest
conceivable  employment ;  he  would  enlist  it  as  a  constant,  ready,  powerful  ally  on
the  side  of  duty — on  the  side  of  God.  He  may  never  see  Timotheus,  never  write  to
him  again ;  well  then,  he  will  leave  dinted  into  his  mind,  by  a  few  incisive  words,  one
commanding  and  sustaining  Image.  For  it  is  not,  as  it  appears  in  our  English  ver-
sion, an  event  of  the  past,  however  supreme  in  its  importance,  however  abiding  in  its
results,  that  St.  Paul  here  fastens  upon  the  memory  of  his  disciple  ;  it  is  not  the
abstract  statement  of  a  truth  in  history  or  theology,  however  central  to  the  faith,
however  vast  in  its  consequences;  it  is  a  Uving  Person,  whom  St.  Paul  has  seen,
whose  form  he  would  have  Timotheus  keep  ever  in  his  mind,  distinct,  beloyed,  un-
rivalled, sovereign — "  Bear  in  remembrance  Jesus  Christ,  raised  from  the  dead."
Let  us  take  two  thoughts  this  Easter  morning  from  the  counsel  which  St.  Paul


15fl  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  u.

thus  gives.  First,  that  he  is  trying  to  lodge  at  the  heart  of  Timotheas's  life  and
work  that  which  has  been  the  deepest  and  most  effective  force  in  his  own.  St.
Paul  was  convinced  that  he  had  seen  the  risen  Lord ;  and  the  energy,  the  effect,  ol
that  unfading  Image  throughout  bis  subsequent  life  might  go  some  way  to  prove
that  the  conviction  was  true.  Physical  weight  is  sometimes  measured  by  the
power  of  displacement ;  and  in  the  moral  and  spiritual  sphere  we  tend,  at  least,  to
think  that  there  must  be  something  solid  and  real  to  account  for  a  change  so  unex-
pected, so  unworldly,  so  thorough,  so  sustained  through  every  trial,  so  vast  in  its
practical  outcome,  as  was  the  conversion  of  St.  Paul.  Let  Si.  Paul's  conviction  be
taken  in  its  context ;  let  justice  be  done  to  the  character  it  wrought  in  him  ;  to  the
coherence  and  splendour  of  the  work  it  animated ;  to  the  penetrating,  sober  insight
of  his  practical  teaching ;  to  the  consistency,  not  of  expression,  but  of  inmost
thought  and  life,  which  is  disclosed  to  any  careful  study  of  his  writings ;  lastly,  to
the  grasp  which  his  words  have  laid  upon  the  strongest  minds  in  Christendom
through  aU  succeeding  centuries,  the  prophetic  and  undying  power  which,  amidst
vast  changes  of  methods  and  ideas,  men  widely  different  have  felt  and  reverenced
in  these  Epistles — let  these  distinctive  notes  of  St.  Paul's  work  be  realised,  together
with  its  incalculable  outcome  in  the  course  of  history,  and  it  will  seem  hard  to  think
that  the  central,  ruling  impulse  of  it  all  was  the  obstinate  blunder  of  a  disordered
mind.  This,  at  least,  I  think,  may  be  affirmed,  that,  if  there  were  against  belief
in  Christ's  resurrection  any  such  difficulty  as  the  indisputable  facts  of  St.  Paul's  life
and  work  present  to  disbelief,  we  should  £nd  it  treated  as  of  crucial  importance,
and  that,  I  think,  not  unjustly.  '•  Bear  in  remembrance  Jesus  Christ  raised  from
the  dead."  It  is  the  form  which  has  made  him  what  he  is,  for  Ufe  or  for  death,
that  St.  Paul  would  with  his  last  words,  it  may  be,  leave  clenched  for  ever  on  the
mind  and  heart  of  his  disciple.  The  vision  of  that  form  may  keep  him  true  and
steadfast  when  all  is  dark,  confused,  and  terrible  around  him.  May  not  we  do  well
to  take  the  bidding  to  ourselves?  There  are  signs  of  trouble  and  confusion  in  the
air,  and  some  faint  hearts  begin  to  fail ;  and  some  of  us,  perhaps,  "  see  not  our
tokens  " — so  clearly  as  we  did.  But  One  we  may  see,  as  we  lift  our  eyes  this  Easter
Day ;  it  is  He  who  liveth  and  was  dead ;  and  behold  He  is  alive  for  evermore ;  He
who  cannot  fail  His  Church,  or  leave  even  the  poorest  and  least  worthy  of  His
servants  desolate  and  bewildered  when  the  darkness  gathers,  and  the  cry  of  need
goes  up.  (F.  Paget,  D.D.)  The  testimony  of  St.  Paul : — St.  Paul  was  a  man  who
could  have  been  trusted  beyond  perhaps  any  other  man  of  his  time  to  take  a  calm,
dear,  and  accurate  view  of  any  alleged  historical  fact,  and  to  estimate  its  practical
bearings  ;  and  if,  after  the  whole  evidence  for  the  Resurrection  had  been  brought  to
bear  upon  his  mind,  he  felt  himself  constrained  to  believe  and  proclaim  it  to  the  dire
extremity  of  martyrdom — that  fact  becomes  the  strongest  possil)le  evidence  for  its
truth.  The  testimony  of  St.  Paul  to  the  truth  of  the  Resurrection  has  a  double  value.
In  the  first  place  there  is  his  personal  witness,  "  Last  of  all  He  was  seen  of  me  also,  as
of  one  bom  out  of  due  time."  It  is  allowed  on  all  hands  that  Paul  at  any  rate  asserted
simply  what  he  believed  to  be  the  truth.  It  is,  in  the  judgment  of  his  hostile  critics,
a  case  of  hallucination,  not  of  wilful  perversion  of  the  truth.  Well,  men  are  subject
to  hallucinations,  no  doubt,  especially  men  of  genius.  But  the  world,  the  hard  rough
world,  is  a  great  dispeller  of  hallucinations.  No  man  lives  and  works  through  a  long
and  intensely  active  Ufe  as  the  victim  of  hallucination  :  either  it  vanishes  and  leaves
him  in  free  possession  of  all  his  faculties,  or  it  makes  him  incapable  of  taking  part  to
any  real  purpose  in  the  business  of  his  fellow-men.  It  must  be  remembered  that  this
statement  of  Paul  does  not  stand  alone.  It  is  in  harmony  with  many  appearances  of
Christ  after  the  Resurrection,  which  rest  on  the  incontestable  evidence  of  numerous
disciples ;  and  it  seemed  real  enough  to  make  a  vital  change  in  the  character,  the
beliefs,  the  aims,  the  life-work  of  one  of  the  very  ablest,  most  self- controlled,  most
masterly  men  whom  we  meet  with  in  the  records  of  universal  history.  But  there  la
a  second  point  of  view  from  which  the  testimony  of  St.  Paul  to  the  truth  of  the  Resor-
rection  is  so  deeply  important.  It  is  the  testimony  of  one  who  had  mastered  the  whole
argument  in  its  favour,  and  who  believed  it  to  be  irresistible.  We  cannot  examine
the  witnesses,  and  sift  their  evidence ;  all  the  details  are  beyond  our  reach  for  ever ;
but  we  have  the  proofs  sifted  for  us,  weighed  and  stamped  as  valid  beyond  shadow  ol
doubt  or  question  by  the  regal  intellect  of  St.  Paul.  His  evidence  has,  however,  a
value  beyond  this,  to  which  I  must  call  your  attention  before  I  close.  St.  Paul  not
only  was  not  a  disciple,  but  he  had  been  the  most  bitter  and  uncompromising  enemy
of  the  truth.  Nor  had  he  been  a  silent  opponent.  Though  but  a  youth,  by  his
brilliantpowers  he  had  already  made  for  himself  a  name  of  renown  among  his  country-


CHAJ.  n.J  U.  TIMOTHY*  167

men.  He  was  the  coming  leader  of  the  people,  the  rising  man,  on  whom  the  hopes  of
the  elders  were  set  as  the  future  champion  of  the  oppressed  nation  in  the  perilous
times  which  were  manifestly  coming  on  the  world.    I  have  said  that  the  evidence  is
the  evidence  of  disciples.  I  have  explained  how  that  is  its  strength  and  its  glory.  But
one  longs  sometimes  to  know  what  was  actually  said  in  the  Sanhedrim  and  in  chief-
priestly  circles  against  it.     We  have  no  contemporary  record  of  this ;  if  any  was
written,  no  note  of  it  has  reached  us,  but  St.  Paul  stands  forth  to  supply  the  want.
His  is  a  voice  out  of  the  hostile  camp,  confessing  that  the  opposition  was  in  hopeless
collapse.     The  fact  that  a  man  of  such  keen  and  eager  intellect,  who  left  no  objec-
tion unanswered,  no  nook  of  argument  unexplored,  never  condescends  in  any  of
his  writings  to  notice  the  counter  statements  of  opponents,  is  proof  absolute  that
there  was  no   validity  in  them.      They  evidently  had  left  on  his  mind  not  a
shadow  of    question,  and    brought    forward   nothing    which  it  was   worth    his
while   to   trouble  himself  to    refute.       Then,   having    borne   his    witness   life-
long to  the  Kesurrection,  he  died  with  the  testimony  on  his  lips.  (J.  B.  Brown,  B.A.)
The  resurrection  of  our  Lord  Jesus : — I.  Let  us  consideb  the  beabinqs  of  the  faci
THAT  Jesus  rose  fkom  the  dead.     1.  It  is  clear  at  the  outset  that  the  resorreotiou
of  our  Lord  was  a  tangible  proof  that  there  is  another  life.    Have  you  not  quoted  a
great  many  times  certain  lines  about  "  That  undiscovered  country  from  whose
bourne  no  traveller  returns  "  ?    It  is  not  so.     There  was  once  a  Traveller  who  said,
"  I  go  to  prepare  a  place  for  you,  and  if  I  go  away  I  will  come  again  and  receive  you
onto  Myself ;  that  where  I  am  there  ye  may  be  also."    He  said,  "  A  little  time,  and
ye  shall  see  Me,  and  again  a  little  time  and  ye  shall  not  see  Me,  because  I  go  to
the  Father."     His  return  from  among  the  dead  is  a  pledge  to  us  of  existence  after
death,  and  we  rejoice  in  it.    His  resurrection  is  also  a  pledge  that  the  body  will
surely  live  again  and  rise  to  a  superior  condition ;  for  the  body  of  our  blessed
Master  was  no  phantom  after  death  any  more  than  before.    2.    Christ's  rising
from  the  dead  was  the  seal  to  all  His  claims.     It  was  true,  then,  that  He  was  sent
of  God,  for  God  raised  Him  from  the  dead  in  confirmation  of  His  mission.     The
rising  of  Christ  from  the  dead  proved  that  this  man  was  innocent  of  every  sin.
He  could  not  be  holden  by  the  bands  of  death,  for  there  was  no  sin  to  make  those
bands  fast.  Moreover,  Christ's  rising  from  the  dead  proved  His  claim  to  Deity.  We
are  told  in  another  place  that  He  was  proved  to  be  the  Son  of  God  with  power  by
the  resurrection  from  the  dead.    3.  The  resurrection  of  our  Lord,  according  to
Scripture,  was  the  acceptance  of  His  sacrifice.     4.  It  was  a  guarantee  of  His
people's  resurrection.     6.  Once  more,  our  Lord's  rising  from  the  dead  is  a  fair
picture  of  the  new  life  which  all  believers  already  enjoy.    There  is  within  na
already  a  part  of  the  resurrection  accomplished,  since  it  is  written,  "  And  yon  hath
He  quickened  who  were  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins."  Now,  just  as  Christ  led,  after
His  resurrection,  a  Ufe  very  different  from  that  before  His  death,  so  you  and  I  are
called  upon  to  live  a  high  and  noble  spmtual  and  heavenly  life,  seeing  that  we  have
been  raised  from  the  dead  to  die  no  more.    U.  Let  us  consider  the  beabinos  o»
THIS  FACT  UPON  THE  GOSPEL  ;  foT  Paul  says,  "  Jesus  Christ  was  raised  from  the  dead
according  to  my  gospel."    1.  The  resurrection  of  Christ  is  vital,  because  first  it
tells  us  that  the  gospel  is  the  gospel  of  a  living  Saviour.    We  have  not  to  send  poor
penitents  to  the  crucifix,  the  dead  image  of  a  dead  man.    Notice  next  that  we  have
a  powerful  Saviour  in  connection  with  the  gospel  that  we  preach ;  for  He  who  had
power  to  raise  Himself  from  the  dead  has  all  power  now  that  He  is  raised.    2.  And
now  notice  that  we  have  the  gospel  of  complete  justification  to  preach  to  you.    3.
Once  again,  the  connection  of  the  Eesurrection  and  the  gospel  is  this  :  it  proves  the
safety  of  the  saints,  for  if  when  Christ  rose  His  people  rose  also,  they  rose  to  a  hfe
like  that  of  their  Lord,  and  therefore  they  can  never  die.    I  cannot  stop  to  show
you  how  this  resurrection  touches  the  gospel  at  every  point,  but  Paul  is  always  full
of  it.    More  than  thirty  times  Paul  talks  about  the  resurrect'on,  and  occasionally  at
great  length,  giving  whole  chapters  to  the  glorious  theme.    HI.  The  beabino  o»
THIS   EEBUREECTiON   UPON   OURSELVES.      Paul  cxpressly  bids  UB  "  remember  *•  it.
Now,  if  yoo  wiU  remember  that  Jesus  Christ  of  the  seed  of  David  rose  from  the
dead,  what  will  follow  ?    1.  You  will  find  that  most  of  your  trials  will  vanish.    Are
you  tried  by  your  sin  ?   Jesus  Christ  rose  again  from  the  dead  for  your  justification.
Does  Satan  accuse  ?    Jesus  rose  to  be  your  advocate  and  intercessor.  Do  infirmities
hinder  ?    The  living  Christ  will  show  Himself  strong  on  your  behalf.    Yon  have  a
living  Christ,  and  in  Him  you  have  all  things.    Do  you  dread  death  ?    Jesoa,  In
rising  again,  has  vanquished  the  last  enemy.    2.  Next  remember  Jesas,  for  then
yon  will  see  how  your  present  sufferings  are  as  nothing  oompared  with  His  sofferings.


158  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  n.

and  you  will  learn  to  expect  victory  over  your  sufferings  even  as  He  obtained  victory.
3.  We  see  here,  in  being  told  to  remember  Jesus,  that  there  is  hope  even  in  our
hopelessness.  When  are  things  most  hopeless  in  a  man  ?  Why,  when  he  is  dead.
Do  you  know  what  it  is  to  come  down  to  that,  so  far  as  your  inward  weakness  is
concerned  ?  You  that  are  near  despair,  let  this  be  the  strength  that  nerves  your
arm  and  steels  your  heart,  "  Jesus  Christ  of  the  seed  of  David  was  raised  from  the
dead  according  to  Paul's  gospel."  4.  Lastly,  this  proves  the  futility  of  all  opposition
to  C3hrist.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  resurrection  of  Christ: — I.  I  would  first  say
a  few  words  on  th£  fact  of  the  bebubrection.  It  is  a  main  point  in  our  faith.
The  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  is  a  pledge  of  ours.  II.  I  would  next  direct  your
attention  to  the  position  of  the  believeb  in  this  life.  As  connected  with  the
risen  Saviour,  the  believer  is  regarded  in  the  Word  of  God  as  "  risen  with  Christ."
We  see,  then,  that  Paul  would  stir  Timothy  by  our  text  to  remember  his  privileges.
He  would,  in  effect,  say  to  him,  "  Timothy,  remember  you  have  the  life  of  Christ
now ;  and  it  is  His  risen  life  which  is  to  animate  you  to  work  and  to  suffer,  and  to
<  endure  hardness  as  a  good  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ.'"  lU.  But  there  is  another
point  to  which  I  would  direct  your  attention,  and  that  is,  union.  It  is  most
important  to  observe  that  this  oneness  of  life  between  Jesus  and  the  believer  is
just  that  which  constitutes  union.  Nothing  short  of  this  is  union.  It  is  the
resnrrection  Ufe  of  Jesus  that  believers  are  united  with  ;  and  this  is  possible  qnly
to  the  "  new  creature,"  only  to  the  "  man  in  Christ."  We  see,  then,  a  little,  I  trust,
of  the  force  of  the  text.  It  is  a  wonderful  text,  and  we  see  the  power  there  is  in  it
to  comfort  the  believer  and  to  strengthen  him  for  service ;  and  just  as  he  under-
stands in  his  own  experience  these  things  will  he  realise  his  privileges.  In  Jesus
Christ  he  will  see  how  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection  is  calculated  to  make  him
"  endure  hardness."  {J.  W.  Reeve,  M.A.)  The  resurrection  of  Christ: — I  desire
to  speak  to  you  on  the  importance  of  connecting  the  fact  of  the  Saviour's  resurrec-
tion with  two  other  facts,  namely,  first,  that  Christ  was  of  the  seed  of  David,
and  secondly,  that  the  resurrection  of  Christ  is  so  essential  a  part  of  the  gospel  of
Christ  that  the  one  may  be  described  as  according  with  the  other.  There  can  4)e
no  dispute  that  it  could  not  be  needful  for  St.  Paul  to  characterise  Jesus  as  of  the
seed  of  David,  in  order  to  distinguish  Him  from  any  other  being  whom  the  name
might  recall  to  the  mind  of  Timothy.  I  deny,  therefore,  altogether,  that  there  is
anything  whatsoever  of  the  fanciful  or  the  far-fetched  in  our  ascribing  any  particular
emphasis  to  this  casual  introduction  of  the  human  lineage  of  Messiah.  I  look  on
the  name  of  Jesus,  and  its  every  syllable  seems  to  bum  and  blaze  with  divinity.  I
may  explain  and  interpret  it ;  I  may  expound  it  as  promising  salvation,  as  eloquent
of  deliverance  to  our  fallen  race  ;  but  in  exact  proportion  as  I  magnify  the  wonder,
I  remove,  as  it  were,  the  being  unto  whom  it  belongs  from  all  kindred  and  com-
panionship witb  the  sinful  tenantry  of  a  ruined  creation.  The  title  of  anointed
Saviour,  full  though  it  be  of  magnificent  mercy,  consisting  of  attributes  and  prin-
ciples bearing  the  impress  of  a  superhuman  greatness;  and,  however  stupeudous
the  truth,  that  Deity  has  interposed  on  behalf  of  the  helpless,  still  the  Saviour  of
man  must  be  one  who  could  hold  communion  and  fellowship  with  man  ;  He  must
not  be  separated  from  him  by  the  appalling  attributes  which  mark  a  Divine  Creator.
If  there  must  be  a  celestial  nature  to  afford  the  succour,  there  must  also  be  a
terrestrial  nature  to  ensure  the  sympathy.  Hence,  I  think  it  just  to  imagine  that
when  the  apostle  sent  to  a  beloved  disciple  this  short  compendium  of  Christian
consolation,  which  he  desired  might  be  carefully  borne  in  mind,  he  would  not  fail
to  interweave  into  such  compendium  a  distinct  reference  to  the  complex  nature  of
the  Redeemer's  person ;  and,  not  content  himself  with  referring  him  to  Jesus  Christ,
he  would  add  some  such  description  as  this — "  of  the  seed  of  David,"  in  order  to
mark  His  real  humanity.  There  is,  however,  a  distinct  allusion  to  other  truths,  as
well  as  to  tlie  Redeemer's  humanity,  in  this  accurate  specification.  It  is  a  wonderful
thing  to  cast  one's  eye  over  the  prophetic  pages  and  behold  how  years  past  and
years  that  are  to  come  do  alike  burn  with  the  deeds  and  triumphs  of  David's  Son,
under  the  name  and  title  of  a  descendant  from  the  man  after  God's  own  heart.  It
concerns  not  my  argument  to  examine  into  the  reasons  which  might  induce  the
frequ^-nt  introduction  of  the  name  of  David  whenever  the  triumphs  of  Messiah  are
the  subject  of  discourse.  I  appeal  simply  to  the  fact,  and  demand  of  every  student
of  Holy  Writ  whether  there  be  any  title  under  which  prophecy  tenders  so  vast  a
revenue  of  honour  as  it  does  to  the  seed,  or  heir,  or  antitype  of  David.  Truly,  the
more  the  mind  ponders  over  the  coojbination  of  ideas  which  are  gathered  into  this
apparently  brief  and  superfluous  message  of  Paul  to  Timothy,  the  more  will  it  b«


CHAP,  n.]  22.  TIMOTHY.  159

struck  with  the  beauty  and  consolation  it  conveys.  Now,  I  have  dealt  at  suflBicient
length  on  the  first  head  of  discourse ;  and  much  that  I  have  advanced  in  illustra-
tion of  the  importance  of  the  clause,  "  of  the  seed  of  David,"  applies  equally  to  the
other,  "  according  to  my  gospel,"  which  I  would,  in  the  second  place,  exhibit  to
you,  as  giving  strength  and  emphasis  to  St.  Paul's  commemoration  of  the  death
and  resurrection  of  our  Saviour.  You  remember  the  strong  terms  in  which  St.
Paul,  when  writing  to  the  Corinthians,  states  the  importance  of  the  resurrection  as
an  article  of  the  Christian  faith.  He  may  be  said  to  resolve  the  whole  of  onr
religion,  all  its  truth,  all  its  value,  all  its  beauty,  into  the  one  fact  that  Christ  Jesus
had  been  raised  from  the  dead.  "  If  Christ  be  not  raised  " — thus  it  is  he  speaks —
"your  faith  is  in  vain ;  you  are  yet  in  your  sins :  then  they  also  which  are  fallen
asleep  in  Christ  are  perished."  By  stating  the  fact  that  life  and  immortality  have
been  brought  to  light  by  the  gospel,  to  which  I  suppose  St.  Paul  to  allude  when  he
speaks  of  Christ  Jesus  as  "  raised  from  the  dead  according  to  my  gospel,"  I  suppose
him  designing  to  remind  his  son  Timothy,  not  so  much  of  the  simple  truth  of  the
Saviour's  resurrection  as  of  the  colouring  and  character  which  this  event  gave  to  the
whole  system  of  Christianity.  {H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  The  place  of  the  resurrection
of  Jesus  in  the  theology  of  the  New  Testament : — The  resurrection  was  far  more  than
any  mere  sign,  though  so  unique  and  remarkable.  Like  the  miracles  of  Christ,
only  in  a  still  profounder  measure,  it  was  in  itself  a  display  of  mercy — an  instrument
of  His  mighty  and  beneficent  mediation.  When  the  apostles  taught  it  they  not
only  bore  witness,  but  they  preached  a  "gospel";  they  not  only  announced  a
wonderful  fact,  but  they  presented  that  fact  to  men  as  in  itself  at  the  same  time  a
measure  of  Divine  grace.  Apart  from  the  resurrection  of  Christ  you  could  not
construct  the  faith,  impart  the  solace,  urge  the  appeal,  or  sway  the  inspiration  of
Christianity.  It  is  not  simply  that  there  would  be  no  sign,  but  there  would  be  no
power.  It  is,  so  to  speak,  the  blood  "  which  is  the  life,"  the  blood  that  circulates
through  every  vein  to  every  limb  and  member  of  the  Christian  system.  This  is  the
fact  I  want  to  impress  in  my  present  discourse.  Perhaps  it  will  surprise  yon  to  hear
my  full  belief  that,  but  for  the  resurrection,  you  would  have  had  in  your  hands  no
such  exposition  as  you  now  possess  of  who  and  what  Christ  was  and  did  for  men.
Christ  Himself  did  not  write  any  book  about  His  life ;  not  a  line.  How,  then,  came
we  to  know  what  we  do  about  Him  ?  Right  down  to  the  end  of  His  life,  to  the  end
of  the  Gospels,  the  disciples  remained  strangely  ignorant  of  the  great  work  their
Master  came  to  achieve.  DuU,  ignorant,  confused,  bewildered,  they  were  the  last
men  in  the  world  to  take  up  a  forlorn  cause,  redeem  it,  and  carry  it  to  triumph.
Contrast  with  this  state  of  mind  the  speech  and  conduct  of  those  self-same  men  in
the  stirring  scenes  with  which  the  Acts  acquaint  us.  You  may  search  all  literature,
I  believe,  and  you  will  not  find  a  greater  contrast.  How  did  this  happen  ?  The
only  book  that  gives  the  history  lets  us  into  the  secret.  I  claim,  then,  on  the
authority  of  this  only  history,  to  say  that  but  for  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  we  had
had  no  portraiture  of  Christ,  no  Gospels,  no  Acts,  no  Epistles,  setting  Him  forth  to
the  world  for  its  salvation  and  joy.  No  other  writers  of  the  age  have  depicted  Him ;
and  these  who  have  all  refer  their  knowledge  and  appreciation  to  the  illumination
of  that  Spirit  whom  He  sent  on  His  exaltation  to  heaven.  Again.  It  is  the  constant
representation  of  the  writers  of  the  New  Testament  that  Christ  offered  Himself  in
some  way  as  a  sacrifice  for  sin,  and  that  that  offering  was  presented  in  His  death.
But  what  had  that  sacrifice  been  without  Christ's  revival  from  death  ?  With  the
greatest  force  does  the  letter  to  the  Romans  teach  us,  "  He  was  delivered  for  our
offences,  and  raised  again  for  our  justification."  Paul  does  not  hesitate  to  declare
that  apart  from  it  there  is  no  pardon  :  "  If  Christ  be  not  raised,  your  faith  is  vain ;
ye  are  yet  in  your  sins."  Ajaother  point  of  our  "precious  faith"  at  which  the
resurrection  of  Christ  meets  us  with  infinite  power  and  solace  is  seen  at  death,  when
we  bury  our  dead  out  of  sight,  or  are  ourselves  laid  in  the  grave.  "  For  if  we  believe
that  Jesus  died  and  rose  again,  even  so  them  also  which  sleep  in  Jesus  will  God
bring  with  Him."  None  of  the  apostles  had  a  higher  standard  of  the  Christian  life
than  the  Apostle  Paul;  none  more  keenly  realised  its  contrast  with  the  former
habits  of  sin,  or  more  acutely  felt  the  struggle,  fierce  and  constant,  by  which  it
alone  was  to  be  attained  and  maintained  ;  none  more  clearly  perceived  the  organic
relation  of  one  part  of  that  life  to  another ;  and  Paul  strove  by  a  most  beautiful  and
expressive  image  to  urge  the  believer  to  all  vigilance  and  mortification  of  unworthy
impulse  and  passion  in  its  culture.  Christ's  death  and  resurrection  furnished  the
image,  "  We  are  buried  with  Him  by  baptism  into  death ;  that  like  as  Christ  was
raised  from  the  dead  by  the  glory  of  the  Father,  even  so  we  also  should  walk  iu


160  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n.

newness  of  life,"  &c.  If  Christ  be  not  risen  from  the  dead,  the  day  of  judgment,
as  solemnly  delineated  in  the  New  Testament,  is  denuded  of  many  of  its  most
sublime  and  thrilling  features.  There  is  no  judgment-seat  of  Christ ;  for  though
Christ  has  died,  He  has  not  risen  and  revived  that  He  might  be  Lord  both  of  the
dead  and  the  living.  Neither,  for  the  same  reason,  can  we  look  for  His  appearing,
or  expect  Him  from  heaven,  since  He  is  not  gone  thither.  I  should  have  to  quote
a  vast  number  of  passages  from  all  the  great  sections  of  the  New  Testament
Scriptures  were  I  to  set  forth  the  claims,  according  to  their  teaching,  of  the  Lord
Jesus  on  our  worship,  His  power  and  readiness  to  hear  our  prayers  and  satisfy  our
trust.  But  these  are  obviously  of  no  authority  and  service  to  us  if  He  did  not  rise
from  the  grave.  The  writer  to  the  Hebrews  has  repeatedly  described  Him  as  seated
at  the  right  hand  of  God,  but  of  course  he  is  mistaken ;  Christ  is  in  the  grave.  He
has  imputed  illimitable  efficiency  to  His  intercession.  But  he  is  mistaken  ;  Christ
is  not  capable  of  making  any  intercession  at  all.  Believers  are  designated  by  Paul
as  those  who  call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  but  they  were  all
deluded,  for  Christ  was  not  risen  nor  ascended.  Nor  would  the  example  of  Christ
as  an  all-perfect  pattern  of  holiness  and  love  in  a  world  governed  by  infinite  holiness
and  power  occasion  us  less  hopeless  embarrassment,  if  He  be  not  risen,  than  the
facts  just  dismissed.  We  should,  in  that  case,  have  the  frightful  spectacle  of  a
righteousness,  truth,  goodness,  and  mercy  that  never  faltered  or  failed  expending
themselves  to  the  very  uttermost,  and  this  without  Divine  acknowledgment  and
vindication.  A  greater  shock  to  all  virtue  could  not  be  conceived.  And  in  this
instance  it  would  be  aggravated  by  the  very  measure  with  which  this  Great
Exemplar  had  indulged  the  hope  of  reward.  Tbe  resurrection  stands  to  us  a
pledge  and  pattern  of  our  own ;  and  while  our  dust  may  await  its  final  recovery,
our  spirits  shall  be  with  Him.  Nay,  He  will  even  be  our  convoy  through  the  gates
of  death,  and  then  receive  us  into  the  mansions  of  His  Father's  house,  tliat  where
He  is  we  may  be  also.  (G.  B.  Johnson.)  My  gospel  : — The  apostle  is  not
contrasting  his  gospel  with  that  of  other  preachers,  as  if  he  would  say,  "  Others
may  teach  what  they  please,  but  this  is  the  substance  of  my  gospel " ;  and  Jerome
is  certainly  mistaken  if  what  is  quoted  as  a  remark  of  his  is  rightly  assigned  to  him
by  Fabricius,  to  the  effect  that  whenever  St.  Paul  says  •'  according  to  my  gospel"
he  means  the  written  gospel  of  his  companion  St.  Luke,  who  had  caught  much  of
his  spirit  and  something  of  his  language.  It  would  be  much  nearer  the  truth  to  say
that  St.  Paul  never  refers  to  a  written  gospel.  In  every  one  of  the  paissages  in
which  the  phrase  occurs  the  context  is  quite  against  any  such  interpretation  (Rom.
ii.  16,  xvi.  25  ;  cf.  1  Tim.  i.  11).  In  this  place  the  words  which  follow  are  con-
clusive :  "  Wherein  I  suffer  hardship  unto  bonds,  as  a  malefactor/*  How  could  he
be  said  to  suffer  hardship  unto  bonds  in  the  Gospel  of  St.  Luke  ?  (A.  Phimmer,  D.D.)
Each  man  has  his  own  conception  of  the  gospel : — We  may  be  sure,  then,  that  the
phrase  "  my  gospel  "  is  not  used  by  St.  Paul  in  the  spirit  either  of  the  Pharisee  or
of  the  bigot.  He  is  not  one  who  refuses  to  recognise  the  excellence  in  those  who
may  not  exactly  agree  with  him,  or  assumes  that  to  him  alone  is  committed  a
trustworthy  form  of  the  faith.  Nevertheless,  the  phrase  has  a  distinct  force  of  its
own.  It  suggests  that  St.  Paul  looked  at  the  gospel  from  his  own  standpoint,  and
that  the  gospel  as  he  represented  it  had  aspects  differing  somewhat  from  the  same
gospel  as  represented  by  others.  We  need  not  be  afraid  to  admit  this.  If  you  look
at  any  great  mountain  from  several  points  of  view,  its  parts  are  at  once  brought  into
varying  relations  to  each  other.  Standing  here  you  see  clearly  great  peaks,  which
from  another  position  would  be  hidden.  Nay,  if  you  look  at  the  same  mountain
from  the  same  standpoint  at  different  times,  it  will  present  different  aspects — now
dim  and  mysterious  in  the  grey  morning,  and  now  rosy  with  the  after-glow  when
the  sun  has  set.  Yet  it  is  the  same  mountain,  presenting  itself  in  varying  guise  to
different  spectators.  So  with  St.  Paul.  When  he  speaks  of  "  my  gospel,"  it  is  not
another  gospel  in  the  sense  of  being  contradictory,  or  even  deficient  as  compared
with  the  gospel  proclaimed  by  other  apostles.  It  is  the  same  gospel,  seen,  however,
from  his  own  standpoint — "  the  gospel  according  to  Paul."  (T.  B.  Stephenson,  D.D.)
The  unity  underlying  the  various  conceptions  of  the  gospel  .-—The  West  Indies  are  a
long  chain  of  islands,  seeming  to  be  widely  and  completely  separated  from  each
other,  each  one  a  lovely  jewel  resting  on  the  heaving  bosom  of  the  sea.  But  if  you
look  below  the  surface  of  the  ocean  you  discover  that  each  of  these  islands  is  bound
to  all  the  others  ;  that  they  are,  in  fact,  the  topmost  points  of  one  long  mountain
chain  which  has  been  submerged.  So  that  whilst  each  island  seems  to  be  separate,
all  rest  upon  and  are  a  part  of  the  vast  and  substantial  unity  which  lies  far  below.


CHAP,  n.]  n.  TIMOTHY.  161

"My  gOBpel":  each  one  of  the  Churches  may  correctly  nee  the  phrase,  yet  these
are  not  many  gospels,  bat  in  essence  and  substance  one.

Yer  9.  Wherein  I  suffer  trouble,  as  an  evil  doer,  even  unto  bonds ;  but  the
Word  of  God  is  not  bound. — "  The  Word  of  God  is  not  bound  "  ; — The  apostle  is
imprisoned,  but  his  tongue  and  his  companion's  pen  are  free.     He  can  still  teach
those  who  come  to  him ;  can  still  dictate  letters  for  others  to  Luke  and  the  faithful
few  who  yisit  him.    He  has  been  able  to  influence  those  whom,  but  for  his  im^
prisonment,  he  would  never  have  bad  an  opportunity  of  reaching — Roman  soldiers,
and  warders,  and  officials,  and  all  who  have  to  take  cognisance  of  his  trial  before
the  imperial  tribunal.     "  The  Word  of  God  is  not  bound."    While  he  is  in  prison
Timothy  and  Titus  and  scores  of  other  evangelists  and  preachers  are  free.    Those
who  are  left  at  large  ought  to  labour  all  the  more  energetically  and  enthusiastically
in  order  to  supply  whatever  is  lost  by  the  apostle's  want  of  freedom,  and  in  order
to  convince  the  world  that  this  is  no  contest  with  a  human  organisation,  or
with  human  opinion,  but  with  a  Divine  word  and  a  Divine  Person.     "  The
Word  of  God  is  not  bound,"  because  ffis  Word  is  the  truth,  and  it  is  the  truth
that  makes  men  free.     How  can  that  of  which  the  very  essence  is  freedom,
and  of  which  the  attribute  is  that  it  confers  freedom,  be  itself  kept  in  bondage?
{A.  Plummer,  D.D.)        God's  Word  free: — He  perhaps  changes  the  expression
from  "  my  gospel"  to  the  "Word  of  God"  in  order  to  indicate  why  it  is  that,
although  the  preacher  is  in  prison,  yet  his  gospel  is  free,  because  the  Word
which  he  preaches  is  not  his  own,   but  God's.      (Ibid.)        Suffering  furthert
the  gospel : — The  sufferings  of  the  witnesses  for  Christ  was,  and  is  at  all  times,
one  of  the  most   powerful  agencies  for  the  furtherance  of  the   gospel  (comp.
Phil.  i.  12-14 ;  Col.  i.  24 ;  2  Col.  i.  6-7).     {Van  Oosterzee).   _     Suffering  for  the
gospel : — I.  The  gospel  mat  occasion  teoublb.    1.  For  it  bruiseth  Satan's  head,
discovereth  his  plots,  overturneth  his  kingdoms.     2.  Besides,  it  puUeth  down  the
pride  of  man,  provoketh  to  repentance,  presseth  him  to  deny  himself,  put  con-
fidence in  Christ,  and  its  worth  is  not  known  in  the  world.    U.  Thk  enemies
or  THE  Chxtbch  afflict   the  godlt  undeb  a  pbetencb  of  law.     1.  For  the
conversation  of  the  godly  is  holy,  honest,  harmless ;  that  without  such  pretences
they  could  have  no  seeming  cause  to  afflict  them.     2.  The  wicked,  in  their  genera-
tion,  are  wise ;  therefore,  to  cover  and  cloak  their  mischiefs  they  must  have  some
pretence  of    law.     IH.   Godly  pbeachers  mat  have  obeat    persecutions.     L
Because  not  many  wise,  mighty,  or  noble  men  are  called  neither  to  embrace  the
gospel  nor  preach  it.    2.  And  godly  preachers  speak  with  power,  curb  men's  raging
corruptions,  wound  their  rebellious  spirits,  and  never  prophesy  of  peace  unto  them.
IV.  The  libertt  of  God's  wobd  is  oeeatlt  to  be  regabded.     1.  For  it  is  the
instrumental  cause  of  man's  conversion.  2.  It  increaseth  grace,  supports  in  trouble,
and  directeth  to  heaven.    3.  And  by  the  Word  are  not  our  adversaries  foiled  ?    V.
The  persecution  op  preachers  doth  not  alwats   infringe  the  libebtt  op  thb
WORD.    1.  Because  then  the  Lord  hath  a  special  care  to  His  own  cause.    2.  The
example  of  some  will  embolden  others.    (J.  Barlow,  D.D.)      The  Word  of  God  not
bound : — 1,  The  first  idea  suggested  by  the  words  in  their  original  connection  is,
that  Paul's  incarceration  did  not  hinder  his  own  personal  exertions  as  a  preacher
of  the  gospel.     The  practical  lesson  taught  by  Paul's  example,  in  this  view  of  it,
is  obvious.    It  is  a  reproof  of  our  disposition  to  regard  external  disadvantages,
restraints,  and  disabilities  as  either  affording  an  immunity  from  blame  if  we  neglect
to  use  the  power  stiU  left  us,  or  discouraging  the  hope  of  any  good  effect  from
using  it.    2.  It  was  still  true,  however,  that  Paul's  bonds  diminished  his  efficiency.
While  he  avoided  the  extreme  of  abandoning  all  hope,  he  equally  avoided  that  of
foolishly  imagining  that  he  could  personally  do  as  much  for  the  diffusion  of  the
gospel  in  his  own  hired  house  at  Eome,  as  in  the  wide  sweep  of  his  itinerant
apostleship.    His  work,  though  not  yet  at  an  end,  was  interrupted,  and  how  should
his  lack  of  service  be  supplied  ?    The  answer  is  a  plain  one  :  By  the  labours  of
others.    This  was  a  large  ingredient  in  the  cup  of  the  apostle's  consolation.    He
rejoiced  not  only  in  the  labours  of  others  during  his  comparative  inaction,  but  in
that  inaction  as  the  occasion,  the  exciting  cause,  of  other  men's  exertions.     Nay,
he  could  even  go  so  far  as  to  consent  to  be  wronged  and  dishonoured,  if  by  that
means  his  ruling  passion  might  be  gratified  (see  Phil.  i.  12-21).    What  is  the
principle  involved  in  this  sublime  profession  of  heroic  devotion  to  the  caase  of
Christ?    Plainly  this,  that  while  Paul  was  ever  ready  to  magnify  his  office  as
apostle  to  the  Gentiles,  and  correctly  appreciated  both  the  honour  and  jtiodiffiewltf  ^~^

11                                            ^"'^i^V   '^-    ^^'fUm''^
n-^      '^


/:


lea  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  h

of  the  work  assigned  to  him,  he  never  dreamed  that  it  was  meant  to  be  entirely
dependent  npon  his  individnal  activity.  It  was  not  at  himself,  bat  at  the  word
that  he  continually  looked.  Here,  too,  the  lesson  to  ourselves  is  obvious.  The
,poBtle's  example  ought  to  shame  us  out  of  all  undue  reliance  upon  certain  human
agencies  and  influences.  Especially  ought  this  to  be  the  case  in  relation  to  our
own  share  of  the  work  to  be  performed  for  the  honour  of  God  and  the  salvation  of
the  world.  3.  One  of  the  most  important  lessons,  couched  in  this  significant  expres-
sion or  deducible  from  it,  would  be  lost  upon  us  if  we  went  no  further.  I  refer  to
the  doctrine  that  the  truth  of  God  is  independent,  not  only  of  particular  human
agents,  but  of  all  human  systems  of  opinion,  organisations,  and  methods  of
procedure.  *'  The  Word  of  God  is  not  bound  "  or  restricted,  in  its  salutary  virtue,
to  the  formal  and  appreciable  power  exerted  upon  Churches  and  Christian  com-
munities, or  through  the  ordinary  modes  and  channels  of  religious  influence,
however  great  this  power  may  be,  however  indispensable  to  the  completion  of  the
work  which  God  is  working  in  our  days.  We  may  even  admit  that  it  is  relatively
almost  all,  but  it  is  still  not  quite  aU ;  and  the  residuary  power  may  be  greater,
vastly  greater,  than  it  seems  to  us  before  attentively  considering  the  other  less
direct,  less  formal,  less  appreciable  ways,  in  which  the  Word  of  God,  the  truth
revealed  in  Scripture,  is  at  this  moment  operating  on  the  condition  of  society,
apart  from  its  constant  and  direct  communication  through  the  pulpit,  the  school,
and  the  religious  press.  These  are  the  agencies,  indeed,  by  which  sound  doctrine
is  maintained  in  your  Churches  and  impressed  upon  your  youth ;  and  this,  in  its
perfection,  is  the  highest  end  that  can  be  wrought  by  the  diffusion  of  the  truth.
But  let  us  not  forget  that  much  may  be  effected  even  when  this  highest  end  is  not
attained.  In  many  a  heresy,  for  instance,  how  much  truth  maybe  mingled,  saving
it  from  absolute  corruption,  and  perhaps  the  souls  of  those  who  hold  it,  from
perdition.  Infidelity,  in  all  its  forms,  affects  to  treat  religion  with  contempt,  as
the  offspring  of  ignorance ;  but  its  own  discoveries  are  mere  mutilations  of  the
truths  which  it  has  stolen  from  its  despised  enemy.  The  attempt  of  infidelity  to
do  away  with  the  great  doctrines  of  religion  is  the  prowess  of  a  dwarf  mounting
on  a  giant's  shoulders  to  put  out  his  eyes.  The  same  thing  is  true  as  to  those
slighter  and  more  trivial,  but  for  that  very  reason  more  effective,  forms  of  unbelief,
which  are  propagated,  not  in  philosophical  abstractions,  but  in  poetry,  romance,
and  other  current  literature.  The  novelist  or  journalist  who,  with  a  scorn  of
Christianity  only  to  be  equalled  by  his  ignorance  of  what  it  teaches,  undertakes  to
show  his  readers  "a  more  excellent  way,"  often  brings  them  at  last  to  some
elementary  truth,  already  wrought  into  the  mind  and  stamped  upon  the  memory
of  every  child  who  reads  the  Bible.  What  a  tribute  is  this  to  the  pervading,
penetrating  force  of  truth,  that  it  can  find  its  way  even  into  such  dark  places,  and
at  least  serve  to  make  the  darkness  visible !  Look,  too,  at  the  schemes  of  civil
government  and  social  order  framed  by  irreligious  men,  or  unbelievers  in  the
Scriptures,  and  observe  these  two  facts  easily  established :  that  every  departure
from  the  lessons  of  God's  Word  is  a  demonstrable  evil  or  defect  in  relation
even  to  the  lower  object  aimed  at;  and  that  everything  conducive  to  a  good
end  in  the  system  is  an  adaptation  of  some  Christian  doctrine  to  a  special
purpose.  It  would  be  easy  to  pursue  the  same  inquiry  through  every  field  of
science  and  every  walk  of  art,  and  to  show  that  even  there  the  Word  of  God
has  first  been  followed  as  a  guide,  and  then  expelled  as  an  intruder ;  that  its
light  has  first  been  used  to  kindle  others,  and  then  vain  attempts  made  to
extinguish  it  for  ever ;  in  a  word,  that  its  enemies  have  first  resorted  to  it  In
their  time  of  need,  and  then  ungratefully  forgotten  or  unblushingly  denied  the
obligation.  If  this  be  a  correct  view  of  the  influence  exerted  even  indirectly  by
the  Word  of  God;  if  over  and  above  its  certain  and  complete  results,  it  shines
through  the  interstices  of  unknown  caverns,  and  mitigates  the  darkness  of
unfathomed  depths ;  if  in  fertilising  one  spot  it  sheds  even  a  few  scattered
but  refreshing  drops  upon  a  multitude  of  others ;  if  in  doing  all  for  some,  it
incidentally  does  some  for  all,  let  me  ask,  in  conclusion.  What  should  be  the
practical  effect  of  this  belief?  1.  We  need  not  tremble  for  the  truth  itself.  2.
There  is  some  hope  for  the  world  itself,  and  even  for  those  parts  of  it,  and
those  things  in  it,  which  otherwise  might  seem  to  be  confined  to  hopeless,  irre-
coverable ruin.  3.  It  may  teach  us  a  valuable  lesson  as  to  the  true  spirit  of
philanthropy,  as  being  not  a  formal,  rigid,  mathematical  attempt  to  save  men's
Bouls  bjr  certain  rules,  and  in  the  use  of  certain  ceremonial  forms  ;  but  a  generous,
impulsive,  find  expansive  zeal  for  the  glory  of  God  in  the  salvation  of  the  lost.


•HAP.  n.  U.  TIMOTHY.  163

And  as  the  Bnreet  way  of  gaining  tWs  end,  let  us  flood  the  world  with  the  pure
and  unadulterated  Word  of  God.  (J.  A.  Alexander,  D.D.)  Not  bound  yet : — I.
In  what  sense  is  it  tbub,  that  "  the  Word  of  God  is  not  hound "  ?  1.  It  is  not
bound  so  that  it  cannot  be  preached.  Paul  could  preach  it  even  when  in  bonds,
and  he  did  preach  it,  so  that  the  gospel  was  made  known  throughout  Caesar's
palace,  and  there  were  saints  in  the  imperial  household.  Nineteen  centuries  after
Paul  we  have  stUl  an  open  Bible  and  a  free  pulpit.  When  Hamilton  was  burned
in  Scotland,  there  was  such  an  impetus  given  to  the  gospel  through  his  burning
that  the  adversaries  of  the  gospel  were  wont  to  say,  "  Let  us  bum  no  more  martyrs
in  public,  for  the  smoke  of  Hamilton's  burning  has  made  many  eyes  to  smart  until
they  were  opened."  So,  no  doubt,  it  always  was.  Persecution  is  a  red  hand
which  scatters  the  white  wheat  far  and  wide.  2.  "  The  Word  of  God  is  not
bound "  so  as  to  be  no  longer  a  living,  working  power  among  men.  Sometimes
the  enemies  of  truth  have  thought  that  they  had  silenced  the  last  witness,  and
then  there  has  been  an  unexpected  outburst,  and  the  old  faith  has  been  to  the
front  again.  The  enemies  of  the  gospel  have  attempted  also  to  bind  it  by  the
burning  of  books.  I  have  in  my  possession  an  early  copy  of  Luther's  sermons,
and  I  was  told  how  very  rare  it  was,  because  at  first  the  circulation  was  forbidden,
and  afterwards  they  were  bought  up  and  burned  as  soon  as  ever  they  were  met
with.  And  what  did  they  do  ?  They  only  put  fire  into  Luther  when  they  burned
his  sermons ;  they  drove  him  to  be  more  outspoken  than  he  otherwise  might  have
been,  and  so  they  helped  the  cause  they  thought  to  destroy.  As  the  sun  is  not
blown  out  by  the  tempest,  nor  the  moon*  quenched  by  the  night-damps,  so  is  not
the  gospel  destroyed  by  the  sophistries  of  perverse  minds.  3.  The  Word  of  God
is  not  bound  so  that  it  cannot  reach  the  heart.  God  has  ways  of  reaching  the
hardest  hearts  and  melting  them,  and  He  can  do  it  at  moments  when  such  a  work
is  least  expected.  Sometimes  it  happens  to  those  whom  we  love  that  they  are
removed  from  the  means  of  grace,  but  even  then  the  Word  of  God  is  not  bound.
Had  we  not,  a  little  while  ago,  an  instance  of  one  whom  we  were  praying  for  at  a
prayer-meeting,  and  that  night,  while  we  were  praying,  it  was  a  moonlight  night,
and  as  he  was  walking  the  deck  of  the  ship,  the  Lord  met  with  him  ?  When  no
tongue  was  able  to  reach  him,  the  memory  of  what  he  had  heard  at  home  came
over  his  soul,  and  he  was  humbled  before  God.  I  was  telling,  just  a  little  while
ago,  at  our  prayer-meeting,  a  very  singular  instance  of  how,  just  lately,  three  or
four  sermons  on  Sunday  evenings  have  been  made  most  useful  to  a  young  friend.
He  was  going  away  to  Australia  unconverted,  and  without  God.  He  went  on  board
to  depart,  and  when  the  vessel  steamed  out  of  dock,  it  ran  into  another  ship,  and
he  was  obliged  to  wait  and  spend  almost  a  month  here,  whilst  the  vessel  was  being
repaired.  The  Lord  met  with  him  on  those  Sunday  nights,  and  he  has  gone  now,
leaving  in  his  mother's  heart  the  sweet  persuasion  that  he  has  found  his  mother's
God.  But  sometimes  we  are  apt  to  think  a  case  is  more  hopeless  still,  when,  in
addition  to  natural  depravity,  and  the  absence  of  the  means  of  grace,  there  springs
up  a  scepticism,  perhaps  a  downright  derision  of  the  Word  of  God,  and  of  things
sacred.  I  knew  a  man  who  had  lived  a  Ufe  of  carelessness  and  indifference,  with
occasional  outbursts  of  drunkenness  and  other  vices.  This  man  happened  one
day,  on  Peckham  Bye,  to  hear  a  preacher  say  that  if  any  man  would  ask  anything
of  God,  He  would  give  it  to  him.  The  assertion  was  much  too  broad,  and  might
have  done  harm ;  but  this  man  accepted  it  as  a  test,  and  resolved  that  he  would
ask,  and  thus  would  see  if  there  was  a  God.  On  the  Saturday  morning  of  that
week,  when  he  was  going  early  to  his  work,  the  thought  came  upon  him,  "Perhaps
there  is  a  God  after  aU."  He  was  ready  to  swoon  as  the  possibility  struck  him,
and  there  and  then  he  offered  the  test  petition,  concerning  a  matter  which  con-
cerned himself  and  his  fellow-workmen.  His  prayer  was  granted  in  a  remarkable
manner,  and  he  came  then  to  be  a  believer  in  God.  He  is  more  than  that  now,
and  has  found  his  way  to  be  a  believer  in  all  that  God  has  spoken,  and  has  found
peace  through  believing  in  Jesus  Christ.  4.  It  is  not  bound  as  to  its  power  to
comfort  the  soul.  5.  The  Word  of  God  is  not  bound  in  the  sense  that  it  cannot
be  fulfilled.  I  now  allude  principally  to  the  promises  and  prophecies  of  God's
Word.  6.  The  Word  of  God  is  not  bound  so  that  it  cannot  endure  and  prevail
unto  the  end.  II.  What  are  the  seasons  why  the  wobd  of  God  is  not  bound  ?
1.  It  is  not  bound,  because  it  is  the  voice  of  the  Almighty.  If  the  gospel  be  indeed
the  gospel  of  God,  and  these  truths  be  a  revelation  of  God,  omnipotence  is  in
them.  2.  Moreover,  the  Holy  Ghost  puts  forth  His  power  in  connection  with  the
Word  of  God,  and  as  He  is  Divine   He   is  unconquerable.      3.  If   you  wanted


164  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  n.

another  reason  less  strong  than  these  two,  I  should  say,  "  How  can  it  be  bound
while  it  is  so  needful  to  men  ?  "  There  are  certain  things  which  if  men  want
they  will  have.  I  have  heard  say  that  in  the  old  Bread  Biots,  when  men  were
actually  starving  for  bread,  no  word  had  such  a  terribly  threatening  and  alarming
power  about  it  as  the  word  "  Bread  !  "  when  shouted  by  a  starving  crowd.  I  have
read  a  description  by  one  who  once  heard  this  cry :  he  said  he  had  been  startled
at  night  by  a  cry  of  "  Fire !  "  but  when  he  heard  the  cry  of  "  Bread !  Bread  I  "  from
those  that  were  hungry,  it  seemed  to  cut  him  like  a  sword.  Whatever  bread
had  been  in  his  possession  he  must  at  once  have  handed  it  out.  So  it  is  with  the
gospel :  when  men  are  once  aware  of  their  need  of  it,  there  is  no  monopolising
it.  None  can  make  "  a  ring "  or  "  a  corner  "  over  the  precious  commodity  of
heavenly  truth.  4.  The  Word  of  God  is  not  bound,  because,  when  once  it  gets
into  men's  hearts,  it  works  such  an  enthusiasm  in  them  that  you  cannot  bind  it.
There  is  Master  Bunyan  ;  they  have  put  him  in  prison,  and  his  family  is  nearly
starving,  and  they  bring  him  up,  and  they  say,  "  You  shall  go  out  of  prison,  John,
if  you  won't  preach.  Go  home,  and  tag  your  laces,  that  is  what  you  have  to  do,
and  leave  the  gospel  alone ;  what  have  you  got  to  do  with  that  ? "  But  honest
John  answers,  "  I  cannot  help  it.  If  you  let  me  out  of  prison  to-day,  I  will  preach
again  to-morrow,  by  the  help  of  God.  I  will  lie  here  till  the  moss  grows  on  my
eyelids,  but  I  will  never  promise  to  cease  preaching  the  gospel."  III.  Onk  ob  two
OTHER  FACTS  BUN  PAEALLEL  TO  THE  TEXT,  Paul  is  bound,  but  the  Word  of  God  is
not  bound.  Bead  it  thus :  the  preacher  has  had  a  bad  week,  he  is  full  of  aches
and  pains,  he  feels  ill :  but  the  Word  of  God  is  not  iU.  "  What  vrill  become  of  the
congregation  when  a  certain  minister  dies  ?  "  Well,  he  will  be  dead,  but  the  Word
of  God  is  not  dead.  "  Oh,  but  the  worker  is  so  feeble  !  "  The  Word  of  God  is  not
feeble.  "  But  the  worker  feels  so  stupid."  But  the  Word  of  God  is  not  stupid.
"  But  the  worker  is  so  unfit."  But  the  Word  of  God  is  not  unfit.  But  you  bitterly
and  truthfully  lament  that  Christian  men  are  nowadays  very  devoid  of  zeal.
"  All  hearts  are  cold  in  every  place";  the  old  fire  bums  low.  But  the  Word  of
God  is  not  cold,  nor  lukewarm,  nor  in  any  way  losing  its  old  fire.  "Yes,"  says
one,  "  but  I  am  disgusted  with  the  cases  I  have  lately  met  with  of  false  brethren."
Yes,  but  the  Word  of  God  is  not  false.  "  But  they  walk  so  inconsistently."  I  know
they  do,  but  the  Word  of  God  is  not  inconsistent.  "But  they  say  they  have  disproved
the  faith."  Yes,  they  have  disproved  their  own  faith,  but  they  have  not  disproved  the
Word  of  God  for  all  that.  "  Oh,  but,"  says  one,  •'  it  is  an  awiul  thing  to  think  of  the
spiritual  ruin  of  so  many  that  are  round  about  us,  who  hear  the  gospel,  and  yet  after
all  wilfully  refuse  it,  and  die  in  their  sins."  Truly  this  is  a  grievous  fact :  they
appear  to  be  boUfld  by  their  sins  like  beasts  for  the  slaughter,  but  the  Word  of
God  is  nut  bound  or  injured.  It  was  said  of  old  that  it  would  be  a  sweet  savour
nnto  God  in  them  that  are  saved,  and  in  them  that  perish — in  the  one  a  savour  of
life  unto  life,  and  in  the  other  a  savour  of  death  unto  death.  (C,  H.  Spurgeon.)
The  Word  of  God  not  bound : — Liberal  Christianity  may  be  defined,  not  as  any
belief,  nor  as  any  system  of  opinions,  but  as  something  going  deeper.  It  is  a  habit
of  noind ;  a  way  of  considering  all  opinions  as  of  secondary  importance ;  all  out-
ward statements,  methods,  operations,  administrations,  as  not  belonging  to  the
essence  of  religion.  Liberal  Christianity  comes  from  that  spiritual  iu sight  which
penetrates  the  shell  and  finds  the  kernel ;  sees  what  is  the  one  thing  needful,  and
discovers  it  to  be  not  the  form,  but  the  substance  ;  not  the  letter,  but  the  spirit ;
not  the  body,  but  the  soul ;  not  the  outward  action,  but  the  inward  motive  ;  not  the
profession,  but  the  life.  Liberal  Christianity  began  when  the  first  struggle  began
between  the  spirit  and  the  letter,  and  that  was  the  great  battle  which  emancipated
Christianity  from  Judaism.  It  was  thought,  at  first,  that  the  Word  of  God  was
bound  to  Judaism,  and  that  no  man  could  be  a  Christian  unless  he  were  also  a
Jew.  Paul  rooted  that  weed  out  of  Christianity,  and  won  for  the  whole  Ethnic
world — Greeks,  Bomans,  Egyptians,  Persians,  Hindoos,  Germans — the  right  of
becoming  Christians  at  once,  just  as  they  were,  without  first  having  to  become
Jews.  But  intolerance  is  the  natural  growth  of  strong  soils.  Out  in  the  West,
when  the  primeval  forest  is  felled,  there  comes  up  in  regular  order,  a  whole  succes-
sion of  weeds,  which  are  killed  out,  one  after  another,  by  culture.  So  it  has  been
in  the  progress  of  Christian  civiUsation.  This  progress  has  killed  off,  one  after
another,  a  similar  series  of  weeds  which  came  up  in  the  Christian  Church.  The
Jewish  intolerance  was  the  first  weed.  Paul  weeded  the  Church  of  that  so  thoroughly
that  it  never  came  up  again.  The  next  weed  was  the  Church  intolerance,  which
said,  "No  mnn  can  be  a  Christian  who  is  not  a  member  of  the  Holy  Roman


CHAP,  u.]  II.  TIMOTHY.  US

Catbolie  Ghnreh,  and  partakes  of  its  sacraments,  and  submits  to  its  authority.'*
Martin  Luther  weeded  Christianity  of  this  form  of  intolerance,  and  made  it  possible
for  man  to  be  a  Christian  without  being  a  Boman  Catholic.    But  not  being  as
liberal  a  Christian  as  Paul,  he  left  another  weed  growing  in  its  place — the  weed  of
dogmatic  intolerance.    The  dogmatists  said,  "  The  Word  of  God  is  not  bound  to
the  Boman  Catholic  Church ;  but  it  is  bound  to  certain  essential  doctrines — the
Trinity,  total  depravity,  the  atonement,  everlasting  punishment."     This  weed  has
also  been  nearly  eradicated  in  our  time.    The  principle  of  liberal  Christianity  has
pervaded  all  denominations.     It   has  taken  the  shells  and  husks  and  outward
coverings  from  the  Word  of  God,  and  these  are  now  seen  to  be  hke  those  envelopes
which  God  puts  around  the  fruits  of  the  earth,  until  they  are  ripe,  but  which  then
are  taken  off  and  thrown  away.    Nothing  abides,  nothing  is  permanent  in  Christi-
anity, says  Paul,  but  faith,  hope,  and  love.    The  Word  of  God  is  not  bound  to  any
Church  or  to  any  creed;  it  goes  outside  of  all  Churches  and  all  creeds.    The  same
cool  breeze  which  fans  the  hot  cheeks  of  the  labourers  on  the  plains  of  Hindostan,
sweeps  on  across  the  Indian  Ocean,  gathering  moisture  as  it  goes,  and  pours  it
down  in  rain  on  the  parched  regions  of  Central  Africa.    So  God  sends  His  prophets
and  teachers  of  truth  to  every  race,  to  help  them  according  to  their  separate  needs ;
sends  some  knowledge  of  Himself,  some  intuitions  of  duty,  some  hopes  of  immor-
tality, to  all  the  children  of  men.     The  Word  of  God  is  not  bound  to  the  Bible.     It
ig  not  the  prophecies  of  the  Bible  which  are  essential — "for  whether  there  be  pro-
phecies, they  shall  fail."    It  is  not  its  verbal  inspiration  which  gives  to  it  its
supreme  importance — "for  whether  there  be  tongues,  they  shall  cease."     Nor  is
its  vitality  even  in  the  doctrinal  truth  it  teaches — "for  whether  there  be  knowledge,
it  shall  vanish  away."    But  it  is  the  faith,  the  hope,  the  love  which  are  in  the
Bible  which  will  abide,  and  will  cause  the  Bible  to  remain  always  a  permanent
blessing  to  mankind.     Nor  is  the  Word  of  God  bound  to  any  belief  we  may  have
about  the  outward  history  of  Jesus — His  miraculous  birth.  His  own  miracles,  or
any  particular  outward  facts  of  His  life.     The  essential  thing,  even  in  His  resur-
rection,  is  not  the  outward  part  of  it,  but  the  inward  part ;  not  the  particular  way
in  which  He  arose,  as  that  He  did  go  up  to  a  higher  life  ;  that  He  is  now  alive,
and  that  death  has  no  dominion  over  Him.    Faith  in  Christ  is  not  believing  this
or  that  fact  about  Him,  but  it  is  faith  in  Himself,  faith  in  the  truth  and  love,
which  are  incarnate  in  Him,  and  which  were  breathed  forth  in  all  He  said  and  did
and  was.    Deny  His  miracles,  if  you  please ;  you  cannot  deny  the  great  miracle
of  His  influence  on  mankind.    Such  a  vast  effect  must  have  its  cause.    If  we  have
faith  in  the  spirit  of  Jesus,  in  the  Divine  piety  which  made  Him  the  well-beloved
Son,  dwelling  always  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father ;  in  the  Divine  charity  which
made  Him  the  Friend  and  the  Helper  of  the  humblest  of  God's  children ;  if  we
have  faith  in  these  as  the  true  life  to  lead  here  and  as  salvation  hereafter,  then
we  have  the  real  Word  of  God  in  our  hearts,  and  believe  in  the  real  Christ.   Finally,
the  Word  of  God  is  not  bound  to  any  particular  religious  experience.     Men  come
to  God  in  all  sorts  of  ways — the  important  thing  is  to  come  to  Him.     Some  are
converted  suddenly ;  others  grow  up,  by  an  insensible  process,  into  the  love  of
God.     God  has  a  great  many  means  of  making  men  good.     If  a  man  find  that
formal  and  regular  prayers  help  him,  let  him  pray  that  way.    If  he  finds  that  he
comes  nearer  to  God  by  endeavouring  to  hve  a  pure  and  honest  life,  and  leaning
on  God's  help  to  do  it,  let  him  pray  that  way.     He  who  loves  truly  prays  well.
Here  is  a  poor  woman  who  is  obliged  to  be  away  from  her  children  all  day,  working
hard  for  their  support.     When  she  comes  home  at  night  she  finds  that  her  oldest
boy  has  been  sawing  the  wood  and  bringing  the  water,  and  that  the  oldest  girl  has
been  taking  care  of  the  little  children  all  the  time  she  has  been  gone.    That  pleases
her  more  than  all  the  affectionate  words  they  could  say  to  her.     That  is  the  best
proof  of  their  love.     If  we  take  care  of  God's  poor,  and  His  sick  and  His  sorrowful
children,  that  will  be  counted  to  us,  I  think,  for  faith  and  prayer  and  conversion
and  piety.     {J.  Freeman  Clarke.)        The  Word  of  God  not  bound: — L   By  any
RESTKicTioNS  IMPOSED  BY  GoD.     God  may  permit  certain  circumstances,  but  He
has  not  imposed  any  restrictions.     The  Old  Testament  and  New  Testament,  the
voice  of  the  prophets,  and  of  Him  who  is  greater  than  prophets,  alike  concur
(Psa.  Ixvii,  6 ;  xcviii.  3 ;  Isa.  xlix.  6  ;  Mark  xvi.  5).     The  character  of  God,  the  end
of  the  gospel,  the  state  of   man,  confirm   this.      II.    By  any  abtificial  ob  con-
ventional BESiBAiMTs   IMPOSED  BY  MAN.    Look   at   the  history  and  progress  of
Christianity  (Acts  iv.  18;   v.  28;   vi.  6;  z.  ;  zii.  24;   xix.  20);  history  of  early
Church — Beformation — of  missionary  labours.     III.    By  any  oeobee  of  human


166  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [onAP.  n,

GTjiiiT  OB  DEPBAvm.     Look  again  at  first  days   of   gospel   (Luke  xv.  2;   xix  1-
11 ;  xxiii.   39-44 ;   1  Cor.  vi,  9-12.     St.  Paul  himself   a  witness   (1  Tim.  i.  12-
17).    But  if  the  Word  of  God  is  not  bound,  why  do  not  all  men  receive  it,  and
live  by  it?    Not   because  the   gospel  is   bound,   but  because  the  natural  heart
is    bound.      {E.  A.   Eardley-Wilmot,   M.A.)        The    invincibility    of  the  Divine
Ward : — As  a  word    expresses    a    thought,    and    so    places  one  in  a  definite
relation  to  another,  so  the  Word  of  God  is  that  by  means  of  which  He  places
Himself  in  a  definite  or  thinkable   relation  to  us.     It  is  an  expression  of  the
purpose  of  God ;  that  purpose  in  accordance  with  which  He  seeks  to  place  Himself
in  a  relation  of  abiding  concord  with  the  children  of  men,  on  the  basis  of  which  all
men  may  be  brought  into  the  perfect  knowledge  and  love  of  God.    By  the  declara-
tion that  the  Word  of  God  is  not  bound,  I  understand  the  apostle  to  assert  that
this  word,  as  a  revelation  of  the  purpose  of  God  to  bless  and  save  men,  must
infallibly  succeed  in  making  that  purpose  known,  and  must  also,  from  the  very
nature  of  the  case,  effect  in  some  sense  and  way  the  realisation  of  the  purpose
itself.     In  80  far  as  the  Word  of  God  is  concerned,  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  the
salvation  and  everlasting  blessedness  of  every  human  being.     1.  The  Word  of  God
is  not  bound  by  either  of  the  two  conditions  of  all  created  existence  :  the  conditions
of  time  and  space.    The  Word  of  God  is  not  bound  as  regards  time,  because  it  ia
the  revelation  of  a  purpose  that  runs  through  all  time,  originating  in  eternity  and
reaching  unto  eternity.     It  is  true  that  the  revelation  is  made  in  time.    It  moves
in  the  Une,  works  on  the  plane,  and  manifests  itself  through  the  sphere  of  the
natural  world ;  still  its  distinctive  feature  is  this,  that  it  is  a  revelation  of  that
which  exists  in  the  supernatural :  and,  therefore,  while  existing  in  time,  it  also
transcends  time,  and  cannot,  in  the  whole  extent  of  its  existence,  be  limited  by
time.     And  yet  there  are  people  who  practically  believe  that  the  Word  of  God  ia
bound  as  regards  time.     What  is  the  error  of  all  traditionalism,  if  it  be  not  this,
that  nothing  is  good  for  us  in  the  matter  of  religion,   but  that  which  has  been
handed  down  to  us  as  a  finished  result  from  the  past ;  and  that,  therefore,  a  new
truth  is  necessarily  not  a  truth  at  all,  having  no  right  to  call  itself  a  truth,  except
on  the  explicit  understanding  of  its  being  the  merest  echo  of  an  idea  uttered  long
ago.    Space,  again,  is  that  in  which  we  have  the  notion  of  the  comprehension  of
existence.     It  is  that  in  which  all  things  exist,  and  are  held  together,  each  in  ita
own  place.     Space  itself  has  no  outline,  but  everything,  as  existing  therein,  has  a
given  outline,  within  which  it  exists.     But  the  Word  of  God  is  not  bound  as
regards  space.    And  yet  there  are  those  who  would  confine  the  Word  of  God  not
merely  to  this  earth,  which  is  but  a  speck  in  the  boundlessness  of  space,  but  would
limit  it  still  further  to  some  particular  spot  of  the  earth.     The  people  who  believe
in  consecrated  places,  and  make  pilgrimages  to  them,  in  the  hope  of  getting
spiritual  benefit  thereby,  are  the  unhappy  dupes  of  the  delusion  that  the  Word  of
God  is  bound — bound  as  to  place.     2.  The  Word  of  God  is  not  bound  by  either  of
the  two  highest  forms  of  supernatural  existence,  viz.,  Christ  and  the  Church.     It
ia  in  the  person  of  Jesus  Christ  that  God  has  placed  Himself  in  a  definite  relation
to  us.     Hence  Christ  is  spoken  of  as  the  living  or  incarnate  Word,  God  manifest
in  the  flesh.    Is  not  the  Word  of  God,  then,  it  may  be  said,  as  thus  embodied  in
the  person  of  Christ,  in  some  sense  limited  or   bound  ?     It   exists  under  the
conditions  of  human  nature ;  appears  in  a  particular  country ;   is  spoken  in  a
particular  language;  submits  to  the  restrictions  of  a  somewhat  limited  sphere,
experience,  and  term  of  life ;  and  have  we  not  in  all  this  that  which  fulfils,  in  the
most  complete  sense,  the  notion  of  the  conditioned  or  bound  ?    In  a  word,  is  not
the  Incarnation  at  best  a  mere  anthropomorphism,  under  which  we  have  only  a
partial  view  of  God  ?     To  this  objection  it  may  be  answered  in  a  general  way  that
the  supernatural  is  not  necessarily  bound  when  it  moves  in  the  line,  works  on  the
plane,  and  manifests  its  power  through  the  sphere  of  the  natural  world,  any  more
than  a  father  is  bound,  when  he  freely  stoops  to  take  the  hand  of  his  child,  and
keeps  pace,  for  a  time,  with  the  shorter  step  of  the  little  one,  in  order  that  the
child  may  ultimately  be  brought  up,  as  nearly  as  possible,  to  the  level  of  the
father ;  and  no  more  is  God,  as  the  self-existent  One,  bound  when  He  reveals
Himself  under  the  forms  of  nature,  or  comes  as  Christ  into  a  more  definite  relation
to  US,  in  order  that  we  may  be  able  thereby  to  think  ourselves  up  to  the  ideas  of
God.     At  the  same  time,  it  must  be  admitted  that  if  the  supernatural  came  down
into  any  form  of  permanent  subordination  to  the  natural,  it  would  undoubtedly  to
that  extent  be  bound.    Accordingly,  up  to  the  time  of  the  first  advent,  or  prior  to
the  ascension  of  our  Saviour,  to  the  right  hand  of  God  in  heaven,  there  waa  a  sense


CHIP,  n.]  II.  TIMOTHY.  167

in  which  the  snpematural  was  boand,  to  some  extent,  in  its  relation  to  the  natural.
That  partial  and  temporary  dispensation  has  given  place  to  the  dispensation  of  the
Spirit,  nnder  which  those  former  limitations  and  restrictions  have  passed  away.
If,  then,  the  Word  of  God  is  no  longer  bound,  even  as  it  was  by  the  circumstances
of  our  Saviour's  hfe  upon  the  earth,  how  can  it  be  bound  by  any  other  individual,
guch  as  an  infallible  Head  of  the  Church  upon  the  earth,  by  an  historical  succes-
sion of  apostles,  or  priestly  caste  of  any  kind,  in  whose  hands  alone  that  Word  is
supposed  to  reside,  and  by  whom  alone  saving  grace  can  be  communicated  to  their
fellow-men  1    The  exaltation  of  Christ  to  the  right  hand  of  God  in  heaven  and  to
the  absolute  supremacy  of  the  whole  world,  puts  an  end  for  ever  to  all  such  pre-
tensions.    But  the  objection  may  still  be  pursued  under  the  form  of  the  Church.
"We  require  to  lay  hold  of  some  clear  idea  of  the  Church  in  its  relation  to  the  Word
of  God.    Undoubtedly  it  is  the  Divinely-appointed  expounder  of  that  Word ;    but
60  long  as  the  Church  is  broken  up  into  so  many  httle  sects,  and  so  long  as
spiritual  matters  are  disposed  of  by  the  merest  majority,  it  may  be  even  of  a  sect,
it  is  difficult  to  see  how  the  whole  truth  of  the  Divine  word  ever  can  be  brought
out  before  the  world,  the  only  orgnn  through  which  the  Holy  Spirit  speaks  in
fullest  form  being  a  truly  Catholic  Church.    In  the  existence,  then,  of  such  a  body
there  is  no  restraint  put  upon  the  Word  of  God,  because  the  creed  of  that  Church
would  be  the  ever-growing  and  ever-brightening  expression  of  the  mind  of  God  as
contained  in  the  sacred  Scriptures.    3.  The  Word  of  God  is  not  bound  by  either  of
the  two  essential  qualities  of  personal  being  ;  viz.,  thought  and  speech.     If  every
idea  is  the  identity  of  a  thinking  subject  and  an  object  thought,  the  one  absolute
law  of  thought  is  the  law  of  identification.    No  doubt  thought  in  its  course  reveals
a  number  of  opposites  or  contradictories,  but  its  last  function  is  to  unite  the  whole.
There  cannot  be  legitimately  different  schools  or  types  of  thought,  any  more  than
there  can  be  different  laws  of  thought  in  different  individuals,  or  different  principles
of  understanding  and  reason  in  different  parts  of  the  world.    Therefore,  we  deem
it  a  fallacy  to  say  that  men  cannot  attain  to  unanimity  of  sentiment  in  regard  to
the  highest  of  all  subjects ;  because  they  have  only  to  be  true  to  the  deepest
principles  of  their  own  intellectual  being  in  order  to  come  to  the  most  perfect
harmony  in  respect  of  all  these  important  matters.    If  so,  the  Word  of  God  is  not
bound  when  it  comes  under  the  conditions  of  human  thought,  seeing  that,  in  its
essential  principles,  it  is  one  with  the  very  laws  of  thought  themselves.    But  it
may  still  be  objected — and  this  is  the  last  point  with  which  we  have  to  deal — that
if  the  Word  is  not  bound  by  the  limits  and  laws  of  thought,  it  is  so  by  the  limits
and  laws  of  speech.    As  regards  the  Bible  there  need  not  be  much  difficulty.    It  is
simply  a  record  of  spiritual  facts.     It  merely  notes  the  different  points  in  the
historical  development  of  the  Divine  purpose.     It  professes,  indeed,  to  be  a  verit-
able history  of  the  supernatural,  as  a  phenomenon  working  itself  out,  in,  and
through  the  natural.     And  it  is  altogether  to  be  tested  from  the  point  of  what  it
claims  to  be.    The  letter  of  the  Bible  is  no  more  a  fetter  on  the  living  purpose  of
God  than  any  word  or  letter  is  to  the  thought  of  which  it  is  the  free  and  adequate
expression.     It  is  not  so  evident,  however,  that  the  Word  of  God  is  not  bound,
when  we  come  to  the  written  creed  of  the  Church ;  and  on  that  account  some
sections  of  the  Church  dispense  altogether  with  a  written  creed.     It  becomes,
therefore,  a  question  as  to  what  the  creed  of  the  Church  is,  and  what  the  relation
of  the  Church  to  her  creed.     And  the  whole  question  seems  to  resolve  itself  into
this — that  on  a  basis  of  perfectly  clear  and  immovable  conviction,  about  which  no
one  can  have  any  real  difficulty,  who  beUeves  in  God  at  all,  and  without  which  the
Church,  as  a  whole,  can  have  no  existence,  every  one  ought  to  be  free  to  carry  out
in  detail,  to  the  minutest  and  remotest  ramifications  of  thought,  those  subordinate
shades  of  spiritual   life   and  conviction  that  belong  to  the  experience  of  one
individual  as  compared  with  another.     In  such  a  case  the  creed  would  only  be
an  arrangement,  in  their  simple  and  natural  order,  of   the  leading  conceptions
of   Divine  revelation ;   and  thus  the   whole   mind   of  the  Church  would  be  left
perfectly  free  to  explore  the  depths,  to  bring  out  the  riches,  and  to  reveal  the
glory  of  the  Divine  Word.       {F.  Ferguson.)         God's  Word  not  bound: — Under
uie  Church  of   Santa   Maria  via  Lata,   on  the   Corso,  in  Rome,  is  an  ancient
house  which  is  said   to   have   been    St.  Paul's  "hired   house,"  where  he  dwelt
during  the  two  years  of  his  abode  in  the  Imperial  City ;  and  where,  as  tradition
says,  he  converted  his  keeper,  a  soldier  named   Marcellus.    In  this  house  is  to
be  seen  an  antique  marble   pillar   and   a  rusty  chain,   hundreds    of   years  old,
riveted  into  it,  bearing  the  inscription :  "  Sed  verbum  Dei  non  est  alligatum  " —


168  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n.

"  The  Word  of  God  is  not  bound."  Our  Divine  Master  Himself  was  bound  to  the
accnrsed  tree,  but  His  gracious  words  are  heard  throughout  the  world.  St.
Paul's  bonds  turned  out  to  the  furtherance  of  the  gospel ;  and  God's  Word  is  set
free  by  the  endurance  and  sufferings  of  its  preachers.  The  apostle's  manacled
hand  still  pointed  to  the  cross  of  his  Divine  Lord.  When  Admiral  Ver  Huce,  a
Protestant  of  whom  Buonaparte  entertained  the  highest  opinion,  went  over  to
London,  a  few  years  after  the  battle  of  Waterloo,  to  represent  the  Bible  Society  of
France,  at  the  annual  meeting  of  the  British  and  Foreign  Bible  Society,  he  and
Admiral  Gambier  met  on  the  platform.  The  last  time  they  had  met  was  in  deadly
combat  on  the  ocean  ;  met  as  enemies,  amidst  the  roar  of  cannon  and  all  the
accompaniments  of  a  bloody  conflict.  Now  they  met,  not  simply  as  friends,  but  as
brethren  in  the  faith  of  a  common  Saviour,  to  advocate  and  help  forward  His
glorious  reign  of  righteousness  and  peace.  As  the  two  brave  old  men  rushed  into
each  other's  arms,  and  wept  aloud,  the  immense  assembly  arose  with  one  accord,
profoundly  moved  by  a  spectacle  so  unlooked  for  and  so  touching.  Although  the
Bible  is  the  best  book  in  the  world,  it  has  always  had  enemies  who  have  tried  to
do  away  with  its  teachings,  if  they  could  not  succeed  in  destroying  it.  For  three
hundred  years  after  our  Saviour  lived  upon  earth,  the  emperors  of  Bome  did  their
utmost  to  hinder  the  advance  of  the  gospel,  by  shutting  up  its  ministers  in  prison,
or  by  putting  them  to  death.  They  stirred  up  dreadful  persecutions  against
Christians,  some  of  which  lasted  ten  years ;  and  during  one  of  these,  more  than  a
hundred  and  fifty  thousand  followers  of  Jesus  were  slain.  Diocletian  was  so
confident  that  he  had  accomplished  his  purpose  that  he  caused  a  medal  to  be
struck,  bearing  this  inscription :  "  The  Christian  religion  is  destroyed ;  and  the
worship  of  the  gods  restored."  After  the  overthrow  of  the  Eoman  empire,  and  the
rise  of  the  Papacy,  stringent  measures  were  inaugurated  against  the  circulation  of
the  Holy  Scriptures.  Fulgentio  once  preached  in  Venice  from  the  text,  "  Have  ye
not  read ?  "  "If  Christ  were  now  to  ask  you  this  question,"  said  the  bold  friar,
"  all  the  answer  you  could  make  would  be,  •  No,  Lord,  we  are  not  suffered  to  do
so  I "  On  another  occasion,  when  preaching  on  Pilate's  question,  "  What  is
truth  ?  "  he  told  his  hearers  that  he  had  been  long  searching  for  it,  and  had  at  last
found  it.  Holding  up  the  New  Testament,  he  said,  "  Here  it  is  in  my  hand  I  "
Then,  returning  it  to  his  pocket,  he  observed,  with  an  arch  look,  "  The  Book  is
prohibited!  "  He  was  a  little  too  venturesome  in  his  zeal  for  the  truth,  and  was
burned  alive.  In  1553,  when  Pope  Julius  III.  asked  some  of  his  counsellors  as  to
the  best  mode  of  strengthening  the  Church,  several  bishops  gave  him  this  advice —
the  original  document  being  still  in  existence — ' '  We  advise  that  as  Uttle  as  possible
of  the  gospel  be  read  in  the  countries  subject  to  your  jurisdiction.  The  little  which
is  usually  read  at  Mass  is  sufficient,  and  beyond  that  no  one  whatever  must  be
permitted  to  read.  While  men  were  conteuted  with  that  httle,  your  interests
prospered;  but  when  they  read  more,  they  began  to  decay."  A  company  of
bigoted  priests  once  met  in  Earl  Street,  Blackfriars,  London,  to  consult  together
concerning  an  edition  of  the  Bible  which  Wychf  had  just  published  in  the  Enghsh
tongue.  As  might  be  expected,  they  not  only  condemned  this  excellent  clergyman
as  a  bad  man,  but  they  passed  this  resolution  :  *'  The  Bible  is  a  dangerous  book.
It  shall  not  be  circulated."  These  instances  of  the  efforts  made  to  suppress  the
Holy  Scriptures  might  be  indefinitely  multipUed ;  but,  instead  of  dwelling  on  so
painful  a  subject,  let  ns  rather  ask,  how  have  such  attempts  succeeded  ?  It  is
certainly  a  wonderful  ordering  of  Providence,  that  on  the  very  spot  where  those
misguided  priests  met  to  destroy  the  Bible,  the  buUding  erected  for  "  The  British
and  Foreign  Bible  Society  "  now  rears  its  head.  Aye,  more  than  this,  millions  of
copies  of  the  Word  of  God  are  scattered  abroad,  every  year,  in  all  the  languages  of
the  earth.  In  Eome  herself,  where  the  Bible  wa^  so  long  a  sealed  book,  it  is  now
openly  sold  and  distributed  by  colporteurs  ;  and  within  a  stone's  throw  of  the  place
where  St.  Paul  was  imprisoned,  a  large  apartment  has  been  fitted  up,  where
multitudes  of  soldiers  gather  every  night  to  listen  to  the  reading  of  the  Bible,  and
to  learn  to  read  it  for  themselves.  These  men  come  from  every  part  of  Italy,  and
are  generally  from  the  better  classes  of  the  peasantry.  After  staying  in  Rome  for
three  years,  they  will  be  removed  to  other  parts  of  the  kingdom,  or  go  back  to  their
homes,  carrying  the  Bible  with  them.  M.  Guizot,  the  famous  French  scholar  and
historian,  on  taking  his  seat  as  president  of  "  The  French  Bible  Society,"  in  Paris,
truthfully  and  forcibly  remarked,  "  The  more  the  Bible  is  contested,  the  greater
the  number  of  devoted  defenders  who  arise  to  affirm  it  and  to  send  it  forth.  The
Bible  renews  itself  throngh  trials,  and  its  battles  lead  only  to  new  oonqnests."


CHAP,  n.]  U.  TIMOTHY.  169

*'  The  Word  of  God  is  not  bound  "  to  any  person  who  preaches  it.  The  weak  and
the  unlearned  often  confound  the  wise  and  the  mighty.  In  1821,  some  wretched
slaves  were  crowded  into  a  Portuguese  ship,  on  the  coast  of  Guinea,  and  among
them  a  boy  of  eleven,  who,  when  the  slaver  was  captured  by  a  British  cruiser,  was
carried  to  England.  The  boy  manifested  such  excellent  qualities  of  mind  and
heart  that  he  was  placed  at  school,  where  he  occupied  a  high  position  in  his  class,
and  became  a  tutor,  and  then  a  clergyman.  He  returned  as  a  missionary  to  his
native  land,  and  one  of  the  first  who  heard  the  glad  tidings  of  the  gospel  from  his
lips  was  his  widowed  mother.  Converts  multiplied,  and  a  bishop  was  needed  to
govern  and  instruct  this  new  community  of  Christians.  All  eyes  were  turned  on
Samuel  Crowther ;  and  on  St.  Peter's  day,  1864,  in  the  grand  old  cathedral  of
Canterbury,  the  slave-boy  was  consecrated  to  the  high  office  which  St.  Paul  himself
had  filled.  2.  "  The  Word  of  God  is  not  bound  "  to  any  form  in  which  it  is
preached.  3.  "  The  Word  of  God  is  not  bound  "  to  any  time,  place,  or  circumstance.
\j.  N.  Norton.)  The  Word  of  Ood  Twt  bound : — "  When  I  was  cast  into  prison
all  knew  that  I  was  locked  up  because  I  had  read  the  Gospel, "  said  Ratushny,  a
Russian  Christian.  "  When  I  was  locked  up  for  the  second  time  people  wondered
again,  and  began  to  search  after  the  gospel  with  greater  zeal,  and  to  read  it.  Thai
is  how  our  doctrines  have  spread,  and  not,  as  some  people  think,  through  my
having  propagated  it."  {Sunday  at  Home.)  Fame  through  opposition: — ^In
1834,  there  was  a  little  book  published  by  the  Abb6  de  la  Manuals,  entitled,
"  The  Words  of  a  BeUever,"  which  began  to  make  some  noise  because  of  its
Bepublican  sentiments.  The  reigning  Pope,  however,  went  out  of  his  way  to
condemn  it  in  an  Encyclical  letter,  which  gave  it  an  additional  popularity,  caused
it  to  be  widely  read,  and  translated  into  the  principal  European  languages.
{H.  0.  Mackey.)  Useful  though  in  prison : — The  Earl  of  Derby's  accusation  in
the  Parliament  nouse  against  Mr.  Bradford  was  that  he  did  more  hurt  (so  he  called
good  evil)  by  letters  and  conferences  in  prison  than  ever  he  did  when  he  was
abroad  by  preaching.     (J.  Trapp.)

Yer.  10.  I  endure  all  things  for  the  elect's  sake. — God's  chosen  ones,  whether
already  in  the  Church,  or  to  be  called  into  it  afterwards.  {Speaker's  Commentary.)
The  visible  church  for  the  take  of  the  elect : — If  we  were  asked  what  was  the  object
of  Christian  preaching  and  instruction,  what  the  office  of  the  Church,  considered
as  the  dispenser  of  the  Word  of  God,  I  suppose  we  should  not  all  return  the  same
answer.  Perhaps  we  might  say  that  the  object  of  Revelation  was  to  enhghten  and
enlarge  the  mind,  or  to  make  us  good  members  of  the  community.  St.  Paul  gives
us  a  reason  in  the  text  different  from  any  of  those  which  I  have  mentioned.  He
laboured  more  than  all  the  apostles;  and  why?  not  to  civilise  the  world,  not  to
smooth  the  face  of  society,  not  to  facilitate  the  movements  of  civil  government,
not  to  spread  abroad  knowledge,  not  to  cultivate  the  reason,  not  for  any  great
worldly  object,  but  "  for  the  elect's  sake,"  And  when  St.  Paul  and  St.  Barnabas
preached  at  Antioch  to  the  Gentiles,  "  As  many  as  were  ordained  to  eternal  hfe,
believed."  When  St.  Paul  preached  at  Athens,  "  some  mocked,"  others  said,  "  We
wUl  hear  thee  again,"  but  "  certain  men  clave  unto  him."  And  when  he  addressed
the  Jews  at  Rome,  some  believed  the  things  which  were  spoken,  and  some  beheved
not.  Such  was  the  view  which  animated,  first  Christ  Himself,  then  all  His
apostles,  and  St.  Paul  in  particular,  to  preach  to  all,  in  order  to  succeed  with  some.
Our  Lord  "  saw  of  the  travail  of  His  soul,  and  was  satisfied."  St.  Paul,  as  His
servant  and  instrument,  was  satisfied  in  hke  manner  to  endure  all  things  for  the
elect's  sake  ;  or,  as  he  says  in  another  place,  ••  I  am  made  all  things  to  all  men,
that  I  might  by  all  means  save  some."  And  such  is  the  office  of  the  Church  in
every  nation  where  she  sojourns :  she  attempts  much,  she  expects  and  promises
little.  This  is  a  great  Scripture  truth,  which  in  this  busy  and  sanguine  day  needs
insisting  upon.  There  are  in  every  age  a  certain  number  of  souls  in  the  world,
known  to  God,  unknown  to  us,  who  will  obey  the  truth  when  offered  to  them,  what-
ever be  the  mysterious  reason  that  they  do  and  others  do  not.  These  we  must  con-
template, for  these  we  must  labour,  these  are  God's  special  care,  for  these  are  all
things ;  of  these  and  among  these  we  must  pray  to  be,  and  our  friends  with  us,  at
the  Last  Day.  In  every  nation,  among  many  bad,  there  are  some  good ;  and,  as
natioufl  are  before  the  gospel  is  offered  to  them,  such  they  seem  to  remain  on  the
whole  after  the  offer — "many  are  called,  few  are  chosen."  And  to  spend  and  be
spent  upon  the  many  called  for  the  sake  of  the  chosen  few  is  the  office  of
Christian  teachers  and  witnesses.    That  their  office  is  such  seems  to  be  evident


170  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [ohap.  a


from  the  existing  state  of  Christian  countries  from  the  first.    Christianity  has
raised  the  tone  of  morals,  has  restrained  the  passions,  and  enforced  external
decency  and  good  conduct  in  the  world  at  large.     Still,  on  the  whole,  the  great
multitude  of  men  have  to  all  appearance  remained,  in  a  spiritual  point  of  view,  no
better  than  before.     Trade  is  still  avaricious,  not  in  tendency  only,  but  in  fact,
though  it  has  heard  the  gospel ;  physical  science  is  still  sceptical  as  it  was  when
heathen.    Lawyers,  soldiers,  farmers,  politicians,  courtiers,  nay,  shame  to  say,  the
priesthood,  still  savour  of  the  old  Adam.  Human  nature  remains  what  it  was,  though
it  has  been  baptized ;  the  proverbs,  the  satires,  the  pictures,  of  which  it  was  the
subject  in  heathen  times,  have  their  point  still.     The  knowledge  of  the  gospel  then
has  not  materially  changed  more  than  the  surface  of  things.     Our  Saviour's  words,
spoken  of  the  apostles  in  the  first  instance,  relate  to  the  Church  at  large—"  I
pray  not  for  the  world,  but  for  them  which  Thou  has  given  Me,  for  they  are  Thine."
In  like  manner  St.  Paul  says  that  Christ  came,  not  to  convert  the  world,  but  "to
purify  unto  Himself  a  peculiar  people,  zealous  of  good  works  " ;  not  to  sanctify
this  evil  world,  but  to  "  dehver  us  out  of  this  present  evil  world  according  to  the
will  of  God  and  our  Father."     This  has  been  the  real  triumph  of  the  gospel,  to
raise  those  beyond  themselves  and  beyond  human  nature,  in  whatever  rank  and
con  lition  of  life,  whose  wills  mysteriously  co-operate  with  God's  grace,  who,  while
God  visits  them,  really  fear  and  really  obey  God,  whatever  be  the  unknown  reason
why  one  man  obeys  Him  and  another  not.    It  has  laboured  for  the  elect,  and  it
has  succeeded  with  them.    This  is,  as  it  were,  its  token.     An  ordinary  kind  of
religion,  praiseworthy  and  respectable  in  its  way,  may  exist  under  many  systems;
but  saints  are  creations  of  the  gospel  and  the  Church.    Not  that  such  a  one  need
in  his  lifetime  seem  to  be  more  than  other  well-living  men,  for  his  graces  lie  deep,
and  are  not  known  and  understood  till  after  his  death,  even  if  tben.  But  in  process
of  time,  after  death,  their  excellence  perhaps  gets  abroad ;  and  then  they  become  a
witness,  a  specimen  of  what  the  gospel  can  do.     There  are  many  reasons  why
God's  saints  cannot  be  known  all  at  once ;— first,  as  1  have  said,  their  good  deeds
are  done  in  secret.    Next,  good  men  are  often  slandered ;  they  are  mistaken  by
those,  whom  they  offend  by  their  holiness  and  strictness.     Then,  a^ain,  their
intentions  and  aims  are  misunderstood.     It  is  no  triumph,  then,  for  unbelievers
that  the  gospel  has  not  done  what  it  never  attemptt^d.    From  the  first  it  announced
what  was  to  be  the  condition  of  the  many  who  heard  and  professed  it — "  Many  are
called,  few  are  ch.  sen."    Though  we  laboured  ever  so  much,  with  the  hope  of
satisfying  the  objector,  we  could  not  reverse  our  Saviour's  witness,  and  make  the
many  religious  and  the  bad  few.    We  can  but  do  what  is  to  be  done.     We  cannot
di'stroy  the  personal  differences  which  separate  man  and  man  ;  and  to  lay  it  as  a
fault  to  baptism,  teaching,  and  other  ministrations,  that  they  cannot  pass  the
bounds  predicted  in  God's  Word,  is  as  little  reasonable  as  attempting  to  make  one
mind  the  same  as  another.    There  is  nothing  to  hinder  the  poorest  man  from  living
the  life  of  an  angel,  living  in  all  the  unearthly  contemplative  blessedness  of  a
Baint  in  glory,  except  so  far  as  sin  interferes  with  it.    I  mean,  it  is  sin,  and  not
poverty  which  is  the  hindrance.     Such  is  the  case  with  the  poor  ;  now,  again,  take
the  case  of  those  who  have  a  competency.     They  too  are  swallowed  up  in  the  cares
or  interests  of  life  as  much  as  the  poor  are.     While  want  keeps  the  one  from  God
by  unsettling  his  mind,  a  competency  keeps  the  other  by  the  seductions  of  ease  and
plenty.     The  poor  man  says,  "  I  cannot  go  to  Church  or  to  the  Sacrament  of  the
Lord's  Supper,  till  I  am  more  at  ease  in  my  mind  ;  I  am  troubled,  and  my  thoughts
are  not  my  own."    The  rich  man  does  not  make  any  excuses, — he  comes;  but  his
"  heart  goeth  after  his  covetousness."    No ;  such  a  one  may  be  far  other  than  a
mere  man  of  the  world, — he  may  be  a  reli-^ious  man,  in  the  common  sense  of  the
word;  he  may  be  exemplary  in  his  conduct,  as  far  as  the  social  duties  of  life  go ;
he  may  be  really  and  truly,  and  not  in  pretence,  kind,  benevolent,  sincere,  and  in  a
manner  serious  ;  but  so  it  is,  his  mind  has  never  been  unchamed  to  soar  aloft,  he
does  not  look  out  with  longing  into  the  infinite  spaces  in  which,  as  a  Christian,  he
has  free  range.    A  sort  of  ordinary  obedience  suffices  them  as  well  as  the  poor.
Alas !  and  is  it  so  ?  is  the  superhuman  life  enjoined  on  us  in  the  gospel  but  _a
dream?   is  there  no  meaning   in   our  own  case,   of  the  texts  about  the  strait
gate  and  the  narrow  way,  and  Mary's  good  part,  and  tlie  rule  of  perfection,  and
Ihe  saying  which   '*  all  cannot  receive  save  they  to  whom  it  is  given  7  "      God
grant  to  us  a  simple,  reverent,  affectionate,  temper,  that  we  may  truly  be  the
Church's  children,  and  fit  subjects  of  '    r  instructions !     {J.  H.  Newman,  ALA.)
Sufftringt  on  behalf  of  the  elect : — The  c^uestion  doubtless  arises,  does  St.  Paul


CBA».  n.]  n.  TIMOTHY.  I7I

here,  and  also  in  ColoBsians  i.  24,  regard  his  own  afflictions  as  a  part  of  the
redemptive  suffering  by  which  the  elect  should  receive  the  gift  of  Chiist's  salvation
and  inherit  their  eternal  glory  ?  This  would,  undoubtedly,  contradict  the  whole
tenor  of  his  teaching  elsewhere.  "  Was  Paul  crucified  for  you  ?  "  rings  out  (in  1  Cor.
i.  13)  his  own  indignant  disclaimer  of  any  such  position.  Still  he  does  assert  his
hope  and  conviction  that  direct  and  positive  advantages  may  accrue  to  the  elect
of  God  from  his  own  sufferings.  The  "  salvation  "  is  "in  Christ  Jesus";  still
there  are  "things  lacking"  in  the  afflictions  of  the  Lord  which  he  and  other
saints  are  called  upon  to  supplement,  to  fill  up  from  another  source.  They  are  to
be  filled  ap  in  the  persons  of  the  members  of  Christ's  suffering  body.  Because
these  bitter  sorrows  effectuate  or  tend  to  produce  a  closer  resemblance  to  Christ,
because  they  may  lead  to  a  more  intense  consecration  on  the  part  of  the  elect  of
God,  he  willingly  endures  them  all.  We  take  it  that  these  BXiypeic  of  Christ  are  not
His  atoning  or  sacrificial  agonies,  but  all  the  contumely  and  repression  which  He
endured  for  as  and  with  us,  and  also  which  He  endured  for  us  and  with  us,  and  also
which  He,  in  sublime  sympathy,  continues  to  suffer  in  His  body  the  Church,  and
which  will  not  be  completed  until  the  last  battle  has  been  fought  and  the  last
enemy  overcome.  Thus  the  Lord  dignifies  every  patiently  borne  cross,  every  holy
death,  as  part  of  His  own  affliction  for  the  sake  of  the  elect.  (H.  R.  Reynolds,
D.D.)       The  redemptive  end  of  affliction : — I.  AnrLicTioNB  abe  the  more  willingly

SUSTAINED  WHEN  THEY  FUBTHEB  THE  LIBERTY  OF  THE  GOSPEL.     1.  For  whcU  the  Word

runs  the  plots  of  the  wicked  are  prevented.  2.  The  wandering  sheep  gathered.
3.  The  body  of  Christ  perfected.  4.  The  kingdom  of  God  enlarged.  II.  A  grown
Christian  can  suffer  all  kinds  of  afflictions.  1.  For  experience  have  taught  him
that  afflictions  are  good  for  him.  2.  Many  acts  make  a  habit ;  whence  it  falls  out  that
tribulation  worketh  patience.  3.  He  believeth  that  thongh  sorrows  be  bitter  at  the
entrance,  they  shall  be  sweet  in  the  end.  4.  The  Lord  assisteth  him,  by  whose  strength
he  can  do  and  suffer  all  things.  III.  There  be  an  elect  people.  Now  concerning
the  elect,  two  things  are  not  unworthy  of  our  consideration — the  one,  their  number,
the  other  their  prerogatives.  For  their  number  absolutely  taken  is  great.  The
prerogatives  are  many,  and  all  excellent,  which  are  proper  to  the  elect,  for  they  be
the  objects  of  God's  love.  The  redeemed  of  His  Son  ;  temples  of  the  Spirit ;  and
co-heirs  with  Christ  of  all  things.  IV.  All  the  goodness  of  our  sufferings  is  in
respect  of  their  ground  and  end.  V.  Of  the  two,  a  true  Christian  man  had
rather  save  souls  than  prosper  in  this  world.  For  such  know,  that  to  save  a
soul  is  more  worth  than  to  win  the  world ;  and  that  they  shall  shine  as  the  sun
for  ever  and  ever.  (J,  Barlow,  D.D.)  A  noble  purpose  : — A  man's  purpose  in
lile  should  be  like  a  river  which  was  bom  of  a  thousand  little  riUs  in  the  mountains ;
and  when  at  last  it  has  reached  its  manhood  in  the  plain,  though,  if  you  watch  it,
you  shall  see  httle  eddies  that  seem  as  if  they  had  changed  their  minds,  and  were
going  back  again  to  the  mountains,  yet  all  its  mighty  current  fiows,  changeless,  to
the  sea.  If  you  build  a  dam  across  it,  in  a  few  hours  it  will  go  over  it  with  a  voice
of  victory.  If  tides  check  it  at  its  mouth,  it  is  only  that  when  they  ebb  it  can  sweep
on  again  to  the  ocean.  So  goes  the  Amazon  or  Orinoco  across  a  continent — never
losing  its  way  or  changing  its  direction  for  the  thousand  streams  that  fall  into  it  on
the  right  hand  and  on  the  left,  but  only  using  them  to  increase  its  force,  and  bearing
them  onward  in  its  resistless  channel.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  Supporting  others: —
A  carious  old  tree  that  supports  other  trees  is  described  in  a  South  American
journal.  It  is  stated  that  in  Columbus  there  is  a  china  tree  that  grew  up  very
tall.  Several  years  ago  the  top  was  taken  off,  leaving  the  main  trunk  of  the  tree
about  twenty  feet  high.  On  the  top  it  has  become  somewhat  decayed,  but  is  making
up  for  lost  life  by  supporting  a  young  forest.  There  are  several  different  shrubs
growing  on  its  top,  among  others  an  evergreen  three  or  four  feet  in  height,  a  black-
berry  bush,  which  has  put  on  leaves  and  flowers,  and  a  water-oak  which  is  aboat
two  inches  in  circumference.  It  is  said  that  the  spectacle  is  a  very  remarkable  one,
and  arboriculturists  take  great  interest  in  it.  The  old  tree  is  a  type  of  many  lives.
When  God  has  withdrawn  one  of  His  children  from  active  service,  he  is  frequently
able  to  continue  his  usefulness  in  another  way,  by  supporting  others,  lifting  them
nearer  to  Heaven  and  sustaining  them  with  his  own  stalwart  spiritual  growth.
Enduring  for  the  elect's  sake  .--^Axi  ordinary  person  may  rest  in  his  bed  all  night,
but  a  surgeon  will  be  called  up  at  all  hours ;  a  farming-man  may  take  his  ease  at
his  fireside,  but  if  he  becomes  a  shepherd  he  must  be  out  among  the  lambs,  and
bear  all  weathers  for  them  ;  even  so  doth  Paul  say,  "  Therefore  I  endure  all  things
for  the  elect's  sake,  that  tiiey  may  also  obtain  the  salvation  which  is  in  Christ


173  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n.

Jesus  with  eternal  glory."    (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)        Suffering  to  help  others : — Suppose
that  by  some  painful  operation  you  could  have  your  right  arm  made  a  little  longer ;
I  do  not  suppose  you  would  care  to  go  under  the  operation  ;  but  if  you  foresaw  that
by  undergoing  the  pain  you  would  be  enabled  to  reach  and  save  drowning  men  who
else  would  sink  before  your  eyes,  I  think  you  would  willingly  bear  the  agony,  and
pay  a  heavy  fee  to  the  surgeon  to  be  thus  qualified  for  the  rescue  of  your  fellows.
Beckon,  then,  that  to  acquire  soul-winning  power  you  wiU  have  to  go  through  fire
and  water,  through  doubt  and  despair,  through  mental  torment  and  soul  distress.
(Ibid.)        The  believer^s  salvation  obtained  by  Christ  and  connected  with  glory  : —
I.  Let  ds  consider  the  nature  of  this  salvation.    1.  It  is  a  salvation  from  the
condemnation  of  a  broken  law.     2.  It  is  a  salvation  from  the  power  and  dominion
of  sin.    3.  It  is  a  salvation  from  the  bondage  of  Satan.      4.  It  is  a  salvation  from
the  temporary  triumphs  of  the  grave.     II.  Let  us  inquire  in  what  respects  this
salvation  is  in  Christ  Jesus.    Because  it  was  with  His  Son  Christ  Jesus  that  God
was  pleased  to  enter  into  covenant,  respecting  human  redemption,  before  the  world
was.      III.   Let  us  glance  at  the  eternal  glory  with  which  this  salvation  is
connected.     1.  The  persons  of  the  saints  will  then  be  glorious.     The  body  will  be
no  longer  subject  to  hunger  and  thirst,  to  pain  and  weariness,  or  to  disease  and
decay.     And  then  in  respect  to  the  soul,  it  wiU  be  formed  after  the  Divine  image,  in
righteousness  and  true  holiness,  made  to  partake,  so  far  as  a  finite  creature  is
capable,  of  the  image  of  God.     2.  The  mansions  of  which  the  redeemed  shall  take
possession  will  be  glorious.     3.  The  society  to  which  they  will  be  admitted  will  be
glorious.     4.  The  employments  of  the  believer  will  be  glorious.     (Essex  Congrega-
tional Remembrancer. )        That  they  may  also  obtain  salvation. — Rather,  that  they
also  may ;  they  as  well  as  we.     {Speaker's  Commentary.)        Salvation  in  Christ: —
Having  Christ  we  have  salvation  also,  while  without  receiving  Christ  Himself  we  can-
not have  the  salvation.     Having  the  fountain  we  have  its  issuing  streams.     Cut  off
fr.  '^^  the  fountain  the  streams  will  not  flow  to  us.     Christ  offers  Himself  to  be  the
Liiucgroom  of  the  soul.     The  mistake  is  that  of  seeking  the  salvation  instead  of
seeking  the  Saviour.  Just  the  same  mistake  that  the  affianced  would  make  if  she  should
seek  to  have  the  possessions  of  him  to  whom  she  was  engaged  made  over  to  her  from
him,  without  their  union  in  wedlock,  instead  of  accepting  his  offer  of  himself,  and
having  the  hymeneal  bond  completed  by  which  he  and  all  he  has  would  become  hers.
(W.  E.  Boaridman.)      Salvation : — I.  The  nature  of  f  lvation.  1.  Salvation  is  the
great  and  constant  theme  of  the  whole  Bible.     2.  Salvation  is  a  word  of  pleasing
import.    3.  Salvation  is  a  full  and  complete  deliverance  from  all  past  guilt  and
condemnation.     4.     Salvation  is  a  glorious  deliverance  from  all  the  miseries  of  sin
and  the  bondage  of  Satan.     5.  Salvation  is  a  deliverance  from  the  envenomed
sting   of   death.     6.    This  salvation   is  a   deUverance  from   the  resurrection   of
damnation,  the  horrors  of  the  judgment,  and  the  miseries  of  the  lost  in  hell.    Now
for  the  peculiar  characteristics  of  this  salvation.      (1)  It  is  free.     (2)  Suitable.
(3)  Present.     (4)  Gracious.     (5)  Eternal.     II.  The  Author  and  Source  op  Salva-
tion.    It  is  "  Christ  Jesus."     III.  Let  us  point  out  its  method.     Some  persons
try  to  mystify  the  plan.    But  it  is  simple.     The  way  is  easy.     Some  want  to
purchase  the  gift  of  salvation,  but  it  is  not  to  be  bought.    It  is  here — "  Look  unto
Me,  and  be  ye  saved,  aU  ye  ends  of  the  earth."  Turn  your  eyes  from  the  world  and
sin,  and,  by  faith,  look  to  Christ  1     {R.  Key.)        Heaven,  or  the  final  happiness  of
the  righteous  : — Let  us  attend  to  what  notices  we  can  gain  from  the  scriptures  of
truth  of  the  heavenly  state,  as  coming  under  the  notion  of  salvation  and  glory.
Each  of  these  sometimes  is  put  alone  for  the  whole  of  it ;  but  being  here  joined
together,   they  make  the  description  of  it  more  complete ;   the  former  directly
signifies  the  negative  part,  a  deliverance  from  all  evil,  and  the  latter  the  positive,
the  possession  of  the  highest  and  greatest  good  our  nature  is  capable  of.    And  how
significantly  and  emphatically  is  this  salvation  with  eternal  glory  said  to  be  in
Christ  Jesus  ?     It  is  in  Him,  as  possession  purchased,  in  whose  right  we  can  only
obtain  it.    It  is  in  Him  as  an  inheritance  kept  in  truth,  and  to  be  conveyed  by  Him
to  the  appointed  heirs.     It  is  in  Him  as  the  grand  Exemplar  in  His  human  nature
of  the  complete  and  final  happiness  of  the  saints.     It  is  in  Him  both  as  a  beatific
object,  and  as  a  perpetual  medium  through  which  the  blessed  will  see  and  enjoy
God.    I.  The  Christian  shall  obtain  instantly  on  his  arrival  at  heaven,  and  ever-
lastingly possess,  a  complete  salvation,  a  perfect  freedom  from  all  manner  of  evil.
1.  In  lieaven  there  will  be  a  perfect  and  eternal  salvation  from  all  sin.     2.  The
Balvatiou  of  heaven  will  be  an  absolute  and  perpetual  deliverance  from  the  tempta^
(ions  of  Satan.    In  heaven,  too,  all  wicked  men,  as  well  as  evil  angels,  shall  <«4s(«


CHAT.n.)  n.  TIMOTHY,  17a

from  troubling  or  tempting ;  for  there  shall  be  nene  of  them  there,  no  more  than
any  matter  of  temptation  in  that  blessed  world.  3.  This  salvation  will  be  a
deliverance  from  all  natural  weaknesses ;  from  slowness  of  apprehension,  errors
of  judgment,  slipperiness  of  me-uory,  levity  of  will,  a  rashness  or  tardiness  in
resolviug,  and  a  heaviness  in  acting.  4.  It  will  be  a  deliverance  from  all  the
diseases  and  pains  which  attend  our  mortal  frame,  together  with  the  great  variety
of  disagreeable  accidents  our  life  on  earth  is  continually  liable  to.  5.  It  will  be  a
deliverance  from  all  God's  wrath  and  anger.  6.  It  is  a  deliverance  from  all  relative
and  sympathising  sufferings  and  sorrows.  7.  It  will  be  a  deliverance  from  death.
But  it  is  time  now  to  say  somewhat — II.  Of  the  positive  felicity  of  the  heavenly  world,
of  which  the  less  will  suffice,  as  several  of  its  ingredients  are  easily  understood
from  the  evils  and  miseries  which  they  stand  in  opposition  to,  and  because  we  can
have  but  a  general  idea  of  this  part,  rather  knowing  what  heaven  is  not,  than  what
in  particular  it  is.  However,  what  belongs  to  this  state  is  all  great,  excellent  and
glorious.  It  is  glory  itself.  Now,  the  glory  which  continues  the  heavenly  happiness
is  both  objective  and  subjective,  and  these  reciprocally  influencing  each  other  and
inseparably  concurring  to  form  it.  Tliere  is  a  glory  without,  objects  of  unspeakable
lustre  and  glory  which  will  be  exhibited  and  presented  to  the  saints  in  heaven  to
converse  with.  And  there  will  be  a  glory  wit  bin  themselves.  All  the  parts  and
powers  of  their  nature  will  be  rendered  inexpressibly  glorious,  as  by  an  elevation
of  them  into  a  fitness  to  converse  with  the  glorious  objects  before  them,  so  by  au
actual  exercise  on  them  and  the  most  satisfying  gratification  by  them.  Hence  the
frequent  expression  in  Scripture  of  their  happiness  in  heaven  is  their  being
glorified.  And  it  is  the  glory  of  God  either  way,  as  it  is  often  called.  He  makes
aU  the  glory  of  heaven ;  He  is  the  principal  object  Himself  of  the  saints'  beatifio
converse,  and  He  forms  all  the  other  objects,  as  well  as  themselves,  glorious.  And
here  we  may  observe  that  all  these  glories  wiU  be  revealed  in  a  propitious  and
amiable  light,  God  will  manifest  Himself  to  His  saints  as  their  own  God,  and  all
His  perfections  and  operations  are  arrayed  in  love.  No  room  will  be  left  for  terror
and  dismay  from  the  full  blaze  of  His  Majesty  above,  as  but  a  few  beams  of  it
breaking  in  on  some  of  His  people  here  have  oppressed  their  souls  with  the  most
dreadful  apprehensions.  Again,  the  revelation  of  heavenly  glories  will  be  made  to
the  blessed  in  a  measure  exactly  suited  to  their  faculties  and  capacities.  There  will
be  no  deficiency  to  cause  an  uneasy  and  an  unsatisfied  craving  ;  no  excess  to  over-
power and  exhaust  the  spirits.  1.  There  will  be  a  perfect  knowledge  in  heaven :
a  knowledge  in  the  very  best  manner  of  the  best  and  noblest  things.  This  know-
ledge will  in  a  great  measure  be  intuitive,  and  so  consequently  very  comprehensive,
easy,  clear,  and  satisfying.  2.  In  heaven  there  will  be  a  perfect  rectitude,  and
regular  harmony  in  aU  the  powers  of  the  soul.  As  the  understanding  clearly  and
steadily  beholds  the  beauties  of  holiness,  the  soul  will  naturally  take  and  keep  a
correspondent  impress,  and  be  satisfied  with  this  Divine  likeness.  3.  In  consequence
of  this,  the  active  powers  will  be  fuUy  and  most  delightfully  employed  in  the
incessant  praises  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb,  and  in  whatever  unknown  services  may
be  assigned  them,  all  noble  and  pleasurable.     (J.  Hubbard.)

Vers.  11, 12.  If  we  be  dead  with  Him,  we  shall  also  live  wltb  Him. — Union  with
Christ  in  death  and  life  : — I.  The  first  branch  of  this  "  faithful  saying  "  is,  '•  If  we
be  dead  with  Him,  we  shall  also  live  with  Him."  There  seem  to  be  two  ways  chiefly
in  which  the  soul  "  is  dead  with  Christ,"  If  we  look  at  the  operation  of  the  law  aa
a  manifestation  of  the  justice  of  God,  the  law  was  the  cause  of  the  death  of  Christ
— that  is  to  say,  the  law  being  broken  by  the  Church  in  whose  place  Christ  stood.
He,  as  a  Substitute  and  a  Surety,  stood  under  its  curse,  and  that  curse  was  death.
If,  then,  we  are  to  die  with  Christ,  we  must  die  under  the  law  just  as  Jesus  died  under
the  law,  or  else  there  is  no  union  with  Christ  in  His  death.  But  further,  Christ  died
under  the  weight  of  sin  and  transgression.  Every  living  soul  then  that  shall  die
with  Christ  spiritually  and  experimentally,  must  die  too  under  the  weight  of  sin —
that  is,  he  must  know  what  it  is  so  to  experience  the  power  and  presence  of  sin  in  his
carnal  mind,  so  to  feel  the  burden  of  his  iniquities  upon  his  guilty  head,  and  to  be
so  overcome  and  overpowered  by  inward  transgression,  as  to  be  utterly  helpless,  and
thoroughly  un>ible  to  deliver  himself  from  the  dominion  and  rule  of  it  in  his  heart.
But  there  is  another  way  in  which  the  soul  dies  witli  Christ.  Christ  not  only  died
under  the  law  and  died  under  sin,  but  He  died  unto  the  law,  and  He  died  unto  sin.
But  in  living  with  Christ,  there  will  be,  if  I  may  use  the  expression,  a  dying  life,  or
a  living  death,  running  parallel  with  all  the  experience  of  a  child  of  God,  who  is


174  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oHA».  n.

broQgbt  to  some  acquaintance  with  the  Lord  Jeeas.  For  instance,  the  apostle  says,
•*  I  am  crucified  with  Christ,  nevertheless  I  live ;  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me."
n.  But  we  go  on  to  consider  another  branch  of  this  vital  onion  with  Christ.  "  II
we  suffer,  we  shall  also  reign  with  Him."  There  can  be  no  suffering  with  Christ,
until  there  is  a  vital  union  with  Christ ;  and  no  realisation  of  it,  until  the  Holy
Ghost  manifests  this  vital  union  by  making  Christ  known,  and  raising  up  faith  in
our  hearts,  whereby  He  is  embraced  and  laid  hold  of.  And  there  is  no  "  reigning
with  Christ,"  except  there  first  be  a  "suffering  with  Christ"  I  believe  that
reigning  not  only  signifies  a  reigning  with  Him  in  glory  hereafter,  but  also  a  measure
of  reigning  with  Hun  now,  by  His  enthroning  Himself  in  our  hearts,  in.  *'  If  we
deny  Him,  He  also  will  deny  us,"  that  is  the  next  branch.  The  words  have  a  twofold
meaning  ;  they  apply  to  professors,  and  they  apply  to  possessors.  There  were  those
in  the  Church  who  would  deny  Him,  for  there  were  those  who  never  knew  Him  experi-
mentally, and  when  the  trial  came,  they  would  act  as  Judas  acted.  And  then  there
were  those  who  were  real  followers  of  Him,  but  when  put  to  the  test  might  act  as
Peter  acted.  {J.  C.  Philpot.)  Christ  and  the  Christian: — In  matters  of  great  worth
and  difficulty  prefaces  are  used :  so  here.    Whence  observe  we,  that — I.  Afflictions

ARENOTEASYTOBEENDUBED.  H.  God'S  WoRD  IS  FAITHFUL.  HI.  ChBIST  AND  A  ChBISTIAM
ABE  FELLOW-BTTFFEEEES.    IV.  ChBIST  AND  A  CHRISTIAN  SHALT.  LIVE  TOOETHEB.    (J".  BurlOW,

D.D.)  Dead  with  Christ : — In  the  fourth  century  a  young  earnest  disciple  sought
an  interview  with  the  great  and  good  Macarius,  and  asked  him  what  was  meant  by
being  dead  to  sin.  He  said,  "  You  remember  our  brother  who  died  and  was  buried
a  short  time  since.  Go  to  his  grave,  and  tell  him  all  the  unkind  things  you  ever
heard  of  him.  Go,  my  son,  and  hear  what  he  will  answer."  The  young  man
doubted  whether  he  imderstood;  but  Macarius  only  said,  "Do  as  I  tell  you,  my
son;  and  come  and  tell  me  what  he  says."  He  went,  and  came  back,  saying,  "I
can  get  no  reply ;  he  is  dead."  "  Go  again,  and  try  him  with  flattering  words — tell
him  what  a  great  saint  he  was,  what  noble  work  he  did,  and  how  we  miss  him  ;
and  come  again  and  tell  me  what  he  says."  He  did  so,  but  on  his  return  said,  "  He
answers  nothing,  father ;  he  is  dead  and  buried."  "  You  know  now,  my  son,"  said
the  old  father,  "  what  it  is  to  be  dead  to  sin,  dead  and  buried  with  Christ.  Praise
and  blame  are  nothing  to  him  who  is  really  dead  and  buried  with  Christ."  (Chris-
tian Herald.)  Dead  with  Christ : — "  Beheve,  my  dear  Pris,  what  I  am  just  begin-
ning to  learn,  and  you  knew  long  ago,  that  the  death  of  Christ  is  far,  very  far,  more
than  a  mere  peace-making,  though  that  view  of  it  is  the  root  of  every  other.  But
it  is  actually  and  literally  the  death  of  you  and  me  and  the  whole  human  race ;  the
absolute  death  and  extinction  of  all  our  selfishness  and  individuality.  So  St.  Paul
describes  it  in  Bom.  vi.  and  in  every  one  of  his  Epistles.  Let  us  believe,  then,  what
is  the  trulji  and  no  lie — that  we  are  dead,  actually,  absolutely  dead ;  and  let  ua
believe  further  that  we  are  risen  and  that  we  have  each  a  life,  our  only  life,  a  life
not  of  you  nor  me,  but  a  universal  life — in  Him.  He  will  live  in  us  and  quicken
us  with  all  life  and  all  love ;  will  make  us  understand  the  possibiUty,  and,  as  I  am
well  convinced,  experience  the  reality,  of  loving  God  and  loving  our  brethren."  (F.
D.  Maurice  to  his  sister.)  Suffering  and  reigning  with  Jesus ; — I.  Suffkbino  with
Jbsds,  and  its  bewabd.  To  suffer  is  the  common  lot  of  all  men.  It  is  not  possible
for  us  to  escape  from  it.  We  come  into  this  world  through  the  gate  of  suffering,
and  over  death's  door  hangs  the  same  escutcheon.  If,  then,  a  man  hath  sorrow,  it
doth  not  necessarily  follow  that  he  shall  be  rewarded  for  it,  since  it  is  the  common
lot  brought  upon  aU  by  sin.  You  may  smart  under  the  lashes  of  sorrow  in  this  life,
but  this  shall  not  dehver  you  from  the  wrath  to  come.  The  text  implies  most
clearly  that  we  must  suffer  with  Christ  in  order  to  reign  with  Him.  1.  We  must
not  imagine  that  we  are  suffering  for  Christ,  and  with  Christ,  if  we  are  not  in  Christ.
2.  Supposing  a  man  to  be  in  Christ,  yet  it  does  not  even  then  follow  that  all  his
sufferings  are  sufferings  with  Christ,  for  it  is  essential  that  he  be  called  by  God  to
suffer.  If  a  good  man  were,  out  of  mistaken  views  of  mortification  and  self-denial,
to  mutilate  his  body,  or  to  flog  his  flesh,  as  many  a  sincere  enthusiast  has  done,  I
might  admire  the  man's  fortitude,  but  I  should  not  allow  for  an  instant  that  he  was
Buffering  with  Christ.  3.  Again,  in  troubles  which  come  upon  us  as  the  result  of
sin,  we  must  not  think  we  are  suffering  with  Christ.  When  Miriam  spoke  evil  of
Moses,  and  the  leprosy  polluted  her,  she  was  not  suffering  for  God.  When  Uzziah
thrust  himself  into  the  temple,  and  became  a  leper  all  his  days,  he  oould  not  say
that  he  was  afflicted  for  righteousness'  sake.  If  you  speculate  and  lose  your  pro-
perty, do  not  say  that  you  are  losing  all  for  Christ's  sake ;  when  you  unite  with
fcubble  companies  and  are  duped,  do  not  whine  about  suffering  for  Christ — call  it


CHU.  n.]  IT.  TIMOTHY.  175

the  frnit  of  yotir  own  folly.  If  yoa  will  pat  your  hand  into  the  fire  and  it  gets
burned,  why,  it  is  the  nature  of  fire  to  burn  you  or  anybody  else ;  but  be  not  so  silly
as  to  boast  as  though  you  were  a  martyr,  4.  Be  it  observed,  moreover,  that  suffer-
ing such  as  God  accepts  and  rewards  for  Christ's  sake,  must  have  God's  glory  as  its
end.  5.  I  must  mind,  too,  that  love  to  Christ,  and  love  to  His  elect,  is  ever  the
main-spring  of  all  my  patience ;  remembering  the  apostle's  words,  "  Though  I  give
my  body  to  be  burned,  and  have  not  charity,  it  profiteth  me  nothing."  6.  I  must
not  forget  also  that  I  must  manifest  the  spirit  of  Christ,  or  else  I  do  not  suffer  with
Him.  I  have  heard  of  a  certain  minister  who,  having  had  a  great  disagreement
with  many  members  in  his  church,  preached  from  this  text,  ••  And  Aaron  held  his
peace."  The  sermon  was  intended  to  pourtray  himself  as  an  astonishing  instance
of  meekness;  but  as  his  previous  words  and  actions  had  been  quite  sufficiently
violent,  a  witty  hearer  observed,  that  the  only  likeness  he  could  see  between  Aaron
and  the  preacher  was  this,  "Aaron  held  his  peace,  and  the  preacher  did  not."  I
shall  now  very  briefly  show  what  are  the  forms  of  real  suffering  for  Jesus  in  these
days.  (1)  Some  suffer  in  their  estates.  I  believe  that  to  many  Christians  it  is
rather  a  gain  than  a  loss,  so  far  as  pecuniary  matters  go,  to  be  believers  in  Christ ;
but  I  meet  with  many  cases — cases  which  I  know  to  be  genuine,  where  persons  have
had  to  suffer  severely  for  conscience'  sake.  (2)  More  usually,  however,  the  suffering
takes  the  form  of  personal  contempt.  (3)  Believers  have  also  to  suffer  slander  and
falsehood.  (4)  Then  again,  if  in  your  service  for  Christ  you  are  enabled  so  to  sacri-
fice yourself,  that  you  bring  upon  yourself  inconvenience  and  pain,  labour  and  loss,
then  I  think  you  are  suffering  with  Christ.  (5)  Let  us  not  forget  that  contention
with  inbred  lusts,  denials  of  proud  self,  resistance  of  sin,  and  agony  against  Satan,
are  all  forms  of  suffering  with  Christ.  (6)  There  is  one  more  class  of  suffering
which  I  shall  mention,  and  that  is,  when  friends  forsake,  or  become  foes.  If  you
are  thus  called  to  suffer  for  Christ,  will  you  quarrel  with  me  if  I  say,  in  adding  all
up,  what  a  very  little  it  is  compared  with  reigning  with  Jesus  1  * '  For  our  light
affliction,  which  is  but  for  a  moment,  worketh  for  us  a  far  more  exceeding  and
eternal  weight  of  glory."  When  I  contrast  our  sufferings  of  to-day  with  those  of
the  reign  of  Mary,  or  the  persecutions  of  the  Albigenses  on  the  mountains,  or  the
sufferings  of  Christians  in  Pagan  Eome,  why,  ours  are  scarcely  a  pin's  prick  :  and
yet  what  is  the  reward  J  We  shall  reign  with  Christ.  There  is  no  comparison
between  the  service  and  the  reward.  Therefore  it  is  all  of  grace.  We  are  not
merely  to  sit  with  Christ,  but  we  are  to  reign  with  Christ.  II.  Dentino  Chbist,  and
ITS  PENALTY.  **  If  WO  deny  Him,  He  also  will  deny  us,"  In  what  way  can  we  deny
Christ  ?  Some  deny  Him  openly  as  scoffers  do,  whose  tongue  walketh  through  the
earth  and  defieth  heaven.  Others  do  this  wilfully  and  wickedly  in  a  doctrinal  way,
as  the  Arians  and  Socinians  do,  who  deny  His  deity :  those  who  deny  His  atonement,
who  rail  against  the  inspiration  of  His  Word,  these  come  under  the  condemnation
of  those  who  deny  Christ.  There  is  a  way  of  denying  Christ  without  even  speaking
a  word,  and  this  is  the  more  common.  In  the  day  of  blasphemy  and  rebuke,  many
hide  their  heads.  Are  there  not  here  some  who  have  been  baptized,  and  who  come
to  the  Lord's  table,  but  what  is  their  character  ?  Follow  them  home.  I  would  to
God  they  never  had  made  a  profession,  because  in  their  own  houses  they  deny  what
in  the  house  of  God  they  have  avowed.  In  musing  over  the  very  dreadful  sentence
which  closes  my  text,  *'  He  also  will  deny  us,"  I  was  led  to  think  of  various  ways  in
which  Jesus  will  deny  us.  He  does  this  sometimes  on  earth.  You  have  read,  I
suppose,  the  death  of  Francis  Spira.  If  you  have  ever  read  it,  you  never  can  forget
it  to  your  dying  day.  Francis  Spira  knew  the  truth ;  he  was  a  reformer  of  no  mean
standing  ;  but  when  brought  to  death,  out  of  fear,  he  recanted.  In  a  short  time  ha
fell  into  despair,  and  suffered  hell  upon  earth.  His  shrieks  and  exclamations  were
80  horrible  that  their  record  is  almost  too  terrible  for  print.  His  doom  was  a  warn-
ing to  the  age  in  which  he  lived.  Another  instance  is  narrated  by  my  predecessor,
Benjamin  Keach,  of  one  who,  during  Puritanic  times,  was  very  earnest  for  Puritanism ;
but  afterwards,  when  times  of  persecution  arose,  forsook  his  profession.  The  scenes
at  his  deathbed  were  thrilling  and  terrible.  He  declared  that  though  he  sought  God,
heaven  was  shut  against  him ;  gates  of  brass  seemed  to  be  in  his  way,  he  was  given
up  to  overwhelming  despair.  At  intervals  he  cursed,  at  other  intervals  he  prayed,
and  so  perished  without  hope.  If  we  deny  Christ,  we  may  be  delivered  to  such  a  fate.
{G.  H.  Spiirgeon.)        Deniers  of  Christ : — I.  DrFFicniiT  duties  ake  greatly  to  bb

PBES8ED.    n.  To  CONOBrVE  THE  ESTATE  OF  A  ChKISTIAN  IS  TO  HAVE  AN  EYE  TO  HIS  LATTEB

END.  ni.  God's  method  and  the  devil's  diffeb.  He  begins  with  death,  ends  with
life  :  but  Satan  the  contrary.    IV.  Christ  is  not  to  bb  denied.    V.  The  deniebs  o»


17e  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  tt

Christ  bttat.t.  be  dented.  Helps  against  this  sin — 1.  Deny  thyself.  2.  Never
dispute  with  flesh  and  blood.  3.  Look  not  on  death  as  death :  but  on  God's  power,
which  is  manifest  in  our  weakness.  4.  Consider  the  examples  of  so  many  martyrs.
(J.  Barlow,  D.D.)  The  encouragement  to  suffer  for  Christy  and  the  danger  of  denying
Him: "It  is  a  faithful  saying."  This  is  a  preface  used  by  this  apostle  to  intro-
duce some  remarkable  sentence  of  more  than  ordinary  weight  and  concernment.
I  shall  btgin  with  the  first  part  of  this  remarkable  saying  :  "If  we  be  dead  with
Him,  we  shall  also  live  with  Him  ;  if  we  suffer,  we  shall  also  reign  with  Him."  1.
Wbat  virtue  there  is  in  a  firm  belief  and  persuasion  of  a  blessed  immortality  in
another  world,  to  support  and  bear  up  men's  spirits  under  the  greatest  sufferings
for  righteousness'  sake  ;  and  even  to  animate  them,  if  God  shall  call  them  to  it,  to
lay  down  their  lives  for  their  religion.  2.  How  it  may  be  made  out  to  be  reasonable
to  embrace  and  voluntarily  to  submit  to  present  and  grievous  sufferings,  in  hopes  of
future  happiness  and  reward ;  concerning  which  we  have  not,  nor  perhaps  are
capable  of  having,  the  same  degree  of  certainty  and  assurance  which  we  have  of
the  evils  and  sufferings  of  this  present  life.  Now,  granting  that  we  have  not  the
same  degree  of  certainty  concerning  our  future  happiness  that  we  have  of  our
present  sufferings,  which  we  feel,  or  see  just  ready  to  come  upon  us  ;  yet  prudence
making  it  necessary  for  men  to  run  this  hazard  does  justify  the  leasonableness  of
it.  This  I  take  to  be  a  known  and  ruled  case  in  the  common  affairs  of  life  and  in
matters  of  temporal  concernment ;  and  men  act  upon  this  principle  every  day.
The  matter  is  now  brought  to  this  plain  issue,  that  if  it  be  reasonable  to  believe
there  is  a  God,  and  that  His  providence  considers  the  actions  of  men;  it  is  also
reasonable  to  endure  present  sufferings,  in  hope  of  a  future  reward :  and  there  is
certainly  enough  in  this  case  to  govern  and  determine  a  prudent  man  that  is  in
any  good  measure  persuaded  of  another  life  after  this,  and  hath  any  tolerable  con-
sideration of,  and  regard  to,  his  eternal  interest.  In  the  virtue  of  this  belief  and
persuasion,  the  primitive  Christians  were  fortified  against  all  that  the  malice  and
cruelty  of  the  world  could  do  against  them  ;  and  they  thought  they  made  a  very
wise  bargain,  if  through  many  tribulations  they  might  at  last  enter  into  the  king-
dom of  God;  because  they  believed  that  the  joys  of  heaven  would  abundantly
recompense  all  their  sorrows  and  sufferings  upon  earth.  And  so  confident  were
they  of  this,  that  they  looked  upon  it  as  a  special  favour  and  regard  of  God  to  them,
to  call  them  to  suffer  for  His  name.  So  St.  Paul  speaks  of  it  (Phil.  i.  29).  If  we
could  compare  things  justly,  and  attentively  regard  and  consider  the  invisible  glories
of  another  world,  as  well  as  the  things  which  are  seen,  we  should  easily  perceive
that  he  who  suffers  for  God  and  religion  does  not  renounce  happiness ;  but  puts  it
out  to  interest  upon  terms  of  the  greatest  advantage.  I  shall  now  briefly  speak  to
the  second  part  of  this  remarkable  saying  in  the  text.  "  If  we  deny  Him,  He  also
will  deny  us  "  ;  to  which  is  subjoined  in  the  words  following,  "  if  we  believe  not ;  «'
awiorovfiev,  if  we  deal  unfaithfully  with  Him  ;  yet  He  abideth  faithful,  He  cannot
deny  Himself";  that  is,  He  will  be  constant  to  His  word,  and  make  good  that
solemn  threatening  which  He  hath  denounced  against  those  who,  for  fear  of  suffer-
ing, shall  deny  Him  and  His  truth  before  men  (Matt.  x.  33).  If  fear  will  move  us,
then,  in  all  reason,  that  which  is  most  terrible  ought  to  prevail  most  with  us,  and
the  greatest  danger  should  be  most  dreaded  by  us,  according  to  our  Saviour's  most
friendly  and  reasonable  advice  (Luke  xii.  4,  5.)  (J.  Tillotson,  D.D.)  If  we
suflFer,  we  shall  also  reign  with  Him. — Suffering  with  Christ : — In  the  olden  time
when  the  gospel  was  preached  in  Persia,  one  Hamedatha,  a  courtier  of  the  king,
having  embraced  the  faith,  was  stripped  of  all  his  offices,  driven  from  the  palace,
and  compelled  to  feed  camels.  This  he  did  with  great  content.  The  king  passing
by  one  da^,  saw  his  former  favourite  at  his  ignoble  work,  cleaning  out  the  camel's
stables.  Taking  pity  upon  him  he  took  him  into  his  palace,  clothed  him  with
sumptuous  apparel,  restored  him  to  all  hi>i  former  honours,  and  made  him  sit  at  the
royal  table.  In  the  midst  of  the  dainty  feast,  he  asked  Hamedatha  to  renounce
his  faith.  The  courtier,  rising  from  the  table,  tore  off  his  garments  with  haste,
left  all  the  dainties  behind  him,  and  said,  "  Didst  thou  think  that  for  such  silly
things  as  these  I  would  deny  my  Lord  and  Master  ?  "  and  away  he  went  to  the
stable  to  his  ignoble  work.  How  honourable  is  all  this  1  (C.  U.  Spjirgeon.)
Christ's  martyrs : — Christ's  true  martyrs  do  not  die,  but  live.  {E.  Thring.)
Ennobled  in  death : — Henry  V.  on  the  evening  of  Agincourt  found  the  chivalric
David  Gamm  still  grasping  the  banner  which  through  the  fight  his  strength  had
borne  and  his  right  arm  defended.  Often  had  the  monarch  noticed  that  pennon
waving  iit  the  foremost  van  of  the  men  of  England  who  that  day  pierced,  broke,  and


CHAP,  n.]  IT.  TIMOTHY.  177

routed  the  proud  ranks  of  France.  The  king  knighted  him  as  he  lay.  The  hero
died,  but  dying  was  ennobled !  "  {S.  Coley.)  Cyril,  the  boy  martyr: — Let  me  tell
you  of  a  young  soldier  of  His,  who  bore  much  for  his  Lord.  We  must  go  back  to
the  early  days  of  Christianity,  and  picture  a  martyr  being  led  to  death  in  the  city  of
Antioch.  At  the  place  of  execution  is  the  judge  surrounded  by  a  guard  of  soldiers.
The  man  about  to  die  for  his  love  to  his  heavenly  King  says  to  the  judge — "  Ask
any  little  child  here  whether  we  ought  to  adore  the  many  false  gods  whom  you  serve,
or  the  one  living  and  true  God,  the  only  Saviour  of  men,  and  that  cbild  will  tell  you."
Close  by  there  stood  a  Christian  mother  and  her  boy  of  ten  years  old  named  Cyril,
She  had  brought  her  son  there  to  see  how  a  true  servant  of  God  could  die  for  his
Lord.  As  the  martjnr  spoke,  the  judge  spied  the  lad,  and  asked  him  a  question.  To
the  surprise  of  all,  Cyril  answered — "  There  is  but  one  God,  and  Jesus  Christ  is  one
with  Him."  At  these  words  the  judge  was  very  angry.  "  Wretched  Christian,"  he
eaid,  turning  to  the  martyr,  "  it  is  thou  who  hast  taught  the  boy  these  words."
Then  more  gently,  he  said  to  the  child — "  Tell  me,  who  taught  thee  this  faith  ?  "
Little  Cyril  looked  lovingly  up  to  his  mother,  and  answered,  "  The  grace  of  God
taught  my  mother,  and  she  taught  me."  "Well,  we  will  see  what  this  grace  of  God
can  do  for  thee,"  cried  the  judge.  He  signed  to  the  guards,  who,  according  to  the
custom  of  the  Komans,  stood  with  their  sheaves  of  rods.  They  came  near  and  seized
the  child.  Passionately  the  mother  pleaded  that  she  might  give  her  hfe  for  that  of
her  son.  But  none  heeded  her  entreaties.  And  all  that  she  could  do  was  to  cheer
her  child,  reminding  him  of  the  Lord  who  loved  him  and  died  for  him.  Then  cruel
Btrokes  fell  upon  the  bare  little  shoulders  of  Cyril.  In  a  tone  of  mocking,  the  judge
said — "  What  good  is  the  grace  of  God  to  him  now  ?  "  "  It  can  enable  him  to  bear
the  same  punishment  which  his  Saviour  bore  for  him,"  answered  the  mother
decidedly.  One  look  from  the  judge  to  the  soldiers,  and  again  the  cruel  blows  fell
on  the  tender  flesh  of  the  boy.  "  What  can  the  grace  of  God  do  for  him  now  ?  "
again  asked  the  pitiless  judge.  Few  of  the  spectators  could  hear  unmoved  the
mother,  who,  with  heart  bleeding  at  the  sight  of  her  boy's  sufferings,  answered —
♦'  The  grace  of  God  teaches  him  to  forgive  his  persecutors."  The  child's  eyes
followed  the  upward  glance  of  his  mother,  as  she  raised  her  pleading  for  him  in
earnest  prayer.  And  when  his  persecutors  asked  whether  he  would  not  now  worship
the  gods  they  did,  that  young  soldier  answered — "  No,  there  is  no  other  God  but  the
Lord,  and  Jesus  is  the  Eedeemer  of  the  world.  He  loved  me,  and  I  love  Him,
because  He  is  mv  Saviour."  Stroke  after  stroke  fell  upon  the  boy,  and  at  last  he
fell  fainting.  Then  he  was  handed  to  his  mother,  and  the  question  was  once
more  repeated  :  '♦  What  can  the  grace  of  God  do  for  him  now  ?  "  Pressing  her  dying
child  to  her  heart,  she  answered — '♦  Now  above  all,  the  grace  of  God  will  bring  him
gain  and  glory,  for  He  will  take  him  from  the  rage  of  his  persecutors  to  the  peace
of  His  own  home  in  heaven."  Once  more  the  dying  boy  looked  up  and  said,
"There  is  only  one  God,  and  one  Saviour,  Jesus  Christ — who — loved — me."  And
then  the  Lord  Jesus  received  him  in  His  arms  for  evermore.  The  boy  martyr
went  in  to  be  with  his  King,  that  Saviour  "  who  hath  abolished  death,  and  hath
brought  life  and  immortality  to  light  through  the  gospel."  Suffering  for  Christ
rewarded: — Agrippa,  grandson  of  Herod  the  Great,  once  expressed  a  desire  that
his  friend  Caligula  might  soon  come  to  the  throne.  Old  Tiberius,  the  reigning
monarch,  felt  such  a  wish,  however  flattering  to  Caligula,  to  be  so  little  kindly  to
himself,  that  he  threw  the  author  of  it  into  a  loathsome  dungeon.  But  the  very  day
Caligula  reached  Imperial  power,  Agrippa  was  released.  The  new  emperor  gave  him
purple  for  his  rags,  tetrarchies  for  his  narrow  cell,  and  carefully  weighing  the  gyves
that  fettered  him,  for  every  link  of  iron  bestowed  on  him  one  of  gold.  Think  you
that  day  Agrippa  wished  his  handcuffs  and  his  leg-locks  had  been  lighter  ?  Will
Jesus  forget  the  wellwishers  of  His  kingdom,  who,  for  His  sake,  have  borne  the
burden  and  worn  the  chain  ?  His  scales  will  be  forthcoming,  and  assuredly  those
faithful  in  great  tribulation  shall  be  beautified  with  greater  glory.  (5.  Coley.)
Happy  ending  of  a  suffering  life  : — We  have  sometimes  watched  a  ship  entering  the
harbour  with  niasts  sprung,  sails  torn,  seams  yawning,  bulwarks  stove  in — bearing
All  the  marks  of  having  battled  with  the  storms,  and  of  having  encountered  many  a
peril.  On  the  deck  is  a  crew  of  worn  and  weather-beaten  men,  rejoicing  that  they
have  reached  the  port  in  safety.  Such  was  the  plight  in  which  many  believers  of
old  reached  the  haven  of  rest.  They  met  with  dangers  and  encountered  diflSculties.
But  if  their  course  was  toilsome,  their  end  was  happy.  It  was  their  joy  to  labour
and  suffer  for  their  Lord's  sake,  and  they  are  now  sharing  His  kingdom  and
His  glory.    IBp.  Oxenden.)        It  we  deny  Him,  He  also  will  deny  us.— Denying

12


178  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n.

Christ : — There  are  many  ways  of  denying  Christ,  hoth  by  word  and  action.  We
may  take  the  part  of  His  enemies,  or  ignore  His  supreme  claim  to  our  allegiance  ;
we  may  transform  Him  into  a  myth,  a  fairy  tale,  a  subjective  principle,  or  find  a
substitute  in  our  own  life  for  His  grace ;  and  we  may  assume  that  He  is  not  the
ground  of  our  reconciliation,  nor  the  giver  of  salvatiun,  nor  the  sole  Head  of  His
Church.  If  so,  we  may  reasonably  fear,  lest  He  should  refuse  to  acknowledge  us
when  upon  His  approval  our  eternal  destiny  will  turn.    (H.  R.  Reynolds,  DJ).)

Ver.  13.  If  we  believe  not,  yet  He  aWdeth  faithful. — Faithless: — "If  we  are
faithless  " — that  is,  untrue  to  the  vows  of  our  Christian  profession,  the  faithless-
ness implies  more  than  mere  unbelief  in  any  of  the  fundamental  doctrines  of  the
faith,  such  as  the  resurrection  of  the  Lord  or  His  divinity.  (H.  D.  M.  Spence,
M.A.)  The  unchangedbleness  and  independence  of  Christ,  proofs  of  His  divinity : —
If  you  open  any  professed  treatise  on  the  divinity  of  Christ,  you  will  find  that  one
series  of  proofs  is  deduced  from  the  ascription  to  our  Lord  of  attributes  or  properties
which  can  belong  only  unto  God.  And  the  words  which  we  have  just  read  to  you
from  the  writings  of  St.  Paul  contain,  as  it  would  seem,  two  instances  of  this  Und
of  evidence.  Amongst  the  characteristics  of  the  Creator,  characteristics  which  can
never  be  transferred  to  a  oreature,  we  justly  reckon  unchangeableness  and  inde-
pendence. You  may  learn  from  the  context,  it  is  of  Christ,  "  the  one  Mediator
between  Ood  and  men,"  that  St.  Paul  affirms  that  '*  He  abideth  faithful,"  and  that
"  He  cannot  deny  Himself."  And  first,  then,  as  to  unchangeableness.  You  know
that  with  the  Father  of  lights  "  there  is  no  variableness  neither  shadow  of  turning."
When  it  is  said  of  God  ' '  He  cannot  change,"  you  should  understand  the  phrase  in
its  largest  and  most  literal  acceptation.  We  are  as  much  borne  out  by  reason  as  by
revelation,  in  pronouncing  it  impossible  that  God  should  change.  To  suppose  that
He  could  change  is  to  suppose  that  He  could  cease  to  be  perfect,  and  we  need  not
prove  to  you  that  an  imperfect  God  would  be  no  God  at  all.  There  is  no  passage  in
the  Bible  in  which  this  unchangeableness  is  more  distinctly  ascribed  to  the  Father
than  it  is  in  our  text  to  the  Son.  "  He  cannot,"  He  is  not  able  to  "  deny  Himself."
Such  language  could  never  have  been  apphcable  to  Christ  had  He  not  been  God.
There  is  nothing  in  the  nature  of  a  creatmre,  not  even  though  it  come  nearest  in  glory
and  greatness  to  that  unchangeable  Being  from  whom  its  existence  was  derived —
there  is  nothing,  I  say,  in  the  nature  of  a  creature  which  renders  it  impossible  that
it  should  deny  itself.  Now,  unchangeableness  is  not  the  only  attribute  of  Godhead
which  is  here  ascribed  to  Christ ;  a  little  examination  will  show  you  that  inde-
pendence is  equally  ascribed.  Sublimely  as  God  is  enthroned  on  His  own  essential
majesty.  He  depends  neither  on  angel  nor  on  man  for  one  jot  of  His  honour,  for  one
tittle  of  His  happiness.  And  you  are  to  observe  that  this  independence  which  is
necessarily  to  be  reckoned  among  the  Divine  attributes  is  actually  incommunicable;
that  is,  it  can  belong  only  to  God,  and  cannot  be  imparted  to  what  is  finite  and
created.  And  yet  the  mode  of  expression  adopted  by  the  apostle  in  our  text  appears
to  me  strictly  to  imply  that  the  being  of  whom  he  speaks  is  independent.  "  If  we
believe  not,"  what  then  ?  will  it  make  any  difference  to  Christ  ?  must  His  purposes
be  altered,  as  though  to  meet  an  emergency  ?  must  the  terms  of  His  gospel  be
lowered,  so  as  to  square  better  with  our  prejudice  or  our  infidelity  ?  Nothing  of  all
this.  "If  we  believe  not,  yet  He  abideth  faithful:  He  cannot  deny  Himself."
Everything  will  follow  the  same  course ;  we  may  turn  the  wiUing  ear,  or  the  deaf ;
we  may  march  in  the  train  of  the  Captain  of  our  salvation,  or  we  may  fight  under
the  banner  of  the  apostate.  "  Yet  He  abideth  faithful  '* ;  or,  as  the  verse  is  para-
phrased by  an  old  prelate  of  our  church,  "  He  loseth  nothing  by  it ;  the  misery  and
the  damage  is  ours ;  but  for  Him,  He  is  the  same  that  He  was,  whatever  become  of
ns."  Now,  we  are  very  anxious  that  whenever  a  portion  of  Holy  Writ  on  which  we
are  meditating  contains  any  indirect  testimony  to  the  divinity  of  Christ,  such
testimony  should  be  carefully  worked  out  and  set  before  you  in  its  strength  and  in
its  simplicity.  And  there  is  no  doctrine  to  which  there  is  a  greater  assemblage  of
these  indirect  testimonies  than  there  is  to  the  divinity  of  Christ.  Passages  occur
in  almost  every  leaf  of  the  New  Testament,  which  do  not  indeed  assert  the  divinity
of  Christ,  which  do  not  even  seem  to  allude  to  the  divinity  of  Christ,  but  which,
nevertheless,  are  stripped  of  all  force,  yea,  of  all  sense,  if  doubt  be  thrown  on  the
divinity  of  Christ.  In  reading  the  Epistles  we  seem  reading  the  writings  of  men
who  never  thought  of  the  divinity  of  Christ  as  of  a  questionable  or  debateable  thing.
They  buckle  on  the  armour  of  controversy  when  the  sinfulness  of  the  human  race  is
lo  b«  demonstrated,  and  when  the  method  of  justification  is  to  be  vindicated,  and


CHAP.  D.]  II.  TIMOTHY.  179

when  the  errors  of  Judaising  teachers  are  to  be  exposed ;  but,  except  in  one  or  two
instances,  there  is  nothing  that  looks  like  controversy  in  regard  to  the  divinity  of
Christ.  And  we  attach  the  greatest  possible  worth  to  this  indirect  kind  of  evidence,
a  specimen  of  which  we  have  found  in  oar  text.  Certain  doctrines  there  may  be,
which  rest  only  on  certain  passages,  and  which  consequently  we  should  find  a
difficulty  in  establishing  if  those  passages  were  removed.  But  this  cannot  be
affirmed  of  the  main  pillar  of  our  faith,  the  divinity  of  Christ.  The  doctrine  rests
not  apou  isolated  passages ;  leave  us  a  page  of  the  New  Testament,  and  I  think  you
will  have  left  us  proof  of  Christ  being  God.  And  now  let  us  take  a  different  view
of  the  text.  It  contains  much  both  of  what  is  alarming  and  what  is  encouraging.
The  threatenings  and  the  promises  of  Christ,  each  of  these,  as  we  may  learn  from
the  text,  will  take  equal  efftct,  whether  we  ourselves  believe  them  or  whether  we
disbelieve  them,  {H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  Eternal  faithfulness  unaffected  by  human
unbelief: — I.  The  sad  possibility,  and  the  consoling  assukanoe — "If  we  believe
not,  yet  He  abideth  faithful."  I  must  take  the  sad  possibility  first — "  if  we  beUeve
not,"  and  I  shall  read  this  expression  as  though,  first  of  all,  it  concerned  the  world
in  general,  for  I  think  it  may  so  be  fairly  read.  If  mankind  believe  not,  if  the
varioas  classes  of  men  believe  not — ^yet  He  abideth  faithful.  The  rulers  believed
not,  and  there  are  some  that  make  this  a  very  great  point.  They  said  concerning
Jesus,  "  Have  any  of  the  rulers  believed  on  Him  ?  "  Well,  if  our  greatest  men,  if
oar  senators  and  magistrates,  princes  and  potentates,  believe  not — it  does  not  affect
the  truth  of  God  in  the  smallest  conceivable  degree — "  yet  He  abideth  faithful."
Many,  however,  think  it  more  important  to  know  on  which  side  the  leaders  of
thought  are  enlisted,  and  there  are  certain  persons  who  are  not  elected  to  that
particular  office  by  popular  vote,  who  nevertheless  take  it  upon  themselves  to  consider
that  they  are  dictators  in  the  republic  of  opinion.  However,  we  need  not  care
because  of  these  wise  men,  for  if  they  believe  not,  but  becloud  the  gospel,  yet  God
abideth  faithful.  Yes,  and  I  venture  to  enlarge  this  thought  a  little  more.  If  the
rulers  do  not  believe,  and  if  the  philosophical  minds  do  not  believe,  and  if  in  addition
to  this  public  opinion,  so  called,  rejects  it,  yet  the  gospel  is  stiU  the  same  eternal
truth.  2.  Now,  having  spoken  of  our  text  as  referring  to  the  world  in  general,  it  ia,
perhaps,  a  more  sorrowful  business  to  look  at  it  as  referring  to  the  visible  church  in
particular.  The  apostle  says,  "  Though  we  believe  not,"  and  surely  he  must  mean
the  visible  church  of  God.  3.  Once  more  I  will  read  the  text  in  a  somewhat
narrower  circle.  "  If  we  believe  not  " — that  is  to  say,  if  the  choicest  teachers  and
preachers  and  writers  believe  not,  yet  He  abideth  faithful.  Here,  then,  is  the
fearful  possibility;  and  side  by  side  with  it  runs  this  most  blessedly  consoling
assurance — "  He  abideth  faithful."  Jesus  Christ  abideth :  there  are  no  shifts  and
changes  in  Him.  He  is  a  rock,  and  not  a  quicksand.  He  is  tbe  Saviour  whether
the  rulers  and  the  philosophers  believe  in  Him  or  refuse  Him,  whether  the  Church
and  her  ministers  are  true  to  Him  or  desert  Him.  And  as  Christ  remains  the  same
Saviour,  so  we  have  the  same  gospel.  And  as  the  gospel  is  the  same,  so  does  Christ
remain  faithful  to  His  engagements  to  His  Father.  II.  A  qlobiods  impossibility
WITH  A  SWEET  INFEBENCE  THAT  MAY  BE  DBAWN  FBOM  IT.  "  He  Cannot  deny  Him-
self." Three  things  God  cannot  do.  He  cannot  die,  He  cannot  lie,  and  He  cannot
be  deceived.  These  three  impossibiUties  do  not  limit  His  power,  but  they  magnify
His  majesty ;  for  these  would  be  infirmities,  and  infirmity  can  have  no  place  in  the
infinite  and  ever  blessed  God.  Here  is  one  of  the  things  impossible  with  God —
"He  cannot  deny  Himself ,"  What  is  meant  by  that?  1.  It  is  meant  that  the
Lord  Jesus  Christ  cannot  change  as  to  His  nature  and  character  towards  us,  the  sons
of  men.  2.  His  word  cannot  alter.  3.  He  cannot  withdraw  the  salvation  which
He  has  presented  to  the  sons  of  men,  for  that  salvation  is  indeed  Himself.  4.  And
then  the  atonement  is  still  the  same,  for  that,  too,  is  Himself :  He  has  by  Himself
purged  our  sins.  5.  And  the  mercy-seat,  the  place  of  prayer,  still  remains ;  for  if
that  were  altered  He  would  have  denied  Himself,  for  what  was  the  mercy-seat,  or
propitiatory,  that  golden  Ud  upon  the  covenant  ark  ?  What  was  it  but  Christ  Him-
self, who  is  our  propitiatory,  the  true  mercy-seat  ?  6.  And  here  is  another  sweet
thought :  Christ's  love  to  His  Church,  and  His  purpose  towards  her  cannot  change,
because  He  cannot  deny  Himself,  and  His  Church  is  Himself.  7.  Nor  will  any  one
of  His  offices  towards  His  Church  and  people  ever  fail.  8.  Now,  my  last  word  ia
about  an  inference.  The  text  says,  "  If  we  believe  not,  yet  He  abideth  faithful  "  :
it  runs  on  that  supposition.  Take  the  other  supposition:  Suppose  we  do  believe.
Will  He  not  be  faithful  in  that  case  ?  And  will  it  not  be  true  that  He  cannot  deny
Himself?     (C  H.  Spurgeon.)         The  Divine  immutability: — Weak  as  man  ig,  aU


180  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cnip.  n.


powerful  as  God  is,  there  is  one  thing  which  weak  man  can  do,  and  which  Almighty
God  cannot  do.  Man  can  pass  his  word,  and  almost  in  the  same  breath  can  call  it
back  again.  God,  on  the  other  hand,  cannot  promise  or  denounce  a  thing  without
fulfilling  it  to  the  very  uttermost.  This  is  a  doctrine  which  there  are  few  of  us,  I
fear,  who  thoroughly  believe.  Whilst  there  are  many  of  us  who  are  making  light
of  the  threatenings  of  God,  and  flattering  ourselves  with  the  profane  idea  that  they
will  never  be  fulfilled,  there  are  others  again  who  are  equally  dii^trustful  of  God's
promises.  If  we  trust  God  in  spirituals  we  mistrust  Him  perhaps  in  temporals.
If  we  believe  Him  as  the  God  of  grace,  we  sometimes  seem  to  doubt  Him  as  the  God
of  providence.  If  we  trust  Him  for  eternity,  we  are  half  afraid  to  rely  on  Him  for
time.  (A.  Roberts, M.A.)  Faith  in  God  ennobla  reaaon;  unbelief  degrades  reason  : —
1.  Faith  in  God  involves,  in  its  very  act,  a  rational  appreciation  of  evidence
Hence  it  is  distinct  from  credulity,  which  is  belief  without  evidence ;  from  scepticism
which  is  unbelief,  though  evidence  is  at  hand ;  and  from  infidelity,  which  is  the
rejection  of  evidence  sufficient  to  convince.  In  each  of  these  there  is  either  the
neglect  or  the  abuse  of  the  reason,  and  a  consequent  injury  to  the  intellectual  as  well
as  to  the  moral  powers  of  the  soul.  But  faith  in  God,  distinct  from  all  these,  la
beUef  on  sufficient  evidence.  2.  Faith  in  God  promotes  the  highest  exercise  of
reason,  because  also  it  rests  upon  the  most  substantial  and  durable  foundation.  If,
in  the  investigation  of  natural  truth,  it  is  philosophical  to  seek  for  first  principles,
it  is  equally  or  more  so  to  require  them  in  the  reception  of  revealed  truth.  Now  to
have  faith  in  God  is  to  rest  on  first  principles,  and  to  build  up  knowledge  and  hops
on  a  sure  foundation.  3.  Faith  takes  in  the  sublimest  truths,  and  the  widest  circle
of  thought.  4.  If  this  be  our  philosophy  we  shall  not  stumble  at  miracles.  While
faith  admits  the  miracles  as  facts,  reason  co-operates  with  faith  by  showing  that  they
are  wise  and  good.  Moreover,  the  great  first  miracle  displayed  in  the  world's
creation,  which  we  receive  by  faith,  prepare  the  mind  for  all  other  miracles,  however
stupendous  they  may  be  (Heb.  xi.  1).  5.  Guided  by  the  philosophy  of  faith,  we
shall  not  stumble  at  mysteries.  For  what  are  mysteries  ?  Grand  truths  as  yet  but
partially  revealed ;  the  first  syllables  of  some  vast  volume  to  be  unrolled  hereafter
6.  Nor  at  alleged  contradictions  between  science  and  revelation.  We  are  free  to
admit  that  there  are  difficulties,  real  difficulties,  between  science  and  revelation  ;  and
there  may  be  even  greater  still.  What  then  ?  We  are  but  in  the  position  in  which
patriarchs  and  prophets  were  placed  for  ages.  7.  Supported  by  the  philosophy  of
faitb,  we  shall  not  faint  under  the  delay  of  promised  good.  "  One  day  is  vrith  the
Lord  as  a  thousand  years,"  &c.  {W.  Cooke,  D.D.)  Faith  and  the  gospel: — I.
Unbelief  is  a  bin.  What  more  in  the  holy  letters  checked,  condemned?  Does  not
Christ  dissuade  from  it  ?  His  apostles  forbid  it  ?  and  God  everywhere  commands
the  contrary?  May  not  arguments  be  produced,  if  any  doubt  of  it,  to  confirm,
ratify  it?  II.  A  man  mat  not  have  faith  yet  possess  the  gospel.  To  try  the
truth  of  thy  faith,  let  these  two  rules  follovnng  be  well  weighed  of  thee :  First,  he
who  hath  faith  receives  Christ,  as  the  wife  does  her  husband.  He  will  have  Him
and  no  other  from  this  time  forward,  for  better,  for  worse  ;  for  richer,  for  poorer ;
in  sickness  and  in  health,  according  to  God's  holy  ordinance,  till  (and  after  that)
death  shall  them  part.  In  the  second  place,  how  does  thy  faith  work  ?  Faith,  if
true  and  sound,  will  embrace  Christ,  purify  the  heart,  lift  up  the  wing  of  thy  soul
and  cause  thee  to  soar  on  high.  It  will  do  what  God  enjoins,  though  it  strip  him
of  reputation,  promotion,  life  and  all.     III.  In  preaching  the  Word  ministers  are

HOT  to  exclude  THEMSELVES,       IV.  ThE  LoBD  IS  EAITHFOL.      V.  ThE  LoBD  IS  WITHOUT

CHANGE.    (J.  Barlow,  D.D.)

Ver.  14.  Put  them  In  remembrance. — Repetition ; — I.  Repetition  oe  the  same
things  is  warrantable.  1.  For  at  the  first  delivery  of  a  thing  we  may  not  fully
apprehend  it ;  the  eve  of  our  mind  is  but  opened  by  degrees.  2.  Our  faith  by  often
repetition  may  be  confirmed.  3.  It  is  a  help  to  cause  the  truth  in  tbe  soil  of  our  memo-
ries to  take  the  deeper  impression.  4.  We  are  slow  to  practise  what  we  conceive,
believe,  and  remember :  therefore  the  reduplication  of  Divine  things  is  profitable.
II.  The  doctrine  op  Christ  is  above  all  things  to  be  desired.  (J.  Barlow,  D.D.)
Repetition : — A  preacher  must  often  repeat  an  exhortation,  because  we  dwell  in  aland
of  forgetfulness.  (Crajner.)  A  good  memory : — Abraham  Lincoln  had  a  marvel-
lous memory ;  nothing  seemed  to  escape  his  recollection.  A  soldier  once  struck
a  happy  description  of  him  when  he  said,  "He's  got  a  mighty  tine  memory;
but  an  awful  poor  forgetery."  How  many  Christians  have  good  "  forgeteries."
Charging  them  before  the  Lord. — Preaching  in   the  sight  of  God : — The  whole


CHAP,  n.]  n.  TIMOTHY.  181

section  is  applicable  to  ministers  throughout  the  Church  in  all  ages;  and  the
words  under  consideration  seem  to  be  well  worthy  of  attention  at  the  present
time,  when  so  many  unworthy  topics  and  so  much  unworthy  language  may
be  heard  from  the  pulpit.  One  is  inclined  to  think  that  if  ministers  always
remembered  that  they  were  speaking  "in  the  sight  of  God"  they  would  some-
times find  other  things  to  say,  and  other  ways  of  saying  them.  We  talk  glibly
enough  of  another  man's  words  and  opinions  when  he  is  not  present.  We
may  be  entirely  free  from  the  smallest  wish  to  misrepresent  or  exaggerate;
but  at  the  same  time  we  speak  with  great  freedom  and  almost  without  restraint.
What  a  change  comes  over  us  if,  in  the  midst  of  our  glib  recital  of  his  views
and  sayings,  the  man  himself  enters  the  room  I  At  once  we  begin  to  measure
our  words  and  to  speak  with  more  caution.  Our  tone  becomes  less  positive,  and
we  have  less  confidence  that  we  are  justified  in  making  sweeping  statements
on  the  subject.  Ought  not  something  of  this  circumspection  and  diffidence  to
be  felt  by  those  who  take  the  responsibility  of  telling  others  about  the  mind
of  God  ?  And  if  they  remembered  constantly  that  they  speak  "  in  the  sight  of  the
Lord,"  this  attitude  of  solemn  circumspection  would  become  habitual.  {A.  Pluni-
mer,  D.D.)  Strive  not  about  words  to  no  profit. — The  spirit  of  controversy : — The
spirit  of  controversy  is  a  bad  thing  in  itself ;  but  the  evil  is  intensified  when  the
subject  of  coiitroversy  is  a  question  of  words.  Controversy  is  necessary,  but  it  is  a
necessary  evil ;  and  that  man  has  need  of  searchings  of  heart  who  finds  that  he
enjoys  it,  and  sometimes  even  provokes  it,  when  it  might  easily  have  been  avoided ;
but  a  fondness  for  strife  about  words  is  one  of  the  lowest  forms  which  the  malady
can  take.  Principles  are  things  worth  striving  about  when  opposition  to  what
we  know  to  be  right  and  true  is  unavoidable.  But  disputatiousness  about  words
is  something  like  proof  that  love  of  self  has  taken  the  place  of  love  of  truth.  The
word-splitter  wrangles,  not  for  the  sake  of  arriving  at  the  truth,  but  for  the  sake  of
a  dialectical  victory  (see  1  Tim.  vi.  4).  And  here  the  apostle  says  that  such
disputes  are  worse  than  worthless,  they  tend  to  "no  profit";  on  the  contrary,
they  tend  "to  the  subverting  of  those  who  listen  to  them."  T'hia  subversion  or
overthrow  is  the  exact  opposite  of  what  ought  to  be  the  result  of  Christian
discipline,  viz.,  edification  or  building  up.  The  audience,  instead  of  being  built
up  in  faith  and  principle,  find  themselves  bewildered  and  lowered.  They  have
a  less  firm  grasp  of  truth  and  a  less  loyal  affection  for  it.  It  is  as  if  some  beautiful
object,  which  they  were  learning  to  understand  and  admire,  had  been  scored  all
over  with  marks  by  those  who  had  been  disputing  as  to  the  meaning  and  relation
of  the  details.  {Ibid.)  Controversy: — It  has  been  a  favourite  device  of  the
heretics  and  sceptics  of  all  ages  to  endeavour  to  provoke  a  discussion  on  points
about  which  they  hope  to  place  an  opponent  in  a  difficulty.  Their  object  is  not  to
settle,  but  to  unsettle ;  not  to  clear  up  doubts,  but  to  create  them ;  and  hence  we
find  Bishop  Butler  in  his  Durham  charge  recommending  his  clergy  to  avoid  religious
discussions  in  general  conversation  ;  because  the  clever  propounder  of  difficulties
will  find  ready  hearers,  while  the  patient  answerer  of  them  will  not  do  so.  To
dispute  is  to  place  truth  at  an  unnecessary  disadvantage.  (Ibid.)  Strife  of
worda : — Christians  are  not  to  strive  about  words.  1.  It  wasteth  time,  consumeth
sfood  hours,  which  are  to  be  redeemed.  2.  Prevents  better  matter.  3.  Kindles
strife  and  contention.  4.  And  for  idle  words  we  are  to  give  an  account.  Now,  for
the  avoiding  of  these  fruitless  disputes,  observe  these  following  directions  : — 1.  Get
a  sound  mind,  a  good  judgment,  to  discern  betwixt  things  that  differ.  2,  Root
self-love  and  pride  out  of  thy  heart.  3.  In  matters  of  less  moment  reserve
thy  judgment ;  publish  it  not,  lest  thou  trouble  others.  4.  Take  heed  of  overmuch
curiosity :  pry  not  into  God's  ark ;  neither  presume  above  that  which  is  written.
5.  Consider  wherein  thou  and  the  party  with  whom  thou  hast  to  deal  do  agree,  and
let  that  consent  make  a  stronger  union  than  the  dissent  can  a  separation.  6.
Abandon  such  companions  as  are  always  complaining  of  Church  government.
{J.  Barlow,  D.D.)  The  hydrostatic  paradox  of  controversy  : — If  a  fellow  attacked
my  opinions  in  print,  would  I  reply  ?  Not  I.  Do  you  think  I  don't  understand  what
my  friend  the  Professor  long  ago  called  the  hydrostatic  paradox  of  controversy  f
Don't  know  what  that  means  ?  Well,  I  will  tell  you.  You  know  that  if  you  had  a  bent
tube,  one  arm  of  which  was  of  the  size  of  a  pipe-stem,  and  the  other  big  enough  to
hold  the  ocean,  water  would  stand  at  the  same  height  in  one  as  in  the  other.
Controversy  equalises  fools  and  wise  men  in  the  same  way — and  the  fools  know  it.
(0.  W.  Holmes.)  Controversy  : — Controversy  has  kept  alive  a  certain  quantity  of
bitterness,  and  that,  I  suspect,  is  all  that  it  would  accomplish  if  it  continued  till  the


182  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Oi

day  oi  jadgment.  I  sometimes,  in  impatient  moments,  wish  the  laity  in  Europe
would  treat  their  controversial  divines  as  two  gentlemen  once  treated  their  seconds,
when  they  found  themselves  forced  into  a  duel  without  knowing  what  they  were
quarrelling  about.  As  the  principals  were  heing  led  up  to  their  places  one  of  them
whispered  to  the  other,  "  If  you  will  shoot  your  second,  I  wiU  shoot  mine."  {A.  J.
Froude.)  Controversy  a  sign  of  vioral  poverty  : — In  the  course  of  more  than
twenty-seven  years,  I  never  knew  one  exemplary  Christian  a  disputer,  whether
amongst  Dissenters  or  in  our  own  Church ;  and  it  is  a  rule  with  me  to  conclude
any  person  who  can  be  taken  up  with  a  desire  to  make  men  converts  to  any  notion,
and  not  to  Christ,  or  to  be  zealous  for  anything  more  than  the  life  of  faith  and
holiness  from  knowledge  of  Christ  crucified,  is  a  sounding  empty  professor,  or,  at
best,  in  a  very  poor  low  state.  (H.  Venn.)  Cavilling  and  disputation : — When
Endamides  heard  old  Xenocrates  disputing  so  long  about  wisdom,  he  inquired  very
gravely,  but  archly,  "If  the  old  man  be  yet  disputing  and  inquiring  concerning
wisdom,  what  time  wiU  he  have  left  to  use  it?"  Controversy  may  be  sometimes
needful;  but  the  love  of  disputation  is  a  serious  evil.  Luther,  who  contended
earnestly  for  the  truth,  used  to  pray,  "  From  a  vainglorious  doctor,  a  contentious
pastor,  and  nice  questions,  the  Lord  deliver  His  Church."  Philip  Melaucthon,
being  at  the  conferences  at  Spires,  in  1529,  made  a  little  journey  to  Bretton  to  see
his  mother.  This  good  woman  asked  him  what  she  must  believe  amidst  so  many
disputes,  and  repeated  to  him  her  prayers,  which  contained  nothing  superstitious.
"Go  on,  mother,"  said  he,  "to  believe  and  pray  as  you  have  done,  and  never
trouble  yourself  about  religious  controversies."    {Sunday  School  Teacher.)

Ver.  15.  Study  to  show  thyself  approved  unto  God. — Approved: — The  word
which  he  uses  {ottovSciI^hv)  is  one  which  scarcely  occurs  in  the  New  Testament,
except  in  the  writings  of  St.  Paul.  And  the  corresponding  substantive  is  also  much
more  common  in  his  Epistles  than  it  is  elsewhere.  It  indicates  that  ceaseless,
serious,  earnest  zeal,  which  was  one  of  his  chief  characteristics.  And  certainly  if
the  proposed  standard  is  to  be  reached,  or  even  seriously  aimed  at,  abundance
of  this  zeal  will  be  required.  For  the  end  proposed  is  not  the  admiration  or
affection  of  the  congregation,  or  of  one's  superiors,  nor  yet  success  in  influencing
and  winning  souls ;  but  that  of  presenting  one's  self  to  God  in  such  a  way  as  to  secure
His  approval,  without  fear  of  incurring  the  reproach  of  being  a  workman  who  has
shirked  or  scamped  his  work.  The  apostle's  charge  is  a  most  wholesome  one,  and  if
it  is  acted  upon  it  secures  diligence  without  fussiness,  and  enthusiasm  without
fanaticism.  The  being  "  approved  "  implies  being  tried  and  proved  as  precious  metals
are  proved  before  they  are  accepted  as  genuine.  (A.  Plummer,  D.D.)  The  minister
approved  of  God : — I.  In  what  way  and  manneb  a  minister  ought  to  show  himself
APPROVED  OF  God.  It  appears  to  me  that  something  more  is  required  to  con-
vince men  that  a  minister  has  the  smile  of  God  than  his  own  belief.  Our  text
evidently  implies  that  by  his  work  a  minister  must  show  that  God  is  with  him.
In  his  work  four  things  will  be  found  which  tend  to  show  this.  1.  Its  quality.  It
must  be  such  as  God  commands.     2.  Its  quantity ;  which  shall  evince  diligence.

3.  The  difficulties  attending  its  performance;   which  is  the  trial  of  sincerity.

4.  The  spirit  in  which  it  is  done.  It  is  a  work  which  requires  a  spirit  of  compassion
and  kindness.  11.  What  abe  the  bions  of  a  minister's  approval  of  God  which
SHOULD  BE  ACCEPTED  BY  PERSONS  ?  1.  I  would  placc  coHversions  as  an  evidence  of
Divine  approval.  They  show  Divine  favour.  The  moral  miracle  of  a  true  conver-
sion evinces  the  Divine  presence  and  power  equally  with  any  other  miracle.  2.  The
convictions  of  truth  and  duty,  which  are  made  by  his  preaching  to  the  consciences
of  sinners.  3.  The  last  sign  we  shall  notice  of  God's  approbation  of  His  minister,
is  the  effects  of  his  preaching  on  the  hearts  of  them  that  believe.  Those  that  are
spiritual  can  judge  whether  his  preaching  is  scriptural.  {W,  Moore.)  God's
approval: — Advert  continually  to  His  presence  with  reverence  and  godly  fear;
consider  Him  as  always  looking  on  the  heart ;  trust  in  His  almighty  protection ;
believe  in  Him  as  a  holy  sin-hating  God  and  reconciled  to  sinners  of  mankind  only
in  Jesus  Christ ;  value  His  favour  above  all  the  world,  and  make  it  the  settled  sole
aim  of  your  lives  to  approve  yourselves  to  His  pure  eyes.  (T.  Adam.)  Desire  for
God's  approbation : — "  If  you  were  an  ambitious  man,"  said  a  person  one  day
to  a  minister  of  talent  and  education,  who  was  settled  in  a  retired  and  obscure
parish,  "you  would  not  stay  in  such  a  place  as  this."  *'  How  do  you  know  that
I  am  not  an  ambitious  man?"  said  the  pastor.  "You  do  not  act  like  one."
"  I  have  my  plans  as  well  as  others — the  results  may  not  appear  as  soon,  perhaps."


CHAP,  a]  XL  TIMOTHY.  183

"Are  yoa  engaged  in  some  great  work?"  "lam;  bat  the  work  does  not  relate
to  literature  or  science.  I  am  not  ambitious,  perhaps,  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the
term.  I  do  not  desire  to  occupy  the  high  places  of  the  earth,  bat  I  do  desire  to  get
near  my  Master's  throne  in  glory.  I  care  bat  little  for  popular  applause,  but
I  desire  to  secure  the  approbation  of  God.  The  salvation  of  souls  is  the  work  He
is  most  interested  in,  and  to  the  successful  prosecution  of  which  He  has  promised  tha
largest  rewards."  {H.  L,  Hastings.)  "  Vibration  inunison  "  ; — "  Something  is  the
matter  with  yoor  telephone;  we  can  hardly  hear  you,"  was  the  response,  that
in  a  faint  voice  came  to  us  from  the  Central  Office  when  we  had  answered  their
signal  ring  with  the  usual  "  Halloo !  "  A  few  minutes  afterwards  a  young  man  from
head-quarters  stepped  into  our  study,  and  taking  the  telephone  in  his  hand  com-
menced to  investigate.  "  Yes,  here  it  is,"  he  exclaimed,  as  he  began  to  unscrew
the  ear-piece.  "  The  diaphragm  is  bulged,  and  dust  has  collected  around  it  to  such
an  extent  that  it  does  not  vibrate  in  unison  with  ours  up  in  the  office,  and  that
spoils  the  sound.  Tou  see,"  he  added,  while  brushing  the  instrument,  "  that  the
telephones  at  both  ends  of  the  wire  must  act  in  harmony  or  there  will  be  no  voice.
There,"  he  said,  "  it  is  all  right  now."  And  sure  enough  the  lowest  word  could
be  distinctly  heard,  There  was,  of  course,  nothing  remarkable  in  this  incident,  and
yet  the  words  "vibrate  in  unison,"  "must  act  in  harmony  or  there  wUl  be  no
voice,"  suggested  higher  thoughts  as  well.  The  human  heart  is  God's  telephone
in  man.  Through  it  He  purposes  to  speak  to  our  inner  consciousness;  and
when  our  conscience,  our  affections,  and  our  desires  "vibrate  in  unison"
with  the  breath  of  His  lips  we  can  hear  His  voice  within  us.  A  work-
man that  needeth  not  to  be  ashamed. — The  single  word  which  represents  "  that
needeth  not  to  be  ashamed"  {avuraiaxuvroi:)  is  a  rare  formation,  which  occurs
nowhere  else  in  the  New  Testament.  Its  precise  meaning  is  not  quite  certain.  The
more  simple  and  frequent  form  (avoiV^vvToc)  means  "  shameless,"  i.e.,  one  who  does
not  feel  shame  when  he  ought  to  do  so.  Such  a  meaning,  if  taken  literally,  would
be  utterly  unsuitable  here.  And  we  then  have  choice  of  two  interpretations,  either
(1)  that  which  is  adopted  in  both  A.  V.  and  R.  V.,  who  need  not  feel  shame,  because
his  work  will  bear  examination,  or  (2)  who  does  not  feel  shame,  although  his  work
is  of  a  kind  which  the  world  holds  in  contempt.  The  latter  is  the  interpretation
which  Chrysostom  adopts,  and  there  is  much  to  be  said  in  its  favour.  Three  times
already  in  this  letter  has  the  apostle  spoken  of  not  being  ashamed  of  the  gospel
(chap.  i.  8, 12, 16).  Does  he  not,  therefore,  mean  here  also,  "Present  thyself  to  God  as  a
workman  who  is  not  ashamed  of  being  in  His  service  and  of  doing  whatever  work
may  be  assigned  to  him  "  ?  This  brings  us  very  close  to  what  would  be  the  natural
meaning  of  the  word,  according  to  the  analogy  of  the  simpler  form.  ' '  If  you  are
to  work  for  God,"  says  Paul,  "  you  must  be  in  a  certain  sense  shameless.  There
are  some  men  who  set  public  opinion  at  defiance,  in  order  that  they  may  follow
their  own  depraved  desires.  The  Christian  minister  must  be  prepared  sometimes
to  set  public  opinion  at  defiance,  in  order  that  he  may  follow  the  commands  of  God. "
The  vox  populi,  even  when  taken  in  its  most  comprehensive  sense,  is  anything  but
an  infaUible  guide.  Public  opinion  is  nearly  always  against  the  worst  forms  of
selfishness,  dishonesty,  and  sensuality ;  and  to  set  it  at  defiance  in  such  matters  is
to  be  "  shameless  "  in  the  worst  sense.  But  sometimes  public  opinion  is  very
decidedly  against  some  of  the  noblest  types  of  holiness  ;  and  to  be  "  shameless "
under  such  circumstances  is  a  necessary  qualification  for  one's  duty.  It  is  by  no
means  certain  that  this  is  not  St.  Paul's  meaning.  If  we  translate  "  A  workman
that  feeleth  no  shame,"  we  shall  have  a  phrase  that  would  cover  either  interpreta-
tion. {A.  Plummer,  D.D.)  The  gospel  workman: — I.  Look,  first,  at  the
DESIGNATION  the  Christian  minister  must  try  to  earn  for  himself,  to  be  "a
workman  approved  of  God,"  one  whose  work  will  bear  trying  in  the  fire;
having  nothing  counterfeit  about  it,  but  discovering  the  fine  gold  of  an  unadul-
terated service — truthful,  hearty,  honest  towards  God  and  man.  1.  Such  a
man  will  strive  to  be  approved  of  God  for  his  diligence,  his  earnestness,  the
anxious  concentration  upon  the  duties  of  the  ministry  of  all  the  powers  which  God
has  given  him.  2.  "  Approved  of  God,"  again,  a  minister  should  strive  to  be  for
his  faithfulness.  Now,  this  faithfulness,  in  relation  to  the  stewardship  of  souls,
consists  in  a  bold  and  unfaltering  adherence  to  the  terms  of  our  gospel  commission ;
in  a  jealousy,  before  all  things,  for  the  honour  of  the  Lord  we  serve ;  in  a  deter-
mination that,  neither  in  public  nor  in  private,  wiU  we  exercise  any  timid  reserva-
tions whether  men  will  hear  or  whether  they  will  forbear.  H.  But  the  text  invites
ns,  in  the  next  place,  to  consider  the  Christian  minister  in  his  ofpick  as  a  public


184  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  k,

teacher.  1.  Where  note,  first,  it  is  the  "  word  of  tmth  "  he  has  to  divide;  an
expression  with  which  we  may  compare  the  language  of  the  same  apostle  on
another  occasion,  where  he  says,  "  "When  ye  received  the  word  of  God  which  ye
heard  of  os,  ye  received  it  not  as  the  word  of  men,  hut  as  is  in  truth  the  word
of  God."  This  mode  of  speaking  of  Holy  Scripture  seems  well  calculated  to  meet
that  irrepressible  craving  for  certainty  on  moral  subjects,  which  is  the  first  need  of
the  awakened  mind.  2.  But  this  word  or  truth,  we  are  told,  is  to  be  "  rightly
divided  "  ;  that  is,  we  may  interpret  the  expression,  to  have  all  its  parts  distributed
and  disposed  after  some  law  of  connection  and  coherence  and  scientific  unity.
The  general  spirit  of  this  injunction  goes  to  reprove  all  that  mutilated  or  partial
teaching  in  which,  through  an  over-fondness  for  particular  aspects  of  theological
truth,  a  man  is  betrayed  into  negligence,  if  not  into  culpable  reticence,  about
all  the  rest.  III.  But  I  proceed  to  the  last  point  which  calls  for  notice
in   our  text,   or   that  which  leads    us    to   contemplate  the    Chbistian  minister

IN      HIS      PEKSONAIi      CHAKACTER      AND       QUALIFICATIONS.         1.      "  Necdcth     not     tO     be

ashamed,"    in    regard    of    his    mental   culture,    and    attainments,    and   general
fitness  to  cope  with  the   demands  of    an  intellectual  age.     2.   "  Needeth  not  be
ashamed,"  once  more,  in  regard  of  his  personal  and  experimental  acquaintance
with  the  truths  he  is  ordained  to  teach.   Every  profession  in  life  has  its  appropriate
and   distinctive  excellence.     We  look  for  courage  in  the  soldier  ;    integrity  in
the  merchant ;  wise  consistency  in  the  statesman ;  unswerving  uprightness  in  the
judge.     What  is  that  which,  before  all  things,  should  distinguish  the  Christian
minister,  if  it  be  not  pre-eminent  sanctity  of  deportment,  and  the  spirit  of  piety
nnd  prayer?    (D.  Moore,  M.A.)        Eightly  dividing  the  word  of  truth. — Cutting
straight: — Literally   "cutting   straight."      The   figure    has  been  very   variously
derived ;  from  a  priest  dividingthe  victim,  the  steward  distributing  the  bread  or  stores,
a  stonemason,  a  carpenter,  a  ploughman,  a  road-cutter.     The  last  has  been  most
f  rf-quently  adopted.     Perhaps  they  are  right,  who,  like  Luther  and  Alford,  consider
that  the  figure  had  become  almost  lost  sight  of  in  common  usage,  and  that  the
word  had  come  to  mean  little  more  than  to  "  m  mage  "  or  "  administer."  (Speaker\<t
Commentary.)      Fearless  faithfulness  : — The  metaphor  is  taken  from  cutting  roads.
The  characteristic  of  the  Roman  roads  would  be  well  known  to  the  apostle,  and  this
idea  is  given  in  the  margin  of  the  revision  "holding  a  straight  course  in  the  word  of
truth."    The  expression  denotes  a  fearless  faithfulness — a  simple  straightforward-
ness in  the  proclamation  of  the  truth  of  God,  whatever  may  be  the  opinions  or  the
conduct  of  men.     The  Word  has  to  be  preached  whether  men  will  hear  or  whether
they  will  forbear.  {R.  H.  S.)      Defection  dangerous : — I  am  lisposed  to  think  that  we
may  perhaps  class  this  among  the  medical  words  with  which  these  Epistles  abound,
an^l  see  in  it  a  reference  to  the  work  of  the  surgeon,  in  which  any  deflection  from  the
true  line  of  incision  might  be  perilous  or  even  fatal.     The  reference  in  ver.  17  to  the
gangrene  or  cancer  seems  to  carry  on  the  train  of  thought.    (E,  H.  Phimptre,  D.D.)
Eight  handling : — The  idea  of  rightness  seems  to  be  the  dominant  one  ;  that  of
cutting  quite  secondary ;  so  that  the  Revisers  are  quite  ju'-tified  in  following  the
eitample  of  the  Vulgate  {recte  tractantem),  and  translating  simply  "  rightly  handling."
But  this  right  handling  may  be  understood  as  consisting  in  seeing  that  the  word  of
truth  moves  in  the  right  direction,  and  progresses  in  the  congregation  by  a  legiti-
mate development.     {A.  Pbimmer,  D.D.)  Straightforwardness: — St.  Paul  sum-
mons Timothy  to  a  right  straij-htforward  mtth' d  of  dealing  with  the  Divine  word.
He  would  have  him  set  out  clear  lines  for  the  intellect,  a  plain  path  for  the  feet,  a
just  appeal  to  the  emotions,  a  true  stimulant  of  the  conscience.     (H.  R.  Reynolds,
D.D.)         Rightly  dividing  the  word  of  truth : — I.  The  Vulgate  version  translates  it —
and  with  a  considerable  degree  of  accuracy — "  Rightly  handling  the  word  of  truth."
What  is  the  right  way,  then,  to  handle  the  word  of  truth  ?     1.  It  is  like  a  sword,
and  it  was  not  meant  to  be  played  with.      It  must  be  used  in  earnest  and  pushed
home.     2.  He  that  rightly  hnndles  the  word  of  God  will  never  use  it  to  defend  men
in  their  sins,  but  to  slay  their  sins.     3.  The  gospel  oiight  never  to  be  used  for
frigliteninp;  sinners  from  Christ.     4.  Moreover,  if  we  rightly  handle  the  word  of  God
we  shall  not  preach  it  so  as  to  send  Chiistians  into  a  sleepy  state.     We  may  preach
the  consolations  of  the  gospel  till  ea.-h  professor  feels  "  I  am  safe  enough  ;  there  is
no  need  to  watch,  no  need  to  fifiht,  no  need  for  any  exertion  whatever.     My  battle
is  fought,  my  victory  is  won,  I  have  only  to  fold  my  arms  and  go  to  sleep."    5.  And,
oh,  beloved,  there  is  one  thing  that  I  dread  above  all  others — lest  I  should  ever
handle  the  word  of  God  so  as  to  persua  e  some  of  you  that  you  are  saved  when  you
are  not.    II.  But  my  text  has  anotbe:  meaning.     It  has  an  idea  in  it  which  I  can


CHAP,  n.]  IL  TIMOTHY.  185

only  express  by  a  figure.  "  Rightly  dividing,  or  straight  cuttino."  A  ploughman
stands  here  with  his  plough,  and  he  ploughs  right  along  from  this  end  of  the  field
to  the  other,  making  a  straight  furrow.  And  so  Paul  would  have  Timothy  make  a
straight  fuiTow  right  through  the  word  of  truth.  I  believe  there  is  no  preaching
that  God  will  ever  accept  but  that  which  goes  decidedly  through  the  whole  line  of
truth  from  end  to  end,  and  is  always  thorough,  earnest,  and  downright.  As  truth  is
a  straight  line,  so  must  our  handling  of  the  truth  be  straightforward  and  honest,
without  shifts  or  tricks.  III.  There  is  a  third  meaning  to  the  text.  "  Eightly
dividing  the  word  of  truth  "  is,  as  some  think,  an  expression  taken  from  the  priests
dividing  the  sacrifices.  When  they  had  a  lamb  or  a  sheep,  a  ram  or  a  bullock,  to
offer,  after  they  had  killed  it,  it  was  cut  in  pieces,  carefully  and  properly ;  and  it
requires  no  little  skill  to  find  out  where  the  joints  are,  so  as  to  cut  up  the  animal
discreetly.  Now,  the  word  of  truth  has  to  be  taken  to  pieces  wisely ;  it  is  not  to  be
hacked  or  torn  as  by  a  wild  beast,  but  rightly  divided.  There  has  to  be  disceimination
AND  dissection.  1.  Evcry  gospel  minister  must  divide  between  the  covenant  of  works
and  the  covenant  of  grace.  2.  We  need  also  to  keep  up  a  clear  distinction  between  the
efforts  of  nature  and  the  work  of  grace.  It  is  commendable  for  men  to  do  all  they  can  to
improve  themselves,  and  everything  by  which  people  are  made  more  sober,  more  honest,
more  frugal,  better  citizens,  better  husbands,  better  wives, is  a  good  thing;  but  that  is
nature  and  not  grace.  Reformation  is  not  regeneration.  3.  It  is  always  well,  too,  for
Christian  men  to  be  able  to  distinguish  one  truth  from  another.  Let  the  knife
penetrate  between  the  joints  of  the  work  of  Christ  for  us,  and  the  work  of  the  Holy
Spirit  in  us.  Justification,  by  which  the  righteousness  of  Christ  is  imputed  to  us,
is  one  blessing  ;  sanctification,  by  which  we  ourselves  are  made  personally  righteous,
is  another  blessing.  4.  One  other  point  of  rightly  dividing  should  never  be  for-
gotten, we  must  always  distinguish  between  the  root  and  the  fruit.  "  I  want  to  feel
a  great  change  of  heart,  and  then  I  will  beheve."  Just  so ;  you  wish  to  make  the
fruit  the  root.  IV.  The  next  interpretation  of  the  apostle's  expression  is,  practi-
cally CUTTING  OUT  the  word  for  holy  uses.  This  is  the  sense  given  by  Chrysostom.
I  will  show  you  what  I  mean  here.  Suppose  I  have  a  skin  of  leather  before  me,  and
I  want  to  make  a  saddle.  I  take  a  knife,  and  begin  cutting  out  the  shape.  I  do  not
want  those  parts  which  are  dropping  off  on  the  right,  and  round  this  corner ;  they
are  very  good  leather,  but  I  cannot  just  now  make  use  of  them.  I  have  to  cut  out
my  saddle,  and  I  make  that  my  one  concern.  The  preacher,  to  be  successful,  must
also  have  his  wits  about  him,  and  when  he  has  the  Bible  before  him  he  must  use
those  portions  which  will  have  a  bearing  upon  his  grand  aim.  V.  One  thing  the
preacher  has  to  do  is  to  allot  to  each  one  his  portion  ;  and  here  the  figure
changes.  According  to  Calvin,  the  intention  of  the  Spirit  here  is  to  represent  one
who  is  the  steward  of  the  house,  and  has  to  apportion  food  to  the  different  members
of  the  family.  He  has  rightly  to  divide  the  loaves  so  as  not  to  give  the  little
children  and  the  babes  all  the  crust ;  rightly  to  supply  each  one's  necessities,  not
giving  the  strong  men  milk,  and  the  babes  hard  diet ;  not  casting  the  children's
bread  to  the  dogs,  nor  giving  the  swine's  husks  to  the  children,  but  placing  before
each  his  own  portion.     VI.  Eightly  to  divide  the  word  of  truth  means  to  tell  each

MAN  WHAT  HIS  LOT  AND   HERITAGE   WILL  BE   IN   ETERNITY.      Just  aS  when   Canaan  waS

conqured,  it  was  divided  by  lot  among  the  tribes,  so  the  preacher  has  to  tell  of
Canaan,  that  happy  land,  and  he  has  to  tell  of  the  land  of  darkness  and  of  death-
shade,  and  to  let  each  man  know  where  his  last  abode  will  be.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)
Appropriate  truth : — Paul  no  doubt  meant  by  this  simile,  that  as  a  father  at  the
dinner-table  cuts  and  carves  the  meat,  and  divides  it  in  proper  shares  to  his  family
— a  big  piece  for  the  grown-up  son  who  works  hard,  and  a  small  tender  bit  for  the
wee  bairn  who  is  propped  up  in  a  high  chair  next  the  mother — so  all  Christian
workmen  should  divide  religious  truth,  according  to  the  <  a  )acity  and  the  wants  of  the
people  amongst  whom  they  labour.  We  are  told  in  a  fable  that  a  half-witted  man
invited  a  number  of  creatures  to  a  feast,  at  which  he  gave  straw  to  the  dog,  and  a
bone  to  the  ass.  So,  unless  we  think  and  res  son,  we  shall  be  giving  the  wrong  sort
of  food  to  the  people  who  look  to  us  for  spiritual  nourishment.  When  you  are
invited  to  visit  the  death-bed  of  a  man  whose  life  has  been  self-indulgent  and  occa-
aionally  vicious,  and  you  see  the  tears  of  repentance  in  his  eyes,  it  is  a  blunder  to
read  him  an  account  of  thelast  judgment  in  the  25th  of  Matthew  ;  but  it  is  rightly
dividing  the  truth  to  open  the  l.^th  chapter  of  Luke,  and  tell  him  the  touching  story
of  the  father's  love  to  his  penitent  prodigal  son.  If  you  are  asked  to  preach
religious  truth  to  a  sceptic,  do  not  ask  him  to  believe  that  tbe  whale  swallowed
Jonah ;  or  that,  one  day,  the  sun  stood  still  while  an  army  fought  out  its  battle.  It


188  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oKKt.  n.

would  be  like  giving  straw  to  a  hungry  god.  Tell  the  sceptic  the  Divine  parable  of
the  humane  Samaritan,  and  say,  "  If  you  copy  the  spirit  of  that  man,  you  shall
find  it  one  of  the  gateways  to  God."  Would  you  influence  for  good  a  young  man
who  is  leaving  home  for  the  great  city  ?  Then,  tell  him  the  story  of  virtue  as
exhibited  in  the  life  of  Joseph,  who  as  a  son,  a  brother,  a  slave,  a  servant,  a  over-
seer, a  prisoner,  and  a  prince,  benefited  man  and  glorified  God.  If  you  have  to
speak  to  children,  tell  them  of  the  child  Samuel,  who  prayed  to  God,  and  was  con-
secrated to  His  service  in  one  of  the  most  illustrious  lives  of  the  Old  Testament ;
and  when  you  wish  to  impress  upon  a  child  that  he  should  trust  in  God,  read  and
expound  to  him  the  psalm  which  begins  with  the  thrilling  words,  "  The  Lord  is  my
shepherd,  I  shall  not  want  "  ;  and  tell  him  of  the  sacred  Saviour  who  took  the  little
ones  in  His  arms  and  blessed  them,  saying,  "  Of  such  little  children  is  the  kingdom
of  heaven."  If  you  are  asked  to  go  to  a  prison  and  speak  to  the  convicted  wretches,
tell  them  of  the  poor,  naked,  dying  thief  on  the  cross  who  saw  Jesus,  believed  in
Him,  prayed  to  Him,  and  the  same  day  was  received  into  paradise.  And  are  you
moved  to  give  a  word  to  the  outcasts  ?  Then,  give  them  their  shareof  suitable  spiritual
food.  Tell  them  of  Mary  Magdalene  whose  heart  was  cleansed  from  its  impure
demons  and  filled  instead  with  sacred  love.  And  when  the  penitent  outcasts  weep
while  you  speak  of  the  Divine  love,  one  may  reply,  "But,  sir,  no  good  woman  will
befriend  such  as  we  have  been  I  "  Then,  tell  them  that  when  Mary  Magdalene  was
converted  she  became  the  companion  of  the  mother  of  Christ ;  and  that  if  they  trust
in  God  and  do  the  right.  He  will  make  a  sacred  path  for  them  through  the  world
and  make  them  perhaps  as  useful  and  as  honoured  as  the  Magdalene  whose  service
to  Christ  and  His  mother  is  the  charm  of  the  world.  Yes  ;  there  is  in  this  grand
gospel  history  a  share  of  food  for  everybody  ;  and  it  should  be  for  us  to  find  it  and
bestow  it  according  to  the  needs  of  the  people.  {W.  Birch.)  Rightly  dividing
the  word  of  truth : — Truth  is  of  various  kinds — physical,  mathematical,  moral,
*c.  ;  but  here  one  particular  kind  of  truth  is  referred  to,  called  the  word  of  truth —
that  is,  the  truth  of  the  Word  of  God — the  truth  of  Divine  revelation — theological
truth.  The  Bible  was  not  given  to  teach  men  philosophy,  or  the  arts  which  have
respect  to  this  life ;  its  object  is  to  teach  the  true  knowledge  of  God,  and  the  true
and  only  method  of  salvation.  1.  The  truths  of  God's  Word  must  be  carefully
distinguished  from  error.  2.  But  it  is  necessary  to  divide  the  truth  not  only  from
error,  but  from  philosophy,  and  mere  human  opinions  and  speculations.  3.  The
skilful  workman  must  be  able  to  distinguish  between  fundamental  truths,  and  such
as  are  not  fundamental.  4.  Rightly  to  divide  the  word  of  truth,  we  must  arrange
it  in  such  order  as  that  it  may  be  most  easily  and  effectually  understood.  In  every
system  some  things  stand  in  the  place  of  principles,  on  which  the  rest  are  built.  He
who  would  be  a  skilful  workman  in  God's  building  must  take  much  pains  with  the
foundation  ;  but  he  must  not  dwell  for  ever  on  the  first  principles  of  the  doctrine  of
Christ,  but  should  endeavour  to  lead  His  people  on  to  perfection  in  the  knowledge
of  the  truth.  5.  A  good  workman  will  so  divide  the  word  of  truth,  as  clearly  to
distinguish  between  the  law  and  the  gospel ;  between  the  covenant  of  works  and  the
covenant  of  grace.  6.  Another  thing  very  necessary  to  a  correct  division  of  the  word  of
truth  is  that  the  promises  and  threatenings  contained  in  the  Scriptures  be  applied
to  the  characters  to  which  they  properly  belong.  7.  But  finally,  the  word  of  God
should  be  so  handled  that  it  may  be  adapted  to  Christians  in  different  states  and
stages  of  the  Divine  life  ;  for  while  some  Christians  are  like  "  strong  men,"  others
are  but  "babes  in  Christ,  who  must  be  fed  with  milk,  and  not  with  strong  meat."
[A.  Alexander.  D.D.)  The  right  division  of  truth : — We  will  suppose  a  workman
dealing  with  the  yet  unrenewed  and  unshapen  material — with  the  unconverted  of
his  hearers;  and  we  will  study  to  show  you  how,  if  he  would  "rightly  divide  the
word  of  truth,"  and  approve  himself  of  his  Master,  he  must  use  different  modes
according  to  the  different  characters  upon  which  he  has  to  act.  To  illustrate  this
we  may  refer  to  a  passage  in  St.  Jude,  where  the  apostle  thus  expresses  himself —
"  Of  some  have  compassion,  making  a  difference ;  and  others  save  with  fear,  pulling
them  out  of  the  fire."  Here  you  have  gentle  treatment  prescribed ;  and  you  have
also  harsh  treatment.  Let  us  see  how  both  will  be  employed  by  "  a  workman,  that
needeth  not  to  be  ashamed."  Of  some,  the  minister  is  to  "  have  compassion."  Is
he  not  to  have  compassion  of  all  ?  Indeed  he  is.  Let  him  lay  aside  instantly  the
ministerial  office ;  let  him  be  pronounced  utterly  wanting  in  the  very  first  qualifica-
tion for  its  discharge,  if  there  be  the  sinner  whom  he  does  not  pity,  for  whom  he  is
not  anxious,  or  whose  danger  does  not  excite  in  him  solicitude.  All  are  to  be
regarded  with  a  feeling  of  pity,  but  all  are  not  to  be  treated  with  the  same  mildness


CHAP,  n.]  n.  TIMOTHY.  187

and  forbearance.  Behold  that  young  man  whose  family  is  irreligions,  who,  with
perhaps  a  sense  of  the  necessity  of  providing  for  the  soul,  is  laughed  out  of  his
seriousness  by  those  who  ought  to  be  urging  him  to  piety — hurried  to  amusements
which  are  only  fitted  to  confirm  him  in  enmity  to  God,  and  initiated  into  practices
which  can  issue  in  nothing  but  the  ruin  of  the  soul.  I  could  not  treat  that  young
person  sternly.  I  could  not  fail,  in  any  intercourse  with  him,  to  bear  in  mind  his
peculiar  disadvantages.  And  though  it  would  be  my  duty — else  could  I  be  "  study-
ing to  approve  myself  unto  God"? — to  remonstrate  with  him  on  the  madness  of
allowing  others  to  make  him  miserable  for  eternity,  the  very  tone  of  my  voice  mast
show  that  I  spake  in  sorrow,  and  not  in  anger.  Or,  behold,  again,  that  man  in  dis-
tressed circumstances,  on  whom  press  the  cares  of  a  large  family,  and  who  is
tempted  perhaps  to  gain  the  means  of  subsistence  through  practices  which  his  con-
science condemns — Sunday  trading,  for  example.  Could  I  go  to  the  man  in  harsh-
ness and  with  severity  ?  I  must  not,  indeed,  spare  his  fault.  I  must  not  allow  that
his  diflSculties  are  any  excuse  for  the  offence.  I  had  "  need  to  be  ashamed  as  a
workman,"  if  I  did  this ;  but,  surely,  when  I  think  on  his  peculiar  temptations,  and
hear  the  cries  of  his  young  ones  who  are  asking  him  for  bread,  you  will  expect  me
to  feel  great  concern  for  the  man,  and  so  to  "  divide  the  word  of  truth,"  as  to  show
that  concern,  by  the  manner  in  which  I  reprove  his  misdoing.  Or,  once  more,  a  man
of  no  very  strong  intellect,  and  no  very  great  reading,  is  thrown  into  the  society  of
sceptical  men  perhaps  of  brilliant  powers,  and  no  inconsiderable  acquirements.
Why,  he  will  be  no  match  for  these  apostles  of  infidelity  !  His  little  stock  of  evi-
dence on  the  side  of  Christianity  will  soon  be  exhausted  ;  and  he  will  not  be  able  to
detect  the  falsehoods,  and  show  the  sophistries  of  the  showy  reasoners  ;  and  pre-
sently, by  a  very  natural,  though  most  unfair  process,  he  will  be  disposed  to  conclude
that  what  he  cannot  prove  wrong  must  be  right.  Towards  a  man  thus  seduced  our
prevailing  feeling  will  be  compassion — a  feeling  which  you  cannot  expect  us  to
extend  towards  those  who  have  seduced  him,  except  in  the  broad  sense  that  we  are
aware  of  their  danger,  and  would  snatch  them  from  ruin.  Again,  it  is  melancholy
to  think  how  many  an  inquirer  may  have  been  repulsed,  how  many  a  backslider
confirmed  in  apostasy,  how  many  a  softening  heart  hardened,  how  many  a  timid
spirit  scared  by  the  mode  in  which  the  truth  has  been  pressed  on  their  attention.
It  requires  great  delicacy  and  address  to  deal  successfully  with  a  very  sensitive
nature  ;  more  especially  where — to  use  the  language  of  the  world — there  is  much  to
excuse  the  faults  which  we  are  bound  to  rebuke.  But  if  there  be  a  right  division  of
the  word  of  truth,  it  is  evident  that  whilst  some  of  you  may  require  the  gentle  treat-
ment, others  will  need  the  more  severe.  There  are  cases  of  hardened  and  reckless  men,
reckless  men,  of  the  openly  dissolute  and  profane — men  living  in  habitual  sin,  and
showing  unblushing  contempt  for  the  truth  of  God.  And  we  must  not  so  speak
as  to  lead  you  to  suppose  us  sure  that  there  are  none  amongst  yourselves  requiring
the  harsh  treatment.  There  are  men  who  cannot  possibly  be  in  any  doubt  as  to  the
wrongness  of  their  conduct,  who  cannot  plead  ignorance  in  excuse,  or  the  suddenness
of  temptation,  or  the  pressure  of  circumstances ;  but  who  have  a  decided  preference
for  iniquity,  and  a  settled  determination  to  gratify  their  passions,  or  aggrandise
their  families — pursuing  a  course  against  which  conscience  remonstrates,  and  who
would  not  themselves  venture  to  advance  any  justification.  And  if  we  would  "  rightly
divide  the  word  of  truth,"  what  treatment  must  we  try  with  such  men  ?  Oh  1  these
men  may  yet  be  saved  1  The  word  of  truth  does  not  shut  them  up  to  inevitable
destruction.  We  are  not  despairing  of  any  one  amongst  you,  and  we  will  not.  We
can  yet  again  bring  you  the  message  of  pardon.  And  thus  whilst  directed  to  make
an  effort  to  save  you,  and,  therefore,  assured  that  you  are  not  past  recovery,  the
word  of  truth  enjoins  severe  and  peremptory  dealing.  These  are  those  of  whom  St.
Jude  uses  the  remarkable  expression  —  "  Others  save  with  fear,  pulling  them  out  of
the  fire."  (H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  Adaptation  in  preaching : — King  Oswald,  of  North-
umbria,  sent  for  missionaries  from  the  monastery  of  lona.  The  first  one  despatched
in  answer  to  his  call  obtained  but  little  success.  He  declared  on  his  return  that
among  a  people  so  stubborn  and  t>arbarous  success  was  impossible.  •'  Was  it  their
stubbornness  or  your  severity?  "  asked  Ardan,  a  brother  sitting  by  ;  •'  did  you  forget
God's  word  to  give  them  the  milk  first  and  then  the  meat?  "  (If.  0.  Muckey.)
Adaptation: — A  divine  ought  to  calculate  his  sermon,  as  an  astronomer  does  his
almanac,  to  the  meridian  of  the  place  and  people  where  he  lives.  (J.  Palmer.)
Close  preaching  : — Do  you  not  know  that  a  man  may  be  preached  to  liturgically  and
doctrinally,  and  never  be  touched  by  the  truth,  or  understand  that  to  which  he
listens  ?    Suppose  I  were  to  preach  to  you  in  Hebrew,  how  much  would  you  under-


188  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n.

stand  ?    Now,  when  I  preach  so  that  a  banker,  who  has  all  along  been  sitting  under
the  doctrinal  preaching,  but  has  never  felt  its  application  to  his  particular  business,
feels  the  next  day,  when  counting  his  coin,  a  twinge  of  conscience  and  says,  "  I
wish  I  could  either  practice  that  sermon  or  forget  it,"  I  have  preached  the  gospel  to
him  in  such  a  way  that  he  has  understood  it.     I  have  applied  it  to  the  sphere  of  life
in  which  he  lives.      When   the  gospel  is  preached  so   that  a  man  feels  that
it  is  applied  to  his   own  life,   he  has   it  translated  to    him.      And    it    needs
to  be  translated  to  merchants  and  lawyers,  and  mechanics,  and  every  other  class  in
society,  in  order  that  all  may  receive  their  portion  in  due  season.     {H.  W.  Beecher.)
Eccentric  souls  to  be  saved  : — Success  in  soul  winning  is  only  given  to  skill,  earnest-
ness, sympathy,  perseverance.    Men  are  saved,  not  in  masses,  but  by  careful  study
and  well-directed  effort.    It  is  said  that  such  is  the  eccentric  flight  of  the  snipe
when  they  rise  from  the  earth,  that  it  completely  puzzles  the  sportsman,  and  some
who  are  capital  shots  at  other  birds  are  utterly  baffled  here.     Eccentricity  seems  to
be  their  special  quality,  and  this  can  only  be  mastered  by  incessant  practice  with
the  gun.    But  the  eccentricity  of  souls  is  beyond  this,  and  he  had  need  be  a  very
spiritual  Nimrod,  a  '*  mighty  hunter  before  the  Lord  "  who  would  capture  them  for
Christ.     (H.  0.  Mackey.)         False  exposition: — Few  sermons  are  more  false  or
dangerous  than  those  in  which  the  teacher  professes  to  impress  his  audience  by
showing  "  how  much  there  is  in  a  verse."    If  he  examined  his  own  heart  closely
before  beginning,  he  would  find  that  his  real  desire  was  to  show  how  much  he,  the
expounder,  could  make  out  of  the  verse.    But  entirely  honest  and  earnest  men
often  fall  into  the  same  error.    They  have  been  taught  that  they  should  always
look  deep,  and  that  Scripture  is  full  of  hidden  meanings  ;  and  they  easily  yield  to
the  flattering  conviction  that  every  chance  idea  which  comes  into  their  heads  in
looking  at  a  word  is  put  there  by  Divine  agency.     Hence  they  wander  away  into
what  they  believe  to  be  an  inspired  m  ditation,  but  which  is,  in  reahty,  a  meaning-
less jumble  of  ideas,  perhaps  very  proper  ideas,  but  with  which  the  text  in  question
has  nothing  whatever  to  do.     (Jo.,n  liuskin.)        "Pray  that  sermon  "  : — A  young
beginner  at  preaching,  after  throwing  off  a  highly  wrought,  and,  as  he  thought,
eloquent  gospel  sermon  in  the  pulpit,  in  the  presence  of  a  venerable  pastor,  soUcited
of  his  experienced  friend  the  benefit  of  his  criticisms  upon  the  performance.    "  I
have  but  just  one  remark  to  make,"  was  his  reply,  "  and  that  is,  to  request  you  to
pray  that  sermon."     "  What  do  you  mean,  sir  ?  "     "I  mean,  Uterally,  just  what  I
say  ;  pray  it,  if  you  can,  and  you  will  find  the  attempt  a  better  criticism  than  any
I  can  make  upon  it."    The  request  still  puzzled  the  young  man  beyond  measure ;
the  idea  of  praying  a  sermon  was  a  thing  he  never  heard  or  conceived  of  ;  and  the
singularity  of  the  suggestion  wrought  powerfully  on  his  imagination  and  feelings.
He  resolved  to  attempt  the  task.     He  laid  his  manuscript  before  him,  and  on  hia
knees  before  God,  undertook  to  make  it  into  a  prayer.     But  it  would  not  pray ;  the
spirit  of  prayer  was  not  in  it,  and  that,  for  the  very  good  reason — as  he  then
clearly  saw  for  the  first  time — that  the  spirit  of  prayer  and  piety  did  not  compose
it.     For  the  first  time  he  saw  that  his  heart  was  not  right  with  God ;  and  this  con-
viction left  him  no  peace  until  he  had  "Christ  formed  in  him  the  hope  of  glory."
With  a  renewed  heart  he  appUed  himself  anew  to  the  work  of  composing  sermona
for  the  pulpit ;  preached  again  in  the  presence  of  the  pious  pastor  who  had  given
such  timely  advice  ;  and  again  solicited  the  benefit  of  his  critical  remarks.     "I  have
no  remarks  to  make,"  was  his  complacent  reply,  "  you  can  pray  that  sermon."
{Sword  and  Trowel.)         In  the  closet: — Of  Mr.  John  Shepherd,  of   the   United
States,  it  is  recorded  that  he  was  greatly  distinguished  for  his  success  in  the  pulpit.
When  on  his  death-bed  he  said  to  some  young  ministers  who  were  present,  "  The
secret  of  my  success  is  in  these  three  things :  1.  "  The  studying  of  my  sermona
very  frequently  cost  me  tears."     2.  Before  I  preached  a  sermon  to  others  I  derived
good  from  it  myself.     3.  I  have  always  gone   into  the  pulpit  as  if  I  were  im-
mediately after  to  render  an  account  to  my  Master."    All  who  knew  that  devoted
man  would  have  united  in  expressing  his  secret  in  three  words,  "  In  the  closet."

ilbid.)  Nor  by  the  depth  either  :—k  young  minister  having  preached  for
)octor  Emmons  one  day,  he  was  anxious  to  get  a  word  of  applause  for  his  labour
of  love.  The  grave  doctor,  however,  did  not  introduce  the  subject,  and  the  young
brother  was  obliged  to  bait  the  hook  for  him.  "  I  hope,  sh,  I  did  not  weary  your
people  by  the  length  of  my  sermon  to  day?"  "No,  sir,  not  at  all;  nor  by  the
depth  either,"  {Ibid.)  A  useful  preacher  :—I  know  a  clergyman  who  valued  aa
one  of  the  best  testimonies  to  his  pulpit  ministry  the  remark  of  a  servant,  overheard
by  a  friend,  after  a  sermon  specially  addressed  to  servants  :  "  One  would  tliink  h«


CHAP.  11.]  IL  TIMOTHY.  189

had  been  a  servant  himself."  (J,  C.  Miller,  D.D.)  Advice  to  preachers  : — On
the  fly-leaf  of  a  Greek  Testament  used  by  Dr.  John  Gregg,  Bishop  of  York,  are  care-
fully written  out  the  following  memoranda  for  his  own  guidance.  They  will  be
found  interesting  to  those  who  aim  at  speaking  in  appropriate  language  on  a
subject  previously  studied  and  thought  over,  and  they  will  know  that  the  hints
given  are  the  results  of  much  experience :  "  Much  depends  on  vitality  and  vigour
of  body,  much  depends  on  the  mood  and  spirit  in  which  you  are ;  therefore  pray,
and  feed  your  mind  with  truth,  and  attend  to  health.  Much  depends  on  subject;
therefore  select  carefully.  Much  on  preparation ;  therefore  be  diligent.  Much  on
kind  and  number  of  hearers.  Much  on  method;  therefore  arrange.  Much  on
manner ;  therefore  be  simple  and  solemn,  spirit  earnest,  tender  and  affectionate.
Much  on  language  ;  therefore  be  choice.  All  on  the  Spirit ;  therefore  invoke  Hia
presence,  and  rely  on  His  power,  that  you  may  expect  docere,  placere,  movere.
Energy  depends  on  the  state  of  mind  and  body,  ease  on  calmness  and  self-possession;
this  on  constant  intercourse  with  people  and  variety  of  ranks,  and  much  practice.
Bead  aloud  various  passages  and  portions.  Think  much,  and  read  select  authors.
Converse  with  refined  and  well-informed  persons.  Prepare  well  for  each  publio
occasion.  Exercise  your  powers  in  public  often,  and  always  do  your  best.  Let
your  public  manner  be  an  enlargement  of  your  private,  and  let  that  be  natural  and
simple,  graceful  without  awkwardness  or  affectation."

Ver.  16.  Shun  profane  and  vain  babblings.  —Shun : — The  word  rendered  "  shun  "
is  a  strong  one,  and  signifies,  literally,  to  make  a  circuit  so  as  to  avoid ;  or  as
Alford  paraphrases  it,  "  the  meaning  seems  to  come  from  a  number  of  persona
falling  back  from  an  object  of  fear  or  loathing,  and  standing  at  a  distance  round
it."    The  word  is  used  in  Tit.  iii.  9.    {H.D.  M.  Spence,  M.A.)        They  will  increase
unto  more  ungodliness.      Will  increase: — irpoKo^/ovaiv.     The  metaphor  is  from
pioneers  clearing  the  way  before  an  army,  by  cutting  down  all  obstacles  :  hence  to
make  progress,  to  advance.     (Jas.  Bryce,  LL.D.)        A    lax  life  connected  with
erroneous   doctrine  : — The    close  connection  between  grave    fundamental  errors
in   doctrine  and  a  lax  and  purely  selfish  life  is  constantly  alluded  to  by  St.
Paul.     (If.  D.  M.   Spence,    M.A.)        Error  is  of  an  encroaching  nature : — Let
the  serpent   but  wind   in  his  head,  and  he  will  quickly  bring  in  his  whole
body.     He  that  saith  Yea  to  the  devil  in  a  little,  shall  not  say  Nay  when  he
pleases.     {J.  Trapp.)         The  odium   theologicum,   the  worst  of  social  devils: —
On  approaching  my  subject  I  shall  premise  four  things  :   1.  I  have  no  disposition
to  underrate  the  importance  of  right  beUefs  in  religion.     2.  I  hold  it  to  be  the
right  of  every  man  to  endeavour  to  propagate  his  beliefs.    3.  I  recognise  the  value
of  a  rightly-conducted  theological  controversy.     4.  The  controversy  of  which  I
have  to  speak  is  that  of  a  conventional  theology.    By  a  conventional  theology  I
mean  a  theology  which  a  man  has  received  from  others,  rather  than  reached  by  hia
own  research ;  a  theology  which  has  been  put  into  his  memory  as  a  class  of
propositions,  rather  than  wrought  out  of  his  sonl  as  spiritual  convictions;  a  theology
which   is  rather  the  manufacture  of  other  men  than  the  growth  of  individual
reflection  and  experience  ;  a  theology  which  is  more  concerned  about  grammar
than  grace — symbol  than  sense — sign  thau  substance.     Now,  such  controversies,  in
the  nature  of  the  case,  must  always  be  marked  by  two  features.     (1)  Technicality.
(2)  Per  onality.      I.  Such  controversies  develop  the  most  iMPions  arroganoy.
All  the  arrogancy  of  mere  worldly  men  pales  into  dimness  in  the  glare  of  the
arrogancy  which  that  man  displays  who  dares  pronounce  a  brother  heretic  because
he  subscribes  not  to  his  own  views.    II.  Such  controversies  develop  the  most
LAMENTABLE  DISHONESTY.    The  polcmic  of  a  mere  scribe  theology  has  ever  been  a
cheat.     1.  He  cheats  by  the  represent  ition  he  makes  of  himself.    He  would  have
his  readers  or  hearers  believe  that  he  has  reached  the  conclusions  in  debate  by  a
thorough  study  for  himself  of  the  holy  Book.    It  is  false.    It  is  a  law  that  self-
reached  convictions  expel  dogmatism.    But  the  polemic  of  a  mere  scribe- theology
cheats  also  by  representing  himself  as  being  inspired  only  in  the  controversy  by  love
for  truth.     It  is  not  love  for  truth  ;  it  is  love  for  his  own  opinions.     2.  He  is
dishonest  in  his  representation  of  his  opponents.     He  imputes  motives  not  felt —
ideas  and  conclusions  not  held.    HI.  Such  controversies  develop  a  most  dis-
ASTB0U6  perversity.    The  conventional  controversialist  perverts  the  Bible,  the
powers  of  the  intellect  and  the  zeal  of  the  heart.    IV.  Such  controversies  develop
THE  most  HEARTLESS  INHUMANITS.     They  blind  the  polemic  to  the  excellences  of
others.    The  technical  theologue  who  looks  at  a  brother  through  the  medium  of


190  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTBATOB.  [oha».  u.

his  o*n  orthodoxy,  will  fraternise  with  a  modern  sconndrel  if  he  is  orthodox;
l9ut,  like  Caiaphas  of  old,  will  rend  his  robes  with  pious  horror  at  incarnate
virtue  if  it  conform  not  to  his  own  views.  What  inhumanities  have  not  been
perpetrated  in  the  name  of  orthodoxy!  What  built  the  inquisition?  What
kindled  the  flames  of  martyrdom?  What  animated  Bonner?  What  prompted
Calvin  to  murder  Servetus  ?  What  roused  the  Jewish  rabbis  to  put  the  Son  of  God
to  death?  The  lemarks  made  will  sufi&ce  to  justify  the  proposition  that  the  con-
troversies of  a  mere  conventional  theology  are  the  most  effective  means  of  developing
depravity.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Profane  babbling  to  be  avoided : — I.  Profane  vain
BABBiiiNOS  ABE  TO  BE  AVOIDED.  How  often  does  our  apostle  condemn  them  ?  Why
are  they  to  be  avoided  ?  1.  Because  the  branches  which  bear  them  are  evil ;  as
weakness  of  judgment,  frowardness  of  will,  and  disorder  in  the  affections.  2.  And
do  they  not  blemish  our  reputation  ?  obscure  the  gloss  of  grace  ?  hinder  the  acts  of
it  ?  kindle  corruption  ?  and  turn  from  the  faith  ?    II.  The  causes  which  incbeasb

BIN   ABB   TO   BE   REMOVED.      (cT".  BarloW,  D.D.)

Ver.  17.  Their  word  will  eat  as  doth  a  canker. — Gangrene : — The  substitution  of
"  gangrene  "  for  "  cancer  "  is  an  improvement,  as  giving  the  exact  word  used  in  the
original,  which  expresses  the  meaning  more  forcibly  than  "cancer."  Cancer  is
sometimes  very  slow  in  its  ravages,  and  may  go  on  for  years  without  causing  serious
harm.  Gangrene  poisons  the  whole  frame,  and  quickly  becomes  fatal.  The  apostle
foresees  that  doctrines,  which  really  ate  out  the  very  heart  of  Christianity,  were  likely
to  become  very  popular  in  Ephesus,  and  would  do  incalculable  mischief.  The  nature
of  these  doctrines  we  gather  from  what  follows.  {A.  Plumnier,  D.D.)  Unsound
opinions : — L  The  Chdrch  in  all  ages  hath  been  pestered  with  tain  babblers.

II.  Unsound  opinions  are  of  a  spreading  natcre.  And  this  is  true  of  all  sin,
original  and  actual.  1.  For  doth  not  corruption,  like  a  disease,  disperse  itself,
and  pollute  every  power  of  the  soul  and  member  of  the  body?  What  part  is
not  infi  cted  with  that  leprous  contagion  ?  Hath  it  not  spread  also,  by  natural
propagation,  to  all  Adam's  posterity?  2.  Will  not  all  actual  sin  spread  also?
For  unbelief,  hath  it  not  run  into  atheism  ?  fear,  into  despair?  anger,  into  fury  ?
and  that,  to  revenge?  Foolish  mirth  will  become  madness;  temporary  faith,
high  presumption ;  and  speculative  lust,  actual  whoredom.  Were  not  images,  in
the  begirming,  for  civil  use,  to  put  men  in  mind  of  deceased  friends ;  and  are  they
not  at  this  day,  by  the  Eomanists,  religiously  adored?  3.  Shall  we  not  see  one
error  beget  another  ?    4.  Moreover,  unsound  opinions  spread  from  person  to  person.

III.  Sin  will  destroy,  if  not  destroyed.  {J.  Barlow,  D.D.)  Justification  by
faith : — This  is  a  most  striking  and  accurate  description  of  the  nature  of  heresy —
it  never  remains  inactive — it  is  sure  to  spread ;  an  error  in  any  essential  point  is
sure,  eventually,  to  corrupt  the  whole  body  of  truth,  just  as  a  gangrene  in  the  human
body  appearing,  at  first,  as  a  small  spot,  gradually  spreads,  eating  into  the  sound
parts  near  it,  and  they,  in  their  turn,  infecting  the  rest,  until  the  whole  body  is
destroyed.  The  reason  for  this  is  very  simple.  The  truths  of  religion  are  not
a  set  of  independent  and  unconnected  notions  bound  up  together  in  a  creed,  as  men
bind  loose  sticks  into  a  bundle ;  they  are  closely  connected  parts  of  a  great  whole,
arising  one  out  of  the  other,  so  that  you  cannot  deny  one  without  denying  or
perverting  a  great  many  otLiers  ;  for  once  you  admit  a  truth,  you  admit  all  its
consequences ;  once  you  deny  a  truth,  you  must  be  prepared  to  deny,  in  like  manner,
all  its  consequences.  God  declares  that  false  doctrine  eats  into  the  faith  of  the
Church  like  a  canker.  Sacramental  justification  does  this — therefore  it  is  false.
In  order  to  show  the  injurious  results  of  this  false  doctrine,  we  will  take,  for  our
example,  that  Church  which  most  strongly  holds  it.  The  Church  of  Bome  gives  us
the  most  awful  instance  of  its  effects.  The  Church  of  Bome  holds  that,  at  his
baptism,  every  one  is  made  perfectly  holy ;  that  if  he  remain  in  this  state  of  grace,
or  if,  after  falling  from  it,  be  is  restored  to  it  again,  so  that  he  be  in  it  at  his  death,
then  he  is  saved.  Now  let  us  suppose  a  church,  as  yet  sound  upon  all  other  poiuts,
adopting  this  opinion.  We  shall  see  how  it  eats  its  way.  And  firstly,  it  must  lead
to  the  perversion  of  the  doctrine  of  original  sin.  But  further ;  every  one  knows
that  he  is  constantly  committing  little  faults.  "  In  many  things  we  offend  all."
But  Rome  affirms  that  some  sins  are  venial,  while  others  are  mortal.  But  the  law
of  God  commands  as  well  as  forbids,  and  toey  must,  by  their  good  works,  continue
to  deserve  God's  favour !  Now,  in  such  a  system,  every  work  must  have  its  own
proper  value,  it  must  be  just  so  much  merit  towards  justification:  a  man  who  works
because  he  has  been  justified,  does  not  stop  to  recivon  or  to  price  his  good  works ;


CHAP.  n.J  II.  TIMOTHY.  191

he  works  from  love — he  cannot  do  too  much ;  but  he  who  works  that  he  may  be
justified,  must  keep  count  of  his  good  deeds,  and  try  to  ascertain  their  value,  that
he  may  be  sure  he  has  really  done  enough  to  secure  his  justification.  But  this  is
not  all.  In  such  a  system  of  external  observances,  it  is  clear  that  the  man  most
remarkable  for  his  fastings  and  his  many  prayers  is  the  hoUest  man.  But  we  may
trace  it  further  still.  These  holy  men,  who  dwell  apart  from  the  common  crowd,
have  clearly  attained  a  degree  of  holiness  greater  than  is  necessary  for  their  own
salvation.  May  they  not,  then,  bestow  some  of  it  on  others  ?  So  far  we  have  been
tracing  the  effects  of  this  false  doctrine  on  those  who  believe  that  they  are  still  in  a
state  of  justification  because  they  have  retailed  their  baptismal  purity.  We  have
now  to  see  its  effects  npon  those  who  have  reason  to  fear  that  they  have  lost  their
justification.  Even  when  men  have  raised  their  own  righteousness  to  the  utmost,
and  lowered  God's  law  to  the  lowest,  still  the  uneasy  doubt  will  intrude  itself —
What  if,  after  aJl,  I  have  not  done  enough  ?  what  if  I  have  fallen  into  mortal  sin  ?
Now,  in  such  a  case,  of  whom  would  the  anxious  sinner  seek  advice  and  con-
solation ?  who  shall  decide  for  him  each  nice  case  of  conscience,  and  say  what  is
venial  and  what  is  mortal  sin  ?  what  are  good  works  and  what  are  not  ?  Who  but
his  pastor,  God's  minister,  whose  province  it  is  to  study  such  matters  ?  He  will
naturally  ask  him  to  decide  for  him  what  his  state  may  be ;  but  if  so,  he  must
confess  all  his  sins  to  him  :  this  spiritual  physician  must  know  all  the  symptoms
of  his  case  before  he  can  give  his  opinion  upon  it ;  and,  accordingly,  the  penitent
will  soon  acquire  the  habit  of  auricular  confession  of  all  his  sins  to  his  priest.  But
what  if  this  adviser,  when  consulted,  shall  decide  that  he  has  fallen  from  grace  and
is  even  in  mortal  sin  ?  The  priest  cannot  re-baptize  him  ;  how  shall  he  regain  his
justification  ?  This  confessor  has  a  right  to  declare  God's  forgiveness  ;  he  preaches
remission  of  sins  ;  what  if  he  have  a  right  to  give  it  ?  it  is  but  a  step  from  saying
"  You  are  forgiven,"  to  "  I  forgive  you."  The  fears  of  the  penitent,  the  ambition
of  the  priest,  soon  take  it ;  the  inquisitor  becomes  a  judge,  the  ambassador  assumes
the  authority  of  the  king,  the  minister  of  Christ  attempts  to  give  the  sinner  tha
peace  he  needs,  by  usurping  the  office  of  his  Lord  and  Master,  who  alone  has  power
on  earth  to  forgive  sins.  The  canker  eats  its  way  I  There  may,  however,  be  cases
where  time  is  too  short  for  the  performance  of  penance — death  may  be  imminent.
For  such  a  state  another  provision  must  be  made — it  is  ready.  There  is  a  scriptural
and  primitive  custom,  that  the  elders  of  the  Church  should  pray  over  a  sick  man,
"anointing  him  with  oil  in  the  name  of  the  Lord."  All  that  is  necessary  is,
to  make  of  this  rite,  a  sacrament  conveying  to  the  insensible,  sick  man  remission
of  sins,  as  baptism  was  supposed  to  have  given  it  to  the  insensible  infant;  and  then
his  salvation  is  secured.  Mark,  now,  how  the  true  doctrine  of  justification  preserves
from  all  this  error.  Being  justified  by  faith  "  I  have  peace  " ;  what  need  have  I
then  to  confess  to  man  ?  I  may  come  boldly  into  the  holy  of  holies,  through  the
new  and  Hving  way  ;  I  need  no  man  to  tell  me  how  great  my  sins  may  be  ;  I  can
ask  God  to  "  pardon  my  iniquity,  for  it  is  great  1 "  If  I  address  myself  to  my
fellow  man,  it  is  for  counsel  and  consolation,  not  for  pardon.  I  have  no  need  of
extreme  unction,  I  have  "  an  unction  from  the  Holy  One  "  ;  I  have  no  need  of
purgatorial  fire,  for  "the  blood  of  Christ  cleanses  from  all  sin."  "Being  justified
by  faith  I  have  peace  with  God."    {W.  G.  Magee.)

Ver.  18.  Saying  that  the  resurrection  is  past  already. — Error  concerning
the  resurrection  : — The  resurrection  of  the  body,  always  a  difficulty  in  ancient
modes  of  thought,  was  especially  so  to  those  who,  with  the  Essenes  amongst
the  Jews,  the  Neo-Platonicians,  and  most  of  the  early  sects  which  afterwards
expanded  into  Gnosticism,  had  adopted  the  dualism  of  the  East,  and  held
matter  to  be  evil — sometimes  the  Evil  Principle  or  his  embodiment.  Hence
they  were  ready  to  avail  themselves  of  the  other  sense  of  resurrection,  the
rising  of  those  who  were  baptized  into  Christ  to  newness  of  life  (Eom,  vi.  35 ;
Col.  ii.  12) ;  and  they  denied  that  any  further  revelation  was  to  be  believed.  This
error  had  been  early  taught  in  the  Corinthian  Church  (1  Cor.  xv.  12).  (Speaker's
Commentary.)  And  overthrow  the  faith  of  some. — Overthrowing  the  faith  of
others : — After  an  infidel  had  succeeded  in  sapping  the  foundation  of  his  mother's
faith  in  the  Christian  religion,  he  received  a  letter  from  her  one  day,  informing  him
that  she  was  near  death.  She  said  that  "  she  found  herself  without  any  support
in  her  distress ;  that  he  had  taken  away  that  only  resource  of  comfort  upon  which
in  all  cases  of  affliction  she  used  to  rely,  and  that  she  now  found  her  mind  sinking
into  despair.    She  did  not  doubt  that  her  son  would  afford  her  some  substitute  for


192  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n.

her  religion ;  and  she  conjured  him  to  hasten  to  her,  or,  at  least,  to  send  her  a
letter  containing  such  consolations  as  philosophy  could  afford  to  a  dying  mortal."
He  was  overwhelmed  with  anguish  on  receiving  this  letter,  and  hastened  to  Scotland,
travelling  day  and  night;  but  before  he  arrived  his  mother  expired.  Vnrdiable

miniaters: — A  misplaced  buoy  caused  the  wreck  of  a  steamer  worth  £25,000,  the
loss  of  a  valuable  cargo  and  peril  to  many  lives  recently.  The  steamer,  which  was
called  the  City  of  Portland,  left  Boston  on  her  voyage  to  St.  Johns,  N.B,,  with
seventy  passengers  on  board  and  considerable  freight.  The  night  was  clear,  and  as
the  steamer  passed  the  Owl's  Head  just  before  daybreak,  the  captain  saw  a  striped
buoy  indicating  the  presence  of  a  sunken  rock.  The  course  was  altered  in  accord-
ance with  the  position  of  the  buoy,  but  in  a  few  minutes  the  steamer  struck  a  ledge.
The  pumps  were  started  at  once,  distress  colours  set,  and  the  boats  cleared.  The
officers  and  crew  retained  their  presence  of  mind,  and  despatched  a  boat  for  help.
In  a  Bhort  time  a  steamer  arrived,  and  took  off  the  terrified  passengers,  but  the
steamer  and  cargo  were  a  total  loss.  The  captain  of  the  ship  was  in  no  way
blameable.  The  buoy,  which  was  put  there  to  be  a  means  of  safety,  was  by  its
displacement  the  cause  of  disaster.  It  had  drifted.  Similarly  some  preachers  drift
from  orthodox  positions,  and  their  change  of  position  may  cause  the  wreck  of  the
Bools  of  those  who  flock  to  hear  them.  Ministerial  responsibility  : — During  a
voyage,  sailing  in  a  heavy  sea  near  a  reef  of  rocks,  a  minister  on  board  the  vessel
made,  in  a  conversation  between  the  man  at  the  helm  and  the  sailors,  an  inquiry
whether  they  should  be  able  to  clear  the  rocks  without  making  another  tack,  when
the  captain  gave  orders  that  they  should  put  off  to  avoid  all  risk.  The  minister
observed,  "I  am  rejoiced  that  we  have  so  careful  a  commander."  The  captain
replied,  "  It  is  necessary  I  should  be  very  careful,  because  I  have  souls  on  board.
I  think  of  my  responsibility,  and  remember  that,  should  anything  happen  through
carelessness,  souls  are  very  valuable."  The  minister,  turning  to  some  of  his
congiegation  who  were  upon  the  deck,  observed,  "  The  captain  has  preached  me  a
powerful  sermon ;  I  hope  I  shall  never  forget,  when  I  am  addressing  my  fellow-
creatures  on  the  concerns  of  eternity,  that  I  have  souls  onboard."  (Arclibp.  Benson.)

Ver.  19.  The  foundation  of  God  standeth  sure. — Nevertheless : — We  should  give
full  force  to  the  fi'ivroi.  If  the  spirit  of  the  apostle  was  perturbed  with  vain  bab-
blings, or  cruel  mortification,  or  the  spread  of  plausible  or  perilous  theories,  he
required  to  fall  back  upon  great  and  deep  principles.  {H.  R.  Reynolds,  D.D.)  The
foundation  : — Ratber,  "  God's  firm  foundation  stands,"  i.e.,  the  Church,  the  "  great
house  "  of  ver.  20,  but  here  designated  by  its  "  foundation,"  because  the  antithesis  is
to  the  baseless  fabrics  of  heresy.  Other  explanations  have  been  :  the  doctrine  of  the
resurrection  of  the  body,  the  promises  of  God,  the  fidelity  of  God,  Christ,  the  Christian
faith,  the  election  of  God.  But  the  context  and  the  analogy  of  Eph.  ii.  19-22  leave
little  doubt  of  the  correctness  of  the  first  interpretation.  (Speaker's  Commentary .)
The  foundation  of  God : — The  scene  here  is  one  of  destruction  and  desolation.  On
all  sides  houses  are  shaken  and  overturned.  The  houses  are  individuals  or  com-
munities professing  to  believe  the  gospel.  The  faith  of  some,  of  many  diversely
minded  and  diversely  influenced,  is  overthrown.  But,  amid  the  storm  and  wreck
occasioned  by  false  principles  issuing  in  corrupt  practice,  there  is  a  building  which
standeth  sure.  Now  it  may  be  the  Church  collective  of  which  it  is  said,  the
Church  which  has  the  Lord's  promise  that  the  gates  of  bell  shall  not  prevail  against
her.  But  it  may  also  be  the  individual  believer  that  is  intended ;  for  the  collective
Church  and  the  individual  believer  are  on  the  same  footing.  For  my  present
purpose  I  take  the  text  in  this  latter  view,  and  hold  it  to  be  descriptive  of  the
Christian  man,  continuing  steadfast  and  firm  in  his  faith  amid  many  surrounding
instances  of  backsUding  and  apostasy.  He  is  a  tower,  or  temple,  or  building  of
some  sort  standing  sure ;  being  the  foundation  of  God.  And  in  token  of  that
security  he  is  sealed.  He  is  doubly  sealed ;  sealed  on  both  sides.  I.  "The  Lord
KNOWETH  THEM  THAT  ARE  His."  1.  The  Lord  knowcth  them  that  are  His  by  signs  or
marks  or  tokens  bearing  on  His  interest  or  right  of  property  in  them.  His  ownership
of  them.  Thus,  He  knows  them  as  given  to  Him  by  the  Father  from  before  all
worlds,  in  the  everlasting  covenant.  The  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  His  as
redeemed  by  Him.  He  knows  them  by  the  Spirit's  work  in  them  also.  2.
The  other  class  of  marks  or  tokens  by  which  the  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are
His,  those  bearing  upon  their  interest  or  right  of  property  in  Him,  do  unquestion-
ably come  within  the  range  and  sphere  of  your  consciousness  and  experience.
They  are,  in  fact,  in  the  main,  but  an  expansion,  or  unfolding,  of  the  last  of  th«


CHAT,  n.]  JI.  TIMOTHY.  193

three  fonner  ones,  the  work  of  the  Spirit  making  yon  Christ'B,  and  Christ  years,
and  keeping  yoa  evermore  in  this  blessed  unity.  (1)  The  Lord  knoweth  them  that
are  His,  by  the  need  they  have  of  Him.  (2)  By  tne  trust  they  put  in  Him.  (3)
By  the  love  they  bear  to  Him.  (4)  By  the  work  they  do  for  Him.  (5)  By  their
Buflfering  for  and  with  Him.  (6)  As  waiting  for  Him.  Now,  put  together  all  these
marks  by  which  the  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  His,  and  say  what  must  His  thus
knowing  them  mean  ?  what  must  it  imply  and  involve  ?  Nay,  rather,  what  will  it
not  include  of  watchful  care,  tender  pity,  unwearied  sympathy,  unbounded  benefi-
cence and  hberality  and  bountif  ulness  ?  II.  "  Let  every  one  that  nameth  the  name  op
Christ  depart  from  iniquity, "  1.  Naming  the  name  of  Christ  comes  before  departing
from  iniquity.  This  is  the  evangelical  arrangement.  And  it  is  the  only  one  that  can
meet  the  sinner's  case.  2.  Naming  the  name  of  Christ  is  to  be  followed  by  depart-
ing from  iniquity:  and  that  not  only  in  the  form  of  a  natural  and  necessary
consequence  to  be  anticipated,  but  in  that  of  obedience  to  a  peremptory  command.
It  is  not  said,  He  that  nameth  the  name  of  Christ  may  be  expected,  or  will  be
inclined,  or  must  be  moved  by  a  Divine  impulse,  to  depart  from  iniquity.  But  it  is
expressly  put  as  an  authoritative  and  urgent  precept.  "  lict  him  that  nameth  the
name  of  Christ  depart  from  iniquity."  3.  Naming  the  name  of  Christ  and  departing
from  iniquity  thus  go  together.  They  are  not  really  twain,  but  one.  There  is  not  first
B  naming  of  the  name  of  Christ,  as  if  it  were  an  act  or  a  transaction  to  be  completed
at  once,  and  so  disposed  of  and  set  aside ;  and  then  thereafter  a  departing  from,
iniquity,  as  its  fitting  consequence  and  commanded  sequel.  The  two  things  cannot
be  thus  separated.  For,  in  truth,  naming  the  name  of  Christ  involves  departing  from
iniquity ;  and  departing  from  iniquity  is  possible  only  by  naming  the  name  of  Christ.
(JR.  S.  Candlish,  D.D.)  The  palace  and  its  inscription  : — I.  The  satety  of  thb
Church  is  founded  on  God's  immutability.  Whether  the  truth  is  regarded  as  an
abstract  existence,  or  as  personified  in  the  Church,  it  takes  its  stand  on  this
attribute  of  the  Divine  Being.  All  ecclesiastical  history  is  but  a  commentary  upon
the  fact  that  "the  foundation  of  the  Lord  standeth  sure."  The  pledge  of  Church
uafety  rests  on  Fact  and  Promise.  Time  would  fail  us  to  trace  out  the  former.  We
eee  it  in  that  dark  vessel  ploughing  the  waves  of  an  ocean- sepulchre,  and  settling
en  the  crest  of  Ararat.  We  see  it  in  those  weeping  tribes  by  the  river  of  Babylon ;
for  though  their  harps  are  silent,  the  very  breeze  that  stirs  the  willow  echoes  the
voice  of  Israel's  God  1  We  see  it  in  that  piUar  of  cloud  and  in  that  pillar  of  light.
We  hear  Daniel  rejoicing  over  it  in  the  Uon's  den,  and  the  faithful  Hebrews  proving
it  in  the  furnace  of  fire,  and  all  the  countless  multitudes  of  Christ's  confessors
deepen  the  voice  of  confirmation !  History  is  our  stronghold  of  proof.  We  dare  the
sceptic  to  unbolt  the  door  of  the  past,  and  show  us  wherein  the  Divine  immutability
has  failed.  Shall  we  turn  to  Promise,  to  show  the  Church's  safety  ?  It  is  like
turning  to  a  sky  lighted  with  constellations  of  suns,  or  to  a  world  bespangled  with
rarest  flowers,  or  to  a  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey.  To  record  the  promises
were  a  task  almost  equal  to  transcribing  the  entire  Bible.  IL  The  seaii  with
which  God  has  enstamped  the  Church  partakes  of  His  immutability.  There
is  no  mistaking  it.  Time  does  not  obliterate  it.  The  ' '  seal "  cannot  be  successfully
counterfeited  in  the  eye  of  God.  He  knows  His  own.  1.  This  "  seal "  is  ornamental.
A  monarch's  star  is  a  mere  toy — give  it  lime  and  it  will  rot.  Young  men,  you  seek
after  the  decorative,  here  it  is  I  It  "  shall  be  an  ornament  of  grace  unto  thy  head,
and  chains  about  thy  neck."  2.  This  "seal"  is  a  passport  to  confidence.  Christianity
has  won  many  compliments  in  its  practical  outworking,  from  those  who  effect  to
despise  the  evidence  on  which  its  claim  to  divinity  is  founded  I  3.  This  "  seal "  is  an
earnest  of  future  glory.  Such  is  the  testimony  of  Scripture  (2  Cor.  i.  21,  22;  Eph.
iv.  30).  HI.  The  seal  indicates  discrimination  and  appreciation  of  character.
"  The  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  His."  What  mean  those  strange  words  ?  In
the  wide  sense  of  creation  all  men  are  God's — in  the  sense  of  Providence  all  are  the
pensioners  of  His  bounty  ;  and  Jesus  Christ  is  the  propitiation  for  our  sins,  and
not  for  ours  only,  but  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world.  There  are  standing  places
in  the  universe,  from  which  all  humanity  may  be  regarded  as  the  peculiar  property
of  God.  But  there  is  an  inner  circle  in  which  are  found  hoarts  differing  from  the
m  ajority — hearts  bearing  the  "  seal "  of  God-property.  1.  The  thought  that  God
appreciates  the  Christian  character,  and  will  finally  glorify  it,  is  to  the  believer  a
source  of  comfort.  2.  This  thought,  moreover,  imparts  a  sense  of  security.  3.
This  thought,  again,  suggests  principles  of  action.  Fond  as  we  may  be  of  comfort,
and  anxious  to  be  assured  of  security,  there  is  something  positive  expected  from
our  Divine  relationship.    If  God  knows  me,  the  world  must  know  me  too.    Th»

13


194  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  a.

ChriBtian  has  a  profession  to  maintain.  lY.  Distinctions  in  mobal  chakacteb
MAT  EXIST  without  THE  SEAL  OF  DiviNE  APPBECiATioN.  II  all  men  Were  God's  in
the  peculiar  sense  of  the  text,  there  would  be  no  special  meaning  in  its  terms.  A
class  is  referred  to,  in  contradistinction  to  all  other  classes.  There  are  only  two
sections  in  the  domain  of  moral  being — the  good  and  the  bad ;  these  again  being
broken  up  into  almost  endless  sub-divisions,  shades  and  stages  of  development.  To
make  the  leading  proposition  clearer,  take  a  sample  of  instances : — 1.  Here  is  a
man  of  keen  reUgious  sensibility.  A  tender  heart  is  a  great  treasure,  indeed,  but
let  not  a  few  tears  be  considered  proof  of  penitence.  2.  Here  is  the  rigid  formalist.
Eeligion  is  a  life,  not  a  form :  it  is  an  actual  power  and  not  an  elaborate  creed.
The  Gross,  and  not  the  pew,  is  the  true  way  to  heaven.  3.  A  third  hopes  in  the
mercy  of  God.  A  benevolent  God,  he  argues,  will  not  destroy  one  of  EQs  own
creatures.  He  forgets  the  harmony  of  the  Divine  attributes.  Overlooking  an  out-
raged Justice,  he  hopes  in  an  insulted  love.  Terrible  is  the  portion  of  those  who
bear  not  God's  seal  (Rev.  ix.  3,  4).  V.  The  Chukch,  as  a  palace,  most  have
DNiTY,  completion,  AND  DESIGN.  The  Church  is  not  a  broken  fragment  or  a  shat-
tered limb.  It  is  a  whole,  where  individual  members  have  their  part  to  play.  The
large  stones  and  the  small  ones  must  be  side  by  side.  The  position  that
each  shall  occupy  in  the  temple  must  be  determined  by  the  wise  Master-
builder.  If  one  member  is  jealous  of  another's  position  there  is  an  end
to  unity  and  progress.  We  are  each  dependent  on  the  other.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)
The  firm  foundation : — The  time  in  which  we  live  presents  two  striking,  and  to
many  minds  incongruous,  features.  1.  There  is  great  unrest  in  the  realm  of  reli-
gious thought  and  life.  On  every  side  are  heard  voices  of  dissent  from  both  theo-
logical and  ecclesiastical  dogmas.  Schools  and  Churches  are  shaken  with  strife.
Many  are  anxiously  questioning  concerning  the  stability  of  the  Christian  faith,  and
not  a  few  are  prophesying  evil.  There  is  a  strong  and  increasing  revolt  against
traditionalism.  But  with  this  commotion  in  the  realm  of  religious  thought  there
is  (2)  a  great  increase  of  practical  Christianity.  Missions  both  at  home  and  abroad
are  pushed  more  vigorously  than  ever,  and  with  larger  results.  Education  for  the
people  advances  with  leaps  and  bounds.  Philanthropic  enterprises  multiply  in
number  and  increase  in  wisdom  and  efficiency  continually.  The  Church  is  strip,
ping  off  her  dainty  garments  and  grappling  with  social  problems  in  a  new  spirit.
There  is  a  broadening  application  of  Christianity  to  life,  such  as  no  past  age  has
witnessed.  In  a  word,  the  situation  is  this  :  The  power  of  dogma  wanes,  but  the
power  of  truth  waxes ;  forms  are  decadent,  life  is  crescent ;  religious  authority  is
challenged  on  every  side,  spiritual  influence  broadens  and  deepens.  Here  is  a
seeming  contradiction  or  anomaly.  Many  do  not  understand  the  times.  In  their
alarm  over  the  upheaval  in  the  realm  of  religious  thought  they  fail  to  see  or  to
appreciate  the  uplift  in  the  realm  of  religious  hfe.    Can  we  not  see  that

"  God  fulfils  Himself  in  many  ways,
Lest  one  good  custom  should  corrupt  the  world  "  ?

There  is  a  *'  firm  foundation  of  God."  A  careful  study  of  the  Scriptures,  of
history,  and  of  experience  makes  clear — (1)  That  the  essential  basis  of  Christianity
is  not  an  institution,  nor  even  a  book.  Christianity  was  before  the  Church.  Chris-
tianity was  before  the  New  Testament.  It  produced  the  Gospels  and  Epistles,  as  in
the  olden  time  the  prophetic  spirit  and  experience  antedated  and  produced  the
prophetic  history  and  literature.  Men  forget  this.  They  forget  that  God  and  the
soul,  and  God  revealing  Himself  to  the  soul,  precede  the  institutions  and  records
of  religion.  (2)  It  is  clear  also  that  the  essential  basis  of  Christianity  is  not  a
creed.  Faith  existed  before  dogma.  It  terminates  in  a  personality  and  not  in  a
proposition  or  any  series  of  propositions.  Dogma  is  the  result  of  an  attempt
to  express  and  justify  faith  as  an  intellectual  possession.  It  is  natural  and  inevit-
able that  men  should  mnke  this  attempt.  But  the  process  which  goes  on  in  the
Fphere  of  the  understanding,  or  even  its  result,  must  not  be  identified  with  Chris-
tianity any  more  than  physiology  should  be  identified  with  the  exercise  of  physio-
logical functions,  or  dietetics  with  eating,  or  optics  with  seeing.  Creeds  change  as
life  and  thoughts  change.  They  must  change  if  there  is  life.  Thought  grows.
Experience  deepens.  All  creeds  save  the  simplest,  the  most  elemental,  are  left
behind.  They  are  not  basal,  but  resultant.  They  belong  to  the  sphere  of  the
understanding.  (3)  The  essential  basis  of  Christianity  is  a  personal  revelation  of
God  in  and  through  "  the  (man  Christ  Jesus,"  and  a  personal  experience  of  a


CHAP,  u.]  U,  TIMOTHY.  195

Divine  communion  and  a  Divine  guidance.  How  do  we  know  God?  Not  by  argu-
ment, but  by  experiencing  the  touch  of  God  on  the  soul.  There  is  a  Divine  impact
on  the  spirit  of  man.  Argument  is  always  subordinate  to  experience.  How  do  we
know  God  as  Father  f  Through  the  revelation  of  the  archetypal  Divine  Sonship
in  Christ  and  the  experience  of  sonship  through  fellowship  with  Him.  Spirituai
experience  underlies  Christianity.  The  great  spiritual  verities  comes  to  us  always
as  experiences.  They  authenticate  themselves  in  consciousness.  "How  do  you
know  that  Christ  is  Divine  ?  "  said  a  Methodist  bishop  to  a  frontiersman  whom  he
was  examining  for  admission  into  the  ministry.  The  brawny-limbed  and  little-
cultivated  but  big-hearted  man  looked  at  the  bishop  a  moment  in  silence,  and  then,
as  his  eyes  filled  with  tears,  he  exclaimed :  "  Why,  bless  you,  sir,  He  saved  my
soul  1 "  It  was  another  way  of  saying  :  "  I  know  whom  I  have  believed,  and  I  am
persuaded  that  He  is  able  to  keep  that  which  I  have  committed  unto  Him  until  that
day."  This  experience  of  God  is  inseparable  from  the  perception  and  the  accept-
ance of  an  inclusive  ethical  principle  that  makes  life  the  progressive  realisation  of
a  Divine  ideal  of  righteousness.  The  experience  of  a  Divine  communion  and  the
attraction  of  a  Divine  ideal  belong  to  the  essence  of  Christianity.  "  Let  every  one
that  nameth  the  name  of  the  Lord  depart  from  unrighteousness."  Christianity  has
its  essential  basis,  then,  in  a  personal  revelation  of  God  in  and  through  the  Christ,
and  a  personal  experience  of  God  as  life  and  love,  as  source  and  goal,  as  ideal  and
law.  The  Book,  or  the  institution,  may  be  a  means  to  the  experience,  but  the
experience  is  fundamental.  Along  this  line  of  experience  lies  the  test  of  all
doctrines.  Truth  is  reaUsed  in  being.  This  foundation  stands  sure.  It  is  not
shaken  by  changes  in  Church  or  creed.  History  is  full  of  illustrations.  The
Beformation  came  shattering  the  mediasval  Church  as  with  throes  of  earthquake.
Many  sincere  souls  cried  out  in  dismay  that  Christianity  was  overthrown.  But  the
convulsion  passed,  and  Christianity  put  on  new  power  to  bless  the  world.  Within
the  present  century  geology  began  to  tell  its  marvellous  story  of  creation,  and  many
devout  souls  saw  in  it  a  deadly  menace  to  religion.  Genesis  became  a  rallying-
groond  for  the  alarmed  theological  hosts.  But  truth  had  its  way.  Old  ideas  and
interpretations  of  the  Mosaic  cosmogony  fell  away,  and  Christianity  spread  more
and  more  widely  among  the  people.  Then  came  Darwin,  with  his  appalling  and
atheistical  ideas  of  evolution !  Then,  indeed,  the  ark  of  God  was  in  danger  I
Doughty  champions  of  the  faith  drew  their  weapons  for  battle,  while  the  timid  were
ready  to  exclaim  that  Church  and  Bible  alike  were  doomed  unless  the  new  foe  were
vanquished.  The  foe  has  proved  the  best  of  friends.  Evolution  soon  appeared  to
be  a  great  structural  principle  of  thought  in  all  realms  of  study.  It  has  entered
the  domains  of  sociology,  politics,  history,  philosophy,  and  even  theology.  Mean-
while Christianity,  better  understood  by  the  very  principle  that  seemed  to  threaten
its  life,  increases  in  power  continually.  Nothing  is  shaken  and  overturned  by
human  progress  but  what  ought  to  be  shaken  and  overturned.  Nothing  true  ever
perishes.  Christianity  has  proved  itself  hospitable  to  every  advance  in  knowledge,
and  to  every  social  and  political  change  that  has  been  a  step  forward  in  the  long
battle-march  of  humanity.  They  are  guilty  of  a  great  error  who  base  the  validity
of  the  gospel  of  Divine  love  and  eternal  life  on  any  theory  of  creation  or  inspira-
tion, or  on  any  fixed  scheme  of  social  and  political  organisation.  They  say ;  If
this  theory  of  inspiration  or  salvation  or  church  order  is  discredited,  Christianity
is  discredited.  But  a  hundred  theories  have  been  discredited,  and  even  disproved,
and  Christianity  is  better  authenticated  and  has  a  wider  and  stronger  hold  on  the
world  to-day  than  ever.  "  The  firm  foundation  of  God  standeth."  These  are
marks  of  abiding  Christianity  :  The  personal  experience  of  God  and  the  spiritual
attraction  of  righteousness — God  in  the  soul,  a  motive  and  an  ideaL  Cultivate  the
passion,  not  for  safety,  but  for  righteousness,  the  realisation  of  love  in  conduct.
Strive  not  for  fixedness,  but  for  growth.  Spiritual  permanence  is  permanence  of
growth  in  knowledge  and  goodness.  Love  for  God  and  man  walks  with  sure  feet
through  paths  where  selfishness  stumbles  and  sinks  in  bogs  of  doubt  and  despair.
Keep  the  mind  open  to  the  ever-teaching  Spirit  of  God.  There  are  withheld  reve-
lations that  wait  for  the  unfolding  of  capacity  in  man  to  receive  God's  disclosure.
Be  content  with  nothing.  Let  faith  in  God  and  love  to  man  be  the  broad  base  on
which  to  build  the  aspiring  structure  of  an  eternal  life.  That  foundation  standeth
sure.  Trust  God  for  the  future  of  humanity.  The  world  was  not  made  in  jest,
nor  does  the  kingdom  of  God  rest  on  a  couticgency.  Faith,  as  well  as  love,  casteth
out  fear.  Two  boys  were  talking  together  of  Elijah's  ascent  in  the  chariot  of  fire.
Said  one :  "  Wouldn't  you  be  afraid  to  ride  in  such  a  chariot  ?  "    •*  No,"  said  th«


196  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  n.

other,  "  not  if  God  drove !  "  God  drives  the  chariot  of  human  progress,  and
it  mounts  as  it  advances.  God  is  in  His  world,  not  outside  of  it.  He  is
redeeming  it  from  sin.  He  is  making  men.  He  is  fulfilling  His  holy  and
beneficent  purpose.  Fear  not,  but  believe  and  hope,  for  the  power  as  well  as
the  glory  is  His  to  whom  be  glory  for  ever  and  ever.  (P.  S.  Moxom.)  The
foundation  and  it$  teal: — I.  First,  let  us  think  of  the  lamentabi-e  ovebthbow
which  the  apostle  so  much  deplored.  1.  The  apostle  observed  with  sorrow  a
general  coldness.  It  was  in  some  respect  coldness  towards  himself,  but  in  realiiy
it  was  a  turning  away  from  the  simplicity  of  the  doctrine  of  salvation  by  grace
through  faith  (see  the  15th  verse  of  the  previous  chapter).  2.  Furthermore,  the
apostle  saw  with  much  alarm  that  teachers  were  erring.  He  names  two  especi-
ally, Hymenteus  and  Philetus,  and  he  mentions  the  doctrine  that  they  taught — not
needlessly  explaining  it,  but  merely  giving  a  hint  at  it.  They  taught,  among  other
things,  that  the  resurrection  was  past  already.  I  suppose  they  had  fallen  into  the
manner  of  certain  in  our  day,  who  spiritualise  or  rationaUse  everything.  3.  In
Paul's  day  many  professors  were  apostatising  from  the  faith  because  of  the  evil
leaders.  Sheep  are  such  creatures  to  follow  something  that,  when  they  do  not
follow  the  shepherd,  they  display  great  readiness  to  follow  one  another.  4.  Paul
also  deplored  that  ungodliness  increased.  He  says  that  the  profane  and  vain
babblings  of  his  time  increased  unto  more  ungodliness.  II.  Now  let  us  turn  to  the
subject  which  supplied  Paul  with  consolation.  He  speaks  of  the  abiding  founda-
tion :  "Nevertheless  the  foundation  of  God  standeth  sure."  What  is  this  founda-
tion which  standeth  sure  ?  Those  who  have  interpreted  the  passage  have  given
many  meanings  to  it,  but  I  believe  that  all  those  meanings  are  really  one.  For  the
sake  of  clearness  I  would  give  three  answers  to  the  inquiry :  the  foundation  is,
secretly,  the  purpose  of  God ;  doctrinally,  the  truth  of  God ;  effectively,  the  Church
of  God ;  in  all,  the  system  of  God  whereby  He  glorifies  His  grace.  III.  Now,  we  are
to  look  at  this  foundation  and  observe  the  instructive  insceiption.  I  think  this
figure  best  expresses  the  apostle's  intent ;  he  represents  the  foundation-stone,  as
bearing  a  writing  upon  it,  like  the  stone  mentioned  by  the  prophet  Zechariah  of
which  we  read,  '•  I  wUl  engrave  the  graving  thereof,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  and  I
will  remove  the  iniquity  of  that  land  in  one  day."  The  custom  of  putting  inscrip-
tions upon  foundation-stones  is  ancient  and  general.  In  the  days  of  the  Pharaohs,
the  royal  cartouche  was  impressed  upon  each  brick  that  was  placed  in  buildings
raised  by  royal  authority.  The  structure  was  thus  known  to  have  been  erected  by
a  certain  Pharaoh.  Here  we  have  the  royal  cartouche,  or  seal,  of  the  Bang  of  kings
set  upon  the  foundation  of  the  great  palace  of  the  Church.  The  House  of  Wisdom
bears  on  its  forefront  and  foundation  the  seal  of  the  Lord.  The  Jews  were  wont  to
write  texts  of  Scripture  upon  the  door-posts  of  then-  houses ;  in  this  also  we  have
an  illustration  of  our  text.  The  Lord  has  set  upon  His  purpose.  His  gospel.  His
truth,  the  double  mark  described  in  the  text — the  Divine  election  and  the  Divine
sanctification.  This  seal  is  placed  to  declare  that  it  belongs  to  the  Lord  alone,  and
to  set  it  apart  for  His  personal  habitation.  If  I  might  use  another  illustration,  I
can  suppose  that  when  the  stones  for  the  temple  were  quarried  in  the  mountains,
each  one  received  a  special  mark  from  Solomon's  seal,  marking  it  as  a  temple  stone,
and  perhaps  denoting  its  place  in  the  sacred  edifice.  This  would  be  like  the  first
inscription,  "The  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  His."  But  the  stone  would  not
long  lie  in  the  quarry,  it  would  be  taken  away  from  its  fellows,  after  being  marked
for  removal.  Here  is  the  transport  mark  in  the  second  inscription :  "  Let  every  one
that  nameth  the  name  of  Christ  depart  from  iniquity."  The  first  mark — 1.  Is  con-
cerning God  and  us.  "The  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  His."  2.  The  text  teaches
us  that  the  Lord  discriminates.  Some  who  bear  His  name  are  not  His,  and  He
knows  them  not.  3.  "  The  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  His  "  signifies  that  He  is
familiar  with  them,  and  communes  with  them.  They  that  are  really  the  Lord's
property  are  also  the  Lord's  company  :  He  has  intercourse  with  them.  4.  Further,
the  words  imply  God's  preservation  of  His  own ;  for  when  God  knows  a  man  He
approves  him,  and  consequently  preserves  him.  The  second  seal  is  concerning  us
and  God — "Let  every  one  that  nameth  the  name  of  Christ  depart  from  iniquity."
Observe  how  the  practical  always  goes  with  the  doctrinal  in  holy  Scripture.  Those
whom  free  grace  chooses,  free  grace  cleanses.  This  is  a  sweeping  precept  as  to  the
thing  to  be  avoided :  let  him  "  depart  from  iniquity  " — not  from  this  or  that  crime
or  folly,  but  from  iniquity  itself,  from  everything  that  is  evil,  from  everything  that
is  unrighteous  or  unholy.  The  text  is  very  decisive — it  does  not  say,  "Let  him  put
iniquity  on  one  side,"  but,  "Let  him  depart  from  it."     Get  away  from  eviL     All


CHAP,  n.]  II.  TIMOTHY.  197

your  lives  long  travel  further  and  further  from  it.  Do  you  know  where  my  text
originally  came  from  ?  I  believe  it  was  taken  from  the  Book  of  Numbers.  Read  in
the  sixteenth  chapter  the  story  of  Korah,  Dathan,  and  Abiram.  In  the  Septuagint
almost  the  same  words  occur  as  those  now  before  us.  The  Lord  Jesus  is
exercising  discipline  in  His  Church  every  day.  It  is  no  trifling  matter  to  be  a
Church  member,  and  no  small  business  to  be  a  preacher  of  the  gospel.  If  yoa
name  the  name  of  Christ,  you  will  either  be  settled  in  Him  or  driven  from
Him.  There  is  continually  going  on  an  establishment  of  living  stones  upon
the  foundation,  and  a  separating  from  it  of  the  rubbish  which  gathers
thereon.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  stability  of  God's  purpose  : — It  may  be
asked,  how  did  it  happen  that  under  the  direct  observation  of  the  apostles
themselves,  standing  as  they  did  on  such  exclusive  ground,  acting  in  the  name  and
by  the  authority  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  clothed  with  all  the  awful  powers  of
their  high  office — how  happened  it  that  so  many  and  such  dangerous  errors  arose  ?
It  might  be  permitted — 1.  To  ascertain  the  faith  and  put  to  the  test  the  obedience
of  the  sincere.  There  must  be  heresies  that  these  may  be  proved  and  made  mani-
fest. 2.  To  show  that  the  claims  of  the  religion  of  Jesus  Christ  are  not  guided  or
influenced  by  secular  authority,  and  that  men's  minds  are  left  perfectly  free,  at
liberty  to  think  and  determine  for  themselves.  3.  To  illustrate  the  nature  of  the
early  discipline  of  the  Christian  Church.  It  was  not  such  as  affected  men's  proper-
ties or  lives,  as  has  too  frequently  been  the  case  where  ecclesiastical  authority  has
been  felt.  Paul  put  down  error  by  virtue  of  his  authority  as  an  apostle ;  but  we
find  nothing  carnal  in  any  of  his  proceedings.  4.  To  furnish  occasions  for  develop-
ing more  clearly  the  essentials  of  Christianity.  Three  topics  of  reflection  are  sug-
gested to  us  here — I.  The  stability  of  God's  purpose.  The  idea  which  we  found
on  this  part  of  the  subject  is,  the  certain  continuance  and  continual  accomplish-
ment of  God's  purposes,  spite  of  all  difficulties,  oppositions,  and  enemies.  But  it
has  respect  chiefly — 1.  To  the  truth  of  God ;  and  2.  To  the  Church  of  God.  II.  Thb
SPECIAL  OBJECTS  OF  God's  PURPOSE.  "  The  foundation  of  God  standeth  sure  ;  having
this  seal,  the  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  His,"  &c.  1.  In  speaking  of  the  special
objects  of  God's  love,  we  shall  notice  chiefly  the  character  under  which  they  are
described — they  are  "His."  This  implies  knowledge,  discrimination,  approbation,
acknowledgment.  They  are  "  His  " — His  by  dedication.  2.  His  in  consequence  of
a  gracious  influence  on  their  hearts.  3.  His  in  consequence  of  an  interest  in  Christ.
But  this  question  is  naturally  suggested :  How  are  we  to  determine  whether  we  are
His  ?  How  are  we  to  know  that  we  belong  to  the  number  of  the  called,  and  chosen,
and  faithful  ?  The  answer  is  ready — "  Let  every  one  that  nameth  the  name  of  Christ,
depart  from  iniquity,"  and  this  leads  us — III.  To  consider  the  holy  character
WHICH  ouoHT  to  RESULT  FROM  CHRISTIAN  PRINCIPLES.  Consider  here — 1.  The  profes-
sion assumed.  Tliey  "  name  the  name  of  Christ."  This  includes  in  it  an  admis-
sion of  His  authority — a  reception  of  His  doctrines — a  public  avowal  of  their  senti-
ments and  convictions.  2.  The  obligation  enjoined.  Let  him  *'  depart  from
iniquity."  To  depart  from  iniquity  is  to  hate  it — to  be  habitually  opposed
to  the  commission  of  it — to  avoid  it  with  the  greatest  circumspection — to
seek  and  pursue  whatever  is  opposed  to  it.  3.  This  is  enjoined  by  the
authority  of  Him  whose  name  we  bear.  Can  we  think  on  that  holy  name
without  calling  to  mind  the  purity  it  should  inspire  ?  He  gave  Himself  for  us  that
He  might  redeem  us  from  all  iniquity.  Think  of  His  character— it  was  holy  and
heavenly :  of  His  doctrines — every  word  of  God  is  pure  :  of  His  institutions — they
•re  all  designed  to  promote  our  sanctification :  of  the  great  ends  and  designs  of  His
government — these  are  all  connected  with  our  purity.  There  is  not  a  doctrine,  not
a  testimony,  not  a  precept  which  Christ  has  lain  down,  not  a  promise  which  He  has
caused  to  be  recorded,  which  does  not  lead  to  the  inculcation  of  holiness.  On  all
parts  of  the  Christian  system  we  see  inscribed,  "  Be  ye  holy,  for  I  am  holy."  4.
This  is  enforced  by  the  peculiar  discoveries  of  revelation.  Can  you  mention  a
doctrine  which  does  not  lead  to  holiness?  5.  This  departure  from  iniquity  is  an
essential  and  constituent  part  of  the  salvation  of  the  gospel .  6.  This  is  provided
for  by  the  continual  agency  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  7.  This  is  the  design  of  all  gospel
institutions.  8.  This  is  the  great  end  of  all  providential  dispensations.  9.  It  is
that  without  which  all  our  professions  would  be  nullified  and  useless.  [J.  Fletcher,
D.D.)  What  is  religion: — We  have  come  in  our  day  into  times  precisely  like
those  of  the  apostle,  in  which  there  is  a  great  movement  throughout  the  whole
oivilised  world,  and  a  great  change  of  feeling,  either  of  apprehension  or  of  words,  in
regard  to  the  stability  of  the  Christian  religion.    I  declare  that  the  essential  ele-


198  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  IX.


merits  of  Christianity  were  never  so  apparent  as  to-day  ;  that  they  were  never  sa
inflaential;  that  they  were  never  so    likely    to  produce  institutions    of    power;
that     they    never    had     such    a    hold     on    human    reason    and    human    con.
science ;  and    that    the    religious    impulse    of    the    human   race  was    never   so
deep   and   never  so  strong  in  its    current.     In    the    first    place,  then,  we   must
recollect  that  there  may  be  very  great  changes   around   about  religion,   in   its
external  forms,  without  any  essential  interior  change,  nay,  even  with  the  augmen-
tation of  its  interior  power.     Some  men  think  that  anything  which  is  a  revelation
from  God  must  be  always  one  and  the  same  thing ;  but  God's  revelation  is  alpha-
betic ;  it  is  a  revelation  of  letters,  and  they  can  be  combined  and  recombined  in  ten
thousand  different  words,  varying  endlessly.     The  great  facts  which  are  funda-
mental to  consciousness,  once  being  given,  are  alphabetic  ;  and  these  facta  may  be
combined ;  and  with  the  development  of  the  human  race  in  intelligence  and  moral
excellence  they  go  on  taking  new  forms,  and  larger  experiences  must  have  a  larger
expression.     It  is  said  that  men  do  not  believe  in  virtue.     Well,  when  a  man  tells
me  that  the  refinements  of  the  schoolmen  are  lapsing  on  questions  which  relate  to
eternal  regeneration  through  the  Son  of  God,  and  that  many  of  the  fine  distinctions
between  ability  natural  and  abiUty  spiritual  are  going  outof  men's  thoughts  and  out
of  much  use,  I  admit  it ;  but  I  say  that  the  great  fundamental  truths  of  religion —
namely,  the  nature  of  man,  the  wants  of  man,  and  Divine  love  as  a  sufficient  sup-
ply for  human  wants — instead  of  growing  weaker  are  growing  stronger  in  men's
minds.    After  all  the  pother  that  is  made  about  the  doctrines  of  human  depravity,
and  the  need  of  regeneration  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  are  they  not  true?
Men  kick  them  about  like  so  many  footballs ;  but  do  they  not  recognise  them  aa
true  when  they  are  stated  in  a  different  way  from  that  in  which  they  have  been
accustomed  to  hear  them  stated,  and  in  a  way  which  is  suited  to  the  experience  of
our  times?    Men  think  these  truths  are  passing  out  of  the  world  ;  but  I  say  they
are  simply  taking  another  form  of  exposition.     The  truths  themselves  are  inherent,
universal,  indestructible.     Religion  is  not  one  thing.     It  means  the  moving  of  the
human  soul  rightly  toward  God,  toward  man,  and  toward  duty.     He  who  is  using
his  whole  self  according  to  laws  of  God  is  religious.    Some  men  think  that  devotion
is  rehgion.    Yes,  devotion  is  religion  ;  but  it  is  not  all  of  religion.     Here  is  a  tune
written  in  six  parts,  and  men  are  wrangling  and  quarrelling  about  it.   One  says  that
the  harmony  is  in  the  bass,  another  that  it  is  in  the  soprano,  another  that  it  is  in
the  tenor,  and  another  that  it  is  in  the  alto  ;  but  I  say  that  it  is  in  all  the  six  parts.
Each  may,  in  and  of  itself,  be  better  than  nothing ;  but  it  requires  the  whole  six
parts  to  make  what  was  meant  by  the  musical  composer.     Some  men  say  that  love
is  religion.    Well,  love  is  certainly  the  highest  element  of  it :  but  it  is  not  that  alone.
Justice  is  religion  ;  fidelity  is  religion  ;  hope  is  religion  ;  faith  is  religion ;  obedi-
ence is  religion.     These  aie  all  part  and  parcel  of  religion.    Eeligion  is  as  much  as
the  total  of  manhood,  and  it  takes  in  every  element  of  it.     All  the  elements  of  man-
hood, in  their  right  place  and  action,  are  constituent  parts  of  religion ;  but  no  one
of  them  alone  is  religion.    It  takes  the  whole  manhood,  imbued  and  inspired  of
God,  moving  right  both  heavenward  and  earthward,  to  constitute  religion.     I  ask
you  to  consider  what  rehgion  is  according  to  the  definition  of  Paul — "  The  fruit  of  the
Spirit  is  love,  joy,  peace,  long-suffering,  gentleness,  goodness,  faith,  meekness,  tem-
perance."   I  do  not  care  whether  a  man  whitewashes  or  blackwashes  his  fence,  or
whether  he  uses  guano  or  barn-yard  manure,  or  what  his  mode  of  cultivation  may
be,  the  question  is.  Does  he  get  good  fruit?     If  he  does,  his  method  is  good.    Now,
I  take  it  that  the  apostle  is  speaking  of  religion  when  he  speaks  of  the  fruit  of  the
Spirit ;  and  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  what  ?     Orthodoxy  ?     Oh,  no.     Conscience  ?
Not  a  bit  of  it.     One  of  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  is  love ;  and  is  love  dead  ?     Another
fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  joy  ;  and  is  joy  gone  ?    Peace,  the  strangest  of  fruits — is  it  not
slowly  coming  to  be  that  which  is  the  unison  of  all  other  qualities  with  blessedness
in  the  soul  ?     Ye,  then,  who  mourn  because  particular  modes  are  changing,  and
think  that  religion  is  dying  out,  look  deeper,  and  pluck  up  hope  out  of  your  despair,
and  confidence  out  of  your  fear ;  and  to  you  that  think  religion  is  going  away  because
of  scieuce,  let  me  say  tbat  science  is  the  handmaid  of  religion.     It  is  the  John
Bajjtist,  oftentimes,  that  clears  the  way  for  true  religion.    By  religion  I  do  not  mean
outward  things,  but  inward  states.     I  mean  perfected  manhood.     I  mean  the
quickening  of  the  soul  by  the  beatific  influence  of  the  Divine  Spirit  in  truth,  and
love,  and  sympathy,  and  confidence,  and  trust.     That  is  not  dying  out.     (//.  W.
Ji(  echer.)        The  sure  foundations  : — It  is  the  nature  of  truth,  as  it  is  developed  by
human  intelhgence  and  used  for  practical  purposes,  to  gather  to  itself  instrumanta


#HAP.n.]  n.  TIMOTHY.  199


and  institutions.  The  permanence  of  great  fundamental  truths,  and  the  infinite
variability  of  the  exponents  of  truth,  in  the  form  of  law,  custom,  philosophical
statement — these  are  the  two  great  truths  with  which  we  are  to  expound  the  past
history  of  religion  in  the  world,  and  by  which  also  we  are  to  prepare  the  way  for  its
development  in  the  days  that  are  to  come.  After  a  while  men  lose  sight  of  the  truth
in  the  instruments  of  it.  They  cease  to  worship  the  thing,  and  worship  its  exponent ;
so  that,  by-and-by,  it  is  not  the  truth  that  men  follow  so  much  as  its  institutions.
And  so,  as  soon  as  this  takes  place,  men,  following  their  senses  and  their  lower
nature,  begin  a  process  of  idolatry,  of  professionalism  ;  and  they  become  worship-
pers of  the  sensuous.  So  it  comes  to  pass  that  all  religions  tend  on  the  one  side
downward,  and  on  the  other  side  upward.  The  tendency  to  carry  on  truth
to  a  higher  and  nobler  form  co-exists  with  another  tendency  to  hold  the
truth  in  just  the  same  confined  forms  with  which  it  has  hitherto  been
served.  And  so  Churches  find  in  themselves  the  elements  of  explosion  and
of  controversy.  Then  comes  revolution  or  reformation.  Then  comes  sec-
tarianism— or  the  principle,  rather,  from  which  sects  grow.  Now,  in  the  time
of  St.  Paul,  vast  changes  were  taking  place.  Mosaism,  or  religion  as  developed
through  the  instrumentality  of  Mosaic  institutions,  had  ripened  and  gone  to  seed,
and  was  passing  away ;  and  in  so  far  as  the  Gentile  world  was  concerned,  there
was  no  further  attempt  on  the  part  of  the  apostles  to  teach  religion  by  the  old  forms
and  under  the  old  methods.  If  you  turn  your  eyes  toward  the  Greek  nation,  which
was  the  thinking  nation  of  the  world,  they  had  knowledge,  philosophy  and  art,  but
they  had  no  moral  sense.  If  you  turn  to  the  Boman  empire,  there  was  organisa-
tion, there  was  law,  and  an  effete  idolatry.  Now  came  Christianity.  But  Christi-
anity in  itself,  in  its  very  origin,  was  vexed  with  schisms,  with  disputings ;  and  it
was  in  the  midst  of  these  confusions  that  Paul  made  the  declaration  of  our  text,
that  "  the  foundation  of  God  standeth  sure."  No  matter  what  this  man  thinks,  or
that  man  teaches ;  no  matter  what  shadows  come  or  go,  be  sure  of  one  thing — that
the  immutable  foundations  of  religion  stand.  They  will  not  be  submerged  perma-
nently, nor  will  they  rot  in  the  ground ;  and  they  have  this  seal  or  superscription,
written,  as  it  were,  on  the  corner-stone :  *•  The  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  His."
There  is  the  great  truth  of  Divine  existence,  and  intelligence,  and  active  interference
in  human  affairs.  God  is  not  blotted  out  by  men's  doubts,  or  reasonings,  or  philo-
sophies, themselves  caused  by  the  interpenetration  of  Divine  thought  upon  human
intelligence.  *'  God  knoweth  them  that  are  His."  "  Let  every  one  that  nameth  the
name  of  Christ  depart  from  iniquity."  That  is  the  other  seal — aspiration  for  good-
ness ;  departure  from  all  evil ;  an  earnest,  thorough  and  persistent  seeking  after  a
godly  manhood.  There  are  the  two  elements.  There  are  fundamental  elements  in
a  Christian  Church  which  we  ought  to  speak  of,  and  which  we  ought  to  mean  when
we  speak  of  fundamental  doctrines,  and  there  are  those  which  are  necessary  for  the
formation  of  the  individual  character,  and  for  the  transformation  of  man  from  an
animal  to  a  spiritual  being.  These  are  the  fundamental  truths  which  stand  con-
nected with  the  existence,  government,  and  power  of  God  in  the  world ;  and  also
with  the  organised  development  of  human  nature,  that  it  may  rise  toward  God.
Now,  it  BO  happens  that  there  are  a  great  many  things  fundamental  to  theology
which  are  not  at  all  fundamental  to  human  nature ;  and  it  so  happens,  on  the  other
side,  that  there  are  in  human  nature  a  great  many  things  which  are  fundamental
to  the  organisation  of  a  noble  and  manly  character,  but  are  hardly  recognisable  in
theobgy  at  all.  We  ought,  then,  to  clear  our  minds  of  the  misuse  of  the  term
londamental  doctrines.  No  doctrines  are  fundamental  except  those  that  teach  the
Divine  existence  and  government,  or  that  teach  the  condition  and  wants  of  human
nature,  and  its  reconstruction,  its  re-organisation  into  Christian  manhood.  Men
cannot  live  without  religion.  They  cannot  be  men  without  it.  The  State  calls  for
it ;  art  calls  for  it ;  home  and  domesticity  call  for  it ;  the  voice  of  mankind  and  the
voice  of  the  ages  have  called  and  are  calling  for  it ;  and  they  are  either  ignorant  or
cowardly  who  fear  that  any  great  disaster  is  going  to  befall  religion  in  consequence
of  the  progress  which  is  taking  place  in  the  investigation  of  truth.  Do  you  believe
in  a  providence  ?  Is  this  great  world  floating  without  a  rudder,  without  a  pilot  or
a  captain  1  is  time  made  up  of  chance-drifts  ?  or  is  there  a  God  ?  If  there  is  a
God,  has  He  a  future,  and  is  He  steering  time  and  the  race  towards  that  future?
And  will  He  sleep  or  forget,  and  allow  the  race  to  run  to  ruin  ?  The  Word  of  God,
the  foundations  of  God,  stand  sure.  Now,  this  general  fear  will  lead  us  to  takeiuto
consideration  the  necessity  of  a  closer  union  and  aflBliation  of  true  Ciiristian  people.
It  seems  to  me  what  we  need  is,  not  to  go  back  to  old  systeuif,  or  to  cling  to  the  old


200  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n.

Churches,  but  sunply  this  :  that  we  should  search  for  the  great  fandamental  facta
and  trutliB  which  stand  connected  with  the  development  of  human  nature  from
animalism  to  spirituality,  and  work  together  on  these  common  grounds.  Not
that  I  would  aholish  ordinances,  days,  or  institutions.  I  say  to  every  sect,  "  Act
according  to  your  beUef  in  regard  to  these  things.  Keep  your  theory ;  ordain  as  you
think  test ;  organise  as  you  think  best ;  let  your  ordinances  be  such  as  you  think
best ;  make  your  philosophical  systems  such  as  you  tbink  best ;  but  stand  with  your
brethren.  Do  not  let  the  veins  of  your  life  run  just  as  far  as  the  walls  of  your
church,  and  then  come  back  again  ;  let  them  go  forth  throughout  Cliristendom."
(Ibid.)  The  foundations  of  the  Christian  faith  : — The  scepticism  which  we  have
to  meet  to-day  concerns  itself  not  with  specific  doctrine,  but  with  the  very  roots  and
foundation  of  Christian  faith  itself.  Time  was  when  the  foundation  of  Christian
faith  was  the  authority  of  the  Church.  The  authority  of  the  Church  as  the  founda-
tion of  Christian  faith  has  passed  away.  Nor  is  the  Bible,  the  printed  Book,  in  any
true  and  profound  sense  the  foundation  of  our  Christian  faith.  Underneath  the
Bible  there  is  a  foundation  on  which  the  Bible  itself  rests.  Now  modern  thought
proposes,  in  lieu  of  these  two  foundations,  another,  the  human  reason,  and  it  asks
us  to  bring  aU  our  questionings  and  our  faiths  to  the  bar  of  the  intellect,  and
have  them  adjudged  and  determined  there.  I  shall  not  stop  to  argue  whether
reason  be  a  sufficient  foundation  for  our  Christian  faith ;  but  I  undertake  to  say
that  it  is  not  the  foundation  of  our  Christian  faith,  and  that  we  beUeve  not  because
things  are  asserted  by  the  Church,  not  merely  because  they  are  printed  in  the  Book,
not  merely  because  they  commend  themselves  to  our  reason.  Deep  down  in  the
human  life  there  is  yet  a  foundation  underneath  all  these.  We  do  not  object  to
bringing  all  Christian  faiths  to  the  bar  of  reason.  We  believe  our  Christian  faith
is  not  unreasonable ;  but  there  are  truths  which  are  not  arrived  at  by  argumenta-
tive processes ;  they  are  not  reached  by  processes  of  logic ;  they  are  not  demon-
strated ;  they  are  known.  .Esthetic  truths,  we  do  not  prove  them,  we  see  them.
All  our  moral  beliefs  rest  on  this  foundation ;  we  do  not  argue  them,  we  know  them.
Love,  patriotism,  honesty,  justice,  truth,  by  what  chemical  processes  will  you
analyse  these  ?  How  wiU  yon  put  them  into  the  scales  and  weigh  them  ;  by  what
logical  demonstration  will  you  prove  they  exist  ?  Now  that  which  is  true  in  respect
of  all  the  seslhetic  elements  of  hfe,  that  which  is  true  in  respect  of  the  moral  ele-
ment of  life  is  true  in  respect  of  the  great  spiritual  reahn.  Our  articles  of  Christian
faith  rest  on  our  vital,  personal,  living  experience  in  them.  Why  do  I  believe  in
God  ?  Wliy  do  you  beUeve  in  your  mother  ?  You  have  seen  her.  I  beg  your
pardon ;  you  never  saw  your  mother.  You  have  seen  the  eyes,  the  forehead,  the
cheeks,  the  face — that  is  not  mother.  If  that  be  mother,  then  why,  when  the  form
lies  prostrate,  and  you  press  the  kiss  upon  the  lips,  and  they  give  no  answering  kiss
back,  and  you  press  the  hand,  and  it  gives  no  answering  pressure  back,  why  burst
you  into  tears  ?  Why  wring  your  hands  with  grief  ?  The  lips  are  there,  the  brow
is  there,  the  cheeks  are  there,  all  that  you  ever  saw  is  there.  But  mother  is  gone  ;
and  love,  patience,  fidelity,  self-sacrifice,  long-suffering — that  is  what  makes  the
mother  that  you  loved — that  you  have  never  seen.  And  we  believe  in  God  because
we  have  known  the  tenderness  of  His  love,  because  in  times  of  great  weakness  Ha
has  strengthened  us,  and  in  times  of  great  sorrow  He  has  comforted  us,  and  in
times  of  great  darkness  He  has  guided  us,  because  we  have  known  in  our  inmost
experience  the  power  that  is  of  God  in  life's  struggle.  Why  do  you  beUeve  in
immortality  ?  It  is  not  because  of  the  philosophical  arguments  that  have  been
addressed  to  you;  it  is  not  because  of  the  proof  texts  you  can  find  in  the  Scriptures  ;
we  know  that  we  are  immortal,  as  the  bird  knows  that  it  has  power  to  fly  while  yet
it  lies  in  its  nest,  and  waits  for  the  moment  when  it  shall  soar  oft  into  the  invisible
air.  There  is  no  better  argument  for  immortality  than  that  of  the  French  Christian
to  his  deistical  friend.  When  the  deist  had  finished  a  long  scholastic  argument,
the  Christian  Frenchman  replied,  with  a  shrug  of  the  shoulders,  "  Probably  you
are  right ;  you  are  not  immortal,  but  I  am."  Now,  when  this  view  of  the  founda-
tion of  the  Christian  faith  is  employed,  men  sometimes  object  to  it  and  say,  "  You
are  appealing  to  our  feelings,  you  are  not  wilhng  to  test  Christian  truth  where  all
truth  must  be  tested,  in  the  clear  hght  of  reason  ;  you  are  appealing  to  our  feelings,
to  our  prepossessions,  to  our  desires,  to  our  sentiments."  Not  at  all.  I  am  putting
our  Christian  faith  on  that  foundation  on  which  all  our  knowledge  and  all  our
beUef  rest,  albeit  our  Christian  faith  stands  closer  to  the  foundation  than  anything
else.  All  that  science  has  taught  us,  all  that  travel,  all  that  history,  all  that
observatioD,  either  of  our  own  or  observations  of  others,  all  is  based,  in  the  analy-


CHAP,  n,]  11.  TIMOTHY.  201

sis,  upon  this — the  truthfulness  either  of  our  own  personal  consciousness,  or  of
the  consciousness  of  others.  Now,  we  carry  in  our  hearts  the  consciousness  of  a
Divine  presence  outside  ourselves.  We  look  upon  this  life  of  Christ,  and  it  stira
within  us  a  new  and  a  Divine  life.  We  know  the  power  there  is  in  the  pardoning
and  atoning  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Why  do  we  believe  the  Bible  is  an
inspired  Book?  Because  it  is  an  inspiring  Book,  because  it  has  given  us  comfort
that  no  other  book  ever  did,  life  that  no  other  book  ever  gave,  strength  that  no  other
book  ever  gave,  because  in  our  own  personal  use  and  experience  of  it  it  has  been
the  life  of  God  in  our  hearts.  Moreover,  our  Christian  faith  rests  not  merely  upon
our  own  consciousness,  it  rests  upon  the  concurrent  consciousness  of  innumerable
witnesses.  But  mark  you  one  thing  more.  Our  Christian  faith  rests  on  our  con-
sciousness, on  the  concurrent  consciousness  of  witnesses  verified  by  actual  testi-
mony. Christianity  is  not  a  theory.  It  proposes  to  do  something  for  me.  Com-
pare old  Borne  with  England  or  America  of  to-day  with  all  our  vices,  with  all  our
shortcomings,  with  all  our  corruptions,  and  behold  what  is  the  answer  of  history  to
the  claim  that  Christ  has  made.  Why,  when  Mr.  Morse  first  proposed  the  mag-
netic telegraph  it  was  not  strange  that  men  were  sceptical.  When  he  said  "  By
touching  a  Uttle  key  here  I  communicate  a  message  to  a  man  a  thousand  miles
yonder,"  no  wonder  that  wise  and  conservative  people  shook  their  heads  and
shrugged  their  shoulders,  and  said,  "  Impossible ! "  But  when  the  wire  had  been
laid  from  Washington  to  Baltimore,  and  the  first  message  was  flashed  through  that
wire,  '*  Behold  what  God  hath  wrought,"  how  could  any  man  doubt  when  the  work
waa  achieved  ?  Some  of  you  will  say,  '•  Ah  I  this  will  not  give  us  a  well-defined
theology."  Well,  perhaps  not.  But  who  can  stand  and  look  out  into  the  vast
future,  and  define  immortality  ?  Who  can  look  up  into  the  heavens  and  define
God  ?  Who  can  look  into  his  own  soul  and  define  there  the  sins  that  have  oppressed
him,  or  the  Saviour  that  has  redeemed  him  from  them  ?  No,  no ;  our  experiences
do  transcend  all  our  definitions,  being  beyond  them.  And  some  of  you  will  say,
'•  This  is  well  for  those  of  you  that  have  this  experience,  but  I  have  it  not."  Is  that
anj  reason  why  you  should  not  believe?  Now,  let  us  reason  this  matter  one
moment.  Because  you  do  not  enjoy  the  music  of  Beethoven  will  you  therefore
conclude  that  all  musical  enjoyment  is  a  myth?  Because  you,  standing  on  the
deck  of  an  Atlantic  steamer,  cannot  see  the  light  of  the  far-distant  lighthouse  which
the  ship  captain  with  his  better  trained  eye  does  see,  will  you  conclude  that  fce  is
mistaken  and  you  are  right  ?  If  it  be  true  that  there  is  a  testimony  coming  from
innumerable  hosts  of  witnesses  to  the  reality  of  God's  presence,  to  the  certainty  of
immortality,  to  the  inspiration  of  God's  Book,  to  the  vital  saving  power  of  a  living
Christ,  will  you  reject  the  light  because  you  are  blind  ?  Will  you  deny  the  truth
because  you  see  it  not  ?  A  father  and  his  son  stand  on  the  shores  of  the  Bay  of
Fundy.  A  great  tidal  wave  forty  feet  in  height  comes  rolling  in,  when  the  boy
catches  the  father's  hand  in  terror,  and  cries,  "  Eun,  father,  run ;  the  ocean  is  going
to  wash  us  away."  The  father  looks  and  smiles  upon  the  lad,  and  says,  "  Wait,
wait. "  The  great  wave  dashes  itself  into  innumerable  atoms  of  foam  upon  the
great  rock,  and  sweeps  back  into  the  ocean.  And  when  this  tidal  wave  of  scepticism
shall  have  expended  its  force  it  will  be  found  broken  into  innumerable  atoms  of
foam  at  the  foot  of  a  rock  which  shall  stand  through  all  the  future,  as  in  all  the
past,  the  Bock  of  Ages.  (L.  Abbott.  D.D.)  The  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are
His. — All  God's  people  favourites  : — ^It  is  said  of  Tiberius,  the  emperor,  that  he  never
denied  his  favourite  Sejanus  anything,  and  often  prevented  his  request ;  so  that  he
needed  only  to  ask  and  give  tbanks.  All  God's  people  are  His  favourites,  and  may
have  all  that  their  hearts  can  wish,  or  their  need  require.  (J.  Trapp.)  Affectionate
remembrance : — At  Bury  St.  Edmunds,  I  went  to  the  infirmary  of  the  workhouse,
where,  amongst  other  patients  in  bed,  I  conversed  with  an  old  man,  who,  if  I  remember
rightly,  was  over  eighty  years  of  age.  As  it  lay  outside  the  counterpane,  I  noticed
that  his  arm  from  the  elbow  to  the  wrist  was  covered,  after  the  manner  of  sailors'
tattooing,  with  numerous  letters.  On  asking  him  what  they  were,  he  said,  "  Why,
you  see,  sir,  I've  had  nine  children,  and  aU  are  gone ;  some  I  know  be  dead,  and
some  I  don't  know  whether  they  be  dead  or  alive,  but  they're  all  the  same  to  me ;
I  shall  never  see  any  of  'em  again  in  this  world.  But  I've  got  all  their  initials
here  on  my  arm ;  and  it's  a  comfort  to  me  as  I  lie  here  to  look  at  'em  and  think  of
'em."  It  was  all  that  this  poor  old  man  could  do  for  his  sons ;  but  he  held  them
in  affectionate  remembrance,  though  he  needed  not  the  sight  of  their  initials  to
remember  them  by.  Our  heavenly  Father  knoweth  and  taketh  pleasure  in  all  them
that  are  His.    He  bears  them  all  on  His  heart,  and  His  power  to  help  and  to  blesa


202  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  a,

tbem  is  as  great  as  His  wealth  of  love.  (B.  Clarke.)  Hidden  Christiant : — There
are  stars  set  in  the  heavens  hy  the  hand  of  God,  whose  light  has  never  reached  the
eye  of  man  ;  gems  lie  covered  iu  the  dark  abysses  of  earth  that  have  never  yet  been
discovered  by  the  research  of  man ;  flowers  which  have  grown  in  blushing  beaaty
before  the  sun,  that  have  never  been  seen  by  the  florist;  so  there  may  be  Christians,
made  such  by  God,  who  are  hidden  from  the  knowledge  of  this  world.  {John  Bate.)
Unknown,  yet  well  known : — Many  of  the  greatest  saints  have  lived  and  died  un-
known and  oncared  for  by  the  world.  These  are  God's  secret  ones,  unknown  to
men,  well-known  to  God.  About  some  of  the  saints  and  apostles  we  hear  much ;
tlie  lives  and  works  of  St.  Paul  and  St.  Peter  are  familiar  to  us  all.  It  is  not  so
with  St.  Bartholomew,  and  yet  none  of  the  martyrs  worked  more  faithfully,  or
suffered  more  severely.  He  who  laboured  so  succes-fully  for  Christ,  and  suffered
so  severely,  is  only  mentioned  four  times  in  the  New  Testament,  and  then  very
slightly.  TLere  is  no  word  to  record  his  hard  toil,  his  burning  love,  his  patient
suffering,  and  his  noble  death.  And  so  it  is  with  many  of  the  greatest  of  God's
saints.  No  one  knows  the  name  of  Naaman's  little  servant,  who  brought  her  master
to  God.  The  names  of  the  Holy  Innocents  appear  in  no  earthly  book.  That  pious
widow  who  gave  all  she  had  to  the  Temple  is  not  named ;  and  there  are  thousands
of  others,  who  though  "  unknown,  are  well  known"  to  God,  whose  names  are  not
written  on  earth,  but  are  written  in  heaven.  There  are  many  who  are  now  living
for  God,  and  working  for  Him,  and  suffering  for  Him,  of  whom  this  world  knows
nothinp:.  Tnere  will  not  be,  perhaps,  a  paragraph  about  them  in  the  newspapers,
but  "  the  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  His."  God  has  hidden  saints  in  every  place,
dwelling  under  cottage  thatch,  as  well  as  in  great  houses.  These  are  the  gems
wliich  no  earthly  eye  has  ever  valued,  but  they  will  shine  none  the  less  brightly  on
that  day  when  God  makes  up  His  jewels.  {H.  J.  Wilmot-Buxton,  M.A.)  The
Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  His : — The  Church  at  Ephesus,  at  a  very  early  age,
suffered  from  that  stumbling-block — the  "  falling  away  "  of  professors.  Oh  !  I  do
not  wonder  at  the  pain  and  the  perplexity  which  the  young  missionary  at  Ephesus
seemed  to  feel,  at  the  thought  of  * '  the  falling  away  "  of  many  whom  he  had  been
wont  to  teach,  and  love,  and  hope,  and  pray  for.  But  mark  the  delightful  emphasis
of  that  "nevertheless" — "Nevertheless  the  foundation  of  God  standeth  sure."
Perhaps,  of  those  who  set  out  with  you  on  the  road  to  heaven,  some  years  ago,  it
may  have  been  your  painful  lot  to  see  one  after  another  stop,  lie  down,  and  go  to
sleep,  and  die.  "Nevertheless,  nevertheless  I  the  foundation  of  God  standeth  sure."
Or,  look  again  at  that  "  nevertheless."  One  by  one  the  friendships  and  ihe  happi-
nesses of  life  have  been  melting  away  from  yon.  And  now  every  idol  has  been
pulled  down ;  and  now  almost  the  only  hope  of  your  earthly  support  is  gone  :  oh  I
with  what  sweetness  at  such  a  moment  will  that  thought  come  back  to  you,  "  Never-
tlieless  the  foundation  of  God  standeth  sure  I "  Too  have  a  Friend  that  never  can
leave  .>  ou.  Or  it  may  come  closer  than  this.  It  may  please  God  to  bring  trial
more  home  to  your  heart.  He  may  lead  you  through  a  long,  dark  cloud,  where  it
may  seem  to  you  as  if  every  trace  of  comfort  was  obliterated  for  ever, — "  Neverthe-
less the  foundation  of  God  standeth  sure."  Beneath  the  feet  the  "  foundation  "
stands.  The  building  may  fall,  but  the  "  corner-stone  "  is  safe.  There  is  pardon  ;
though  there  is  no  sense  of  it.  There  is  faith  ;  though  there  is  not  "  the  joy  in
believing."  There  is  Christ ;  though  there  is  not  the  feeling  of  Christ.  That  cloud
will  roll  over,  and  when  the  morning  breaks,  it  will  light  up  that  "  foundation,"
brighter,  clearer,  and  more  saving,  for  ever.  For  "  Nevertheless  the  foundation  of
God  standeth  sure."  You  see,  then,  that  the  whole  of  a  man's  peace  and  all  his
secuiity  depend  upon  this, — What  is  his  "foundation  "?  It  is  the  plainest  of  all
plain  Scriptural  truths,  that  the  only  "  foundation  "  of  any  soul's  safety  is  the  Lord
Jesus  Christ.  "  Other  foundation  can  no  man  lay  than  that  is  laid,  which  is  Christ
Jesus."    "  Other  foundation  "  may  have  a  momentary  peace ;  but  this  only  can  sup-

f)ort  the  super-structure  for  eternity.  Now  this  truth  the  apostle  carries  out  into  a
ittle  more  detaiL  In  order  to  do  it,  his  mind  borrows  an  image  from  a  ceremony
common  at  the  commencement  of  the  erection  of  a  public  building,  when  a  king,  as
he  lays  the  foundation-stone,  sets  upon  it  the  impression  of  the  royal  seal.  In  like
manner,  as  if  to  give  the  believer's  hope  a  two- fold  security,  God  is  said  not  only  to
"lay  the  foundation,"  but  to  **  seal  "  it;  and  when  He"  seals"  it.  He  seals  it  to
Himself,  by  the  "  oath  "  with  which  He  "  confirms  it  "  ;  and  to  the  believer,  by  the
Spirit  in  which  He  gives  it.  Now,  that  "  seal,"  with  which  God  stamps  every  con-
verted soul,  is  two-fold.  Or,  to  speak  more  accurately,  it  is  a  single  "  seal"  which
has  two  faces.     Accordingly,  on  the  heart  of  every  child  of  God,  on  the  ground  of  it,


CHAT,  n.]  II.  TIMOTHY.  203

there  will  be  found  two  inscriptions,  which  the  hand  or  "  seal "  of  God  has  engraven
there.  In  other  words,  there  are  two  fundamental  principles  which  God  has  placed
there.  The  one  stands  out  clear,  legible,  and  large — ' '  The  Lord  knoweth  them  that
are  His."  And  the  other  is  like  unto  it — "  Let  every  one  that  nameth  the  name  of
Christ  depart  from  iniquity."  The  •'  seal "  must  have  been  twice  stamped — both
inscriptions  must  have  been  there — before  the  soul  is  safe,  and  stands  quite  "  sure."
Now,  let  UB  look  at  the  two  sides  of  that  "  seal" ;  first,  separate ;  and  then  together.

I.    The  FIB8T  IN  THE  RELATION,  AS  ALSO  THE  FIRST  THAT  IS  LAID  UPON  THE  HEART,  IS  THE

IMPRESSION  OF  God's  LOVE.  "  The  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  His."  This  records
that  truth  of  truths  on  which  the  whole  gospel  rests,  as  upon  one  base — that  salva-
tion is  all  of  God's  eternal,  sovereign  love.  This  must  be  held  by  every  man  who
wishes  to  enjoy  the  peace  of  God :  that  it  was  God  who  "  knew  "  me,  loved  me,  and
cared  for  me,  and  drew  me  long  before  I  ever  had  any  thoughts  of  Him.  The  whole
of  a  man's  safety  depends  upon  this  :  "  The  Lord  knew  "  me  from  aU  eternity ;  •*  the
Lord  knew  "  me  when  He  drew  me  to  Himself ;  "  the  Lord  knows  "  me  now — all
my  little  thoughts  and  works :  "  the  Lord  knows  "  I  am  trying  to  serve  Him ;  "  the
Lord  knows  "  I  wish  to  love  Him.  But  as  the  one  side  of  God's  "  seal  "  is  privilege,
the  other  is  duty,  IL  The  one  is  God's  love,  the  other  is  your  holiness.  "  Let
every  one  that  nameth  the  name  of  Christ  depart  from  iniquity."  The  two  aides
must  never  be  divided.  But  as  the  stamp  of  God's  love  is  laid,  so  must  the  stamp
of  man's  obedience  be  laid.  God's  love  first,  to  teach  that  there  can  be  no  real
obedience  till  there  is  first  a  sense  of  God's  love.  Feelings  often  have  deceived  us,
and  they  will  deceive  again.  But  the  question  is,  practically,  Are  you  "  departing
from  iniquity"?  Observe  the  expression.  It  is  not  one  single  act;  but  it  is  a
gradual,  progressive  retiring  back  from  evil,  because,  more  and  more,  the  good  pre-
vails. Now,  how  is  it  ?  Say  you  have  conquered  the  acts  of  sin,  have  you  conquered
the  desires  ?  Say  you  have  conquered  the  desires,  have  you  conquered  the  thoughts  ?
Do  you  think  that  your  temper  is  being  every  day  more  subdued  ?  Is  your  pride
lessened  f  Tour  worldliness,  and  your  covetousness — are  they  receding  ?  Would  your
own  family — would  your  own  dearest  friend  have  cause  to  say,  that  you  are
growing  every  day  in  grace?  Is  it  a  "seal,"  think  you,  that  can  be  "read
of  all  men"  upon  you?  Could  they  see  it  exemplified?  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)
Inscriptions  on  foundation  stones  : — The  figure  is  probably  drawn  from  the
practice  of  engraving  inscriptions  on  one  or  both  sides  of  the  foundation-
stone.  So,  in  Bev.  xxi.  14,  the  names  of  the  twelve  apostles  are  found  on
the  twelve  foundations  of  the  mystical  Jerusalem.  "  The  Lord  knoweth  them
that  are  His."  Not  as  expressing  the  knowledge  that  flows  from  an  inscrutable
decree,  but,  as  in  1.  Cor.  viii.  3,  xiii.  12 ;  John  x.  14,  the  knowledge,  implying
love  and  approval,  which  Christ  has  of  those  who  are  truly  His.  This  represents
one  side  of  the  liie  of  the  believer,  but,  lest  men  interpret  the  truth  wrongly,
the  other  side  also  needs  to  be  put  forward,  and  that  is  found  in  personal
holiness.  (E.  H.  Plumptre,  D.D.)  The  chosen  known  to  God : — "  The  Lord
knoweth  them  that  are  His  "  is  a  citation  from  the  Septuagint  of  Num.  xvi.  5,
and  a  moment's  consideration  will  show  how  appositely  the  apostle  quotes  this
passage.  Eorah,  Dathan,  and  Abiram  had  gathered  themselves  together  against
Moses  on  the  plea  of  the  holiness  of  the  whole  congregation  :  "  aU.  the  congrega-
tion," they  said,  "are  holy,  every  one  of  them,  and  the  Lord  is  among  them:
wherefore  then  lift  ye  yourselves  up  above  the  congregation  of  the  Lord  ?  "  Here
then  certain  bad  men  had  got  hold  of  a  true  principle,  but  were  applying  it  wrongly
and  rebelliously.  It  was  quite  true  that  all  the  congregation  were  holy,  but  it  was
also  true  that  God  had  especially  sanctified  the  sons  of  Levi  above  the  remainder  of
His  people.  Eorah  and  his  company  came  forward  with  specious  pretensions  to
superior  spirituality  ;  they  asserted  that  all  the  people  of  Israel  were  priests  of  God
— a  great  truth  in  itself,  but  not,  therefore,  to  supersede  another  truth,  viz.,  that  God
had  chosen  a  certain  tribe  to  be  specially  His  priests.  So  Hymenseus  and  Philetus
asserted  a  great  truth,  viz.,  the  nature  and  importance  of  the  spiritual  resurrection ;
but  because  they  so  asserted  it  as  to  supersede  by  it  another  plainly  revealed  truth,
they  ondermined  and  overthrew  the  very  faith  itself,  and  proved  themselves  to  be  the
children  of  Satan,  and  not  of  God.  (If.  F.  Sadler,  M.  A.)  Inconspicuous  lives
related  to  heaven : — In  modern  times  it  has  been  found  out  that,  by  a  wise  adapta-
tion of  electricity,  an  organ  can  be  played  many  miles  away,  under  certain  condi-
tions.  If  the  keyboard  is  connected  with  the  battery,  and  the  wires  run,  no  matter
how  tar,  even  hundreds  and  thousands  of  miles — if  the  battery  be  properly  charged
and  the  wires  ran,  say,  to  New  Orleans,  the  organist  sitting  here  may  thunder  ther*


204  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.   i.

ihe  majestic  tones  of  an  anthem.  And  if  you  consider  that  the  human  soul  is  a
battery,  and  that  all  its  wires  run  into  the  heavenly  land,  there  are  many  incon-
spicuoua  persons  Uving  in  the  world  of  whom  we  see  and  hear  and  know  notLing,
but  from  whom  to  heaven  wires  go,  and  around  whose  souls  are  augel  assemblies
gathered  together  chanting  joyful  songs ;  and  there  are  many  men  a  knowledge  of
wLom  the  telegraph  wires  are  busy  communicating,  and  about  whose  fame  the
newspapers  pile  telegraph  upon  telegraph ;  there  are  many  noisy  men  respecting
whom  there  is  much  ado  made  on  earth,  but  there  is  not  a  single  wire  that  runs
between  them  and  the  other  life.     {H.   W.  Beccher.)  God's  knowledge  of  His

children: — I  remember  a  story  of  Mr.  Mack,  who  was  a   Baptist   minister   in
Northamptonshire.    In  his  youth  be  was  a  soldier,  and  calling  on  Kobert  Hall,
■when  his  regiment  marched  through  Leicester,  that  great  man  became  interested  in
him,  and  procured  his  release  from  the  ranks.    When  he  went  to  preach  in  Glas-
gow he  sought  out  his  aged  mother,  whom  he  had  not  seen  for  many  years.     He
knew  his  mother  the  moment  he  saw  her,  but  the  old  lady  did  not  recognise  her
son.    It  so  happened  that,  when  he  was  a  child,  his  mother  had  accidentally
wounded  his  wrist  with  a  knife.     To  comfort  him  she  cried,  "  Never  mind,  my
bonnie  bairn,  your  mither  will  ken  you  by  that  when  you  are  a  man."    When
Mack's  mother  would  not  beUeve  that  a  grave,  fine-looking  minister  could  be  her
own  child,  he  turned  up  his  sleeve  and  cried,  "  Mither,  mither,  dinna  ye  ken  that  ?  "
In  a  moment  they  were  in  each  other's  arms.    Ah,  the  Lord  knows  the  spot  of  His
children  1  He  acknowledges  them  by  the  mark  of  correction.    What  God  is  to  us  in  the
way  of  trouble  and  trial  is  but  His  acknowledgment  of  us  as  true  heirs,  and  the  marks
of  His  rod  shall  be  our  proof  that  we  are  true  sons.  He  knows  the  wounds  He  made
when  exercising  His  sacred  surgery.   {A.  Maelaren,  D.D.)     Pretended  spirituality  : —
It  is  as  if  Paul  said,  "  Here  are  false  teachers  who,  under  a  show  of  great  spirituality,
have  overthrown  the  faith  of  some  in  the  Church.   They  have  come  as  angels  of  light.
They  have  said,  *'  The  only  real  resurrection  is  the  resurrection  of  a  dead  soul  to
the  knowledge  of   God.     Why  trouble  yourselves  about  any  other  resurrection
except  this  ?  "    And  by  these  specious  words — words  which  apparently  only  highly
spiritual  men  could  say— they  have  opened  the  flood-gates  of  unbelief ;  but  God,
after  all,  knows  who  are  sound  and  who  are  rotten  at  heart.    The  Lord  knoweth
them  that  are  His.     The  Lord  sees  through  every  pretence  of  sanctity.     The  sura
foundation  of  God  standeth,  for  God  knows  the  souls  who  really  and  truly  belong
to  Him.    He  knows  them  infallibly,  and  no  one  knows  them  but  He.    You  see,  St.
Paul  evidently  impUes  that  these  falsely  spiritual  teachers,  and  those  who  were  led
by  them,  were  not  in  heart  God's  true  people.    We  learn  from  this  that  our  faith
may  be  subverted  and  our  souls  ruined  by  pretenders  to  spirituaUty  in  rehgion.
We  may  extend  this  to  our  doctrines  of  the  faith  besides  the  resurrection  of  the
body.     The  two  sacraments,  for  instance,  have   each  an  outward  part,  which
touches  the  body,  or  which  is  received  by  the  body ;  and  God  has  made  the  recep-
tion of  the  inward  grace  of  the  sacrament  to  depend,  ordinarily  speaking,  on  the
reception  of  the  outward  sign.    And  now  I  have  to  put  you  on  your  guard  against
another  form  of  specious  yet  false  spirituality,  with  which  a  very  large  proportion
of  our  modern  religious  literature  is  saturated.    Beware  of  books  and  tracts,  and
appeals  and  sermons,  full  of  deep  doctrine  and  evangelical  statements,  without  any
duty — any    lowly,  common-place,    homely  Christian    duty,  mixed  up  with  such
doctrine  or  Gospel  statements.     No  book  of  religion  can  possibly  be  more  spiritual
than  St.  Paul's  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians.   And  yet,  what  sort  of  exhortations  have  we
in  the  fourth  chapter  of  this  most  spiritual  Epistle  ?   What  I  have  said  respecting  the
teaching  of  St.  Paul  is  equally  true  of  that  of  his  brother  apostles,  SS.  Peter,  James,
and  John.   Remember,  then,  that  if  our  standard  of  Christianity  is  the  teaching  of
the  apostles,  then  writings,  full  of  high  experience  or  sweet  assurance,  without  any
Inculcation  of  lowly  duty,  are  simply  unscriptural,  and  so  unspiritual.    (M.  F.  Sadler,
M.A.)        The  >ertl  of  the  foundation  of  God: — The  inscription  is  twofold  ;  the  first
part  relating  to  God,  the  second  to  ourselves  ;  tlie  first  confirming  our  faith,  the
second  directing  our  practice ;  the  first  permitting  us  to  trust  our  all  on  our  Redeemer,
the  second  inciting  us  to  "  work  out  our  own  salvation  with  fear  and  trembUng."
I.  In  the  visible  Chdbch  the  bad  are  mingled  with  the  good.     Many  bear  the
name  of  Christian  who  have  not  even  the  outward  appearance  of  the  reality ;  othera
profess  much  with  their  lipa,  but  are  strangers  to  the  power  of  religion  in  the  heart :
others,  again,  are  despised  by  man,  who  yet  bear  about  with  them  that  pearl  of
great  price — a  true  and  lively  faith,  without  which  the  rich  are  poor,  and  with
which  the  poor  are  richer  than  all  the  world  could  make  them.    But  all  this  ifl


CHAP,  n.]  11.  TIMOTHY,  205

surrounded  with  such  a  mist  of  circumstances  and  forms  and  conventional  habits,
that  the  difference  is  well  nigh  imperceptible  to  human  eyes.  Certain  broad  lines
of  distinction  between  those  who  may  be  the  Lord's,  and  those  who  certaiuly  are
not,  may  easily  be  drawn  ;  but  much  will  stiU  be  left  where  we  may  hope  or  fear,
but  cannot  know.  But  God  knows.  His  eye  pierces  through  the  outward  covering
of  professions,  and  looks  directly  on  the  heart.  And  there  is  much  comfort  in  the
belief  that  God  thus  •'  knoweth  them  that  are  His."  1.  It  is  a  guarantee  of  the
safety  of  those  who  are  His,  whatever  may  be  their  station,  or  how  powerful  soever
their  enemies.  2.  Joined  to  this  belief  also  is  the  comfortable  conviction  that,
where  God  "  has  begun  a  good  work,  He  will  perform  it  unto  the  day  of  Jesus
Christ "  (Phil.  i.  6).  3.  And  this  truth  furnishes  a  key  to  the  mystery,  that  in  the
visible  Church  the  bad  are  ever  mingled  with  the  good.  To  human  eye  they  are,
but  not  to  God's.  II.  But  this  is  but  part  of  the  seal  or  inscription  on  the  founda-
tion of  God's  temple,  and  the  part  with  which,  however  confirmatory  of  our  faith
and  consolatory  to  our  weakness,  we  have  the  less  immediate  concern.  This  relates
to  God's  knowledge,  the  other  to  our  duties.  "  Let  every  one  that  nameth  the
name  of  Christ  depart  from  iniquity."  1.  God's  foreknowledge  does  not  at  all
diminish  man's  responsibility,  nor  detract  from  the  necessity  of  our  own  endeavours.
2.  Man's  holiness  is  the  end  of  God's  predestination.  He  has  chosen  those  who  are
His,  not  simply  to  be  happy,  but  to  be  holy.  Would  we  read  God's  eternal  counsels
concerning  ourselves  ?  We  may  do  so  with  reverence  and  trembling  hope ;  but  only
in  our  growing  freedom  from  sin,  and  the  increasing  hoUness  of  our  lives.  {John
Jackson,  M.A.)  Let  every  one  that  nameth  the  name  of  Christ  depart  from  iniquity.
— '•  Iniquity  "  here  includes  the  teaching  of  those  false  men  above  alluded  to,  as  their
teaching  led  away  from  the  truth,  and  resulted  in  a  lax  and  evil  way  of  life.  (H.
D.  M.  Spence,  M.A.)  Departing  from  iniquity  the  duty  of  all  who  name  the  name
of  Jesus : — We  are — I.  To  show  who  they  are  whom  the  Lord  charges  to  depart
FROM  naqriTY.  The  text  tells  you  it  is  every  one  who  names  the  name  of  Christ.
1.  Baptized  persons,  capable  to  discern  betwixt  good  and  evil.  2.  Who  profess
faith  in  Christ,  and  hope  of  salvation  through  Him.  3.  Who  pray  to  God  through
Christ.  4.  Who  profess  faith  in  Christ,  and  holiness  of  life  also.  5.  Communi-
cants who  name  the  name  of  Ohrisi  in  a  most  solemn  manner,  by  sitting  down  at
His  table,  before  God,  anpels,  and  men.  H.  To  show  what  is  implied  in  this
departing  from  iniquity  which  God  chnrgeth  us  to  aim  at.  Here  let  us  inquire  in
what  this  departure,  this  happy  apostasy,  lies.  There  is — 1.  A  giving  up  with  our  rest
in  sin.  God  chargeth  yon  to  awake  and  bestir  yourself,  to  spring  to  your  feet,  and
prepare  to  make  progress  in  the  ways  of  holiness.  2.  A  going  oft  from  sin,  and  giving
up  with  it :  "  If  I  have  done  iniquity,  I  wiU  do  no  more  "  (Job.  xxxiv.  32).  8.  A
standing  off  from  sin,  as  the  word  properly  signifies :  '*  Avoid  it,  pass  not  by  it,  turn
from  it,  and  pass  away"  (Prov.  iv.  15).  4.  A  going  oft  to  the  oiher  side,  namely,
to  Christ  and  holiness.  5.  A  going  farther  and  farther  from  sin.  Let  us  inquire
what  of  iniquity  God  charges  us  to  depart  from.  It  is  the  accurs-  d  thing,  with
which  we  have  nothing  to  do.  We  must  depart  from  all  sin,  from  the  whole  of  it.
We  must  di  part — (1)  From  under  the  dominion  of  sin  (Eom.  vi.  12).  (2)  From  the
practice  of  sin  (Isa.  Iv.  7).  (3)  From  the  devising  and  contriving  of  sin.  (4)  From
the  lo'  e  of  sin  (Ezek,  xiv.  6).  (5)  From  the  enjoyment  of  the  fruits  of  sin.  (6)
From  the  occasions  of  sin,  and  all  temptations  to  it  (Ezek.  xiv.  6).  (7)  From  the
workers  of  iniquity  (2  Cor.  vi.  17).  We  now  proceed — III.  To  explain  the  nature
OP  this  charge.  You  may  know  the  nature  of  this  charge  given  to  them  in  the
text,  by  these  following  properties.  It  is — 1.  An  universal  charge,  and  this  in  two
respects.  (1)  In  respect  of  the  persons  naming.  "  Every  one,"  says  the  text,  "  who
nametti  the  name  of  Christ."  (2)  In  respect  of  the  sins  which  you  are  to  depart
from  (Exek.  xviii.  31).  2.  A  peremptory  charge  (Acts  xvii.  30).  3.  A  charge  for
the  present  time  (Psa.  icv.  7,  8).  4.  A  charge  with  certification,  a  charge  upon
your  highest  peril  (Heb.  xii.  25).  We  are  now — IV.  To  show  why  those  par-
ticularly WHO  name  the  name  of  Christ  are  charged  to  depart  from  iniquity.
All  to  whom  the  gospel  comes  are  so  charged,  but  those  who  profess  Christ  are  in  a
special  manner  thus  charged.  For — 1.  The  practice  of  iniquity  is  a  contradiction
to  their  profession ;  so  that  they  cannot  have  tbis  practice,  but  they  give  the  lie  to
their  profession.  2.  Whosoever  partakes  of  Christ's  salvation  departs  from  iniquity ;
for  salvation  fr<>m  sin  is  the  leadmii!  and  chief  part  of  Christ's  salvation.  3.
The  practice  of  iniquity  is  in  a  peculiar  manner  offensive  to  God,  and  grieving
to  His  Spirit.  4.  It  reflects  a  pi-culiar  dishonour  upon  God;  such  sins  bring  a
scandal  upon  that  holy  name  and  religion  which  they  profess  (Bom.  ii.  24).    Wa


206  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  tt

are  now V.  To  make  bomb  practical  impbotemekt.    This  doctrine  shows  us — 1.

That  all  and  every  one  amongst  us,  by  the  authority  of  God  who  made  us,  and  in
whose  name  we  were  baptized,  are  obliged  to  depart  from  iniquity.  2.  That  for
men  to  abstain  from  the  sacrament  of  the  supper,  to  this  end  that  they  may  not  be
abridged  of  their  liberty  in  sinful  courses,  is  not  only  impious,  but  childish  and
foolish.  8.  That  they  are  bold  adventurers,  and  run  a  dreadful  risk,  who  come  in
their  sins,  unrepented  of,  and  not  sincerely  resolved  against,  and  sit  down  at  the
Lord's  table.  4.  Behold  here  how  the  Lord's  table  is  fenced,  by  a  fence  of  God's
own  making.  Our  text  debars  from  this  holy  table  whosoever  will  indulge  them-
selves in,  and  will  not  part  with,  any  known  sin  whatsoever ;  particularly — (1)  All
neglecters  of  the  duties  of  piety  towards  God.  (2)  All  who  make  not  conscience  of
their  duty  towards  men,  righteousness,  mercy,  and  charity.  (3)  All  those  who  are
not  sober  in  their  lives  (Tit.  ii.  12).  f4)  All  those  who  suffer  their  tongues  to  go  at
random,  and  make  no  conscience  of  tneir  words.  (5)  All  those  who  make  no  con-
science of  inward  purity,  the  keeping  of  the  heart.  (6)  All  those  who  entertain  and
indulge  themselves  in  any  known  sin,  or  in  the  neglect  of  any  known  duty,  or  are
not  content  to  have  their  sin  and  duty  discovered  to  them  (Psa.  Ixvi.  18).  6.  Be-
hold how  the  door  of  access  to  the  Lord's  table  is  opened  to  all  true  penitents,
whose  hearts  are  loosed  from,  and  set  against,  all  sin.  6.  This  shows  us  the  neces-
sity of  self -searching,  examining  ourselves  on  this  occasion  (1  Cor.  xi.  28).  We
e^ort  you  to  depart  from  iniquity,  turn  from  your  sins,  since  you  name  the  name
of  Christ.     (T.  Boston,  D.D.)        How  is  gospel  grace  the  best  motive  to  holinest  ? —

I.  DePABTINO  from  iniquity  is  no  cause  of  justification.  n.  DEPABTma  FBOM
INIQUITY  HATH  ITS   INFLUENCE  UPON,    THOUGH   NO   CAUSE  OF,    OUB  SALVATION  (Hob.  xil.

14).  III.  Holiness  is  indispensably  necessaey  unto  all  justified  persons.  As
it  was  necessa  y  that  Christ  should  take  upon  Him  our  flesh,  so  it  is  as  necessary
that  we  should  receive  from  Him  His  Spirit.  As  it  is  storied  of  one  who  was  very
debauched  and  wicked,  and,  taking  up  a  Bible,  which  by  his  religion  he  had  not
been  acquainted  with  (being  a  Papist),  he  confessed  that  whatsoever  book  that  was,
it  made  against  him ;  so  unless  thou  dost  sincerely  labour  after  holiness,  there  is
never  a  word  in  all  the  book  of  God  that  speaks  any  comfort  unto  thee,  none  of  the
fruit  that  grows  upon  the  Tree  of  Life  can  be  tasted  by  thee.  This  might  be  more
evinced  if  we  fix  our  mind  on  these  following  reasons  : — 1.  From  the  nature  of  God.
I  mean  the  essential  holiness  of  His  nature,  by  which  He  cannot  have  communion
with  any  one  that  is  unholy,  no  more  than  light  can  have  "  fellowship  with  dark-
ness "  ;  but  He  indispensably  hates  and  opposes  all  wickedness,  and  hath  declared
His  enmity  against  it.  Neither  can  the  gospel  change  God's  nature,  or  make  Him
less  to  abhor  sin.  It  is  indeed  a  declaration  of  the  way  and  means  which  God  hath
ordained  to  exalt  his  grace  and  mercy  to  the  sinner  by ;  but  it  is  in  saving  of  him
from  his  sin,  and  not  with  it.  2.  From  the  requisites  in  the  gospel  itself.  All  the
privileges  of  the  gospel  do  include  or  pre-suppose  departing  from  iniquity.  How  did
the  Jews  search  every  hole  and  corner  of  their  houses  to  find  out  leaven,  and  how
earnestly  did  they  cast  it  away  I  or  else  the  paschal  lamb  would  not  have  availed
them,  and  the  destroying  angel  would  not  have  passed  from  them.  And  "  these
things  are  our  examples  "  (1  Cor.  x.  7),  and  tell  us,  that  unless  we  industriously
Bearoh  out  and  cast  away  the  leaven  of  sin  and  wickedness,  the  very  death  of  Christ,
the  Lamb  of  God,  will  profit  us  nothing.  Let  us  take  a  view  of  the  privileges  of
those  that  are  saved  by  the  gospel,  and  see  how  they  are  obliged  to  holiness  by
them.  (1)  Election  is  the  first.  And  if  we  are  "chosen  in  Christ  Jesus,"  the
apostle  tells  us,  that  we  are  '•  chosen  in  Him,  that  we  should  be  holy  and  without
blame  before  Him"  (Eph.  i.  4).  (2)  Our  vocation  is  unto  holiness,  (3)  Out
regeneration,  or  being  bom  again,  which  the  gospel  insists  so  much  upon,  is  in
being  made  like  unto  God.  "  Partakers  of  the  Divine  nature  "  (2  Pet.  i.  4).  (4)
And  what  is  glory,  which  we  seek  for,  and  endeavour  after,  but  only  holiness  in
perfection  ?  (Rom.  ii.  7.)  Grace  is  glory  in  the  bud,  glory  is  grace  in  the  flower.
Christian  is  not  an  empty  name  ;  and  being  called  so  makes  us  not  to  be  so.  Every
one  is  not  a  scholar,  or  an  artist  in  any  faculty,  who  is  called  so.  Besides,
Christianity  is  a  practical  science ;  and  thou  hast  no  more  of  it  than  thou  dost
practise.  What  should  an  unholy  heart  do  in  heaven?  There  are  no  carnal
delights.  3.  It  is  written  in  our  veiy  natures,  did  we  but  understand  them.  Every
man  that  receives  a  reasoning  soul  is,  by  his  receiving  of  it,  obliged  to  give  God  a
reasonable  service.  IV.  Free  pardon  the  best  motive  to  become  holy.  1.  If  it
be  to  expiate  for  by-past  offences,  or  to  merit  undeserved  favours,  it  must  needs  be
abominable  in  the  sight  of  God,  being  the  highest  act  of  pride  or  presumption  that


OHA».  n.]  U.  TIMOTHY,  207

can  be  imagined.  Let  our  works  be  what  they  will,  though  the  best  "  are  as  filthy
rags"  (Isa.  Ixiv.  6),  if  they  be  offered  unto  God  by  way  of  barter  or  exchange,  they
become  most  abominable :  as  if  God  stood  in  need  of  something  that  we  have,  or
that  we  were  so  safficient  as  to  be  able  to  benefit  God  too.  2.  To  depart  from  iniquity,
or  to  labour  in  holiness,  in  order  to  express  our  thankfulness  unto  God  for  Hia
mercies  in  Jesus  Christ,  is  most  grateful  and  most  forcible.  3.  Love  imto  God  for
all  His  glorious  excellencies,  especially  for  His  mercy  in  Christ  Jesus,  is  the  best
principle  of  holiness  and  of  our  depaurting  from  iniquity.  God  requires  His  children
to  give  Him  their  heart  (Prov.  xxiii.  26).  Now  love  is  as  a  fire  which  "  many  waters
cannot  quench."  Difficulties  will  be  overcome,  and  obedience  will  be  permanent,
where  true  love  to  God  is.  And  this  love  in  the  soul  to  God  is  begun  by  and  flows
from  God's  love  first  unto  the  soul,  as  fire  kindles  fire :  "  He  loved  us  first "  (1  John
iv.  19).    {Ibid.)        The  obligation  of  Christians  to  a  holy  life : — I.  What  obligation

THE  PB0FE88I0N  OP  ChBISTIANITT  LAYS  UPON  MEN  TO  LIVE  HOLT  LIVES.      1.  He  that  pro-

fesseth  himself  a  Christian  professeth  to  entertain  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  to  believe
the  whole  gospel,  to  assent  to  all  the  articles  of  the  Christian  faith,  to  all  the  pre-
cepts and  promises  and  threatenings  of  the  gospel.  Now  the  great  design,  the
proper  intention  of  this  doctrine,  is,  to  take  men  off  from  sin,  and  to  direct  and  en-
courage them  to  a  holy  life.  2.  He  that  professeth  himself  a  Christian  professeth
to  live  in  the  imitation  of  Christ's  example,  and  to  follow  His  steps,  "  who  did  no
sin,  neither  was  guile  found  in  His  mouth."  3.  He  that  calls  himself  a  Christian
hath  solemnly  engaged  himself  to  renounce  all  sin  and  to  live  a  holy  life.  Thus  you
see  what  obligation  the  profession  of  Christianity  lays  upon  us  to  holiness  of  life.
From  all  which  it  is  evident  that  the  gospel  requires  something  on  our  part.  For
the  covenant  between  God  and  us  is  a  mutual  engagement ;  and,  as  there  are
blessings  promised  on  His  part,  so  there  are  conditions  to  be  performed  on  ours.
II.  I  come  now  to  the  second  thing  propounded,  and  that  is,  to  persuade  those
WHO  PBOFESS  Christianity  to  answer  those  obligations  to  a  holy  liee,  which
THEIR  religion  LAYS  UPON  THEM.  1.  Consider  how  unbecoming  it  is  for  a  man  to
live  unsuitably  to  his  profession.  2.  Consider  how  great  a  scandal  this  must  needs
be  to  our  blessed  Saviour  and  His  holy  religion.  As  we  would  not  proclaim  to  the
world  that  the  gospel  is  an  unholy  and  vicious  institution,  let  us  take  heed  that  we
bring  no  scandal  upon  it  by  our  Uves,  lest  the  enemies  of  our  religion  say  as  Salvian
tells  us  they  did  in  his  time — "  Surely  if  Christ  had  taught  so  holy  a  doctrine.
Christians  would  have  lived  holier  lives."  3.  And,  lastly,  let  us  consider  the  danger
we  expose  ourselves  to  by  not  living  answerably  to  our  religion.  Hvpocrites  are
instanced  in  Scripture  as  a  sort  of  sinners  that  shall  have  the  sharpest  torments  and
the  fiercest  damnation.  {J.  Tillotson,  D.D.)  The  obligations  of  Christians  to
depart  from  iniquity : — I.  Every  professing  Christian  does  name  the  name  op
Christ,  and  is  called  by  His  name,  even  as  the  disciples  were  called  Christians  first
at  Antioch ;  nay,  even  before  that  naming  at  Antioch,  every  believer  in  Christ
— every  one  baptized  into  His  name— was  virtually  so  called.  And  we  may
say,  as  every  pupil  or  disciple  of  the  various  schools  and  sects  of  philosophy
acknowledged  the  master,  and  assumed  the  name  of  the  school  to  which
he  belonged ;  and  as  the  soldier  wore  the  badge  of  the  commander,  and  of
the  corps  to  which  he  was  attached;  and  as  idolaters  had  the  name  of  the
idol-god  whom  they  worshipped  upon  their  hands  or  upon  their  forehead ;  so,  in  like
manner,  in  a  far  higher  and  in  the  most  eminent  and  religious  sense,  every  Christian
showed  his  school,  the  company,  the  corps  to  which  he  belonged,  to  be  that  of  Christ
Jesus  the  Lord,  whose  name  he  bears,  and  into  whose  service  he  has  been  admitted.
n.  Press  upon  you  departure  from  all  sin.  1.  One  great  end  of  the  religion  of
Jesus  is  the  destruction  of  sin  and  the  encouragement  of  holiness.  Can  any  one
doubt  of  this  ?  Can  the  most  superficial  examination  of  its  terms,  and  language,
and  ordinances,  leave  any  one  to  doubt  of  this  ?  I  appeal  to  the  testimony  of
enemies,  of  wicked  men,  and  of  evil  spirits  in  proof  of  this.  Why  has  the  gospel
been  so  hated  and  opposed  ?  And,  from  the  whole  current  of  prophecies,  types,  and
positive  declaration  of  the  great  Author  of  the  Gospel,  is  it  not  undeniable  that  the
destruction  of  the  works  of  the  devil  was  the  grand  end  of  the  wondrous  dispensa-
tion? 2.  If  any  spark  of  gratitude  be  kindled  in  your  hearts  to  Him  who  hath  given
Himself  for  you,  to  deliver  you  from  this  present  evil  world,  and  to  bless  you  in
turning  every  one  of  you  from  your  iniquities,  and  who  hath  done  this  at  such  an
expensive  rate,  redeeming  you  not  with  corruptible  things,  as  silver  and  gold,  but
with  His  own  precious  blood,  surely  you  wiU  depart  from  all  iniquity.  3.  Again,
the  credit  of  religion,  regard  to  the  honour  of  Christ,  should  lead  you  to  depart  from


208  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n,

all  iniquity.  It  is  said  of  the  Pythagoreans,  an  ancient  sect  of  philosophers,  that
they  used  to  send  a  coffin  to  unworthy  members  who  had  disgraced  the  sect,
intimating  that  they  were  considered  as  dead  and  gone.  4.  Finally,  if  you  would
maintain  your  peace  of  mind  and  your  good  hope  through  grace,  and  have  the  first
part  of  this  text  and  motto  secured — "The  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  His" — see
that  the  second  part  of  it  which  we  have  been  illustrating  be  fulUlled  and  carried
through,  even  "  departing  from  all  iniquity."  (W.  H.  Burns.)  Christians  bound
to  cultivate  Iwliness  of  heart  and  life : — I.  Consider  to  whom  the  text  is  addbessed.
1.  It  may  be  said  of  all  professing  Christians  that  they  have  named  the  name  of
Christ.  The  text  is  not  addressed  to  infidels.  Those  who  have  merely  named
the  name  of  Christ  have  His  name,  but  have  nothing  of  His  nature;  they
have  something  to  do  before  they  can  depart  from  iniquity.  It  is  idle  to  tell  the
eaptive  to  leave  his  prison  till  the  fetters  are  broken  which  chain  him  to  its  floor  ;
before  a  dead  man  walks  he  must  live  ;  before  the  branch  bears  it  must  be  grafted ;
before  the  water  wells  from  the  frozen  fountain  the  springs  must  be  thawed ;  and  the
breeze  and  the  breath  of  heaven  must  blow  down  the  valley  before  its  dry  bones  are
changed  into  living  men  ;  and  so  before  a  man  can,  by  one  step,  leave  iniquity,  he
must  be  made  a  new  creature  in  Jesus  Christ.  2.  Our  text  is  addressed  to  real
Christians.  When  the  apostle  said,  "  Let  every  one  that  nameth  the  name  of  Christ
depart  from  iniquity,"  it  was  a  very  different  thing  to  do  so  then  and  to  do  it  now ;
it  is  one  thing  to  swim  down  the  stream  and  another  thing  to  make  head  against  it ;
the  mere  naming  the  name  of  Christ  is  nowadays  no  evidence  at  all  that  a  man  is
a  true  lover  of  Jesus.  II.  Christ's  people  are  called  on  to  depart  from  iniquity.
The  text  calls  on  you  who  are  lovers  of  Jesus  not  only  to  abstain  from  open  and
barefaced  iniquity,  not  only  to  maintain  before  the  world  the  high  honour  of  your
Master's  cause,  but  to  part  with  your  secret  and  your  sweetest  sins.  III.  The  love
OF  Christ  should  lead  tjs  to  depart  from  all  iniquity.  Can  a  lover  of  Jesus  think
of  the  shame,  the  spitting,  scourging,  crucifying,  and  very  tempest  of  evils  they
rained  down  on  the  head  of  a  beloved  Saviour,  and  not  hate  his  sins  ?  IV.  Seek
Divine  grace  to  enable  you  to  depart  from  all  iniquity.  Sin  is  like  the  negro's
colour :  it  is  not  an  accidental  property  ;  he  is  born  with  it ;  the  water  of  the  broad
eea  cannot  wash  it  away  ;  the  art  of  man  cannot  remove  it ;  in  change  of  climate
he  remains  imchanged ;  you  may  carry  him  to  shiver  amid  the  snows  of  Greenland ;
he  may  exchange  the  shadow  of  his  palm  trees  for  a  hut  of  snow,  the  burning  sands
for  the  frozen  sea,  he  is  as  dark  as  ever ;  nothing  but  a  miracle  of  nature  can  change
the  negro's  colour,  and  nothing  but  a  miracle  of  grace  can  change  the  sinner's
heart ;  "  though  you  wash  thee  with  nitre,  and  take  tbee  much  soap,  yet  thine
iniquity  is  marked  before  me,  saith  the  Lord."  You  have  one  of  two  things  to
choose — you  must  either  depart  for  Christ  from  iniquity,  or  you  must  depart  for
iniquity  from  Christ.  (T.  Guthrie,  D.D.)  The  moral  tendency  of  the  gospel: — I.
The  great  design  of  Alihghty  God  in  the  dispensation  of  the  gospel  is  our  im-
provement in  holiness  and  virtue  here,  in  order  to  the  attainment  of  eternal  life
hereafter.  The  gospel  is  not  a  fanciful  theory,  containing  a  system  of  speculative
opinions,  which  have  little  or  no  connection  with  virtue  and  happiness.  Universal
obedience  is  declared  to  be  requisite.  Having  thus  considered  the  nature  of  our  holy
religion,  we  are  now — 11.  To  consider  the  consequences  of  living  unsuit.^ly  to
that  profession.  1.  He  who  naiues  the  name  of  Christ,  without  departing  from
iniquity,  exposes  himself  to  reproach  and  contempt.  Men  will  not  be  imposed  upon
by  an  empty  possession.  They  cannot  indeed  see  into  our  hearts,  and  notice  the
motives  by  which  we  are  actuated  ;  but  they  can  observe  our  good  or  bad  actions,
and  judge  whether  our  lives  be  answerable  to  our  profession.  2.  But  the  conse-
quences of  vice  in  a  professed  Christian  extend  fai  ther  than  to  the  sinner  himself.
A  wicked  life  in  a  professed  Christian  is  attended  with  more  than  ordinary  mischief :
it  not  only  serves  to  seduce,  like  every  other  evil  example,  but  it  has  a  strong  ten-
dency to  stagger  a  weak  and  honest  mind.  Perplexities  crowd  upon  his  mind.  He
begins  to  suspect  the  truth  of  religion,  and  to  regard  it  as  an  empty  profession.  His
zeal  abates ;  he  relaxes  in  the  discharge  of  his  duty ;  and  throws  religion  away  as  a
mere  imposition.  His  enemies  rejoice  ;  his  friends  weep.  Eeligion  has  lost  an
advocate  ;  the  world  has  gained  a  triumph  ;  but  his  blood  will  be  required  of  your
hands.  3.  But  the  consequences  of  iniquity,  in  a  professed  Christian,  extend  farther
than  individuals;  they  extend  to  the  cause  of  Christianity,  nay,  even  to  our  blessed
Saviour  Himself.  It  is  an  indignity  offered  to  Christ,  and  an  outrage  committed
upon  the  gospel,  in  the  disguise  of  a  friend.  It  seems  to  declare  either  that  Christi-
anity countenances  immorality,  or  that  it  wants  authority  to  enforce  its  laus.     Oa


CHIP,  n.]  II.  TIMOTHY.  209

both  which  suppositions  it  destroys  its  authority  as  coming  from  God.  4.  A  wicked
L'fe,  as  it  injures  the  weak  and  reflects  discredit  on  religion  and  its  author,  also
exposes  the  sinner  himself  to  the  most  imminent  danger.  There  are  many  cir-
cumstances which  aggravate  the  guilt,  and  will  add  to  the  punishment  of  a  wicked
Christian.  The  more  indulgent  the  father  who  commands,  the  more  ungrateful  is
the  IOC  who  disobeys ;  the  more  plain  and  reasonable  the  command,  the  more  inex-
cusable *:he  breach  of  it ;  the  more  powerful  the  motives  to  obedience,  the  more
obstinate  the  disobedience ;  the  more  advantages  and  means  of  improvement,  the
more  culpable  the  neglect,  and  the  more  dreadful  the  condemnation.  (Andreio
Donnan.)  Particular  in  small  things : — Balph  Waldo  Emerson  was  a  man  of  rare
integrity,  and  so  particular  about  small  things  as  to  be  punctilious.  One  day  a  new
cooking-stove  had  been  provided  for  his  house,  and  although  the  stove  came  highly
recommended  it  proved  thoroughly  refractory  and  aggravating,  and  did  everything
but  what  it  was  expected  to  do.  At  length  the  family  was  in  despair,  and  some  one
suggested  sending  it  to  auction.  "  What  1  "  exclaimed  Emerson,  "  transfer  our  own
perplexity  to  another  pair  of  shoulders?  No,  never!  unless  the  stove  be  labelled
•  imperfect.' "  And  "  imperfect "  it  was  labelled,  and  sold  at  a  heavy  discount.
(New  Zealand  Methodist.)  A  holy  life : — The  following  testimony  borne  to  the
character  of  the  Rev.  John  Fletcher  by  Wesley,  in  the  funeral  sermon  which  he
preached  for  him  soon  after  his  death,  serves  to  explain  the  powerful  influence
which  he  exerted  on  the  age  in  which  he  lived,  an  influence  which  has  not  yet  died
out.  •'  I  was  intimately  acquainted  with  him  for  about  thirty  years.  I  conversed
with  him  morning,  noon,  and  night,  without  the  least  reserve,  during  a  journey  of
many  hundred  mUes ;  and  in  all  that  time  I  never  heard  him  speak  an  improper
word,  or  saw  him  do  an  improper  action.  To  conclude  :  many  exemplary  men  have"
I  known,  holy  in  heart  and  life,  within  fourscore  years  ;  but  one  equal  to  him  I  have
not  known,  one  so  inwardly  and  outwardly  devoted  to  God.  So  unblamable  a
character  in  every  respect  I  have  not  found  either  in  Europe  or  America,  and  I
scarce  expect  to  find  another  such  on  this  side  eternity."  Power  of  holy  lives : —
I  was  once  privileged  to  lead  an  aged  man  across  a  thoroughfare — that  old  man  of
whom  you  may  read  in  a  tract  called,  "I  never  Lost  but  Once."  Some  rough  men,
attracted  by  his  patriarchal  appearance,  cleared  a  way  for  him  through  the  carts  and
boys,  and  as  he  acknowledged  their  kindness  with  a  low  bow  of  his  silver  head,  I  heard
one  man  say,  "  If  ever  there  was  a  godly  party,  that  is  one ;  the  face  don't  teU  lies."
A  good  life  enforces  teaching  : — A  gentleman  from  England  wrote  that  he  went  to
some  one  of  our  cities  in  the  morning  prayer-meeting  of  one  of  the  churches ;  that
during  the  meeting  a  man  spoke  with  Uttle  or  no  animation,  and  the  address  was
wanting  in  all  the  elements  calculated  to  produce  an  impression.  Yet,  to  his  astonish-
ment, the  entire  meeting  appeared  to  be  listening  with  rapt  attention,  and  it  was  but
a  little  before  he  saw  many  of  the  people  were  in  tears.  He  was  so  utterly  surprised
at  the  result  that  he  was  led  to  inquire  about  it  at  the  close  of  the  service.  He  was
told  that  the  man  who  had  spoken  was  so  remarkable  for  his  uniform  Christian  con-
sistency, and  was  so  gentle  and  affectionate,  that  his  words  were  always  weighty,  for
that  his  life  had  secured  him  the  affection  of  the  whole  church.  This  visitor  wroto
further  that  he  went  to  the  meeting  the  following  morning,  and  was  much  interested
in  the  whole  service,  and  specially  so  in  a  gentleman's  address,  who  spoke  with
such  fervour  and  eloquence  as  to  excite  his  feelings  intensely,  so  that  he  found  him-
self weeping  profusely,  aud  supposed  that  everybody  in  the  meeting  would  be  as
much  excited  as  himself;  but  on  looking  around,  he  found  that  he  was  the  only
weeper  to  be  seen.  Again  he  was  astonished ;  but  the  solution  was  the  fact  that
while  his  brethren  did  not  question  his  being  a  Christian,  his  hfe  had  not  compelled
their  homage.  {S.  B.  Halliday.)  Rxmning  from  sin : — We  once  heard  Dr.  W.  F.
Broadus  tell  of  a  little  girl  who,  in  the  days  when  the  conversion  of  children  was
not  the  subject  of  as  much  prayer  as  now,  applied  for  membership  in  a  Baptist
chapel.  "  Were  you  a  sinner,"  asked  an  old  deicon,  "before  this  change  of  which
you  now  speak?"  "Yes,  sir,"  she  replied.  "Well,  are  you  now  a  sinner?'
*'  Yes,  sir,  I  feel  I  am  a  greater  sinner  than  ever."  ••  Then,"  continued  the  deacon,
"  what  change  can  there  be  in  you?  "  "  I  don't  know  how  to  explain  it,"  she  said,^
"  but  I  u'jed  to  be  a  sinner  running  after  sin,  but  now  I  hope  I  am  a  sinner  running]
from  sin.*'  They  received  her,  and  for  years  she  was  a  bright  and  shining  hght;{
and  now  ehe  lives  where  there  is  no  sin  to  run  from.  Sin  ruinous: — A  man  must
have  hell  taken  out  of  him  if  he  is  to  escape  hell.  {Norman  Macleod.)  Th»
itability  of  holiness : — A  building  which  demands  holiness,  carries  within  itself  no
ground  of  dissolution  and  overthrow.  {Van  Oosterzee.)     Inconsistent  Christians  false

14


f


210  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  n.

vntne$se» : — Dr.  E.  W.  Benson  (Archbishop  of  Canterbury)  said  that  a  well-known
advanced  freethinker  had  told  him  that  he  was  more  impressed  by  the  inconsistency
between  the  theoretical  teaching  and  the  social  practice  of  caltivated  and  active-
minded  Christians  in  respect  of  wealth,  advancement,  and  luxuriuusness  than  by
our  doctrinal  dLSerence.  And  what  was  his  inference  ?  That  the  standard  of  the
gospel  was  too  high — that  its  morality  was  impracticable,  as  tested  by  the  lives  of
those  who  accepted  it,  and  that  it  was,  therefore,  not  divine.  The  power  of  a  good
-^life : — A  sceptic  towards  whom  a  Christian  had  shown  great  kindness,  said  to  him«
X  •'  I  don't  believe  in  Christ,  but  I  do  believe  in  you,  and  I  will  try  to  believe  in  Christ
because  you  tell  me  it  is  He  who  has  made  you  what  you  are."  (J.  Clifford,  DJ).)
Christ  dishonoured  by  the  inconsiiteiicies  of  His  professed  people : — A  recently-erected
edifice  has  fallen :  how  do  men  treat  the  fact  ?  They  instantly  connect  it  with  tha
architect  or  the  builder.  When  a  chemical  experiment  has  failed,  how  is  it  looked
upon  ?  Instantly  the  manipulator  is  blamed  for  want  of  skill,  or  for  want  of  judg-
ment in  the  selection  of  the  quaUty  of  his  materials.  So  all  the  practices  of  the
Church  are  carried  back  to  Christ,  and  He  is  magnified  or  "  crucified  afresh,"  accord-
ing to  their  nature.    (J.  Parker,  DJ).)

Yet.  20,  21.  In  a  great  house  there  are  not  only  vessels  of  gold  and  of  silver,  but
also  of  wood  and  of  earth ;  and  some  to  honour  and  some  to  dishonour.  If  a  man,
therefore,  purge  himself  from  these  he  shall  be  a  vessel  unto  honour. — The  house
and  its  vessels  : — The  words  imply  a  parable  which  is  not  formally  interpreted.  Bising
as  it  does,  however,  from  the  thought  of  the  "  foundation  "  in  ver.  19,  we  shall  not  be
far  wrong  in  assuming  that  the  "  great  house  "  is  (as  in  1  Tim.  iii.  15)  the  Church
of  God.  The  sequel  of  the  parable  presents  questions  of  greater  difficulty.  Are  we,
with  the  majority  of  interpreters,  to  identify  the  vessels  made  to  honour  with  silver
and  gold,  those  of  wood  and  earth  with  the  vessels  made  to  dishonour  7  In  this
case  the  difference  between  the  two  sets  of  vessels  is,  in  the  interpretation  of  tha
parable,  purely  ethical.  All  true  members  of  Christ  are  as  the  gold  and  silver,  all
unworthy  members  as  the  wood  and  clay.  And,  as  the  material  of  which  the  vessel
is  made  does  not  depend  upon  itself,  it  might  seem  at  first  as  if  we  had  here,  as  in
the  parable  of  the  tares  and  the  drag-net,  to  interpolate  the  thought  that  the  man
whom  the  vessel  represents  may,  by  purifying  himself,  transmute  his  nature,  and
pass  from  the  one  class  to  the  other.  I  venture  to  think  that  a  different  interpre-
tation gives  a  far  truer  meaning.  The  classes  of  vessels  correspond  to  the  gifts
which  men  have  received  (as  in  the  parable  of  the  talents  we  have  the  five,  the
two,  the  one),  and  each  has  its  proper  use  and  honour  in  the  great  house  of  the
Church  of  God.  But  in  each  case,  of  the  gold  as  of  the  clay,  it  is  true  that  purity
is  the  one  essential  condition  of  honourable  use.  The  man  of  poorer  gifts  (to  pass
from  the  sign  to  the  thing  signified)  may,  if  he  keeps  himself  pure,  be  a  vessel
made  to  honour.  If  the  silver  and  gold  are  allowed  to  be  defiled  by  that  which  is
unclean,  if  "  holiest  things  find  vilest  using,"  then  even  they  are  in  danger  of
serving  only  as  vessels  for  dishonour,  of  showing  (not  ceasing  even  then  to  fulfil  a
Divine  purpose)  that  the  righteous  judgment  of  God  is  against  them  that  commit
such  things.  In  this  case  the  words,  "  If  a  man  purge  himself  "  retain  their  full
significance,  and  we  have  no  need  to  interpolate  the  idea  of  a  self-transmuting
process,  changing  the  earthen  vessel  into  gold.  (E.  H.  Plumptre,  D.D.)
The  Church  a  kingly  house : — I.  Thb  tbue  visiblb  Chubch  is  like  a  obeat
AND  KINGLY  H0U3K.  For,  did  not  the  King  of  kings  contrive  its  platform?
lay  its  foundation?  rear  its  walls?  and  perfect  its  building?  Doth  He  not
protect  it,  dwell  in  it,  and  prescribe  laws  to  govern  it?  For  its  circle,  is  not
that  also  great,  spacious?  Doth  it  not  extend  itself  to  the  four  corners  of
the  world?  Who  can  number  the  inhabitants  of  it?  or  tell  the  tenth  part
of  this  household?  Is  not  its  provision  wonderful?  Do  not  its  servants  eat
angels'  food,  bread  from  heaven,  and  drink  the  choicest  wines,  the  water  of  Ufe  ?
II.  In  thk  visible  Chubch  abb  good  and  bad  pbbsons.     III.  All  God's  sbbvants

ARE   NOT   EQUALLY   SANCTIFIED.      IV.    StbONO    CfiBISTIANS   ABE    LIKE   VESSELS  OF   OOLD.

First,  they  are  resembled  to  vessels,  both  good  and  bad  persons ;  this  is  common
to  all.  Secondly,  unto  vessels  of  gold  and  silver ;  this  is  proper  to  the  good,  not
the  bad.  Why  to  vessels?  Because  they  are  capable  to  receive  the  water  of  grace ->
and  corruption,  as  vessels  any  liquid  or  solid  matter.  Again,  they  are  of  use  in
God's  house,  like  vessels  in  man's.  And  grown  Christians  are  like  golden  vessels  ;"
for  they  are  rare,  precious,  pure,  glorious ;  of  honour,  profit,  and  will  endure  tha
fire,  hammer,  and  come  out  of  the  furnace  the  more  purged  from  tin,  dross,  cor-


CHAP,  n.]  11.  TIMOTHY,  211

ruptioD.  And,  as  noblemen  engrave  their  arms  on  the  one,  so  doth  God  imprint
His  image  on  Uie  other.  But  you  will  say,  How  may  I  know  myself  to  be  such  ?
Well  enough ;  for  golden  vessels  have  the  most  fiery  trials,  endure  much  hammer-
ing, are  strongest  set  on  by  the  devil,  have  the  hottest  skirmishes  in  their  captain's
army,  scatter  the  words  of  grace  the  farthest,  and  rejoice  in  the  greatest  tribulation.
V.  Weakeb  Christians  abe  like  vessels  of  silver.  VL  The  wicked  are  not
equamjY  cobrdpted.  Vn.  Persons  less  profane  are  like  wooden  vessels.
VUI.  The  basest  sort  of  men  be  like  earthen  ones.  IX.  The  final  estatb
OF  MEN  18  BUT  TWOFOLD.  (J.  Barlow,  D.D.)  The  house  of  God  and  uteTisils  of
it : — I.  What  is  the  obeat  house  here  spoken  of  ?  The  Church  is  sometimes
in  Scripture  called  the  house  of  God  (1  Tim.  iii.  15  ;  Heb.  iii.  2),  and  here  a  great
house.  If  the  greatness  of  that  material  house  of  God,  erected  by  Solomon,  was
measured  by  the  number  of  workmen,  which  were  200,000,  and  of  the  years  wherein
it  was  a  building,  which  were  seven ;  much  more  may  we  conceive  this  spiritual
house  great,  which  hath  been  from  the  beginning  of  the  world  a  setting  up,  both
by  God's  own  hand,  and  infinite  numbers  and  millions  of  workmen,  patriarchs,
prophets,  apostles,  pastors,  teachers,  martyrs,  confessors,  professors,  and  holy  men
in  all  ages.  And  for  the  parts,  the  foundation  is  of  pure  gold,  even  Jesus  Christ.
The  stones  not  dead,  as  in  other  houses,  but  living  stones  (1  Pet.  ii.  5).  And  the
whole  house  is,  saith  St.  Peter,  a  spiritual  house  ;  so  as  great  things  are  spoken,
and  might  more  be  spoken,  of  this  great  house  of  God.  H.  What  are  thesb
vessels  of  gold  and  silver,  of  wood  and  earth  ?  As  in  the  material  house  of  God,
the  temple,  were  vessels  for  all  services,  both  more  honourable,  of  gold  and  silver,
and  others  of  baser  matter ;  so  in  this  spiritual  house  (typified  by  that)  are  vessels,  that
is,  persons  of  sundry  sorts,  distinguished  in  our  text.  1.  In  themselves,  by  their
matter,  gold,  silver,  wood,  earth.  2.  In  their  use  and  end,  honour  and  dishonour.
Now,  out  of  each  part  observe  somewhat.  1.  In  that  the  Church  is  the  house  of
God,  and  we  all  profess  ourselves  to  be  within  this  house,  we  learn  two  things :  (1)
To  walk  careful  in  God's  presence,  who  dwelleth  in  it.  In  other  great  houses  many
things  pasi;  and  are  done,  which  the  master  knows  not,  for  that  he  is  not  always  at
home,  and,  if  he  were,  yet  his  eye  could  not  be  in  all  corners.  But  the  owner  of
this  house  is  never  from  home,  and  His  eye  pierceth  into  every  part  of  His  house,
and  is  on  every  person,  so  that  nothing  can  escape  Him.  (2)  To  acquaint  ourselves
with  His  will  and  directions.  2.  In  that  the  Church  is  the  house  of  God,  it  follows
every  Christian  is  a  part  of  this  house  (Heb.  iii.  6).  And  therefore  we  must — (1)
Give  the  Lord  possession  of  His  house.  (2)  Having  once  given  Him  possession,
beware  of  sacrilege.  What  was  once  dedicated  to  God  might  never  be  profaned.
1.  Note  that  there  must  necessarily  be  a  mixture  of  good  and  bad  in  the  visible
Church ;  vessels  of  divers  sorts.  2.  Note  how  the  Lord  esteems  of  a  godly  man,
though  he  be  good  but  in  part.  He  calls  him  a  vessel  of  gold  and  a  vessel  of
honour,  even  where  much  dross  remains  to  be  purged.  But  how  shall  I  know  that
I  am  indeed  a  vessel  of  honour?  1.  In  respect  of  himself,  he  purgeth  himself  from
these  things.  What  is  this  purging  or  purifying?  According  to  our  former
resemblance,  we  may  conceive  the  metaphor  to  be  taken  from  goldsmiths,  who  used
to  try  and  purify  their  metals  from  dross,  before  they  can  frame  it  to  a  vessel  of
honourable  use  and  service.  Even  so  doth  the  Lord  with  His  chosen.  Who  must
cleanse  and  purify?  Every  man  himself,  none  excepted,  that  will  be  a  golden
vessel.  This  purging  is  all  one  with  our  sanctification  ;  the  whole  work  of  which
is  God's,  as  appears — (1)  By  His  promise  (Isa.  iv.  4).  (2)  By  Christ's  testimony
(John  XV.  2).  (31  By  His  prayer  for  the  whole  Church  (John  xvii.  17).  (4)  By  the
prayers  of  all  samts  (Psa.  li).  And  yet  we  are  said  to  purge  ourselves ;  yea,  to
convert  ourselves,  and  make  ourselves  new  hearts.  When — 1.  Being  renewed  by
the  Spirit,  we  co-operate  with  Him  in  using  the  means.  In  not  resisting  His
work.  From  what  must  a  man  purge  himself  ?  From  these  things — that  is,  lusts
and  defilements,  errors  in  judgment  and  practice,  in  faith  and  manners,  of  which
he  had  spoken  before ;  implying  sin  to  be  the  foulest  filthiness  in  the  world,  and
that  it  defiles  the  whole  man.  But  when  must  he  purge  himself  ?  The  apostle
speaks  in  the  present  time,  for  there  is  no  purgatory  hereafter.  Again,  the  present
time  noteth  a  continued  act ;  so  as  every  man  must  always  while  he  liveth  be
purging  away  these  things.  2.  The  second  mark  for  the  trial  of  such  a  one  is  in
respect  of  God.  He  is  meet  for  the  Lord.  Before  God  can  use  men  as  vessels  of
honour,  Himself  must  first  fit  and  prepare  them  to  honourable  services.  We  are
His  workmanship,  created  in  Christ  unto  good  works  (Epb,  ii.  10).  3.  The  third
is  io  respect  of  godliness.    Prepared  to  every  good  work.     Where — (1)  The  object,


213  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (chap,  a

works  good  in  the  author,  role  and  kind,  piety  and  mercy.     (2)  The  extent — every.
(3)  The  readiness  to  it— Whence ?  of  God.     (T.  Taylor,  D.D.)        The  great  house
and  the  vessels  in  it: — "After  all,"  says  the  apostle  in  effect,  though  in  fewer  words,
••  it  is  not  such  a  very  great  wonder  that  there  should  be  persons  in  the  Church  who
are  not  of  the  sterhng  metal  of  sincerity,  nor  of  the  gold  and  silver  of  truth,  which
endures  the  fire.    You  must  not  look  at  Hymenseus  and  Philetus  as  if  they  were
prodigies,  there  have  been  many  like  th^m  and  there  will  be  many  more ;  these  ill
weeds  grow  apace,  in  all  ages  they  multiply  and  increase."    Where  beneath  the
skies  shall  we  find  absolute  purity  in  any  community  ?     The  very  first  family  had
a  Cain  in  it,  and  there  was  a  wicked  Ham  even  in  the  select  few  within  the  ark.
Isaac,  with  all  his  quiet  walk  with  God,  must  be  troubled  with  an  Esau,  and  yo
know  how  in  the  house  of  Jacob  there  were  many  sons  that  walked  not  as  they
should.    ••  I  have  chosen  you  twelve,  and  one  of  you  is  a  devil."    In  the  great  field
which  Christ  has  sown,  tares  will  spring  up  among  the  wheat,  for  the  enemy  takes
pains  to  sow  them;  neither  is  it  possible  for  us  to  root  them  up.    In  the  king's
garden  briars  will  grow,  thorns  also  and  thistles  will  the  most  sacred  soil  yield  to
us.     Even  the  lilies  of  Christ  grow  among  thorns.    You  cannot  keep  the  best  of
chui'ches  altogether  pure.    Yea,  lift  your  eyes  even  to  the  skies,  and  though  there
te  myriads  of  stars,  yet  ye  shall  mark  wandering  stars  among  them,  and  meteors
which  are  and  are  not,  and  are  quenched  in  the  blackness  of  darkness  for  ever.
Until  we  shall  come  to  the  heaven  of  the  Most  High  we  must  expect  to  find  chaff
mixed  with  the  wheat.    Coming  to  the  text,  the  apostle  suggests  the  encourage-
ment I  have  already  given,  under  a  certain  metaphor.    The  Church  of  God  being
in  the  world  has  its  common  side  and  its  common  vessels,  but  being  also  a  heavenly
house  has  also  its  nobler  furniture,  far  more  precious  than  gold  which  perisheth
though  it  be  tried  with  fire.    I.  First  let  us  consider  the  great  house.    The
apostle  compares  the  Church  to  a  great  house.     We  feel  sure  he  is  not  speaking  of
the  world;  it  did  not  occur  to  him  to  speak  about  the  world,  and  it  would  have
been  altogether  superfluous  to  tell  us  that  in  the  world  there  are  all  sorts  of  people,
—  everybody  knows  that.     The  Church  is  a  great  house  belonging  to  a  great
personage,  for  the  Church  is  the  house  of  God,  according  to  the  promise — "  I  will
dwell  in  them,  and  walk  in  them."    1.  It  is  a  great  house  because  planned  and
designed  upon  a  great  scale.    2.  Because  it  has  been  erected  at  great  cost,  and
with  great  labour.     3.  Because  its  household  arrangements  are  conducted  on  a
great  scale.    Speak  of  fine  flour — behold.  He  has  given  as  angels'  food ;  speak  of
royal  dainties — behold,  the  Lord  hath  given  us  fat  things  full  of  marrow,  wines  on
the  lees  well  refined.    What  a  perpetual  feast  doth  the  Lord  Jesus  keep  up  for  all
His  followers.     4.  For  the  number  of  its  inhabitants.     How  many  have  lived
beneath  that  roof -tree  for  ages.    What  a  swarm  there  is  of  the  Lord's  children,  and
yet  not  one  of  the  family  remains  unfed.    The  Church  is  a  great  house  wherein
thousands  dwell,  yea,  a  number  that  no  man  can  number.    6.  Because  of  its
importance.    The  Church  is  a  great  house  because  it  is  God's  hospice,  where  He
distributes  bread  and  wine  to  refresh  the  weary,  and  entertains  wayfarers  that  else
had  been  lost  in  the  storm.    It  is  God's  hospital,  into  which  He  takes  the  sick,  and
there  He  nourishes  them  until  they  renew  their  yonth  like  the  eagle's.    It  is  God's
great  pharos  with  its  lantern  flashing  forth  a  directing  ray  so  that  wanderers  far
away  may  be  directed  to  the  haven  of  peace.     It  is  the  seat  of  God's  magistracy,
for  there  are  set  thrones  of  judgment,  the  thrones  of  the  house  of  David.     The
great  house  of  the  Church  is  the  university  for  teaching  all  nations,  the  library
wherein  the   sacred  oracles  are  preserved,  the  treasury  wherein  the  truth  is
deposited,  and  the  registry  of  new-born  heirs  of  heaven.    It  is  important  to  heaven
as  well  as  to  earth,  for  its  topmost  towers  reach  into  glory.    H.  We  will  now  go
inside  the  great  house,  and  we  at  once  observe  that  it  is  well  furnished.    Our  text,
however,  invites  us  to  note  that  it  contains  a  number  of  meaner  vessels,  articles
of  the  coarser  kind  for  ordinary  and  common  uses.    Here  are  trenchers  and  buckets
of  wood,  and  pitchers  and  pots  and  divers  vessels  of  coarse  pottery.    Some  have
thought  that  this  figure  of  vessels  to  dishonour  relates  to  Christians  of  a  lower
grade,  persons  of  small  grace  and  of  less  sanctified  conversation.     Now,  although
believers  may  from  some  points  of  view  be  comparable  to  earthen  vessels,  yet  I  dare
not  look  upon  any  child  of  God,  however  low  in  grace,  as  a  vessel  to  dishonour.
Moreover,  the  word  "  these  "  refers  to  the  earthen  and  wooden  vessels,  and  surely
they  cannot  represent  saints,  or  we  should  never  be  told  to  purge  ourselves  from
them.    Besides,  that  is  not  the  run  of  the  chapter  at  all.     The  real  meaning  is,
that  in  the  Church  of  God  there  are  unworthy  persons  serving  inferior  and


«aAP.  n.]  II.  TIMOTHY.  213

temporary  purposes,  who  are  vessels  to  dishonour.  They  are  in  the  Church,  but
they  are  like  vessels  of  wood  and  vessels  of  earth,  they  are  not  the  treasure  of  the
mansion,  they  are  not  brought  out  on  state  occasions,  and  are  not  set  much  store
by,  for  they  are  not  "  precious  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord."  The  apostle  does  not  tell
ns  how  they  came  there,  for  it  was  not  his  intent  to  do  so,  and  no  parable  or  meta-
phor could  teach  everything ;  neither  will  I  stay  to  describe  how  some  professors
have  come  into  the  Church  of  God,  some  by  distinct  falsehood  and  by  making  pro-
fessions which  they  knew  were  untrue,  others  through  ignorance,  and  others  again
by  being  self-deceived,  and  carried  away  with  excitement.  The  parable  does  not
say  how  they  got  there,  but  there  they  are,  and  yet  they  are  only  vessels  of  wood
and  vessels  of  earth.  The  vessels  in  the  great  house  are,  however,  of  some  use,
even  though  they  are  made  of  wood  and  earth ;  and  so  there  are  persons  in  the
Church  of  God  whom  the  Lord  Jesus  will  not  own  as  His  treasure,  but  He  never-
theless turns  them  to  some  temporary  purpose.  Some  are  useful  as  the  scaffold  to
a  house,  or  the  dogshores  to  a  ship,  or  the  hedges  to  a  field.  I  believe  that  some
unworthy  members  of  the  Church  are  useful  in  the  way  of  watch-dogs  to  keep
others  awake,  or  lancets  to  let  blood,  or  burdens  to  try  strength.  Some  quarrel-
some members  of  the  Church  help  to  scour  the  other  vessels,  lest  they  should  rust
through  being  peaceful.  There  is  one  thing  noticeable,  viz.,  that  the  wooden  and
earthen  vessels  are  not  for  the  Master's  use.  When  He  holds  high  festival  His
cups  are  all  of  precious  metal.  How  sad  it  is  that  many  Christians  are  useful  to
the  Church  in  various  ways,  but  as  for  personal  service  rendered  to  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ  Himself,  in  that  they  have  no  share  whatever  and  never  can  have  tiU  grace
changes  them  from  wood  to  silver,  or  from  earth  to  gold.  Note  that  in  these
vessels  of  which  the  apostle  speaks  the  substance  is  base.  They  are  wood,  or  they
are  earth,  nothing  more.  So  are  we  all  by  nature  of  base  material,  and  grace  must
make  us  into  silver  or  into  golden  vessels,  or  the  Master  cannot  Himself  use  us,  nor
can  our  use  in  the  Church  ever  be  to  honour.  These  vessels  uuto  dishonour,
though  turned  to  some  account,  require  a  good  deal  of  care  on  the  part  of  the
servants.  "When  our  forefathers  used  to  eat  from  wooden  trenchers,  the  time  tha
good  wives  used  to  spend  in  scalding  and  cleaning  to  keep  them  at  all  sweet  to  eat
upon  was  something  terrible,  and  there  are  members  of  the  Church  who  take  a  world
of  time  from  pastors  and  elders  to  keep  them  at  all  decent ;  we  are  continually
trying  to  set  them  right,  or  keep  them  right,  in  the  common  relationships  of  life.
in.  We  are  now  going  into  the  treasury,  or  plate  room,  and  will  think  of  thb
KOBLBB  VESSELS.  These  are,  first  of  all,  of  solid  metal,  vessels  of  silver  and  vessels
of  gold.  They  are  not  all  equally  valuable,  but  they  are  all  precious.  Did  yoa
ever  hear  how  vessels  come  to  be  golden  ? —

•*  There  stood  a  golden  chalice  wondrous  fair,
And  overflowing  with  deep  love  for  him.
He  raised  it  to  His  gracious  lips,  and  quaffed
'  The  wine  that  maketh  glad  the  heart  of  God,*
Then  took  the  cup  to  heaven."

1.  On  the  vessels  to  honour  you  can  see  the  hall  mark.  What  is  the  hall  mark
which  denotes  the  purity  of  the  Lord's  golden  vessels  ?  Well,  He  has
only  one  stamp  for  everything.  When  He  laid  the  foundation  what  was  the
seal  He  put  upon  it  ?  *'The  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  His,  and  let  every  one
that  nameth  the  name  of  Christ  depart  from  all  iniquity."  That  was  God's  seal,
the  impress  of  the  great  King  upon  the  foundation-stone.  Do  we  find  it  here  f
Yes,  we  do.  "  If  a  man,  therefore,  purge  himself  from  these  he  shall  be  a  vessel
nnto  honour."  You  see  that  the  man  who  is  the  golden  or  silver  vessel  departs
from  all  iniquity,  and  that  is  the  token  of  his  genuine  character.  2.  Notice,  how-
ever, that  they  are  purged,  for  the  Lord  wiU  not  use  filthy  vessels  be  they  what  they
may.  3.  And  then  notice  that  these  gold  and  silver  vessels  are  reserved  as  well  as
purged.  They  are  made  meet  for  the  Master's  use.  As  Joseph  had  a  cup  out  of
which  he  alone  drank,  so  the  Lord  takes  His  people  to  be  His  peculiar  treasure,
vessels  for  His  personal  use.  4.  Oh,  for  a  holy  character  and  holy  communion
with  God ;  then  we  shall  be  golden  vessels  fit  for  the  Master's  use,  and  so,  accord-
ing to  the  text,  we  shall  be  ready  for  every  good  work,  ready  for  the  work  when  it
comes,  and  ready  at  the  work  when  it  has  come,  because  completely  consecrated  to
God  and  subject  to  His  hand.  IV.  We  must  speak  about  the  Master.  1.  He  ia
introduced  here,  you  see,  as  having  certain  vessels  meet  for  His  use,  and  this  showa


214  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  \cwkx,  tt,

that  He  is  in  the  honse.  Secondly,  the  Master  knows  all  about  the  house,  and
knows  the  quality  of  all  the  vessels.  And  then  refleot  that  the  Master  will  use  as
all  as  far  as  we  are  fit  to  be  used.  What  comes  of  this,  then,  lastly  ?  Why,
let  us  bestir  ourselves  that  we  be  purged,  for  the  text  says,  "  If  a  man  there-
fore purge  himself."  (C.  H.  Spur g eon.)  The  Christian  vessel  : — 1.  Vessels  of
gold  and  silver.  We  are  reminded  here  of  the  vessels  used  in  tabernacle  and
temple  service,  golden  basins  for  the  blood,  golden  dishes  for  the  bread,  golden
flagons  for  the  wine,  golden  snuffers,  snuff  dishes,  and  oil  vessels,  for  the  lamps.
Then  there  were  the  silver  sockets  for  the  foundations  of  the  tabernacle,  silver
fillets  and  hooks,  silver  vessels,  attached  to  the  brazen  altar.  To  prepare  these,
the  gold  and  silver  needed  refining  that  the  dross  might  be  purged  away  by  the  fire.
In  figure  we  see  the  refining  process  through  which  God  passes  His  people  that
.^hey  may  be  fit  for  His  use  (Mai.  iii.  2,  3).  He  sits  and  watches  until  the  reflection
of  Himself  is  visible  in  the  hearts  and  lives  of  those  whom  He  is  refining.  If  we
would  be  honoured  in  special  service  in  the  sanctuary,  and  be  found  prepared  unto
every  good  work,  we  must  cheerfully  and  willingly  submit  to  the  refiner,  and  the
refiner's  fire.  Self  must  be  consumed,  all  impurity  of  motive  must  be  purged  away,
all  the  faith  that  God  esteems  so  precious  must  be  tried  to  its  utmost  power  of
endurance.  2.  Vessels  of  wood  and  of  earth.  These  are  the  vessels  for  everyday
and  ordinary  use— for  the  Master's  constant  use  in  His  house.  A  wooden  vessel  ia
formed  out  of  the  rough  timber,  and  must  undergo  the  sharp  cutting  of  saw,  plane,
and  chisel.  The  Lord  finds  many  knots  and  gnarls  in  the  rough  material,  from
which  He  fashions  these  vessels,  and  He  knows  how  to  use  the  sharp  tools  of  disci-
pline and  triak  He  wUl  shape  our  lives  according  to  His  own  design,  and  the
pattern  after  which  we  are  made  will  be  a  heavenly  one.  An  earthen  vessel  is
made  out  of  the  clay  under  the  hands  of  the  potter.  "  We  are  the  clay  "  (Isa.  Ixiv.
8).  Some  are  inclined  to  boast  of  superiority  of  ancestry,  but  after  all  it  is  only
clay.  To  be  made  into  vessels  the  clay  must  needs  be  soft  to  receive  the  impres-
sion of  the  hand  of  the  potter.  It'must  be  free  from  grit  and  other  hard  substances,
otherwise  it  will  not  yield  to  the  hand.  God  would  have  us  as  the  clay,  able  to
take  the  impression,  and  yield  to  the  pressure  of  His  will.  He  must  remove  all  the
grit  of  self  and  pride,  and  the  many  hard  substances  that  find  their  way  in,  other-
mse  "the  vessel  will  be  marred  in  the  hands  of  the  potter"  (Jer.  xviii.  5).  The
wheel  was  a  horizontal  disk  on  which  the  clay  was  placed,  and  made  to  rotate
rapidly.  Day  by  day,  the  wheel  of  our  life  spins  round,  and  God  would  fashion  us
by  our  daily  circumstances  and  surroundings.  When  the  wheel  stops  how  will  He
find  us  ?  Finished  or  unfinished  ?  Unto  honour  or  dishonour  ?  Complete  or
marred  ?  Has  He  not  frequently  almost  stopped  the  wheel,  and,  finding  the  vessel
marred,  has  "  made  it  again  another  vessel,  as  it  hath  pleased  Him"?  Many  can
thank  God  for  the  change  in  their  lives,  produced  through  sickness  sanctified  to
their  souls.  3.  All  the  famous  porcelain  works  have  their  private  marks  burned
into  the  vessels  they  produce,  so  that  they  can  be  easily  identified  at  any  time.  So
the  Great  Potter  has  placed  His  private  mark  on  all  who  are  His  handiwork,  and
the  mark  has  been  burned  in  by  the  fire  of  His  love,  thus  becoming  indelible,  and
easy  of  identification.  4.  The  vessel  made  and  marked,  and  prepared  in  the
furnace,  is  now  fit  for  use,  and  is  to  be  in  constant  use,  by  being  filled  with  treasure.
Look  for  a  moment  into  yonder  house.  It  is  breakfast- time,  and  the  little  white
earthenware  mug  stands  full  of  milk  on  the  table  for  Uttle  Mary.  Afterwards  it  is
washed  and  put  away  ready  for  use,  and  in  the  course  of  the  morning  her  little
brother  asks  for  a  drink  of  water.  Mary  fills  her  mug  and  give  it  to  him.  Again
the  vessel  is  put  aside  ready  for  use.  A  friend  calls  and  leaves  a  nosegay  of  flowers.
Down  runs  the  child  to  fill  her  mug  with  water  to  revive  the  flowers,  and  the  house
is  filled  with  their  perfume.  At  the  door  later  on  a  poor  creature  falls  fainting  and
exhausted,  and  the  mug,  ready  again,  is  quickly  brought  containing  some  wine  or
other  restorative,  that  is  poured  down  the  sufferer's  throat.  It  is  only  an  earthen
vessel,  but  it  is  prepared  for  every  good  work  by  being  kept  clean.  What  shall  we
be?  Only  vessels,  to  do  one  thing,  only  a  Sunday-school  teacher,  only  a  tract  dis-
tributor, only  a  church  member.  Let  us  ask  the  Master  to  use  us  in  every  way  He
chooses.  Let  us  be  for  Him  the  basin  wherewith  He  may  wash  some  soiled  ones,
or  a  vessel  wherewith  He  may  give  of  the  milk  of  the  Word  to  His  babes,  or  the
bearer  of  the  message  of  atoning  blood,  or  all  these,  as  He  may  have  need.  Let  ua
purge  ourselves  from  all  filthiness  of  flesh  and  spirit ;  be  sanctified  by  the  truth,
and  reserved  absolutely  for  His  use  and  for  no  other.  5.  If  not  a  "vessel  of
mercy,"  then  a  "  vessel  of  wrath."    If  not  in  His  hand  for  His  use  in  His  house-


CHAP.  II.]  II.  TIMOTHY.  815

hold,  then  to  be  dashed  in  pieces,  and  to  be  but  a  potsherd  cast  away  amongst  the
rubbish.  {0.  SoUau.)  Holy  vessels :—l.  The  vessels  of  honour  abe  obioinaixt
UNHOLY.  Were  it  not  thus,  why  are  we  commanded  to  purge,  to  cleanse  ourselves  ?  II.
The  vessels  of  honoub  abb  to  be  purged,  in.  The  holt  are  honourable.  1.  For,
are  not  such  the  nearest  onto  the  nature  of  God  ?  2.  Set  apart  for  the  most  noble
ends  f  3.  Can  any  else  truly  hate  evil  ?  detest  base  courses  ?  4.  And  who  but
they  shall  be  crowned   with   immortal   glory?     IV.  Sanctified  men   are    meet

DJSTBUMENTB  FOR  THE  USE  OF  THEIR  MaSTER.  V.  ThB  LoRD  HATH  USE  FOB  Hl3
HOLT   VESSELS.      VI.     SANCTIFIED    PERSONS     FOR     EVERT    GOOD    WORK    ABB     PREPARED.

Not  for  one,  but  all.  They  can  fast,  pray,  hear,  read,  meditate  ;  deny  themselves,
afflict  their  souls,  give  alms,  do  and  suffer  anything.  What  God  affirms  they
believe,  what  He  commands  they  obey,  what  He  doth  they  approve.  {J.  Barlow,
D.D.)  Fitness  for  the  Lord^s  service : — I.  Our  text  describes  the  service  to
WHICH  Christians  abe  called.  It  is  described  in  three  ways.  1.  A  Christian  in
his  service  should  be  an  honour  to  himself.  Worthy  of  the  nature  God  has  given
him,  worthy  of  his  capabilities,  worthy  of  his  privileges,  and  worthy  of  his  position
and  opportunities  and  means.  Now  we  naturally  estimate  all  service  by  the  heart
there  is  in  it.  There  are  differences  in  true  service ;  some  lower  and  some  higher.
The  supreme  aim  of  Christian  men  must  be  spiritual  service  by  spiritual  means.
2.  A  Christian  in  his  service  must  be  useful  to  his  Master.  "  Meet,"  &c.  It  is
intimated  in  this  view  of  our  service  that  we  do  not  work  apart  and  alone  as  master-
workmen,  choosing  our  own  work,  choosing  how  to  do  it,  and  finishing  and  round-
it  off  by  ourselves.  We  work  under  a  master,  we  receive  our  work  at  lus  hands,  we
do  it  according  to  his  directions,  we  do  it  under  his  eye,  and  when  it  is  done  we
bring  it  to  bim  that  he  may  put  it  to  its  proper  use.  It  is  the  glory  of  a  master-
worker  that  he  can  use  the  services  of  a  thousajid  workmen,  give  full  scope  to  their
faculties,  and  then  by  the  use  he  makes  of  their  work  double  its  value.  3.  A
Christian  in  his  service  should  be  "  prepared  unto  every  good  work."  Prepared  for
good  work.  There  are  stages  in  goodness.  There  is  good  desire,  the  conception
and  digestion  of  the  plan  for  canying  out  the  desire,  the  provision  of  means,  and,
last  of  all,  the  actual  work.  Prepared  unto  every  good  work.  The  world  is  wide  ;
human  needs  are  great ;  God  calls  sinful  men  to  a  high  destiny.  The  obstacles  in
the  way  are  great  and  many ;  how  great  must  the  design  be,  and  how  manifold  the
work  which  embraces  all.  But  our  Master  is  prepared  unto  every  good  work,  and
He  gives  His  servants  power  like  His  own.  II.  The  preparation  necessabt  fob
SUCH  service.  In  every  department  of  God's  kingdom  fitness  is  the  law  of  service.
It  is  true  that  what  man  deems  fit  may  be  foolishness  with  God ;  and  what  God
deems  fit  may  be  foolishness  with  man.  In  this  sense  the  Cross,  and  the  preaching
of  the  Cross  are  foolishness.  Again,  it  has  pleased  God  to  accomplish  great  results
by  slender  human  instruments,  that  He  might  teach  us  rightly  to  estimate  the
value  of  our  own  work  and  His.  But  all  this  does  not  alter  the  fact  that  so  far  as
man's  work  is  used,  it  is  used  according  to  its  fitness.  God  does  not  employ
ignorant  men  to  teach  wisdom,  nor  worldly  men  to  produce  spirituality,  nor  lovers
of  ease  to  conduct  great  enterprises,  nor  selfish  men  to  generate  enthusiasm  of  love.
Wherein  does  preparation  consist  ?  1.  In  purity  of  life.  Personal  worth  is  the
foondation  of  service,  and  the  measure  of  personal  worth  is  the  measure  of  fitness
for  service.  Two  considerations  show  the  need  of  eminent  personal  worth  as  a
preparation.  (1)  We  never  do  anything  well  till  we  have  caught  the  spirit  of  it,
till  it  possess  us,  till  we  live  in  it  and  find  our  joy  in  it.  (2)  Men  are  slow  to
believe  in  goodness — i.e.,  in  goodness  as  the  proper  result  of  personal  principle.
They  are  apt  to  explain  it  as  the  result  of  circumstances,  of  a  good  natural  disposi-
tion, of  what  is  necessary  to  maintain  with  credit  a  Christian  profession.  This
euspicion  is  often  excessive  and  unreasonable,  but  there  it  is ;  and  he  who  would
win  men  to  righteousness  must  have  personal  worth  to  overcome  it.  2.  Purity  of
doctrine  is  not  less  necessary  than  purity  of  life.  Personal  excellence  enables  a
man  to  do  good  chiefly  by  enabling  him  to  bear  witness  of  Christ.  John  the
Baptist  was  as  eminent  in  personal  worth  as  any  man  that  ever  lived ;  yet  he  spoka
of  himself  as  only  a  voice.  It  was  needful  for  the  work  appointed  him  that  he
should  be  a  man  of  sterling  worth ;  but  what  would  his  personal  worth  have  done
for  Jndea  apart  from  his  witness  to  Christ?  The  personal  worth  of  God's  people
does  not  enable  them  to  save  men ;  but  it  does  enable  them  to  bear  witness  to  Him
who  can  save.  {John  Pillans. )  The  Master's  use  : — I.  First  comes  meetness.
In  the  renewed  spirit,  the  chastened  imagination,  the  energised  conscience,  the
obedient  will,  we  find  the  highest  meetness  for  spiritual  service.    1.  Meetness  comea


216  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii.

from  faculty  patiently  used.  This  is  true  of  all  faculty.  Mr.  Buskin  shows  us  hovr
hard  it  is  to  draw  a  straight  line,  how  none  but  an  accustomed  hand  can  do  it.
Men  shrink  from  commencement.  If  you  wish  to  skate,  you  must  not  mind  a  fall,
the  graceful  cm-ve  is  not  a  gift,  but  a  growth.  The  most  able  musician  once  had
the  drill  of  exercises.  The  most  perfect  classic  once  toiled  over  anpoetical  gram-
mar-books. Christian  service  is  not  an  easy  service ;  to  teach  a  child  is  not  merely
an  inspiration,  but  an  education.  Of  course  faculty  varies,  and  there  are  diverse
adaptations.  Talents  are  differentiated — ten,  five,  one — but  all  have  talents.  2.
Meetness  comes  through  suffering  patiently  borne.  Many  of  the  Church's  best
angels  are  not  the  ablest  or  the  cleverest,  but  the  humblest.  Sorrow  often  does
what  no  other  agency  can  achieve.  Suffering  creates  sympathy  and  tenderness  to
the  erring,  and  consciousness  of  our  own  frailty.  Moreover,  the  heavenly  world
becomes  clearer  to  the  eye  that  is  purified  by  trial.  3.  Meetness  comes  from
instrumentalities  faithfully  employed.  These  are  divine  and  wonderful.  As  soldiers,
we  have  the  perfect  panoply  of  the  heavenly  armour.  As  stewards,  we  have  each
a  many-acred  farm  to  care  for.  As  vine-dressers,  we  have  the  sun  and  shade  and
shower,  and  God  has  given  us  our  own  sweet  vineyard  of  Church  or  home.  If  we
do  not  the  work  nearest  to  us,  we  shall  do  no  other.  Reynolds,  it  is  said,  could  sit
thirty-six  hours  before  the  canvas  without  a  break  to  bring  out  in  beauty  the  human
face  divine.  How  seldom  have  we  ever  lingered  enthusiastically  at  our  work  to
bring  out  on  the  living  canvas  of  the  human  heart  the  beautiful  likeness  of  Jesus
Christ !  Let  us  be  diligent.  Meetness  will  come  through  meditation  which  is
prayer  in  preparation,  and  prayer  which  is  meditation  spoken ;  and,  above  all,
from  the  consciousness  of  dependt^nce  on  the  spirit  of  the  living  God,  who  will
strengthen  us  with  all  might  in  our  inner  man.  II.  Ministration.  We  come
here  to  the  word  "  use."  Use  characterises  all  the  works  of  God.  The  running
stream  is  more  than  a  line  of  silver  beauty  in  the  landscape  ;  it  brings  fertility  and
blessing  with  it.  The  sea  bears  the  freight  of  commerce,  and  brings  the  healthful
ozone  on  its  bosom,  as  well  as  spreads  its  broad  expanse  of  beautiful  blue.  The
tree  gives  you  shade  in  summer,  and  breathes  out  its  air  of  ox.\gen.  We  cannot  as
yet  di.jcern  all  uses  ;  but  use  there  is,  delicate  and  exquisite,  in  all  the  works  of
God.  1.  The  Christian  man  is  to  be  a  useful  man,  not  a  self-indulgent  one.  We  are
under  a  Master.  Alas !  how  many  take  Christ  as  a  Saviour  who  do  not  take  Him
as  a  Master,  and  seldom  ponder  how  much  they  can  obey  Him  1  2.  We  are  of  use
to  the  Master.  He  has  condescended  to  link  His  kingdom  in  its  extension  with
our  poor  endeavours.  Cliristian  work  is  not  merely  a  kind  of  spiritual  exercise.
Your  living  and  your  loving  heart,  your  sanctified  energies,  are  useful  to  the  Master.
3.  We  must  give  our  best  to  tbe  Master.  It  is  sad,  in  this  England  of  ours,  to
think  how  little  faculty  is  cultured.  The  Scotch  set  us  a  splendid  example  in  this
respect,  so  do  the  Germans.  Dr.  Guthrie's  autobiography  shows  what  Scotch  lads
did  and  do  to  rise,  not  merely  in  position,  but  in  attainment  1  They  have  had
heroes  other  than  those  who  fought  at  Bannockburn — heroes  of  the  parish  school
and  college.  It  is  not  lamentable  to  find  faculty  so  little  cultivated  amongst  us?
How  few  fit  themselves  for  higher  po.sts  I  (W.  M.  Statham.)  The  holinesa  of
iise  : — Who  are  they  whom  the  apostle  sees  enthroned  ;  his  vessels  unto  honour ;
the  people  whom  the  law  of  creation  praises  and  places  on  high  ?  They  are  the
"  sanctified,"  he  writes.  A  favourite  epithet  with  him,  which  our  translators
frequently  rendering  thus,  have  sometimes  rendered,  "hall>>wed"  a'  d  sometimes
"holy,"  and  the  fundamental  idea  of  which  is  *'  separation."  Hence  its  ancient
application  to  the  firstlings  of  the  Hebrew  flocks  and  herds  as  being  animals  taken
out  from  the  rest,  and  set  apart  for  God,  to  be  laid  upon  His  altar.  St.  Paul's
sanctified  ones,  then,  are  God's  sacred  ones — God's  saints.  But  that  is  not  telling
us  much.  What  is  it  to  be  a  sacied  person,  we  ask  ;  what  is  a  saiut?  They,  you
know,  have  been  designated  "  sai-rcd  "  who  have  withdrawn  from  ootnmon  mundane
pursuits  to  occupy  themselves  mainly  with  religious  exercises,  in  the  performance
of  religious  rites  and  ceremonies;  and  "  saint,"  you  may  hear  applied,  not  seldom,
with  half  a  sneer,  to  those  who  are  interested  in  and  zealous  for  theological  dogmas,
or  scrupulous  in  abstaining  from  practices  and  amu-ements  to  which  tht- generality
are  addicted,  or  given  to  church  worship  and  pious  talk.  The  real  sacredness,
however,  the  real  sanctity  in  men,  consists  according  to  the  implication  and  sug-
gestion of  the  term  employed  here,  in  personal  surrender  to  the  Divine  claims
upon  as  ;  in  separation  from  self  indulgence  and  self-will,  from  contrary  inclina-
tions and  propensities,  to  be  what  HeH\en  would  have  us  be,  to  cultivate  conformity
to  the  Divine  ideal.     This  is  gloy,  teaches  the  apostle  ;  this  is  to  enjoy  rank  and


CHAP,  u.]  II.  TIMOTHY.  217

commendation  ;  being  good  and  doing  nobly.  But  now,  we  have  not  advanced  very
far  after  all.  Our  explanatory  words  wait  to  be  explained.  What  is  it  to  be  good
and  do  nobly,  to  be  worthy  and  act  well  our  part,  which  St.  Paul  describes  theo-
logically as  "  sanctification,"  or  devotion  to  the  will  of  God  ?  In  whom  is  it
exemplified?  and  our  writer  answers  shortly:  In  those  who  are  "meet  for  the
Master's  use,"  or,  more  correctly,  in  those  who  are  "  useful  for  the  Master."  The
saint,  then,  is  eminently  the  useful  person.  Holiness  is  use.  It  is  not  in  mere
Laving,  lior  yet  in  being  and  doing,  that  it  is  reached  ;  but  in  being  and  doing
beneficially.  But  while  without  some  use  we  are  naught,  there  is  a  certain  special
use  which  it  is  necessary  to  yield  in  order  to  be  a  saint,  and  the  yielding  of  which
reveals  and  marks  the  saint.  "  Useful  for  the  Master,"  says  the  ap  stle.  He  has
been  comparing  society  to  a  house  containing  divers  kinds  of  vessels — of  which
house  he  has  imphed  that  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Lord  and  Head;  and  the  hallowed
vessels  therein  are  the  vessels,  he  tells  us,  that  are  profitable  to  Him.  Now,  we
may  be  said  to  be  profitable  to  another,  as  we  are  contributing  to  the  fulfilment  of
his  wishes  and  ideas,  as  we  are  instrumental  in  forwarding  his  views,  in  advancing
his  purposes.  We  are  useful  for  Christ,  can  only  be  useful  for  Him  in  that  way —
by  helping  to  promote  His  ends.  And  what  are  they?  What  was  His  grand
passion,  the  object  that  burdened  and  cons'imed  Him  ?  Was  it  not,  speaking
broadly,  and  according  to  His  o  .\  n  constant  testimony,  that  men  might  be  quickened
and  raised  to  live  more  abundantly  ?  But  here,  probably,  many  an  earnest,  well-
meaning  soul  will  be  moved  to  say,  "  I  really  do  not  know,  I  really  cannot  tell,
whether  or  no  I  am  of  any  such  use  in  the  world,  and,  what  is  more,  I  seem  to  have
80  little  chance  or  power ;  my  scope  is  so  narrow,  my  ability  so  small."  And  as  if
to  meet  and  answer  these,  and  encourage  and  assure  them,  St.  Paul  hastens  to  add
to  the  words,  "  Useful  for  the  Master,"  the  qualifying  explanatory  clause,  "  being
prepared  or  ready  to  every  good  work."  We  do  not  know,  we  cannot  tell,  whether
we  are  divinely  helpfuL  Not  a  few  are  so  to  a  considerable  extent  without  per-
ceiving it.  They  live  sincerely  and  beautifully,  and  die  wearily,  unconscious  of
how  noble  or  wide  their  effect  has  been.  But  while  unable  to  decide  concerning
the  amount  of  our  helpfulness,  we  can  tell  whether  we  are  ready  to  do  every  good
work  that  may  be  done  by  us  in  our  sphere ;  whether  we  carry  about  within  us  a
spirit  and  disposition  to  serve ;  whether  we  are  alive  to  each  open  door  of  oppor-
tunity and  quick  to  enter  in  and  occupy ;  whether  we  have  a  heart  sensitively
responsive  to  needs  that  appeal,  to  the  calls  and  claims  of  the  hour;  whether  our
desire  and  aim  is  to  make  a  good  work  of  whatever  is  laid  upon  us  to  do,  to  do  it
according  to  our  light  and  power  in  the  best  and  perfectest  way,  let  it  be  the  paint-
ing of  a  picture  or  the  sweeping  of  a  room,  preaching  a  sermon  or  managing  a
business.  We  can  tell  whether  it  is  thus  with  us.  But  what  then  ?  Why  the
apostle  implies  that  such  alertness  to  do  weU  at  every  step,  on  every  occasion,  is
certain  to  involve  the  radiation  fr^mus  of  some  helpfulness;  that  you  may  conclude
you  are  for  some  use  if  only  you  are  eager  and  anxious  to  discharge  faithfully  each
duty  as  it  presents  itself,  to  answer  duly  to  the  requirements  of  the  time  and  place,
to  the  facts  before  you.  And  now  a  word  in  conclnsion,  concerning  what  is  neces-
sary in  order  to  reach  and  maintain  this  hallowed  state  of  use  in  preparedness  for
every  good  work.  "If  a  man  purge  himself  from  these,"  says  St.  Paul,  that  is,
from  the  vessels  unto  dishonour,  of  which  he  has  been  speaking,  as  mixed  with
others  in  the  house — "  If  a  man  purge  himself  from  these,  tlien  shall  he  be  a  vessel
unto  honour."  It  is  intimated,  you  see,  that  none  are  found  saints  to  begin  with  ;
that  to  become  such  and  remain  such  we  must  need  engage  and  persevere  in  effort,
in  effort  to  cleanse  and  emancipate  ourselves ;  that  there  is  that  which  has  to  be
shaken  off  and  risen  out  of.  And  there  is,  around  us,  morally  ailverse,  morally
opposing  atmospheres,  unavoidable  contncts  and  intercourses  that  tend  to  deaden
and  depress,  popular  maxims  and  sentiments,  prevailing  ideas  and  fashions,  tue
spirit  of  the  world  seeking  other  things  altogether  than  the  things  which  are  Jesus
Christ's,  and  encountered  continurtlly  at  every  turn,  insinuating  and  insidious.  All
this  has  to  be  resisted  and  surmounted.  (S.  A.  Tipple.)  Sanctified  nnd  meet  for
the  Master's  use: — For  a  moment  the  apostle  drops  the  figure  of  the  house  and  the
foundation,  to  take  it  up  again  in  the  remaining  portion  of  the  sentence.  Purifica-
tion from  vessels  would  be  a  very  incongruous  figure.  What  St.  Paul  says  is — If
therefore  any  man  shall  have  purged  himself  from  these  evil  associations  or  corrupt-
ing ideas,  from  persons  whose  words  are  like  the  deadly  poison  of  contagious
gangrene,  then  he  will  be  a  vessel  unto  hon()"r,  whether  his  faculties  cause  him  to
resemble  the  golden  goblet  or  the  siler  lamp;  the  wooden  bowl  or  the  porcelain


218  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  n.

vase ;  if  pure  and  conscientioas,  faithful  and  good,  he  will  be  consecrated  to  noblest
OSes,  serviceable  to  the  Master  of  the  house,  and  prepared  for  every  good  work.
{H.  R.  Reynolds,  D.D.)  Fit  for  use : — I  remember  reading  of  a  man  who,  having
a  gmdge  against  a  railway  company,  threw  a  bar  of  soap  into  their  tank  of  water.
The  soap  was  dissolved,  introduced  into  the  boiler,  and  as  soapy  water  does  not
generate  steam,  the  engine  by  and  by  came  to  a  standstill.  The  fires  were  all  right
but  there  was  no  steam ;  and  we  must,  figuratively  speaking,  keep  the  soap  out,  or
God  cannot  use  as.  Bemember  we  owe  allegiance  to  Him  who  needs  every  thought
of  the  heart.  (6.  F.  Pentecost.)  A  clean  vessel : — If  in  haste  we  would  give  a
draught  of  refreshing  water  to  a  traveller,  we  take  from  our  shelf  the  first  vessel
which  is  clean.  We  pass  over  the  elegant  and  richly-chased  cup  for  the  earthen-
ware mug,  if  the  latter  has  a  cleanUness  which  the  former  lacks.  And  our  Lord
Jesus  wiU  gladly  use  us  for  His  service,  though  we  be  but  common  ware,  if  only  we
are  clean  and  ready  for  use.  In  our  hospitals  the  instruments  used  in  operations
are  constantly  kept  in  carbolic  acid,  that  they  may  not  carry  the  slightest  contagion
to  the  open  wound ;  and  we  cannot  touch  the  open  and  festering  wounds  which  sin
has  caused  without  injury  to  ourselves  and  others,  unless  we  are  ever  in  the  flow  of
the  blood  and  water  of  which  St.  John  speaks.  {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  Holiness
and  service : — Through  the  whole  of  Scripture  we  find  that  whatever  6od  sanctifies
is  to  be  used  in  the  service  of  His  holiness.  Holiness  and  selfishness,  holiness  and
inactivity,  holiness  and  sloth,  holiness  and  helplessness,  are  utterly  irreconcilable.
Whatever  we  read  of  as  holy  was  taken  into  the  service  of  the  holiness  of  God.
HoUness  is  essential  to  effectual  service.  In  the  Old  Testament  we  see  degrees  of
holiness,  not  only  in  the  holy  places,  but  as  much  in  the  holy  persons.  In  the
nation,  the  Levites,  the  priests  and  then  the  High  Priest,  advance  from  step  to  step;
as  in  each  succeeding  stage  the  circle  narrows,  and  the  service  is  more  direct  and
entire,  so  the  holiness  required  is  higher  and  more  distinct.  It  is  even  so  in  this
more  spiritual  dispensation ;  the  more  of  holiness,  the  greater  the  fitness  for
service;  the  more  there  is  of  true  holiness  the  more  there  is  of  God,  and
the  more  true  and  deep  is  the  entrance  He  has  had  into  the  soul  The  hold  He
has  on  the  soul  to  use  it  in  His  service  is  more  complete.  {Andrew  Murray.)
Various  vesnels : — All  the  vessels  of  Christ's  house  are  not  of  one  size.  (S.  Ruther-
ford.) What  service  miglit  have  been  done  by  greater  tanctification : — When
Nelson  served  under  Admiral  Hotham,  and  a  certain  number  of  the  enemy's  ships
had  been  captured,  the  commander  said,  "  We  must  be  contented :  we  have  done
very  well."  But  Nelson  did  not  think  so,  since  a  number  of  the  enemy's  vessels
had  escaped.  "  Now,"  said  he,  "  had  we  taken  ten  sail,  and  allowed  the  eleventh
to  escape  when  it  had  been  possible  to  have  got  at  her,  I  could  never  have  called  it
well  done."  If  we  have  brought  many  to  Christ  we  dare  not  boast,  for  we  are
humbled  by  the  reflection  that  more  might  have  been  done  bad  we  been  fitter
instruments  for  God.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  stimulus  of  holiness  : — Holiness
is  a  source  of  every  kind  of  human  excellence.  For  it  sets  to  work  all  our  powers,
and  sets  them  to  work  in  the  best  possible  direction.  It  gives  to  intellectual  effort
its  noblest  aim,  viz.,  to  comprehend  and  to  convey  to  others  the  life-giving  truth  of
God  ;  and  it  guards  intellectual  success  from  the  perils  which  surround  it.  It  gives
the  noblest  motive  for  the  care  and  development  of  the  body ;  for  it  shows  us  that
the  powers  even  of  our  perishing  body  may  work  out  eternal  results.  And  it  gives
the  only  pure  motive,  and  a  very  strong  motive,  for  effort  after  material  good ;
for  it  teaches  that  this  world's  wealth  may  be  a  means  of  laying  up  treasure  In
heaven.  Thus  holiness  quickens,  develops,  and  elevates  all  our  powers.  (/.  A.
Beet.)  The  beauty  of  service: — Once  upon  a  time,  says  the  legend,  a  dispute
arose  between  three  young  ladies  as  to  which  had  the  most  beautiful  hand.  One
sat  bv  a  crystal  stream  and  dipped  her  snowy  hand  into  the  water  and  held  it  up.
Anotner  plucked  strawberries  till  the  ends  of  her  tapering  fingers  were  pink.
Another  gathered  violets  till  her  hands  were  fragrant.  Thereupon  an  aged  woman
passed  by,  hungry,  emaciated,  decrepit.  "  Wlio  will  give  me  a  gift,"  said  she,  "  for
I  am  poor?  "  AH  three  young  ladies  denied  her  request;  but  a  poor  peasant  girl,
who  stood  near,  unvvanhed  in  the  stream,  unstained  by  the  pink  of  strawberries,
unadorned  with  flowers,  gave  her  a  simple  gift  and  cheered  the  aged  pilgrim.  Then,
turning  back,  she  asked  the  three  young  ladies  what  they  disputed  about.  They
told  her,  and  lifted  up  their  beautiful  hands  for  her  to  decide.  "  Beautiful,  indeed!  "
exclaimed  she,  with  radiant  countenance.  "But  which  is  the  most  beautiful?"
asked  they.  ••  It  is  not  the  hand  that  is  washed  in  the  purling  brook,"  said  she ;
"  it  is  not  the  hand  that  is  tipped  with  delicate  pink  ;  it  is  not  the  hand  garlanded


CHAP,  n.]  II.  TIMOTHY.  219

with  fragrant  flowers,  it  ia  the  hand  which  gave  a  gift  to  the  destitute  that  is  most
beautiful."  And  as  she  spoke  lier  body  was  slowly  transfigured,  her  wrinkles
gradually  vanished,  her  staff  suddenly  dropped,  and  there  flew  up  to  heaven,  in  a
blaze  of  glory,  the  radiant  form  of  an  angel  of  God.  Yes,  the  sanctification  of  man
means  the  sanctification  of  all  that  the  man  has  to  do.  It  means  the  sanctification
of  the  hand,  the  feet,  the  brain,  the  heart,  the  temper,  the  disposition,  the  pocket,
the  whole  man,  inwardly  and  outwardly.  It  is  the  perfecting  of  the  heart  that
makes  the  perfection  of  every  state  iu  hfe.  The  service  of  love : — We  may  be
blameless  without  being  faultless.  If  it  be  asked  what  practical  difference  there  la
in  such  a  distinction,  we  may  take,  as  an  example,  a  little  child  whose  loving  heart
is  bent  upon  pleasing  her  mother.  Her  first  little  task  of  needlework  is  put  into
her  hands.  But  the  Uttle  fingers  are  all  unskilled,  nor  has  she  any  thought  of  the
nicety  required  ;  still  with  intense  pleasure  she  sets  stitch  after  stitch,  until  at  last
she  brings  it  to  her  mother ;  she  has  done  her  best  and  does  not  dream  of  failure.
And  the  mother  taking  it,  sees  two  things :  one  is  a  work  as  faulty  as  it  well  can  be,
with  stitches  long  and  crooked  ;  and  the  other  is  that  smiling,  upturned  face,  with
its  sweet  consciousness  of  love.  Not  for  anything  could  she  coldly  criticise  that
work.  She  thinka  of  the  effort  to  please,  and  how  little  she  could  expect  in  a
first  attempt.  It  is  the  child's  best  for  the  time  being.  So  she  commends  her  and
even  praises  the  poor,  imperfect  work,  and  then  gently  and  most  lovingly  shows
her  how  she  may  do  still  better.  The  child  is  blameless,  but  her  work  not  faultless.
It  will  be  nearer  and  nearer  faultless,  as  day  after  day  she  gathers  skill,  and  even
new  ideas  of  care  and  faithfulness  in  her  tasks  ;  but  still  in  her  mother's  eyes  she
is  at  first,  as  well  as  at  last,  her  blameless  child.  {S.  F.  Smiley. )  Reasons  why
you  are  not  used : — You  are  admitted  into  a  great  house,  along  the  walls  of  which
are  four  shelves  ;  on  the  lower  shelf  the  gold,  on  the  second  the  silver,  on  the  third
the  wood,  and  on  the  fourth  —  high,  way  up  where  you  would  think  the  dust
collected — the  earthern  vessel.  Upon  one  of  these  four  shelves  there  is  each  one
of  those  in  this  congregation.  You  say,  "  I  am  not  gold,  I  am  not  silver,  I  am
rather  wooden  if  anything,  or  earthenware ;  my  place  is  on  the  very  top  shelf,"
and  when  I  ask  if  you  can  tell  which  of  those  four  shelves  holds  the  vessels  to
honour,  you  say,  "  Oh,  I  suppose  those  golden  or  silver  ones  beneath,  and  my  lot
will  never  be  there."  The  Master  enters.  "Wilt  Thou  tell  us  to-day,  for  our
hearts  are  all  aflame  to  be  used  by  Thee  in  the  foreign  mission  or  home  mission
field,  where  we  may  stand,  to  be  vessels  of  honour  ?  "  And  He  says  :  "  I  cannot
tell  by  the  outside  appearance.  I  must  look  in."  He  takes  the  gold,  and  says :
"That  won't  do,  it  is  not  clean."  He  takes  the  silver  one  and  puts  it  back  with  a
sad  look.  It  is  not  clean.  But  it  may  be  He  comes  to  those  upper  shelves,  and
takes  down  one  of  the  very  commonest  of  the  vessels,  and  I  see  a  smile  come  over
His  face  as  He  lifts  it,  and  He  presses  it  to  His  lips,  and  says  :  "  This  will  do  ;
this  is  a  vessel  to  honour,  this  is  a  choice  vessel,  it  is  clean.  If  a  man  cleanse
himself  he  shall  be  a  vessel  to  honour."  "  Ah,  but.  Master,  there  is  nothing  inside
of  it."  "  That  doesn't  matter.  I  will  put  inside  what  has  got  to  be  put  inside.  I
only  want  a  clean  vessel  to  put  it  in."  God  says,  "  My  child,  you  have  failed,  not
because  you  lack  the  talent  or  power,  but  are  deficient  in  the  one  thing  yon  might
accomplish,  having  the  cleansed  heart."    (F.  B.  Meyer,)

Yer.  22.  Flee  youthful  lusts :  but  follow  righteousness,  faith,  charity,  peace. —
Flee  the  passions  of  youth  : — Timothy  was  no  longer  a  young  man,  but  he  was  still
in  the  strength  of  his  manhood,  when  he  might  easily  suffer  from  desires  and
passions  which  are  comparatively  venial  in  a  youth.  The  juvenilia  desideria,  the
immoderate  hilarity,  the  irregular  longings  of  the  flesh  and  mind,  the  rash-
ness of  judgment,  the  self-indulgence,  the  love  of  admiration,  which  are
weakness  and  failure  of  youth,  not  ite  beauty  nor  its  charm.  (H.  R.  Reynolds,  D.D.)
The  Christian  young  vtan : — To  the  word  '*  lust "  a  specific  meaning  is  now  popularly
attached,  which  we  do  not  find  in  the  original;  the  term  there  used  being  much
more  extensive,  and,  with  the  addition  of  the  epithet,  "  youthful,"  much  more  ex-
pressive. It  signifies  the  inclination  of  the  mind;  and  thus  it  includes  what  ia
evil  in  the  spark  as  well  as  in  the  flame,  in  the  blossom  as  well  as  in  the  fruit,  in
the  deep,  though  still  fountain,  as  w»-ll  as  in  the  rolling,  turbid,  and  impetuous
stream.  And  with  good  reason ;  for  however  small  and  obscure  the  beginning,  the
end  may  be  most  momentous,  most  irreparable.  Hear  it  plainly  stated :  "  Lust,
when  it  hath  conceived,  bringeth  forth  sin  ;  and  sin,  when  it  is  finished,  bringeth
forth  death."    Watch  over  inclination,  lest  it  become  desire;  watch  over  desire.


220  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n.

lest  it  become  appetite ;  watch  over  appetite,  lest  it  become  passion  ;  watch  over
passion,  lest  it  become,  in  the  evil  and  extreme  sense,  "  lust."  And  this  applies
equally  to  voluptuousness,  ambition,  covetousness,  revenge,  and  all  the  cha-
racteristic vices  of  youth.  I.  And  this  is  to  be  done  by  avoiding,  as  fab  as  it  bb
POSSIBLE,  THE  COMPANIONSHIP  ov  THE  DNOODLT.  On  this  subject,  indeed,  the  wipe
man,  teaching  from  experience,  is  earnest  even  beyond  his  wont;  counselling  with
an  emphatic  iteration  :  •'  Enter  not  iuto  the  path  of  the  wicked,  and  go  not  in  the
way  of  evil  men ;  avoid  it,  pass  not  by  it,  turn  from  it,  and  pass  away."  It  is
against  the  first  step  that  young  men  should  be  exhorted  especially  to  guard  ;  to
beware  of  the  first  act,  against  which  conscience  enters  and  records  its  solemn
protest,  n.  While,  however,  you  " flee  youthful  lusts"  by  avoiding  companion-
ship with  the  wicked,  flee  them  also  by  cuLTrvATiNO  companionship  with  thb

HEABT  ;   AND   WEIGH   WELL   THOSE   ASSOCIATIONS.    HABITS,   AND   PrBSUITS,   WHICH  GIVE  A

DIRECTION  TO  THE  MIND.  Bewarc  lest  inclination  assume  the  reins  of  action ;  beware
lest  interest  or  convenience  usurp  that  supremacy  over  the  purposes  and  the
practices,  which  ought  to  be  exercised  only  by  conscience  and  by  principle.  Test
all  things  by  one  etan  lard  ;  try  all  men  by  one  rule ;  and  let  that  be  the  Word  of
God.  Whenever,  therefore,  in  a  judgment  administered  upon  such  principles,  and
directed  to  such  an  end,  the  bent  of  the  mind  and  the  will  are  found  to  be  in  any
particular  instance  opposed  to  the  great  purpose,  for  which  all  who  bear,  by  their
own  consent,  the  name  of  Christian,  must  for  that  very  reason  profess  to  live,  it  is
clear  that  the  course  of  life  must  be  altered,  the  stream  of  thought  and  desire  must
be  turned,  the  current  must  be  made  to  flow  in  an  opposite  direction.  And  if  this
only  be  done  as  soon  as  the  necessity  is  discerned,  it  will  be  done  effectually,  and  it
will  be  done  comparatively  without  an  effort.  III.  Not  only,  however,  are  we
exhorted  in  the  text  to  *'  flee  youthful  lusts,"  but  to  cultivate  those  Chbistian

GRACES  AND  DISPOSITIONS,  WHICH  CAN  NEVER  APPEAR  TO  GREATER  ADVANTAGE  TBAX
WHEN  THEY  ABE  ASSOCIATED  WITH  THE  NATURAL  TRANSPARENCY  AND   INGENUOUSNESS   OF

YOUTH.  1.  Follow,  then,  after  righteousness.  Give  God  what  is  His  due  ;  and  you
will  never  withhold  from  man  what  is  his.  2.  Follow  not  only  after  righteousness,
but,  as  the  apostle  exhorts  his  son  Timothy,  after  "  faith."  Account,  that  as
practical  righteousness,  the  rendering  of  everything  that  is  due  to  man,  so  faith
is  the  expectation  of  all  that  is  needful  from  God.  3.  Next,  you  are  exhorted  to
follow  "  charity "  or  love.  Love  is  the  essence  of  righteousness,  for  it  is  "  the
fulfilling  of  the  law"  ;  it  is  also  the  evidence  of  faith,  for  "  faith  worketh  by  love."
4.  Lastly,  in  the  words  of  the  apostle,  "  follow  after  peace."  This,  indeed,  is  the
subject  of  one  of  the  most  earnest  petitions  that  ever  fell  from  human  lips  :  "  Now
the  God  of  peace  Himself  give  you  peace  always  by  all  means."  Nor  can  the
apostles  of  the  Lord  and  Saviour  better  express  the  fervour  of  their  love  for  the
brethren  than  by  the  prayer  that  "  grace,  mercy,  and  pea'^e  may  be  multiplied  to
them  through  Jesus  Christ."  Yes,  peace  is  indeed  an  object  worthy  to  be  followed  by
man,  a  blessing  worthy  to  be  mnltiplied  by  God.  Follow  after  peace,  then,  and  ye
will  find  it,  in  all  its  varieties  of  excellency  and  of  loveliness.  Peace  of  conscience ;
for  your  sins,  however  multiplied  and  aggravated,  shall  be  made  as  though  they
had  never  been.  Peace  of  mind  ;  for  "  great  peace  have  they  that  love  Thy  law,
and  nothing  shall  offend  them."  Peace  with  man  in  life,  for  "the  work  of
righteousness  is  peace  "  ;  and  peace — the  "  peace  that  passeth  understanding  " — in
death,  for  "mark  the  perfect  man,  and  behold  the  upright,  for  the  end  of  that
man  is  peace."  Now  we  have  looked  upon  four  objects  of  moral  excellency  and
social  usefulness,  which  the  young  Christian  is  to  follow — righteousness,  faith,
charity,  peace.  Let  us  contrast  these  with  four  •'  youthful  lusts,"  desires,  inclina-
tions, or  tendencies,  call  thera  which  you  will,  from  which  he  is  to  flee.  The  love
of  self,  as  opposed  to  righteousness  ;  the  pride  of  philosophical  unbelief — unbelief
that  calls  itself  philosophical — as  opposed  to  faith  ;  covetousness,  or  the  desire  of
accumulation,  as  opposed  to  charity ;  and  the  turbulence  of  mirth,  revelry,  and
excess,  as  opposed  to  peace.  (T.  Dale,  M.A.)  Admonitions  to  the  young: — L
Consider  what  you  ought  to  avoid — "  Flee  youthful  lusts."  The  objects  of
abhorrence  are  distinctly  specified  in  this  short  but  impressive  caution.  No  pal-
liating epithets  are  employed  to  divest  them  of  their  disgusting  quaUties.  They
are  not  pleaded  for  by  being  called,  as  too  many  in  modern  times  represent  them —
"  mere  juvenile  indiscretions," — "youthful  follies,"  which maturer  age  will  correct;
but  they  are  marked  by  a  term,  which  at  once  describes  and  condemns  them.
Lust,  in  the  language  of  Scripture,  has  an  extensive  latitude  of  meaning;  it  if
applied  to  evil  desire  in  general — the  desire  of  what  is  in  itself  anlswfol  and  for*


CHAP.  M.]  II.  TIMOTHY.  221

bidden,  or  the  intemperate  desire  of  what  is  in  itself  lawful  and  allowed.    Thia
explanation  accords  with  the  assertion  of  the  apostle  John  in  his  first  Epistle,  in
which  he  gives  an  accurate  classification  of  evil  desires  :  "  All  that  ia  in  the  world,
the  lust  of  the  flesh,  the  lust  of  the  eye,  and  the  pride  of  life,  is  not  of  the  Father,
but  of  the  world."   The  passions  and  appetites  of  our  nature  are  powerful  principles
of  action.    Were  they  always  subjected  to  the  government  of  enlightened  reason,
they  would  become  sources  of  innocent  gratification ;  indulgence  would  leave  no
stain,  and  remembrance  would  awaken  no  remorse.    But  fnm  their  fatal  pre-
dominance over  the  convictions  of  the  understanding,  and  the  remonstrances  of
conscience,  what  streams  of  sin  and  misery  have  inundated  the  world  !     To  these,
as  their  immediate  sources,  may  be  traced  innumerable  diseases  which  ruin  the
body,  by  causing  its  premature  debility,  and  securing  its  inevitable  destruction.
But  their  direst  evil  is  that  they  "war  against  the  soul,"  impair  the  mind,  and
pollute  the  heart.    In  order  to  render  the  impression  more  vivid,  let  us  consider  to
what  evil  desires  the  young  are  peculiarly  exposed;   what  are  the  unhallowed
passions  that  require  their  utmost  vigilance  and  opposition.      1.   I  would  first
exhort  you,  my  young  friends,  to  guard  against  the  seductions  of  sensuality;
against  what  are  emphatically  termed  *'  fleshy  lusts."    On  no  subject  are  the
sacred  writers  more  frequent,  or  more  alarming  in  their  denunciations  than  on  this.
Aware  of  the  wide-spreading  nature  of  the  contagion,  they  continually  remind  ua
of  its  evil,  and  direct  ua  to  the  means  of  counteracting  and  expelling  it.    2.  Beware
of  intemperance.     By  intemperance,  I  mean  particularly  the  excessive  indulgence
of  those  appetites  of  our  nature  on  which  our  existence  depends.    It  is  sometimes
said  that  such  indulgence,  so  basely  irrational,  places  a  man  on  a  level  with  the
brutes  that  perish.     But  it  is  insulting  to  brutes  to  make  the  comparison.     The
laws  of  animal  instinct  teach  them   moderation,  and  the  dictates  of  universal
conscience  as  well  as  the  "  grace  of  God,"  should  teach  men,  that  "  denying  un-
godliness and  worldly  lusts,  they  should  live  soberly  in  this  present  evil  world,"
Intemperance  is  the  baneful  source  of  most  destructive  evils  ;  it  is  the  powerful
stimulus  to  the  commission  of  crimes,  which  men  would  shudder  to  perpetrate  in
the  cool  moments  of  sobriety.    3.  Amongst  the  evil  principles  which  the  apostle
warns  us  to  avoid,  may  be  included  also  high-mindedness,  for  immediately  after
the  exhortation  in  the  text,  he  says,  "The  servant  of  the  Lord  must  not  strive  ;
bat  be  gentle  unto  all,  apt  to  teach,  patient,  in  meekness  instructing  those  that
oppose  themselves."      And  to  enforce  this  impressive  caution  he  predicts  the
approach  of  "perilous  times,"  when  all  the  symptoms  of  unhallowed  self -exaltation
should  be  manifest  in  the  prevaihng  characters  of  men.     I  have  adopted  a  term  of
extensive  appUcation,  because  it  includes   the  various  modifications  of  pride,
haughtiness,  conceit,  vanity,  and  ambition.     It  is  worthy  of  your  attentive  regard
that  the  admonition  in  the  text  is  levelled  at  the  very  seat  and  principle  of  iniquity.
The  tyranny  of  the  passions  is  enthroned  on  the  heart ;  and  it  is  from  that  interior
dominion  they  must  be  expelled.    The  axe  is  therefore  laid  at  the  root  of  the  tree,
that  aU  its  branches  and  fruit  may  be  destroyed.    The  apostle  does  not  merely  say,
Flee  evil  habits,  impure  connections,  and  all  the  scenes  of  temptation,  but  he  says
what  virtually  includes  all  this,  by  denouncing  their  pernicious  origin:  "Flee
youthful  lusts  " ;  let  not  the  desire  be  indulged ;  "  the  thought  of  foolishness  ia
Bin."     As  the  venerable  Elisha  purified  the  waters  of  Jericho,  by  sprinkling  salt  on
the  fountain  whence  they  flowed,  so  the  apostle  directs  us  to  cleanse  the  springs  of
action ;  persuaded  that  they  will  send  forth  wholesome  streams  when  healed  from
the  contamination  of  sin.     II.   Our  next  general  inquiry  respects  the  opposite
principles  and  tempers  which  ought  to  form  the  objects  of  your  constant  and  unre-
mitting pursuit.    What  should  tou  follow  ?    He  was  persuaded  that  in  order  to
"abhor  that  which  is  evil,"  we  must "  cleave  to  that  which  is  good."    Let  us
attend  to  his  wise  and  salutary  directions.     1.  Follow  righteousness.     This  term
frequently  occurs  in  the  sacred  writings,  with  various,  though  connected  accepta-
tions.    In  its  most  important  reference  it  iB  applied  to  that  perfect  "  obedience
even  unto  death,"  by  which  our  exalted  Lord  "  magnified  the  law  and  made  it
honourable."    The  Scriptures  which  so  clearly  reveal  this  righteousness  as  the
exclusive  basis  of  acceptance  with  God,  announce  the  method  of   obtaining  ita
blessings.    "  Not  to  him  that  worketh,  but  to  him  that  believeth  on  Him  that
justifietb  the  ungodly,  his  faith  is  accounted  for  righteousness."    This  righteous-
ness, the  possession  of  which  justifies  a  sinner  in  the  sight  of  Ood,  will  infallibly
secnre  as  its  invariable  consequence,  an  inherent  rectitude  of  principle— that
personal  righteousness, "  without  which  no  man  can  see  the  Lord."    In  conformi^


222  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n.

Tvith  this  statement,  I  would  earnestly  exhort  you,  my  young  triends,  to  cultivate
all  the  fruits  of  righteousness.  Aim  at  the  entire  agreement  of  yonr  spirit  and
actions  with  the  unerring  rule  of  righteousness,  laid  down  in  the  sacred  Word.
There  you  behold  its  nature  clearly  defined,  and  its  wide  extent  unfolded.  It  is  not
a  variable,  shifting  principle,  adapted  to  the  changes  of  custom,  and  the  fluctua-
tions of  caprice.  Its  nature  and  obligations  are  not  dependent  on  views  of  ex-
pediency, which  may  happen  to  agree  with  its  dictates  to-day,  and  suggest  an
opposite  rule  of  conduct  to-morrow.  Righteousness  is  the  conformity  of  the  heart
and  life  to  the  immutable  laws  of  equity  which  God  has  established ;  an  equity,
unbending  in  its  decisions,  and  unalterable  in  its  claims.  2.  If  you  "  follow
righteousness,"  your  character  will  be  adorned  by  fidelity.  This  I  conceive  is  what
the  apostle  meant  by  "faith  ";  and  the  word  has  precisely  this  rendering,  in  the
Epistle  to  Titus,  in  which  servants  are  exhorted  to  "  show  all  good  fidelity."
Fidelity  is  an  important  part  of  righteousness ;  it  is  one  of  the  essential  expres-
sions of  it,  and  aU  pretensions  to  rectitude  without  it  are  but  as  "tinkling  cymbals
and  as  sounding  braes."  3.  With  "  righteousness  and  fidelity,"  the  apostle  connects
charity  and  peace.  The  principles  and  duties  of  justice  are  intimately  bleuded
with  those  of  benevolence.  The  latter  derive  all  their  value  and  stability  from  the
former,  and  give  them  in  return  "  an  ornament  of  grace — a  crown  of  glory."
Charity,  or  love,  is  of  essential  importance  to  Christian  character.  It  is  often
referred  to  as  a  decisive  test  of  real  religion.  It  is  well  described  by  the  apostle
Paul  as  the  "bond  of  perfectness."  It  unites  and  combines  all  the  other  graces,
"  fitly  framing  them  together,"  giving  them  beauty,  proportion,  and  effect.  The
apostle  Paul  has  presented  a  full-length  portraiture  of  Charity.  Are  you  surprised
that  peace  should  spring  from  that  charity  which  "  endureth  all  things  "  ?  This
is  its  rational  and  invariable  result.  The  peace  which  flows  from  believing,  and
which  consists  in  reconciliation  with  God  through  Jesus  Christ,  will  be  connected
with  a  pacific  temper  and  disposition.  These  are  the  objects  of  pursuit  exhibited
to  your  attention,  in  the  exhortation  of  the  text.  You  are  commanded  to  follow
them,  wherever  they  may  lead  you  ;  to  aim  at  attaining  them,  whatever  they  may
cost  you ;  and  with  unremitting  diligence  to  persevere  in  the  path  which  they  have
prescribed.  With  peculiar  propriety  has  the  apostle  connected  this  wise  direction
with  the  preceding  caution.  Every  disposition  marked  out  as  the  object  of  pursuit,
immediately  tends  to  the  subversion  of  those  unhallowed  desires  which  you  are
warned  to  avoid.  You  cannot  indulge  in  one  "  youthful  lust "  but  you  violate  the
claims  of  "  righteousness,  faith,  charity,  and  peace."  Let  these  holy  principles
exist,  and  you  will  be  effectually  armed  against  the  enemies  of  your  souls.  III.
With  whom  beouli)  tou  associate  ?  "  With  them  that  call  on  the  Lord  with  a
pure  heart."  Religion  does  not  extirpate  the  social  affections  of  our  nature ;  but
it  directs  their  exercise,  and  consecrates  them  supremely  to  the  glory  of  God.  The
fellowship  of  a  Christian  Church  is  designed  to  bring  them  under  the  guidance  of
those  laws  which  Christ  has  revealed  in  His  Word,  and  to  regulate  all  our  voluntary
associations.  The  influence  of  pernicious  example  is  peculiarly  felt  in  the  circle  of
intimate  friendship.  There  your  opinions  and  practices  receive  their  strongest
confirmation ;  and  your  character  and  habits,  if  at  first  opposed  to  the  prevailing
complexion  of  those  with  whom  you  associate,  will  be  almost  imperceptibly
changed.  Consider  the  infinite  importance  of  being  now  "numbered  with  the
saints,"  "  on  the  Lord's  side,"  that  jou  may  not  be  "  gathered  with  sinners  "  at
the  day  of  final  separation  and  unalterable  decision  1  (Jos.  Fletcher,  M.A.)
Purity : — Antony  William  Boehme,  a  German  divine,  once  preached  from  Exodus
XX.  14 :  "  Thou  shalt  not  commit  adultery."  A  chevalier,  who  was  one  of  his
hearers,  felt  himself  so  much  insulted  that  he  challenged  Boehme  to  fight  a  duel,
because  he  thought  his  sermon  designed  entirely  to  offend  him.  Boehme  accepted
the  challenge,  and  appeared  in  his  robes  ;  but  instead  of  a  pistol  he  had  the  Bible
in  liis  hand,  and  spoke  to  him  in  the  following  manner  :  "  I  am  sorry  you  were  so
much  offe  ded  when  I  preached  against  that  destructive  vice ;  at  the  time  I  did  not
even  think  of  yi'U.  Here  I  appear  with  the  sword  of  the  Spirit,  and  if  your  con.
science  condemns  yon,  I  beseech  you,  for  your  own  salvation,  to  repent  of  your
sins  and  lead  a  new  life.  If  you  will,  then  fire  at  me  immediately,  for  I  would
willingly  lose  my  life  if  that  might  be  the  means  of  saving  your  soul ! "  The
chevalier  was  so  struck  with  this  language  that  he  embraced  him  and  solicited  his
friendship.  A  bold  man  was  this  preacher,  and  reminds  you  of  another  bold  man
iu  RnKliftii  history,  Hugh  Latimer,  Bishop  of  Worcester,  who  presented  to  Henry
Vlli.  for  a  now  year's  gift  a  New  Tebtament,  doubled  down  at  the  leaf  where  is


OBiP.  n.]  n.  TIMOTHY.  223

written,  "Whoremongers  and  adulterers  God  will  judge"  (Heb.  xiii.  4).  Ood'a
trath  must  be  told,  and  not  be  kept  back.  The  Seventh  Commandment  concerns
our  own  and  our  neighbour's  chastity :  "  Thou  shalt  not  commit  adultery."  It
forbids  all  acts  of  uncleanness,  with  all  those  fleshly  lusts  which  produce  those  acts
and  war  against  the  soul ;  and  all  those  practices  which  cherish  and  excite  those
fleshly  lusts,  as  looking  in  order  to  lust,  which  Christ  teUs  us  is  forbidden  in  this
commandment  (Matt,  v,  28).  The  eyes,  like  Jacob's  cattle,  too  firmly  fixed  on
beautiful  objects,  make  the  affections  bring  forth  spotted  fruit,  and  it  is  as  easy  to
quench  the  fire  of  Etna  as  the  thought  fixed  by  lust.  Lusting  is  often  the  result  of
looking,  as  in  David,  who  saw  Bathsheba  bathing,  and  in  Joseph's  mistress,  who
set  her  eyes  upon  Joseph.  Lust  is  quicksighted.  How  much  better  Job,  who
would  not  look,  lest  he  should  think  upon  a  maid  1  He  had  learned  to  keep  in  his
eyes  from  roving  to  wanton  prospects.  Samson's  eyes  were  the  first  offenders  that
betrayed  him  to  unlawful  desire  of  carnal  pleasure ;  therefore  are  his  eyes  first
pulled  out,  and  he  led  a  blind  captive  to  Gaza,  where  before  he  had  with  carnal
appetite  gazed  on  his  DeUlah.  Amoug  the  things  which  in  our  baptismal  vow  we
promised  to  renounce  are  the  sinful  lusts  of  the  flesh.  The  text  enforces  that
promise  upon  us.  Carnal  pleasures  are  the  sins  of  youth ;  ambition  and  the  love
of  power  the  sins  of  middle  age  :  covetousness  and  carking  cares  the  crimes  of  old
age,  "Flee  fornication,"  &c.  (1  Cor.  vi.  18,  19).  He  that  commits  this  sinsinneth
against  his  own  body ;  and  inasmuch  as  his  body  was  created  for  God's  Holy
Spirit  to  dwell  in,  it  is  a  defilement  of  the  temple  of  God.  This  sin  of  fornication
is,  therefore,  the  more  hateful,  because  by  committing  it  a  man  sins  both  against
himself,  against  his  fellow-creature,  and  against  his  God.  By  indulging  in  this  sin
he  debases  his  noblest  faculties ;  he  defiles  and  destroys  God's  handiwork ;  he
makes  vile  that  which  God  made  holy.  By  the  just  judgment  of  God  all  these  ir-
regular and  sinful  connections  are  married  to  death.  Neither  prostitutes,  whore-
mongers, nor  unclean  persons  of  any  description  can  live  out  half  their  days
Parents  I  beware  of  the  example  of  Eli  I  He  was  a  good  man  himself,  but  his
children  were  extremely  wicked — he  restrained  them  not.  Parents  1  see  that  your
children  do  not  associate  with  corrupt  companions — "  Evil  communications  corrupt
good  manners."  Lidulged  children,  Uke  Dinah  (Gen,  xxxiv,),  often  become  a  grief
and  shame  to  their  families.  Her  pretence  was  to  see  the  daughters  of  the  land,
to  see  how  they  dressed,  and  bow  they  danced,  and  what  was  fashionable  amongst
them ;  she  went  to  see — she  went  to  be  seen  too ;  she  went  to  gain  an  acquaintance
with  those  Canaanites,  and  to  learn  their  way.  See  what  came  from  Dinah's
roving  1  The  beginning  of  sin  is  as  the  letting  forth  of  water — "  Give  the  water
no  passage,  neither  an  unprotected  daughter  liberty  to  gad  abroad "  (Ecclus).
Carefully  avoid  all  occasions  of  sin  and  approaches  to  it.  Parents!  let  your
household  arrangements  be  such  as  never  to  endanger  your  children's  purity  of
character;  never  let  the  blush  of  shame  be  needlessly  raised  on  their  cheeks.
Whatever  sacrifice  it  may  cost  you  in  other  ways,  do  not  put  them  in  jeopardy
by  crowding  your  family  into  too  small  a  space,  thus  rendering  it  impossible
that  a  sense  of  decency  and  modesty  should  be  preserved.  It  is  a  false  and  fatal
economy  that  would  tempt  you  to  do  this.  Much  depends  on  you,  landlords,
masters,  employers  of  labour.  But  whatever  may  be  done  by  parents  or  by
masters,  to  you,  young  men  and  young  women,  we  must  mainly  look.  The
celebrated  John  Newton,  as  the  commander  of  a  slave-ship,  had  a  number  of
women  under  his  absolute  command,  and  knowing  the  danger  of  his  situation
on  that  account,  he  resolved  to  abstain  from  flesh  in  his  food,  and  to  drink
nothing  stronger  than  water  during  the  voyage,  that  by  abstemiousness  he  might
subdue  every  improper  emotion.  Upon  his  setting  sail,  the  sight  of  a  certain
point  of  land  was  the  signal  for  his  beginning  a  rule  which  he  was  enabled  to  keep.
(R.  A.  Taylor,  M.A.)  Helps  against  lusts : — 1.  Get  a  sound  knowledge  of  them.
2.  Mortify  thy  carnal  members,  3.  Labour  for  a  broken  heart,  4.  Be  diligent  in
thy  calling.  5.  Abandon  lewd  companions.  6.  And  strive  to  taste  deeply  of  the
water  of  life ;  favour  the  best  things,  (J.  Barlow,  D.D.)  Youthful  lusts : — And
thy  lusts  of  youth  are  principally  these :  pride,  idleness,  pleasure,  wantonness.
To  avoid  these  see  thou — 1,  Set  a  watch  over  all  thy  external  senses.  In  presence,
view  not,  touch  not.  In  absence,  talk  not,  think  not  on  wanton  affections.  2.
Sleep  little,  eat  little,  work  much,  pray  much  ;  for  take  away  the  fuel  and  the  fire
will  be  quenched.  3.  When  wandering  cogitations  or  suggestions  reflect  on  thy
fancy,  divert  them  the  contrary  way.  Forget  not  this.  4,  Attend  to  good  counsel,
and  follow  it ;  and  see  before  thou  purpose  anything  what  the  best  men  advise


224  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n.

thee.     (Ibid.)        A  choice  between  the  higher  and  lower  life  : — Thou  hast  a  doable
nature.    Choose  between  the  worse  and  the  better  that  is  within  thee.     Thou  hast
it  in  thy  power  to  become  the  slave  of  passion,  the  slave  of  luxury,  the  slave  of
sensual  pleasure,  the  slave  of  corruption.    Thou  hast  it  in  thy  power  to  become
the    free    master    of    thyself,    to    become    the    everlasting    benefactor    of    thy
country,  and  the  unf&iling  champion  of  thy  God.     {Dean  Sta7iley.)        Passions
to  be  early  checked: — There    was    once    an    old    monk    walking    through   the
forest  with  a  httle  scholar  by  his  side.    The  old  man  suddenly  stopped  and
pointed    to    four   plants    close    at    hand.      The  first    was    beginning    to    peep
above  the  ground ;  the  second  had  rooted  itself  pretty  well  into  the  earth ;  the
third  was  a  small  shrub  ;  whilst  the  fourth  and  last  was  a  full-sized  tree.     Then
the  old  monk  said  to  his  young  companion  :  "  Pull  up  the  first."    The  youth  easily
pulled  it  up  with  his  fingers.     "  Now  pnll  the  second."     The  youth  obeyed,  but
not  80  easily.     •'  And  the  third."    But  the  boy  had  to  put  forth  all  his  strength,
and  to  use  both  arms,  before  he  succeeded  in  uprooting  it.     "And  now,"  said  the
master,  "  try  your  hand  upon  the  fourth."     But  lo  1  the  trunk  of  the  tall  tree,
grasped  in  the  arms  of  the  youth,  scarcely  shook  its  leaves,  and  the  little  fellow
found  it  impossible  to  tear  its  roots  from  the  earth.    Then  the  wise  old  monk  ex-
plained to  his  scholar  the  meaning  of  the  four  trials.    "  This,  my  son,  is  just  what
happens  with  our  passions.     When  they  are  young  and  weak,  one  may,  by  a  little
watchfulness  over  self,  and  the  help  of  a  little  self-denial,  easily  tear  them  up  ;  but
if  we  let  them  cast  their  roots  deep  down  into  our  souls,  then  no  human  power  can
uproot  them,  the  Almighty  hand  of  the  Creator  alone  can  pluck  them  out.     For
this  reason,  watch  well  over  the  first  movements  of  your  soul,  and  study  by  acts  of
virtue  to  keep  your  passions  well  in  check."    The  bloom  of  youthful  purity  : — There
grows  a  bloom  and  beauty  over  the  beauty  of  the  plum  and  apricot,  more  exquisite
than  the  fruit  itself — a  soft,  delicate  flush  that  overspreads  its  blushing  cheek.
Now,  if  you  strike  your  hand  over  that,  it  is  gone  for  ever,  for  it  never  grows  but
once.      The  flower  that  hangs  in  the  morning  impearled  with  dew,  arrayed  as  a
queenly  woman  never  was  arrayed  with  jewels ;  once  shake  it  so  that  the  beads
roll  off,  and  you  may  sprinkle  water  over  it  as  you  please,  yet  it  can  never  be  made
again  what  it  was  when  the  dew  fell  silently  on  it  from  heaven.     On  a  frosty
morning  yon  may  see  panes  of  glass  covered  with  landscapes,  mountains,  lakes,
and  trees,  blended  in  a  beautiful  fantastic  picture.     Now,  lay  your  hand  upon  the
glass,  and  by  a  scratch  of  your  finger,  or  by  the  warmth  of  your  palm,  all  the
delicate  tracery  will  be  obliterated.      So  there  is  in  youth  a  beauty  and  purity  of
character,  which,  when  once  touched  and  defiled,  can  never  be  restored — a  fringe
more  delicate  than  frost-work,  and  which,  when  torn  and  broken,  will  never  be  re-
embroidered.      He  who  has  spotted  and  soiled  his  garments  in  youth,  though  he
may  seek  to  make  them  white  again,  can  never  wholly  do  it,  even  were  he  to  wash
them  with  his  tears.  When  a  young  man  leaves  his  father's  house  with  the  blessing
of  a  mother's  tears  still  wet  upon  his  brow,  if  he  once  lose  that  early  purity  of
character,  it  is  a  spot  that  he  can  never  make  whole  again.     Such  is  the  conse-
quence of  crime.     Its  effects  cannot   be   eradicated ;    it  can  only  be   forgiven.
Righteousness: — Let  me  exhort  you  to  put  on  the  righteousness  of  Ciirist  Jesus,  as
by  application,  so  in  imitation.     When  thou  art  to  deal  with  God,  and  to  appeal  in
His  court,  see  thou  have  this  wedding  garment:  clothe  thy  nakedness  with  the
mantle  of  Jesus ;  cover  thy  sinful  person  with  no  other  robe ;  wear  not  linsey-
woolsey  ;  mix  not  thy  pigeon  feathers  with  this  eagle's  plumes  ;  blend  not  thy  flash
water  with  this  fresh  wine,  lest  thy  nakedness  appear,  and  death  be  found  in  the
pot.      But  with  him,  who  knew  what  he  did  (Phil.  iii.  8,  9),  cast  off  thy  rags,
trample  them  under  foot,  and  apparel  thyself  with  the  pure  linen  of  Christ  our
Lord ;    for  Solomon  in  all  his  royalty  was  not  clothed   like  him,  who  hath  put
on  Christ  Jesus.     (J.  Barlow,  D.D.)         Faith  : — By  faith  the  righteousness  of
Christ   is   unfolded,  apprehended,  put  on.     Knowledge,  like  the  eye,  may  direct
us  unto  the  wedding  garment.    But  faith,  as  the  hand,  must  take  hold  of  it,
apparel  ourselves  with  it.    What  if  we  be  said  to  live  by  faith?  so  are  we  by
our  hands.     Yet  doth  any  man  eat  his  fingers  ?    No  ;  it  is  by  that  which  faith
applieth;  and  the  motion  of  the  hand  procureth  and  receiveth.     (Ibid.)      Follow-
ing  peace  : — For  thy  help  take  these  directions : — 1.  Be  at  peace  with  God  ;  for
that  will  keep  thy  heart  and  mind  in  the  acknowledgment  and  love  of  the  truth
(Phil.  iv.  7,  9).     2.  Have  peace  with  thyself.    In  all  things  be  in  subjection  to  the
Spirit  (James  iii.  14,  15).    For  if  wars  be  in  us,  peace  will  not  be  without  us  (Gal.
vi.  16).    8.  Depart  with  part  of  thine  own  rights ;  so  did  Abraham  to  Lot  (Gen.


BHip.  a.]  17.  TIMOTHY.  826

xiii.  9).  Christ  paid  tribute  to  preserve  peace  (Mat.  xvii.,  alt.).  And  for  peace
take  we  should  suffer  wrong  (1  Cor.  vi.  7).  4.  Abandon  self-loTe,  and  praj  for
peace.  When  men  will  have  their  own  actions  still  go  forward,  without  doubt,  it
IB  a  work  of  the  flesh  (Gal.  vi.  20).  For  motives — 1.  Are  we  not  the  sons  of  God  ?
and  is  not  He  the  King  of  Peace  ?  (1  Cor.  xiv.  33).  2.  Be  we  not  subjects  to
Him  who  is  the  Prince  of  Peace  ?  (Isa.  iz.  6).  3.  Is  not  a  Christian  called  to  live
In  peace  ?  (1  Cor  vii.  15).  4.  And  if  we  continue  in  peace,  will  not  the  God  of  love
and  peace  be  with  us?  (2  Cor.  xiii.  11).  {Ibid.)  Self-control  inspired  by  th*
thought  of  God : — A  heathen  may  herein  teach  multitudes  of  unconverted  men  and
many  professing  Christians  a  lesson.  We  read  of  Cyrus,  that  when,  after  one  of
fais  victories,  a  captive  of  singular  beauty,  Fanthea,  the  wife  of  Abradates,  king  of
Basiana,  was  taken,  he  refused  to  see  her,  and  entrusted  her  to  the  keeping  of
Araspes,  giving  him  a  very  prudent  admonition  respecting  his  conduct,  and  was
thus  assured  by  him;  "Fear  nothing ;  I  am  sure  of  myself,  and  I  will  answer  with
my  life  that  I  shall  do  nothing  contrary  to  my  duty."  This  young  nobleman  was
notwithstanding  overcome  by  her  beauty,  and  in  danger  of  basely  violating  his
promise,  had  not  Panthea  given  Cyrus  intelligence  of  his  baseness.  Araspes,  when
cited  to  appear  before  his  prince,  was  overwhelmed  with  shame  and  fear,  and  spoke
of  the  control  over  his  desires  which  he  had  when  in  Cyrus'  presence,  and  hia
weakness  when  left  to  himself  (see  "  EoUin's  Ancient  History,"  bk.  iv.,  ch. !.,  sec.
iv.).  If  the  presence  of  a  fellow-creature,  however  marked  by  purity  and  modera-
tion, availed  to  curb  the  passions  of  a  heathen,  how  much  more  should  the  re*
collection  of  a  pure  and  holy  God  I  And  if  love  constrain  not,  the  fear  of  His
displeasure  should  lead  us  to  beware  of  danger,  and  to  guard  our  eyes  and  onr
hearts,  lest  we  fall  into  temptation.  Avoiding  danger : — Have  you  never  heard
the  story  of  a  lady  who  wanted  a  coachman  ?  Two  or  three  called  to  see  her  about
the  situation,  and,  in  answer  to  her  inquiries,  the  first  applicant  said,  "  Yes,
madam,  yon  could  not  have  a  better  coachman  than  myself."  She  replied,  "  How
near  do  you  think  you  could  drive  to  danger  without  an  accident  ?  "  "  Madam,  I
could  go  within  a  yard  of  it,  and  yet  you  would  be  perfectly  safe."  "  Very  well,'*
ehe  said,  "  you  will  not  suit  me."  The  second  one  had  heard  the  question  upon
which  the  other  had  been  rejected,  and  therefore  he  was  ready  with  his  answer,
"  Danger  I  madam,  why  I  could  drive  within  a  hair's  breadth,  and  yet  be  perfectly
safe."  "  Then  you  will  not  suit  me  at  all."  When  number  three  came  in,  he  was
asked,  ••  Are  you  a  good  driver  ?  "  "  Well,"  he  replied,  "  I  am  careful  and  have
never  met  with  an  accident."  "  But  how  near  do  you  think  you  could  drive  to
danger  ?  "  "  Madam,"  he  said,  "  that  is  a  thing  I  never  tried,  I  always  drive  as
far  away  from  danger  as  ever  I  can."  The  lady  at  once  replied,  "You  are  the  kind
of  coachman  I  want,  and  I  will  engage  you  at  once."  Get  such  a  coachman  as
that  yourself,  to  guide  your  own  heart,  and  lead  your  own  character.  Do  not  see
how  near  you  can  go  to  sin,  but  see  how  far  you  can  keep  away  from  it.  (C  H.
Spurgeon.)  Abstinence ; — A  friend  who,  in  the  opinion  of  all  who  knew  him,  was
very  unlikely  to  take  stimulants  to  excess,  and  who  had  very  little  sympathy  with
teetotalism,  told  me  the  other  day  that  he  had  given  up  wine.  When  I  asked  him
his  reason  he  gave  me  this  suggestive  reply  :  "  Because  I  was  beginning  to  like  it
and  count  on  it."  It  was  the  wise  repression  of  incipient  rebellion  before  it  had
asserted  itself  by  overt  act.  {A.  Rowland,  LL.B.)  Taken  unawares : — We  have
read  that  "  a  debtor  seeing  a  bailiff  in  quest  of  him  ran  three  miles  to  a  boundary,
beyond  which  he  was  safe."  The  bailiff,  seeming  calmly  to  submit  to  his  failure,
stretched  out  his  hand  and  said,  "  Well,  let  us  part  good  friends,  at  any  rate."
The  debtor,  off  his  guard,  accepted  the  offered  hand,  whereupon  the  bailiff,  with  a
desperate  effort,  pulled  him  across  the  line,  and  clapping  him  on  the  shoulder,
Baid;  «•  You  are  my  prisoner."  So  men  may  be  overcome  by  the  evil  one  when
they  least  expect  an  assault  from  him,  and  think  themselves  most  safe.  (Sunday
School  Teacher.)  Self-control: — Bishop  Eyle,  in  his  "  Young  Men  Exhorted,"
makes  some  pungent  remarks  on  this  duty  of  self-control.  "  Besolve  at  once,"  he
writes,  "  by  God's  help,  to  shun  everything  that  may  prove  an  occasion  of  sin.  It
is  an  excellent  saying  of  good  old  Bishop  Hall :  '  He  that  would  be  safe  from  the
acts  of  evil  must  wisely  avoid  the  occasions.'  Never  hold  a  candle  to  the  devil.
He  that  would  be  safe  must  not  come  near  the  brink  of  danger.  He  must  look
npon  his  heart  as  a  magazine  of  gtmpowder,  and  be  cautious  not  to  handle  one
Bpark  of  temptation  more  than  he  can  help.  Where  is  the  use  of  your  praying,
'  Lead  us  not  into  temptation,'  unless  you  are  yourselves  careful  not  to  run  into
it?  "       •*  Flee  " ; — Prayer  is  not  enough.    Many  have  prayed,  and  have  not  tovin<^

16


22«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [chap.  n.

it  Bofficient.  Therefore  the  advice  in  the  Bible  ia  rational — ^Flee.  The  nsual
receipt  for  resisting  sin  is,  Fight ;  bnt  I  venture  to  say  the  Bible  and  common
sense  recommend  flight  rather.  There  are  many  sins  we  must  not  even  look  at ;
to  turn  away  and  run  is  the  only  resource.  The  Bible  says,  "  Flee  youthful  lusts,"
and  "  Look  not  on  the  wine."  The  brave  thing,  although  it  looks  the  cowardly,  ia
to  flee.  But  it  is  not  into  space  we  are  to  flee.  We  are  to  fly  upward,  to  get
into  a  higher  mood,  and  breathe  another  atmosphere.  (Prof.  H.  Drummond.)
Temptation'$  deceitt : — In  the  Fisheries  Exhibition  the  nets  were  so  beautifully
hung  and  draped  as  to  form  graceful  curtains.  How  many  of  Satan's  nets  are
made  to  appear  charmingly  attractive.  {H.  0.  Mackey.)  The  conquett  of  self: —
The  following  epitaph  was  once  placed  over  a  soldier's  grave : —

"  Here  lies  a  soldier,  whom  all  must  applaud.
Who  fought  many  battles  at  home  and  abroad ;
But  the  hottest  engagement  he  ever  was  in
Was  the  conquest  of  self  in  the  battle  of  sin."

The  danger  of  success : — There  is  danger  in  success.  St.  Bernard  astonished  an
immense  congregation,  intensely  interested  in  his  sermon,  by  suddenly  exclaiming,
"  Get  thee  behind  me,  Satan."  He  felt  that  the  devil  was  tempting  him  to  be
proud  of  his  eloquence,  as  though  he  would  win  souls  by  his  own  enticing  words.
And  when  Lacordaire  had  enthralled  thousands  by  one  of  his  Lenton  sermons  in
Notre  Dame,  the  young  monk  who  went  to  summon  him  to  the  refectory,  found
him  kneeling  before  a  crucifix,  with  the  tears  on  his  cheeks,  and  inquired,  "  Oh,
father,  why  are  you  so  sad?"  This  was  the  answer,  "My  eon,  I  am  afraid  of
success."      Be    not   high-minded,    but    fear.      {Dean  Hole.)  Undiscovered

character: — ^Every  man  has  in  himself  a  continent  of  undiscovered  character.
Happy  is  he  who  acts  the  Columbus  to  his  own  soul.  {Sir  J.  Stephen.)  Peace
with  them  that  call  on  the  Lord  out  of  a  pure  heart. — This  last "  peace  "  must
be  joined  with  the  words  immediately  following :  "  With  them  that  call  on  the
Lord,"  &c.  The  "peace"  here  signifies  absence  of  contention;  it  is  well  para-
phrased by,  "  that  spiritual  concord  which  unites  together  all  who  call  upon  and
who  love  their  Lord."  (fl.  D.  M.  Spence,  M.A.)  The  Christian  young  man: —
It  will  be  manifest,  at  the  very  first  glance,  that  when  the  apostle  expresses  with
whom  his  son  Timothy  should,  he  implies  with  what  kind  of  persons  he  should  not
associate;  with  those  who  do  not  "call  upon  the  Lord,"  and  with  those  who  do
indeed  appear  to  call  upon  the  Lord,  but  not  "out  of  a  pure  heart."  First,  the
unbeliever,  whether  he  be  such  in  appearance,  or  only  in  practice ;  and  next,  the
hypocrite,  the  formalist,  the  inconsistent,  and  the  insincere.  1.  Our  first  character
is  that  of  the  avowed  and  unblushing  sceptic ;  that  of  the  man  who  contemptuously
characterises  religion  as  the  business  of  women,  the  trade  of  preachers,  and  the  toy
of  men ;  one  who  mistakes  adroitness  in  contending  against  truth  in  argument,
for  capability  of  disproving  it,  and  who  is  as  much  delighted  with  himself,  when
he  has  hurled  a  sarcasm  or  a  sneer  against  the  gospel  or  the  Church,  as  if  he
had  invented  an  objection  which  must  tend  to  the  overthrow  of  them  both.  This
class  of  persons  may  be  ordinarily  identified  by  one  generic  feature ;  namely,  that
they  assume  everything,  and  demonstrate  nothing.  Avoid,  then,  as  far  aa  possible,
all  intercourse,  all  communion,  with  persons  such  as  these.  If  they  interrogate
you,  answer ;  but  when  you  have  answered,  do  not  argue.  2.  I  shall  next  describe
the  character  of  tbe  man  whose  infidehty  is  practical ;  who  is  only  not  an  atheist
because  he  ia  nothing ;  who  does  not  avow  or  advocate  false  principles  simply
because  he  has  no  principles  at  all;  and  who  remains  just  as  indifferent  to  all
that  concerns  his  moral  responsibility  or  hia  religious  duty,  as  if  indeed  he
were  the  base  degraded  thing,  to  which  he  endeavours  to  assimilate  himself;
as  if  in  truth  he  were  '•  the  beast,  whose  spirit  goeth  downward  to  the  earth "
— not  the  rational,  immortal,  intelligible,  accountable  man,  whose  spirit,  when
dismissed  from  and  disencumbered  of  its  earthly  tabernacle,  must  "  return  to  God
that  gave  it."  The  root  of  the  evil  is,  that  so  far  as  the  interests  of  the  soul  are
concerned,  persons  of  this  class  do  not  think  at  all.  From  such,  then,  as  we  have
now  described,  such  as  ''separate  themnelvea"  from  the  assembUes  of  Christian
worship,  being  "aensual,  having  not  the  Spirit"  ;  such  as  do  not  "call  upon  the
Lord  "  in  the  house  of  prayer,  and  therefore  cannot  be  presumed  to  call  upon  Him
in  the  closet — you  ought  to  separate  yourselves  as  far  as  possible,  on  no  other
ground  than  the  simple  knowledge  of  the  fact.     They  are  far  more  likely  to  injure


CHAT,  n.]  n.  TIMOTHY.  821

yon  than  yon  are  likely  to  profit  them ;  for  they  have  an  ally,  an  accomplice,  in
yonr  own  sinful  nature.  8.  There  is  yet  another  class  of  characters,  from  whom
in  following  out  the  spirit  of  the  text,  we  are  constrained  to  counsel  separation.
It  is  the  inconsistent,  the  undecided,  the  manifestly  insincere;  those  who  *•  call  on
the  Lord,"  but  not"  out  of  a  pure  heart  " ;  those  who  observe  proprieties,  but  who
disregard  principles ;  who  conform  to  the  ritual  without  imbibing  the  spirit  of  the
Church ;  who  profess  with  their  lips  that  they  know  God,  but  in  works  do  deny
Him — disguising  their  practices  by  their  profession,  and  masking  their  private
vices  by  their  public  prayers.  Those  who  "  call  on  the  Lord  out  of  a  pure  heart."
But  then  understand  what  this  means — the  heart  of  such  persons  is  not  innately
pure ;  it  is  not  pure  from  the  first.  No,  nor  is  it  inherently  pure  by  any  natural
constitution  or  organisation  peculiar  to  itself.  Nor  is  it  independently  pure —
without  the  aids  of  Divine  and  spiritual  operation,  or  by  influence  of  its  own.  Nor
is  it  invariably  pure — pure  without  any  apprehension  of  or  capability  of  change.
Its  purity  is  derived  and  imparted  from  above ;  purity  in  the  comparative  sense,
for  all  human  purity  is  comparative ;  and  produced  by  the  action  of  the  Spirit  of
God  npon  the  heart.  It  is  first  the  purposed,  attempted,  desired  separation  from
all  iniquity — because  we  "  name  the  name  of  Christ " ;  the  ceasing  to  regard  it  with
the  heart,  as  well  as  admit  it  knowingly  into  the  life.  It  is  next  the  fixed,  settled,
honest  purpose,  to  "  seek  first  the  kingdom  of  God  and  His  righteousness  " ;  and
to  postpone  all  considerations  of  present  pleasure,  interest,  or  inclination  to  the
"one  thing"  which  is  supremely  "  needful,"  even  to  "  win  Christ  and  be  found  in
Him."  Purity,  indeed,  is  but  another  name  for  what  is  elsewhere  called  "  single-
ness of  heart  " ;  that  which  St.  Paul  exemplified  when  he  declared,  "  One  thing
I  do ;  forgetting  those  things  which  are  behind,  and  reaching  forth  unto  those
things  which  are  before,  I  press  toward  the  mark  for  the  prize  of  the  high  calling
of  God  in  Christ  Jesus  " ;  and  what  the  Lord  Himself  delineated  when  He  said,
"  If  thine  eye  be  single,  thy  whole  body  shall  be  full  of  light."  I  have  already
spoken  to  you  about  the  prudence  of  avoiding  companionship  with  the  ungodly,
but  this  example  leads  you  one  step  beyond  it — to  the  cultivation  of  fellowship
with  the  pious.  And  for  this  reason :  that  every  friendship,  which  is  formed  upon
such  principles  and  with  such  persons,  is  an  additional  barrier  and  defence
against  the  encroachment  or  aggressions  of  the  enemy.  To  form  a  new  Christian
connection  or  intimacy  is  like  placing  a  new  warrior  within  the  citadel  of  the
heart,  a  new  sentinel  upon  the  watch-tower,  or,  it  may  be,  a  new  defender  in  tha
breach.     (T.  Dale,  M.A.)

Ver.  23.  Foolish  and  unlearned  qnestlons  avoid. — The  Greek  word  translated
"  unlearned,"  is  better  rendered  ignorant.  These  "  questions,"  which  the  false
teachers,  with  whom  Timothy  was  so  much  thrown,  loved  to  put  forward  for
discussion,  could  hardly  be  termed  "  unlearned" — much  useless  learning  being  often
thrown  away  in  these  disputings  of  the  schools — but  were  rather  "  pomtless,"
"stupid,"  as  well  as  foolish.  (H.  D.  M.  Spence,  M.A.)  Ignorant  questionings : — I.
Unadvised  and  dnlbabned  questions  abe  to  be  avoided.  1.  For  the  ground  of  them
is  not  good  :  such  spring  eitber  from  curiosity  or  ignorance.  2.  The  fruit  therefore
will  be  bitter ;  for  nothing  profitable.  H.  Sin  in  the  ftbst  causes  is  to  be  peevented.
What  of  less  motion  or  power  than  a  word — a  question  ?  yet  such  of  all  men  are  to
be  regarded.  III.  The  causes  op  sin  once  discebned  abe  to  be  besisted,  shunned.
Thou  knowt'St  that  fond  reasonings,  unadvised  disputings,  beget  quarrels,  stir  up
strifes :  therefore  reject  them,  flee  from  them.  IV.  Foolish  questions  eaisb
contentions.  It  is  a  wonder  to  see  what  abundance  of  ill  fruit  one  branch  of  fond
reasoning  hath  produced.  Like  a  bone  cast  amongst  curs,  an  unlearned  question
will  cause  men  to  snarl,  bite,  and  quarrel.  (/.  Barlow,  D.D.)  Foolish  question-
ings : — A  lady,  of  whom  we  heard  in  our  travels,  had  worried  several  ministers  who
sought  her  good  by  always  telling  them  that  she  could  not  believe  till  they  could
explain  to  her  how  God  could  be  without  a  beginning.  "For,"  said  she,  "if  He
never  began,  then  He  has  not  begun,  and  there  can  be  no  God  at  all."  Very
dexterous  are  certain  persons  in  blocking  up  their  own  road,  and  yet,  perhaps,
there  is  no  great  dexterity  in  it,  for  the  proverb  says,  "  A  fool  may  put  questions
which  a  wise  man  cannot  answer."  In  the  Vatican  at  Eome  we  saw  the  renowned
statue  of  the  boy  who  has  a  thorn  in  his  foot,  and  is  busy  extracting  it.  He  waa
doing  this  when  we  first  saw  him,  and  three  years  after  he  was  attempting  the
same  operation.  We  have  good  reat^on  for  believing  that  he  is  even  now  in
the  same  posture,  and  will  be  found  in  Uke  attitude  fifty  years  hence.    He  is  carved


228  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  k.

in  marble,  and  therefore  is  excused  for  making  no  progress;  bnt  what  shall  be
Boid  of  living,  thoughtful  individuals  who  year  after  year  are  trifling  with  imaginary
difficulties,  and  never  set  foot  on  the  road  to  heaven  ?  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Urnvite
curiosity  : — The  over-curious  are  not  over-wise.     {MasHnger.)  Metaphy$ieal

$ubtleties  t—

"Defend  me,  therefore,  common  sense,  say  I,
From  reveries  so  airy,  from  the  toil
Of  dropping  buckets  into  empty  wells,
And  growing  old  in  drawing  nothing  np."        (Cotoper.)

Religious  ttrife :— Haxley  came  to  Baltimore  to  attend  a  general  conference  in
1820.  A  discussion  arose  on  a  question  of  order,  whether  presiding  elders  shoald
be  elected  by  preachers  or  not,  and  the  dispute  had  waxed  warm,  not  to  say  hot.
Brother  Haxley  had  said  not  a  word  through  it  all,  but  at  the  close  of  the  session
the  Bishop  called  upon  him  to  make  the  concluding  prayer.  He  knelt  and  said,
"  Now,  0  Lord,  Thou  knowest  what  a  time  we've  had  here  discussing  and  arguing
about  this  elder  question,  and  Thou  knowest  what  our  feeUngs  are.  We  do  not
oare  what  becomes  of  the  ark ;  it's  only  who  drives  the  oxen."    {Christian  Age.)

"Sfet.  24.  The  servant  of  the  Lord  must  not  strlye,  but  be  gentle. — Conciliation ;
— It  is  noteworthy  how,  in  these  Pastoral  Epistles — which  contain,  so  to  speak,
the  last  general  directions  to  believers  in  Jesus  as  to  life,  as  well  as  doctrine  of,
perhaps,  the  greatest  of  the  inspired  teachers — so  many  careful  suggestions  are
given  for  the  guidance  of  Christians  in  aU  their  relations  with  the  great  heathen
world.  Conciliation  may  be  termed  the  key-note  of  these  directions.  St.  Paul
would  press  upon  Timothy  and  his  successors  the  great  truth  that  it  was  the
Master's  wiU  that  the  unnumbered  people  who  sit  in  darkness  and  in  the  shadow  of
death  should  learn,  by  slow  though  sure  degrees,  how  lovely  and  desirable  a  thing
it  was  to  be  a  Christian ;  should  come  at  length  to  see  clearly  that  Christ  was,
after  all,  the  only  lover  and  real  friend  of  man.  (H.  D.  M.  Spence,  M.A.)  Gentle-
ness becometh  a  minister : — He  must  not  be  a  fighter,  quarreller ;  but  meek,  quiet,
easy  to  be  entreated :  for  such  are  fathers,  nurses,  surgeons,  physicians.  Oh,  how
much  pity,  tenderness  of  affection  is  required  of  them  1  Lambs,  sucking  babes,
bones  out  of  joints,  stand  in  need  of  a  gentle  heart  and  finger  to  feed,  nourish,  and
rightly  to  place  them.  To  be  fierce,  cruel,  outrageous,  better  befits  a  dog  than
B  shepherd.      (/.  Barlow,  D.D.)  True  spirit  of  reform: — The  temper  and

deportment  recommended  by  St.  Paul  in  the  text  to  those  who  undertake  to  serve
God  in  the  instruction  of  man,  or  in  advancing  any  reformation,  approve  themselves
to  our  sober  judgment  as  best  suited  to  the  work  in  view,  and  alone  conformable  to
the  example  and  precepts  of  our  blessed  Saviour.  But  then  we  look  back  upon  the
history  of  the  Church,  which  is  in  great  part  an  history  of  ignorance  and  instruction,
of  corruptions  and  reformations,  and  we  find  that  among  the  most  prominent  of  the
servants  of  the  Lord,  among  the  most  remarkable  leaders  in  religious  progress,
were  those  who,  though  apt  to  teach  were  also  very  apt  to  strive,  and  so  far  from
being  patterns  of  gentleness,  patience  and  meekness,  were  rather  remarkable  for
qualities  of  an  opposite  description,  for  rudeness,  for  hastiness,  and  for  intem-
perance of  language  and  action.  We  ask,  whether,  considering  the  task  which
these  men  assumed,  the  obstacles  which  they  were  obliged  to  contend  with,  and  the
success  which  rewarded  their  efforts,  they  were  not,  after  all,  the  right  kind  of  men
for  the  work  and  for  the  time ;  whether  their  severe  and  even  martisJ  characteristics
were  not  necessary  to  the  accomplishment  of  their  purpose ;  and  whether  a  dififerent
kind  of  men,  of  more  peaceful  sentiments,  and  moderate  designs  and  measures,
would  have  made  any  head  at  all  against  the  torrent  of  sin  and  error  which  they
might  endeavour  to  stem.  We  think  of  Luther,  of  Calvin,  of  Knox — fiery,  arbitrary,
and  often  abusive  men.  But  were  they  more  so  than  they  ought  to  nave  been  ?
Here  is  the  gospel  rule  on  the  one  side,  and  here,  on  the  other,  are  these
impressive  facts.  Now,  in  few  of  these  facts,  must  not  the  gospel  rule  admit
of  exception  and  modification  ?  If  this  has  at  any  time  been  my  opinion,  longer
reflection  has  induced  me  to  renounce  it ;  and  I  am  now  convinced  that  truth  never
requires  the  sacrifice  of  love,  that  wrath  and  violence  are  never  necessary  to
reforms,  that  the  cause  of  Christianity  is  never  really  advanced  by  the  operations
of  an  unchristian  spirit.  Do  I  then  undertake  to  say,  that  what  we  have  been
accustomed  to  call  reformations  are  not  reformations,  and  that  the  leaders  of  them
do  not  deserve  the  name  of  reformers,  which  has  so  long  been  awarded  them  ?    I


CHAP,  n.]  II.  TIMOTHY.  229

Bay  no  such  thing.  But  I  do  venture  to  affirm,  that  these  reformations  would  have
been  attended  with  less  suffering  and  evil,  and  would  have  been  more  extensive
than  they  were,  if  the  reformers  had  manifested  more  of  the  Christian  spirit  than
they  did.  I  would  attribute  the  success  of  those  reformers  whom  I  have  already
named,  such  as  it  was,  and  it  surely  was  great,  not  to  their  failings  but  to  their
excellences,  not  to  their  vices  but  their  virtues.  They  possessed  in  great  perfection
the  energetic  virtues :  through  the  force  of  these  virtues,  and  the  force  of  truth,
they  succeeded  as  they  did.  Their  bitterness,  their  fierceness,  did  not  promote,
but  on  the  contrary  impeded,  the  progress  of  the  truths  for  which  they  contended,
A  Christian  reform  cannot  be  caused  or  aided  by  a  spirit  which  the  law  of  Christ
expressly  and  utterly  condemns.  The  real  causes  which  bring  it  about  are  of
another  character.  1,  There  is,  in  the  first  place,  the  obviousness  of  the  corruptions
which  the  reformer  would  abolish,  and  which  the  pure  and  honest  portion
of  society,  when  their  eyes  are  opened,  will  unite  in  abolishing.  2,  There  is,
in  the  second  place,  the  equal  obviousness  of  some  good,  which  the  reformer
distinctly  presents  as  an  end,  and  which  the  well-disposed  wiU  assist  him  to
establish.  3.  There  is,  in  the  third  place,  the  real  virtue  which  the  reformer
manifests  in  the  exhibition  and  accomplishment  of  his  purpose.  4.  In  the  fourth
place,  there  is  the  vast  amount  of  noble  enthusiasm  which  is  excited  by  the
prospect  of  enormous  conruptions  on  the  one  hand,  and  of  great  improvements  and
blessings  on  the  other,  and  which  enlists  itself  on  the  reformer's  side,  5.  And,  to  go
no  further  in  the  enumeration,  there  is  the  help  of  God,  which  is  always  bestowed
upon  those  who,  with  whatever  imperfections,  are  labouring  to  accomplish  a  high
and  worthy  object,  I  find  that  my  opinion  is  supported  by  an  authority  which,  on
Buch  a  subject,  is  entitled  to  more  than  common  weight.  "I  know,"  says  the
reformer  John  Wesley,  speaking  of  the  reformer  John  Enox,  and  of  that  fierce
and  barbarous  spirit  of  his  followers,  which  demolished  the  finest  architecture
of  Scotland,  "I  know  it  is  commonly  said,  the  work  to  be  done  needed  such  a
spirit.  Not  so;  the  work  of  God  does  not,  cannot  need  the  work  of  the  devil
to  forward  it.  And  a  calm,  even  spirit  goes  through  rough  work  far  better  than
a  furious  one.  Although,  therefore,  God  did  use  at  the  time  of  the  Eeformation,
Bour,  overbearing,  passionate  men,  yet  He  did  not  use  them  because  they  were
such,  but  notwithstanding  they  were  so.  And  there  is  no  doubt  He  would  have
used  them  much  more,  had  they  been  of  a  humbler  and  milder  spirit,"  Instances,
in  sufficient  number,  might  be  mentioned  beside  that  of  Wesley,  of  men  who,
charged  with  an  important  message,  and  meeting  with  rude  and  cruel  opposition  in
delivering  it,  have  still  delivered  it  with  a  kind  and  loving,  and  withal  a  steady
voice,  and  who  have  been  heard  and  obeyed  at  last,  when  opposers  grew  ashamed
of  their  own  ferocity,  and  sank  into  quietness  from  the  want  of  exasperation.  But  if
there  were  no  such  instances,  I  see  not  what  is  to  forbid  our  pointing  to  the  Great
Bedeemer,  and  requiring  that  all  who  work  in  His  name  should  work  with  His
spirit;  and  moreover  asserting  that  whatever  contradictions  of  this  spirit  are
manifested  by  them  are  to  be  counted,  not  among  their  excellences,  nor  among
qualities  which  are  necessary  to  their  success,  but  among  their  defects,  and  defects
which  their  cause,  if  a  Chris'tian  cause,  might  easily  have  spared,  (F,  W.  P.  Green-
wood, D.D.)  Gentleness  : — It  is  a  suggestive  fact  that  the  dove,  which  is  regarded
as  the  emblem  of  gentleness,  has  no  gall-bladder,  (H.  O.  Mackey. )  Power  of
gentleness  : — St,  Anselm  was  a  monk  in  the  Abbey  of  Bee,  in  Normandy,  and  upon
Lanfranc's  removal,  became  his  successor  as  director.  No  teacher  ever  threw
a  greater  spirit  of  love  into  his  toil.  "Force  your  scholars  to  improve?  "  he  burst
out  to  another  teacher  who  relied  on  blows  and  compulsion,  "  Did  you  ever  see  a
craftsman  fashion  a  fair  image  out  of  a  golden  plate  by  blows  alone  ?  Does  he  not
now  gently  press  it  and  strike  it  with  his  tools ;  now  vrith  wise  art,  yet  more  gently
raise  and  shape  it.  What  do  your  scholars  turn  into  under  this  ceaseless  beating  ?  "
"They  turn  only  brutal,"  was  the  reply.  "You  have  bad  luck,"  was  the  keen
answer,  ••in  a  training  that  only  turns  men  into  beasts."  The  worst  natures
softened  before  this  tenderness  and  patience.  Even  the  Conqueror,  so  harsh
and  terrible  to  others,  became  another  man,  generous  and  easy  of  speech,  with
Anselm.  {Ibid.)  The  quietness  of  Christ :— One  feature  of  Christ's  teaching
•which  St.  Matthew  notices,  is  the  quietness  in  deahng  with  those  by  whom  it  was
misunderstood.  There  was  no  fighting,  no  contention  of  words,  no  hot  disputing,
where  it  could  be  avoided,  but  retirement.  So  we  are  told  that  when  the  Pharisees
held  a  council  against  Him,  how  they  might  destroy  Him,  He  withdrew  Himself
fulfilling,  St.  Matthew  tells  us,  the  old  words,  "  He  shall  not  strive  nor  cry,  neither


230  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n.

shall  any  man  hear  His  voice  in  the  streets."  I  must,  however,  draw  your  attention
to  yet  one  more  feature,  His  teaching  was  positive,  not  negative.  There  was  mnch
in  the  religion  of  the  day  that  was  so  small,  contemptible,  and  even  base,  that  it
might  have  seemed  right  and  wise  to  pull  down  first  and  then  build.  But  He,
by  His  actions  and  His  words,  was  constantly  justifying  His  express  statement  that
He  came  not  to  destroy,  but  to  fulfil.  So  far  from  fulminating  against  the  dead
formaUty  of  the  temple  worship.  He  tried  to  make  it  better  by  purging  it  and
infusing  fresh  life  into  it.  His  life  and  words  were  a  continual  filling  in  with  a  new
spirit  aJl  that  was  good  and  helpful.  Where  He  could  transform  He  would  never
discard.  Could  we  catch  something  of  His  spirit  by  retiring  from,  instead  of
fighting  with,  determined  enemies,  by  transforming  instead  of  discarding,  how
helpful  our  service  of  man  in  this  respect  would  be  1  (Prof.  G.  H.  S.  Walpole.)
Christian  gentleness : — I  remember  to-day  two  masters  I  was  under  at  school.
One  was  a  huge,  burly  fellow,  with  a  sharp,  unkind  word,  and  a  sharper  punish-
ment for  every  boy,  big  or  little,  who  was  guilty  of  an  omission  or  a  fault :
and  every  lad,  little  or  big  in  the  school,  hated  him,  and  longed  for  the  time
when  they  would  see  him  no  more.  The  other  was  by  no  means  a  weakling,  for  he
was  a  splendid  fellow  in  the  cricket-field ;  but  he  was  as  gentle  as  a  child.  And  tha
roughest  and  wildest  lads,  who  would  have  scorned  to  allow  their  faces  to  tell  what
they  suffered  under  a  cruel  beating  from  the  first,  used  to  dread  a  quiet  five  minutes'
talk  with  the  second  master,  who  in  a  sweet  low  voice  always  used  to  begin  with  "my
dear  boy."  Few  lads  left  the  presence  of  that  second  master  without  having  felt  unable
to  repress  the  rising  tears,  and  without  a  noble  resolve  to  be  better  for  the  sake  of
the  Christian  gentleness  with  which  the  folly  or  the  fault  had  been  dealt  with.
(./.  Bowker.)  Kind  words  : — Kind  words  never  bUster  the  tongue  or  lips,  and  wa
never  hear  of  any  mental  trouble  arising  from  this  quarter.  Though  they  do  not  cost
much,  yet  they  accomplish  much.  They  help  one's  own  good  nature  and  good  will.
Soft  words  soften  our  own  soul ;  angry  words  are  fuel  to  the  flame  of  wrath,  and
make  it  burn  more  fiercely.  Kind  words  make  other  people  good-natured.  Cold
words  freeze  people,  and  hot  words  scorch  them ;  and  bitter  words  make  them
bitter,  and  wrathful  words  make  them  wrathful.  There  are  such  a  number  of
other  kinds  of  words,  that  we  ought  occasionally  to  make  use  of  kind  words.  There
are  vain  words,  and  idle  words,  and  silly  words,  and  hasty  words,  and  empty  words,
and  profane  words,  and  boisterous  words,  and  war-like  words.  But  kind  words
soothe  and  comfort  the  hearer ;  they  shame  him  out  of  his  sour,  morose,  unkind
feelings.  We  have  not  yet  begun  to  use  kind  words  in  such  abundance  as  they
ought  to  be  used.  (Pascal.)  Scholars  to  be  considered  rather  than  subjects  : — If
teachers  could  be  convinced  that  every  lesson  in  which  a  child,  however  it  has
increased  its  knowledge,  has  increased  its  dislike  for  knowledge,  is  a  lesson  worse
than  lost,  then  they  would  consider  not  only  how  subjects  ought  to  be  treated,  but
pupils.  There  are  many  who  do  great  justice  to  their  subjects,  while  they  do  great
injustice  to  their  pupils.  The  nature  of  the  one  is  understood,  but  not  the  nature
of  the  other.  (Su7iday  School  Teacher.)  Patient  (see  WisLlom  ii.  19.) — Endurance
of  malicious  detraction  is  one  of  the  victories  of  grace.  {H.  R.  Reynolds,  D.D.)
Teaching  letter  than  controveny : — This  is  what  the  servant  of  God  should  really  aim
at  being  :  the  teacher  rather  than  the  controversialist — rather  the  patient  endurer  of
wrong  than  the  fomenter  of  dissentions  and  wordy  strifes.  (H.  D.  M.  Spence,  M.A.)
Impatience : — Antony,  the  hermit,  heard  praise  of  a  certain  brother ;  but  when  he
tested  him  he  found  that  he  was  impatient  under  injury.  Quoth  Antony,  "  Thou
ait  iike  a  house  which  has  a  gay  porch,  but  is  broken  into  by  thieves  through  the
back  door."  (C.  Kingsley.)  Provocation  wisely  used  : — The  oyster,  when  it  is
feeding,  lies  with  its  shell  open  a  little  way,  so  that  the  water  may  flow  through  it ;
and  when  any  of  the  very  little  insects  and  animals  on  which  it  feeds  comes
floating  in  with  the  water,  the  o.vster  opens  its  mouth  and  swallows  them.  But  it
sometimes  happens  that  things  float  in  which  the  oyster  does  not  want,  and  which
it  cannot  swallow  or  eat.  When  it  is  lying  quietly  in  the  sunshine,  and  enjoying
its  meal,  a  little  grain  of  sand  may  come  inside  the  shell,  so  small  that  you  and
I  could  scarcely  see  it,  but  bo  hard  and  sharp,  that  if  it  gets  under  the  oyster's  soft,
tender  body,  it  would  irritate  and  pain  it.  What  does  the  oyster  do?  It  has
no  hands  to  catch  bold  of  it  and  throw  it  out.  Well,  it  does  not,  as  we  nhould  say,
get  into  a  passion,  and  knock  itself  about  the  shell;  no,  it  lies  quite  still,  and  with
some  of  that  beautiful,  white,  smooth,  glossy  matter,  with  which  it  has  lined  the
inside  of  its  sliell,  it  covers  the  sand  all  over,  and  so  makes  it  smooth  too.  And
more  than  that,  when  the  oyster  is  caught,  and  its  shell  is  opened,  if  one  of  these


CHAJ.  II.]  II.  TIMOTHT.  131

email  roand  beads  is  foand,  it  is  taken  oat  and  called  a  pearl,  and  sometimes  makes

•  very  valaable  and  handsome  ornament.  So  provocation  should  be  tiio  occasion
of  developing  the  pearl  of  patience.

Ver.  25.  In  meekness  instraoting  those  that  oppose  themselves ;  If  Qod  per-
adventure  will  give  them  repentance  to  the  acknowledging  of  the  truth.— The
phrase  is  difficult  as  it  stands.  Strictly  translated  it  would  be,  "  lest  at  any  time  ";
bat  this  would  be  out  of  harmony  with  the  whole  strain  of  the  passage.  Grave
doubt  is  expressed,  but  hope  is  not  extinguished.  God  is  the  giver  of  repentance.
Scharlitz,  quoted  by  Fairbaim,  suggests  "  whether  God  may  not  still  give  repentance."
Here  is  expression  of  the  thought  that  there  is  room  and  necessity  for  the  operation
of  the  Spirit  of  God,  over  and  above  the  normal  action  of  the  truth  upon  the  under-
standing, (if.  JR.  Reynolds,  D.D.)  Timothy^a  ministry  {vetfi.  25,  26) ; — Con-
sider— I.   The  0HABACTER8  AMONG  WHOM  IT  WAS  TO  BB  BXEECI8BD — OppOSCrS  not  Only

of  God,  but  of  themselves.  They  oppose — 1.  Their  duty.  2.  Their  conscience.
8.  Their  peace.  4.  Their  safety.  U.  Its  natcbb.  It  was  a  ministry  of — 1.
Instruction.  2.  Meekness.  III.  Its  desiom.  1.  That  sinners  may  be  led  to
repentance.  2.  Led  to  an  acknowledgment  of  the  truth.  3.  Beoovered  from  the
snares  of  the  devil.  {Anon.)  Meekness  in  the  minister: — He  who  cannot  bear
calmly  and  reply  with  dignity  to  contradiction,  is  just  as  little  fitted  for  the
ministry  of  the  gospel  as  the  physician  would  be  for  his  profession  who  would
allow  himself  to  become  moved  by  the  abusive  speech  of  a  patient  in  fever  delirium
either  to  forsake  the  sick-bed,  or  to  hurl  back  the  abuse.  (Van  Oosterzee.)  Thunder
rare : — But  you  may  reply  that  ministers  must  be  Boanerges,  Sons  of  Thunder,
rattle  in  a  congregation.  True;  notwithstanding,  meekness  is  to  be  retained,
practised.  But  to  return  an  answer  suitable  to  the  objection.  1.  Every  thin
vapour,  light  exhalation,  will  not  afford  matter  to  cause  a  thunder-crack ;  bo  each
text,  subject,  doth  not  give  warrant  to  denounce  terrors.  2.  Before  it  thunder  we
apprehend  a  light,  and  then  the  voice  striketh  the  organ  of  hearing,  and  the  eye
of  the  mind  is  to  be  enlightened  in  order  ere  that  judgment  be  threatened.  3.
Thunder  is  rare,  not  at  every  season;  should  the  minister  continually  shoot  the
shafts  of  God's  indignation,  would  not  the  vulgar  begin  to  smile,  laugh  him  to
scorn  ?  4.  After  a  great  crack  of  thunder  the  heavens  grow  black  and  refresh  the
earth  with  sweet  showers  of  water,  and  when  the  bolts  of  justice  are  cast  among
the  people  a  preacher  is  to  assume  a  doleful  look,  a  sad  countenance.  These  rules
observed,  cry  aloud.  Thunder  and  spare  notl  What  shall  I  more  say?  In  the
cause  of  thy  Master  be  bold,  resolute ;  in  thine  own,  let  meekness  have  her  perfect
work.  (J.  Barlow,  D.D.)  The  spirit  of  opposition : — It  was  written  of  Thoreau,
the  author,  that  "  He  was  by  nature  of  the  opposition ;  there  was  a  constitutional

•  No  *  in  him  that  could  not  be  tortured  into  •  Yes.'  "  {H.  O.  Mackey.)  The  nature
of  religious  truths : — I.  Hebe  is  a  supposition  laid  down  :  that  tboth  is  something
BBAii  IN  ITSELF  AND  OF  iMPOBTANCB  TO  MEN ;  Something  that  may  be  found,  and
which  we  ought  to  seek  after.  Wherever  the  Scripture  speaks  of  truth  it  always
means  such  truth  as  has  relation  to  religion.  All  truth,  of  what  kind  soever  it  be,
is  real.  But  truth  in  matters  of  religion  is  always  of  the  greatest  importance ;  as
being  the  foundation  and  the  support  of  right  practice.  These  truths  of  God  are
like  an  immovable  rock,  the  basis  and  foundation  of  that  true  religion  which
approves  itself  to  every  man's  understanding  by  clear  reason,  and  glorifies  God  by
making  men  like  unto  Him  through  virtue  and  righteousness  in  their  practice.  AU
false  reli>.'ions  consist  in  changing  these  truths  of  God  into  a  lie  (Bom.  i.  25).  II.
Such  is  the  corrupt  state  and  disposition  of  mankind,  that  some  there  will  alwats
BB  WHO  will  set  THEMSELVES  TO  OPFOSB  THE  TBUTH.  Notwithstanding  the  native
excellency  and  beauty  of  truth  considered  in  itself  ;  notwithstanding  tiie  strength
and  clearness  of  reason  with  which  it  is  generally  accompanied  ;  notwithstaudiBg
the  apparent  benefit  and  advantage  which  the  knowledge  of  truth  always  brings  to
mankind ;  yet  so  little  sensible  are  men  of  the  intrinsic  excellency  of  things,  so
nnatteniive  to  the  strength  of  the  clearest  reason,  so  apt  to  be  imposed  upon  in
judging  concerning  their  own  true  interests  ;  that  nothing  is  more  common  than  to
see  the  plainest  and  most  useful  truths  in  matters  of  religion  violently  and  passion-
ately opposed.  The  principal  causes  of  this  opposition  are — 1.  Ignorance.
Meaning  here  by  ignorance  not  a  bare  want  of  knowledge.  There  is  a  presumptuous
ignorance  which  despises  knowledge,  and  this  makes  men  oppose  the  truth  before
^ey  understand  anything  of  it.  2.  Carelessness.  They  blindly,  and  without  any
consideration,  follow  the  customs  of  the  place  where  they  happen  to  live,  and  tha


232  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [chap.  n.

knowledge  of  truth  seems  to  them  to  be  of  no  great  importance.  They  take  up
their  religion  at  adventures,  not  from  the  consideration  of  the  laws  of  nature  or  of
revelation,  but  merely  from  the  company  they  chance  to  be  educated  amongst,  and
thus  all  religions  are  put  upon  an  equal  foot,  varying  according  to  the  accidental
temper  of  tie  persons  among  whom  they  prevail.  3.  Prejudice.  They  have
accustomed  themselves  to  found  their  belief  entirely  in  an  impUcit  rehance  upun
other  men,  instead  of  building  it  upon  the  evidence  of  things  themselves  which  is
the  foundation  of  truth.  4.  But  the  last  and  greatest  reason  of  men's  setting
themselves  in  opposition  to  the  truth  is  the  wickedness  and  corruption  of  their
manners,  the  love  of  unrighteousness  and  debauchery,  the  desire  and  power  of
dominion,  the  concern  they  are  under  for  the  defence  and  support  of  a  sect  or
party  without  having  any  knowledge  how  far  they  are,  or  are  not,  in  the  right.
III.  The  dikectioji  given  ds  concebmng  ouk  own  duty,  that  we  odoht  in  meekness

TO  INSTBUCT  THOSE  WHO  OPPOSE  THEMSELVES  AGAINST  THE  TRUTH.      We   Caunot   alwayS

discern  who  they  are  that  err  through  ignorance  and  through  a  vicious  dis-
position. But  if  we  would,  yet  meekness  is  at  all  times  necessarily  a  fruit  of  the
spu'it,  and  we  are  commanded  to  be  patient  towards  all  men,  towards  them  that
oppose  as  well  as  towards  them  that  are  only  ignorant  of  the  truth.    IV.  A  pabti-

OTJIiAB  SEASON  WITH  KEGABD  TO  THE  PERSONS  TO  BE  INSTBUCTES,  WHY  CUB  INSTBDCTIOH
TO  THEH   OUGHT   ALWAYS  TO   BE   ACCOMFANIEI)  WITH   MEEKNESS.      If  God  peradvcntura

will  give  them  repentance  to  the  acknowledgment  of  the  truth.  In  the  original  it
is,  "Lest  God  peradventure  should  give  them  repentance  to  the  acknowledgment  of
the  truth."  The  meaning  is,  we  are  to  instruct  them  with  meekness,  lest  per-
adventure, by  our  beat  and  passion,  we  raise  in  them  a  just  prejudice  against  us,
when,  by  meek  instruction,  they  might  possibly  have  been  brought  to  repentance,
and  to  the  acknowledgment  of  the  truth,  and  so  we,  by  our  ill-behaviour  become
answerable  for  their  miscarriage.  For  this  reason  we  so  frequently  find  repeated
in  Scripture  the  following  admonitions,  which  may  serve  for  a  proper  applica-
tion of  this  whole  discourse  :  1  Pet.  ii.  12,  iii.  15 ;  1  Cor.  x,  32 ;  Coh  iv.  6 ;
1  Tim.  iii.  7;  Phil.  ii.  15,  iv.  5;  Matt,  v.  16.  {S.  Clarke,  D.D.)  Bepentanee
the  design  of  preaching: — 1.  One  principal  end  of  the  ministry  is  to  bring
men  to  repentance.  2.  By  meek  preaching  God  may  work  repentance.  8.
Bepentanee  is  hopeful  and  yet  doubtful.  4.  Ministers  are  to  preach  and  leave
the  success  to  the  Lord.  {J.  Barlow,  D.D.)  Meekness  in  controversy  :—
When  Dr.  Swift  was  arguing  one  day  with  great  coolness  with  a  gentleman
who  had  become  exceedingly  warm  in  the  dispute,  one  of  the  company  asked
him  how  he  could  keep  his  temper  so  well.  "  The  reason  is,"  rephed  the  dean,  "  I
have  truth  on  my  side."  A  cobbler  at  Leyden,  who  used  to  attend  the  publio
disputations  held  at  the  academy,  was  once  asked  if  he  understood  Latin.  "  No,"
replied  the  mechanic,  "  but  I  know  who  is  wrong  in  the  argument."  "How?"
replied  his  friend.  "  Why,  by  seeing  who  is  angry  first."  (Sunday  School  Teacher.)
Many  qualities  requisite  in  a  minister  : — The  medical  attendant  of  my  brother  has
just  been  expressing  his  surprise  to  see  how  much  I  am  worn  within  this  last  half-
year  ;  I  am  very  sensible  of  it  myself,  and  expect  that  I  shall  be  much  more  worn
if  my  people  continue  in  such  a  grievous  state.  I  would  that  my  eyes  were  m
fountain  of  tears  to  run  down  day  and  night.  Would  you  believe  it  ?  I  have  been
used  to  read  the  Scriptures  to  get  from  them  rich  discoveries  of  the  power  and  grace
of  Christ :  to  learn  how  to  minister  to  a  loving  and  obedient  people ;  I  am  now
reading  them  really  and  literally  to  know  how  to  minister  to  a  conceited,  con-
tentious, and  rebellious  people.  Two  qualities,  I  am  sure,  are  requisite,  meekness
and  patience,  yet,  in  some  cases,  I  shall  be  constrained  to  rebuke  with  authority.  I
have  been  used  to  sail  in  the  Pacific.  I  am  now  learning  to  navigate  the  Bed  Sea,
that  is  full  of  shoals  and  rocks,  with  a  very  intricate  passage.  I  trust  the  Lord  will
carry  me  safely  through ;  but  my  former  trials  have  been  nothing  to  this.  (C.
Simeon.)  Plain  instruction: — Who  expects  to  find  "Bradshaw"  full  of  Latin
questions  ?  You  get  it  as  a  guide,  and  you  want  it  to  be  as  plain  as  possible.  Yoa
have  lost  your  way  among  some  mountains  one  night,  and  are  overtaken  by  some
classic — who  says,  "  I  will  tell  you  the  way  to  get  home  in  sixteen  different
languages,"  none  of  which  you  comprehend.  I  think  you  would  reply,  "  I  would
rather  be  told  it,  sir,  in  one  that  I  could  understand."  Or,  if  some  profound
professor  should  inform  you  that  he  could  explain  the  geological  strata  and
formation  of  the  soil  on  which  you  were  standing,  I  think  you  would  say,  "  If  yoa
could  point  me  to  my  own  abode,  I  should  be  more  grateful."   And  I  think  if  soma


CHAP,  uj  21.  TIMOTHY,  233

poor  ragged  girl  or  shepherd  boy  could  tell  you  of  a  way  by  which  you  could  escape
that  wood  or  yonder  precipice  and  reach  a  hospitable  shelter,  such  information  would
undoubtedly  be  more  profitable  to  you.  The  sign-post  that  points  the  way  by
the  side  of  the  roads  never  have  a  quotation  of  poetry  upon  them,  or  sentences
from  Isocrates  or  Sophocles.  There  is  just  the  word,  and  that  is  enough.  ((7.  H.
Spurgeon.)

Yer .  26.  And  that  they  may  recover  themselves  out  of  the  snare  of  the  devil,  who
are  taken  captive  by  him  at  his  will. — And  that  they  may  return  to  sobriety  from
the  benumbing  intoxication  of  false  philosophy  and  bad  habits,  here  represented  as
a  snare  of  the  devil,  in  which,  though  held  captive,  they  were  not  yet  killed — •*  out
of  the  snare  of  the  devil,  being  made  living  captives  of  by  him."  So  far,  there  is  no
difficulty,  but  the  last  clause,  "  according  to  the  will  of  Him,"  leaves  the  reader  in
doubt  as  to  its  meaning,  since  two  pronouns  are  used  which  generally,  if  noi
universally,  refer  to  two  dififerent  subjects.  De  Wette,  Huther,  and  Davidson
disregard  the  difference  of  the  pronouns,  and  make  them  both  refer  to  the  devil.
But  the  contrast  of  the  two  pronouns  is  remarkable,  and  the  sense  of  the  passage
very  obscure,  the  "will  of  the  devil"  being  an  otiose  addition,  unless  it  be  trans-
lated, as  by  Davidson,  "to  do  his  will."  If  Ufivov  refers  to  the  more  remote
antecedent,  then  "  God's  will "  is  suggested  as  the  gracious  accompaniment  and
occasion  of  this  gift  of  repentance,  or  as  the  exposition  of  the  state  of  new  life,
into  which  such  penitents  may  be  brought.  The  passage  will  read  as  follows  : —
"Whether  haply  God  would  grant  them  repentance,  and  also  whether  haply  they
may  return  to  society,  into  harmony  with  His  wiU,  out  of  the  snare  of  the  devil,
seeing  they  have  been  made  living  captives  by  him."  {H.  R.  Reynolds,  D.D.)
Satan's  temptations  are  like  snares  : — The  devil  is  a  fowler,  beholds  the  world  like  a
great  and  spacious  forest  full  of  all  kinds  of  beasts  and  birds,  and  setteth  snares
and  gins  in  every  corner  to  catch  them.  1.  In  a  suare  there  is  subtlety,  so  in
Satan's  temptations.  (1)  He  never  propounds  a  temptation  in  his  own  name.  No,
should  he  do  so,  his  plot  would  be  discerned  prevented.  How  cunningly  crept  he
into  the  serpent  and  seduced  the  woman  ?  He  conveyed  himself  into  such  things
as  we  are  least  suspicious  of.  Who  would  have  thought  that  any  snare  had  been
in  the  words  of  the  apostle.  Master  pity  thyself?  Yet  doth  not  Christ  reply,  "Get
thee  behind  Me,  Satan  "  ?  (2)  He  can  lay  a  snare  in  the  very  Scriptures.  Though
they  be  mUk  for  babes,  strong  meat  for  grown  men,  he  can  poison  all.  Let  Christ
answer  him  by  Scripture,  straight  he  replies,  tempting  him  by  a  place  of  Scripture.
"  Cast  thyself  down ;  for  it  is  written,  God  shall  give  His  angels  charge  over  Thee
that  thou  dash  not  Thy  foot  against  a  stone."  (3)  He  can  convey  a  temptation  in
the  frame  of  a  man's  spirit.  He  conceives  that  some  are  apt  to  pride,  malice,
coveteousness,  melancholy,  mirth,  silence,  Uberalness  of  speech,  and  according  to
our  natural  inclination  he  sets  his  gins  for  us.  Thus  he  provides  a  wanton  object
in  the  time  of  idleness,  a  beautiful  woman  washing  herseCf,  and  so  the  good  king  is
caught  in  his  net.  What  way  the  tree  leans  he  thrusts  it,  and  where  the  fence  ia
weaikest  he  seeks  to  enter.  So  subtley  will  he  here  lay  a  snare  that  we  will  hardly
be  brought  to  believe  it  is  a  temptation  of  Satan,  but  think  rather  it  proceeds  solely
from  our  natural  disposition.  2.  In  a  snare  there  is  cruelty ;  so  here.  He  is  called
Abaddon,  Apollion,  a  murderer,  a  destroyer.  3.  In  a  snare  is  strength,  and  is  it
not  to  be  found  in  Satan's  temptations  ?  4.  You  shall  find  in  Satan's  temptations,
as  in  snares,  pleasures  and  suddenness.  Were  it  not  thus  they  were  not  snares
properly.  Was  not  the  tree,  in  the  eye  of  Eve,  good  for  meat,  pleasant,  and  to  be
desired  to  get  knowledge  (Gen.  iii.  6)  ?  Were  not  the  daughters  of  men  fair  (Gen.
vi.  2)  ?  And  in  these  was  not  a  bait  to  catch  the  beholders  ?  Have  not  fowlers  a
lure  and  call,  as  if  they  were  birds  themselves,  to  allure  and  deceive  ?  Will  they
not  scatter  com  and  all  to  seduce  and  bring  within  danger  the  httle-suspicious
birds  ?  Do  they  not  creep  on  their  hands  and  knees,  stand  in  close  and  secret
places,  and  when  the  fowl  is  within  reach  how  suddenly  is  the  net  pulled  I  Per-
adventure,  when  she  is  singing,  playing,  suspecting  nothing,  she  is  wound  in.
When  Satan  assaults,  how  eagerly,  busily,  and  suddenly  will  he  follow  the  prey  ?
He  sets  a  man's  affections  on  fiie,  kindles  such  a  heat  within  him  that  for  the
present  the  object  of  temptation  seems  wonderful  fair,  delightful,  honourable;
though  when  he  is  ensnared  he  perceives  no  such  thing,  but  the  direct  contrary
{J.  BarloWf  D.D.)  The  deluded  captives  .-—These  words  are  the  concluding
portion  of  a  solemn  address  to  Timothy,  in  reference  to  the  instruction  of  the
ungodly,  and  is  the  end  pointed  ont  as  resulting  from  that  instruction — "  And  that


S34  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [OHA*.  U.

they  may  recover  themselves  out  of  the  snare  of  the  devil."  They  present  to  the
thoughtful  mind  a  sad  picture,  hringing  before  us  on  the  one  hand  the  devil,  in
the  character  of  fowler ;  and  on  the  other  hand  his  victims,  as  deluded,  taken
alive,  under  a  hard  bondage.    L  Tee  chabaciebs  sfoebn  of.    II.  Thb  muans  bt

WHICH    THET    ABE    HELD    IN    BONDAGE.      III.     ThB     MEANS    BY     WHICH    THEY    MAY   BE

BEcovEBED  FBOM  THAT  BONDAGE.  I.  Tbcy  are  spokeu  of  as  those  who  are  ensnared
by  Satan,  and  "  taken  captive  by  him  at  his  will."  1.  We  must  notice  who  is  the
captor  It  is  the  devil,  the  murderer  and  liar,  the  destroyer  of  souls;  represented
here  under  the  character  of  a  snarer  or  fowler.  It  is  very  important  to  notice  Satan
in  his  character,  because  it  manifests  his  subtlety.  The  fowler  must  be  subtle  in
hiding  his  net,  or  otherwise  he  would  miss  his  prey.  It  is  plain  from  Scripture
ttat  sin  was  introduced  through  Satan's  subtlety.  2.  In  the  next  place,  see  the
awful  force  of  the  language.  The  expression,  '•  taken  captive,"  is  rendered  in  the
margin  •*  taken  alive  " ;  it  is  an  idea  derived  from  fowling,  in  which  the  prey  is
taken  alive  in  snares :  so  the  devil  takes  men's  souls  alive  by  his  subtlety  .  nay,
more,  unless  they  be  recovered  out  of  his  snares,  they  must  be  alive  for  ever  under
his  sway :  lost,  yet  alive ;  hopeless,  yet  alive ;  tormented,  yet  alive ;  ever  desiring  to
die,  but  never  able.  The  other  expression,  "  at  his  will,"  may  bear  a  double
interpretation.  It  may  mean  that  they  have  been  ensnared  by  Satan's  arts  unto
his  will ;  i.e.,  they  were  so  influenced  by  him  that  they  complied  with  his  will.  It
is  most  important  to  notice  this,  because  it  at  once  brings  out  the  humiliating
truth,  that  the  ungodly  comply  with  Satan's  will.  The  man  who  live-!  in  drunken-
ness, who  is  a  sensualist ;  or  to  pass  on  to  sins  which  are  thought  little  of  in  the
■world,  the  man  who  is  untruthful,  a  backbiter,  a  slanderer  or  deceitful,  is  complying
with  Satan's  will.  The  man  who  is  a  neglecter  of  salvation,  who  never  prays,  who
is  putting  off  the  thought  of  eternity  to  a  convenient  season,  is  complying  with
Satan's  wUl.  Again,  the  expression  "  at  his  will,"  may  have  reference  to  the  devil'a
will  concerning  his  victims — viz.,  their  destruction.  Hence  those  who  are  taken
alive  by  Satan  at  his  will  are  taken  alive  by  him  for  their  destruction,  he  is  leading
them  on,  step  by  step,  with  the  one  end  and  the  one  object  of  dragging  them  alive
into  that  pit  of  darkness  and  agony  piepared  for  himself  and  his  angels.  Ob,  look
upon  this  other  picture — while  Satan  wills  your  destruction,  God  wills  your  salva-
tion. **  He  would  have  all  men  to  be  saved,  and  to  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the
truth."  8.  In  the  next  place,  notice  the  bondage  itself.  It  is  worse  than  Egyptian
bondage.  A  sinner,  taken  captive  by  Satan,  has  his  immortal  soul  iu  captivity,
bound  in  fetters  which  none  can  break  but  tbe  Lord  of  glory.  But  we  may  see  the
fearfulness  of  this  bondage  by  looking  at  it  in  a  threefold  point  of  view.  (1)  The
master  whom  the  captive  serves.  Dread  thought  1  it  is  not  Jesus,  the  sinner's  great
Deliverer,  but  it  is  the  devil,  the  sinner's  great  destroyer.  Ah  1  and  what  a  master  I
one  who  hates  him ;  one  who  watches  closely  to  prevent  his  victim's  escape,  biuding
around  him  every  day  tighter  and  tighter  the  cords  of  his  destruction.  Look  again
— (2)  At  tLe  state  of  t!  e  captive.  It  is  one  of  misery  and  wretchedness.  "The
way  of  transgressors  is  hard."  It  is  utterly  impossible  to  experience  true  peace
and  hiippiness  while  walking  in  the  pathway  of  the  devil.  Christ's  yoke  in  opposi-
tion to  Satan's  ;  the  one  is  perfect  liberty  while  the  other  is  the  most  galling  bondage.
Look  again — (3)  At  the  end  of  this  bondage.  Now,  Satan  does  not  make  his
bondage  felt,  for  fear  of  alarming  the  victim,  and  leading  him  to  seek  deliverance
from  it :  but  in  eternity,  when  all  hope  of  deliverance  is  past,  he  will  make  his
bondape  felt  in  all  its  overwhelming  force.  II.  The  means  by  which  Satan  kkbfs
BiNNERS  CAPTIVE.  Hc  does  BO  by  his  snares.  We  must  look  at  some  of  those
principle  nnares  by  which  he  deludes  and  holds  captive  the  unwary.  1.  The  first
snare  of  Satan  which  I  shall  mention  is,  his  making  sin  pleasant,  and  hiding  its
awful  const  quences.  He  makes  the  sinner  believe  the  command  not  to  sin,  to  be  a
restriction  of  his  hberty,  and,  therefore,  one  which  he  has  no  right  to  listen  to.
It  is  the  present,  and  the  present  only,  which  the  devil  seeks  to  force  on  the  captive's
mi  d  ;  the  present  and  its  gain  ;  but  the  awfully  mysterious  future  he  puts  out  of
sight,  veiling  from  the  pinner's  mind  his  dread  connection  with  it.  2.  A  second
snare  of  Satan's  is,  his  insinuating  doubts  into  the  mind  as  to  the  truth  of  Ood's
Word.  3.  A  third  snare  of  Satan's  is,  his  presenting  God  to  the  soul  as  one  made
up  of  all  mercv.  4.  A  fourth  snare  of  Satan's  is,  by  persuading  the  soul  that  the
work  of  repentance  is  an  easy  w^rk  :  that  it  need  not  be  thought  of  till  laid  on  a
bed  of  sickness  or  a  bed  of  death  :  and  he  will  suggest  to  the  sinner's  mind  examples
from  God's  Word  to  bear  out  this  delusion.  5.  Another  snare  of  Satan,  by  which
he  takes  souls  captive,  is  by  making  himself  an  object  of  ridicule.    This  is  one  of


CHAP,  n.]  U.  TIMOTHY.  236

**  the  depths  of  Satan  " :  he  knows  that  the  Bible  puts  him  forward  as  an  object  of
dread ;  he  takes  oare,  therefore,  to  pnt  himself  forward  as  an  object  of  ridicule,  so
as  to  blind  the  ungodly,  and  keep  them  captive  at  his  will.  Mark  the  consequence :
all  the  warnings  of  Scripture  concerning  him,  all  the  representations  of  him  as  an
adversary,  a  murderer,  fall  on  the  ear  of  his  captives  as  unmeaning  titles,  they
cannot  comprehend  why  he  is  to  be  dreaded.  And  why  is  this  ?  Just  because  they
are  ignorant  of  the  real  reason  why  they  cannot  comprehend  it — viz.,  Satan  has
deceived  them,  deceived  them  as  to  his  character,  deceived  them  as  to  his  object,
deceived  them  as  to  their  danger,  deceived  them  as  to  their  end,  and,  will  deceive
them  to  that  very  hour  when,  as  lost  and  wretched,  they  shall  open  their  eyes,  to
learn  then,  but,  alas  1  too  late,  that  though  the  devil  appeared  to  them  "  an  angel
of  light,"  yet  he  was  indeed  a  deceiver,  a  liar,  and  a  murderer.  6.  Another  snare
by  which  Satan  takes  souls  captive  at  his  will  is,  by  making  them  rest  in  outward
forms  instead  of  true  conversion,  m.  The  means  by  which  souls  uay  be
BECOVEBED  FBOM  HIS  BONDAGE.  "And  that  they  may  recover  themselves  out  of
the  snare  of  the  devil."  The  word  which  is  rendered  "  recover  "  is  in  the  margin,
••  awake."  It  properly  means  to  become  sober  again,  as  from  intoxication ;  to  awake
from  a  deep  sleep  ;  and  then  to  come  to  one's  self,  or  to  a  right  mind.  The  idea  is,
that  while  men  are  under  the  bondage  of  the  devU,  they  are  like  men  intoxicated,
or  in  a  deep  slumber,  unconscious  of  their  danger.  How  are  they  to  be  roused  to  a
sense  of  their  danger  ?  The  answer  is  given  in  the  previous  verse,  we  are  to  set
before  them  the  "  truth,"  the  simple  truth  of  Christ,  '•  If  peradventure  God  will
give  them  repentance  to  the  acknowledging  of  it."  Acknowledging,  implying  not
merely  confession  of  the  truth,  but  a  vital  reception  of  it  as  it  is  in  Jesus.  It  is  the
truth  of  Christ  borne  home  to  the  heart  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  is  the  means  of
conversion.  As  long  as  Satan  can  spread  over  us  the  veil  of  darkness,  so  long  are
we  his  captives,  but  no  sooner  does  the  light  of  Christ's  truth  break  in  on  the  soul,
than  the  darkness  is  dispersed,  Satan  is  vanquished,  and  the  sinner  delivered  out
of  darkness  into  light,  and  from  the  power  of  sin  and  Satan  unto  God.  But  mark
you,  it  is  God  alone  who  can  effect  this  transformation ;  it  is  God  aJone  who  can
bear  home  the  word  to  the  heart,  and  make  it  a  converting  word.  {A.  W.  Snape,
M.A.)  The  snare  of  the  devil: — Forbidden  fruit  is  sweet.  It  is  sweetened
by  the  devil.  One  forbidden  tree  in  Eden  seemed  better  than  a  thousand  trees
allowed.  That  terrible  magician  has  power  to  concentrate  our  gaze  upon  one
object — ^power  to  withdraw  our  eyes  from  the  pure  and  wholesome  fruits  of  many
trees,  and  rivet  them  upon  that  one  forbidden  thing.  He  so  intensifies  our  thought
upon  that  one  desire  that  it  outgrows  all  desires,  and  perhaps  life  itself  for  the  time
seems  stale  and  flat  unless  that  one  desire  be  gratified.  That  is  one  of  the  super-
natural powers  of  the  serpent  to  charm  his  victims.  This  dreadful  delusion,  this
deadly  fascination,  fills  common  objects  with  dazzling  beauty.  The  coloured  lights
of  hell  are  reflected  upon  earthly  things  and  make  them  appear  heavenly.  Thus  the
gaming-table  is  made  to  assume  attractions  which  make  money  and  land  and  houses
insignificant  trifles  in  comparison.  Thus  a  glass  of  liquor  grows  in  beauty  and
power  that  will  out-dazzle  the  love  of  family,  or  the  joys  of  home,  or  even  the  hopes
of  heaven.  {R.  S.  Barrett.)  Snared  through  over-confidence : — Naturalists  tell  us
that  amongst  birds  and  butterflies,  the  swiftest,  strongest  fliers  approach  man
much  nearer  than  those  with  weaker  wings,  feeling  confident  that  they  can  dart
away  from  any  threatened  danger,  and  this  misplaced  confidence  brings  them  into
the  net  of  the  collector.  {W.  L.  Watkinson.)  Caution  necessary : — In  mountain
ranges  there  is  often  a  loose  detritus  especially  dangerous  to  mountaineers ;  these
loose  or  crumbling  stones  being  called  "  the  devil's  stones,"  for,  owing  to  their
treacherous  character,  if  you  step  on  one  incautiously  you  may  be  precipitated  into
the  depths.  There  are  many  such  stones  in  the  path  of  life.  False  maxims  with
sophistical  colourings ;  license  stealing  the  name  of  liberty ;  harmful  speculations,
luring  as  grand  chances ;  methods  of  trade  outlined  square,  yet  full  of  betrayal ;
Bandy  doctrines  simulating  the  rock ;  friendships  which  are  flowery  graves  ;
occupations,  recreations  which  promise  rest  and  serve  only  to  slip  ns  into  mire ;
these  are  the  things  of  peril :  life  is  full  oi  them ;  and  he  only  walks  surely  who
walks  discreetlj.    (Ibid.)


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap  nx.


CHAPTER  m.

Veb.  1.  Perilous  times  shall  come. — Perilous  times: — I.  The  manner  of  the  wabn-
ING. — "  This  know  also."  1.  It  is  the  duty  of  ministers  to  foresee  and  take  notice  of  the
dangers  which  the  churches  are  falling  into.  2.  It  is  the  great  concern  of  all  professors
and  believers  to  have  their  hearts  very  much  fixed  upon  present  and  approaching
dangers.  3.  Not  to  be  sensible  of  a  present  perilous  season  is  that  security  which
the  scripture  so  condemns  ;  and  I  will  leave  it  with  you  under  these  three  things —
(1)  It  is  that  frame  of  heart  which  of  all  others  God  doth  most  detest  and  abhor.
Nothing  is  more  hateful  to  God  t  lan  a  secure  frame  in  perilous  days.  (2)  A  secure
person,  in  peiilous  seasons,  is  assureiUy  under  the  power  of  some  predominant  lust,
whether  it  appears,  or  not.  (3)  This  senseless  frame  is  the  certain  presage  of
approachintr  ruin.  II.  The  evil  itself.  "  Perilous  times  " — times  of  great  diffi-
culty, like  those  of  p  blic  plagues,  when  death  lies  at  every  door.  III.  The  manneb
OF  iNTROoncTiON  — "  Sh'iU  come."  Our  great  wisdom  then  will  be  to  eye  the  dis-
pleasure of  God  in  perilous  seasons,  since  there  is  a  judicial  hand  of  God  in  them  :
and  we  see  in  ourselves  reason  enough  why  they  should  come.  IV.  The  time  and
SEASON  OF  IT — •'  In  the  last  days."  You  may  take  it  in  what  sense  you  will :  the
last  days,  the  days  of  the  gospel ;  the  last  days  towards  the  consummation  of  all
things  ;  the  last  days  following  the  days  of  the  profession  of  churches ;  and  the  last
days  with  many  of  us,  with  respect  to  our  lives.  1.  The  first  thing  that  makes  a
season  perilous  is,  when  the  profession  of  trae  religion  is  outwardly  maintained
under  a  visible  predominancy  of  horrible  lusts  and  wickedness  (i-ee  vers.  2-5).  (1)
Because  of  the  infection.  (2)  Because  of  the  effects.  When  predominant  lusts  have
broken  all  bounds  of  Divine  light  and  rule,  how  long  do  you  think  human  rules  will
keep  them  in  order?  (3)  Because  of  the  consequences — the  judgments  of  God
(2  Thess.  ii.  10,  11).  2.  A  second  perilous  season  is,  when  men  are  prone  to  forsake
the  trut  1 1,  and  seducers  abound  to  gather  them  up  that  are  so;  and  you  will  have
always  these  things  go  together.  If  it  be  asked,  how  we  may  know  whether  there
be  a  proneness  in  the  minds  of  men  in  auy  season  to  depart  from  the  truth  ?  there
are  three  ways  whereby  we  may  judge  of  it.  (1)  The  first  is  that  mentioned  in  2  Tim.
iv.  3.  When  men  grow  weary  of  sound  doctrine,  when  it  is  too  plain,  too  dull,  too
common,  too  high,  too  mysterious,  one  thing  or  other  that  displeases  them,  and  they
would  hear  something  new,  something  that  may  please.  (2)  When  men  have  lost
the  power  of  truth  in  their  conversation,  and  are  as  prone  and  ready  to  part  with  the
profession  of  it  in  their  minds.  Do  you  see  a  man  retaining  the  profession  of  the
truth  under  a  worldly  conversation  ?  He  wants  but  baits  from  temptation,  or  a
seducer  to  take  away  his  faith  from  him.  (3)  The  proneness  to  depart  from  the  truth,
is  a  perilous  season,  because  it  is  the  greatest  evidence  of  the  withdrawing  of  the
Spirit  of  G')d  from  His  Church.  3.  A  third  thing  that  makes  a  perilous  season  is,
professors  mixing  themselves  with  the  world,  and  learning  their  manners.  Such  a
season  is  danger  us,  because  the  sins  of  pro  cssors  in  it  lie  directly  contrary  to  the
whnle  design  of  the  mediation  of  Christ  in  this  world.  Christ  "  gave  Himself  for  us,
that  He  might  purge  us  from  dead  works,  and  purify  us  unto  Himself  a  peculiar
people"  {T  t.  li.  14).  "Ye  are  a  royal  na'ion,  a  peculiar  people."  4.  Another
perilous  season  is  when  there  is  great  attendance  on  outward  duties,  but  inward,
spiri  ual  decays.  5.  Times  of  persecution  are  also  times  of  peril.  Use  1.  Let  us
all  be  exliorted  to  endeavour  to  get  our  hearts  afferted  with  the  perils  of  the  day
wherein  we  live.  (1)  Consider  the  present  things,  and  bring  them  to  rule,  and  see
what  God's  Word  sa>s  of  them.  (2)  If  jou  would  be  sensible  of  present  perilous
times,  take  he>d  of  centring  in  self.  Whether  you  pursue  riches,  or  honours,  while
you  centre  there,  nothing  can  make  >ou  sensible  of  the  perils  of  the  day.  (3)  Pray
that  God  wiiulcl  give  us  grace  to  be  sensible  of  the  perils  of  the  day  whi  rein  we  live.
Uj'e  2.  The  r>ext  thing  is  this,  that  tnere  are  two  things  in  a  perilous  season — the
sin  of  it,  and  the  misery  of  it.  Labour  to  be  sensible  of  the  former,  or  you  will  never
be  sensible  of  the  lalter.  Use  3.  U  member  there  is  a  special  frame  of  spirit  re-
quired in  us  all  in  such  perilois  seasons  as  tncse  are.  And  what  is  that?  It  is  a
mourning  fra  e  of  spirit.  Use  4.  Keep  up  church  watch  with  diligence,  and  by
the  rule.  When  I  say  rule,  I  m  an  the  life  of  it.  Use  5.  Keckon  upon  it,  that
in  such  times  as  these  are,  all  of  us  w.ll  no'  g  >  free.  {John  Owen,  D.D.)  Perilous
times  in  the  lad  days: — 1.  The  notitic  tion  ot  an  event  as  future — "Perilous  times
shall  come."  (1)  Tirues  wherein  ir  will  be  hard  for  people  to  keep  their  feet,  to
know  how  to  carry  themselves,  tu  kt-  p  uut  of  danger,  and  keep  a  good  conscience.


CHAP,  m.]  U.  TIMOTHY.  237

(2)  •'  Shall  come."  They  will  be  on  men,  in  the  coarse  of  providence,  to  try  what
metal  they  are  of  ;  as  darkness  comes  on  after  light,  and  adversity  after  prosperity,
in  their  turn.  2.  The  time  of  that  event — "In  the  last  days."  The  days  of  the
gospel  are  the  concluding  period  of  time.  In  these  last  days  are  several  particular
periods ;  the  first  of  which  was  the  last  time  of  the  Jewish  state,  beginning  from  the
time  of  our  Saviour,  to  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem;  and  more  periods  followed,
and  some  are  yet  to  come  ;  but  from  the  time  of  our  Saviour  to  the  end  of  the  world,
is  "  the  last  days."  3.  The  notice  to  be  taken  of  that  events"  This  know  also  "  ;
rather,  "  Now  know  this";  consider  it  duly,  and  lay  it  to  heart,  that  being  fore-
warned, ye  may  be  armed  against  the  "  perilous  times."  I.  We  shall  consideb
"the  days  of  the  gospel  as  the  last  days."  And  so  we  may  take  them  up  in  a
threefold  view.  1.  As  the  last  days  of  the  world,  the  latter  end  of  time.  With  rela-
tion to  them  that  oath  is  made  (Bev.  x.  6).  The  morning  and  forenoon  of  the  world
are  over  ;  it  is  afternoon  with  it  now,  and  drawing  toward  the  evening.  2.  As  the
days  of  the  last  dispensation  of  grace  towards  the  world,  with  whi<^h  God's  dealing
with  sinners  for  reconciliation  shall  be  closed  (Rev.  x.  7).  There  have  been  three
dispensations  of  grace  in  the  world  :  the  Patriarchal  dispensation  in  the  first  days;
the  Mosaical  dispensation  in  the  middle  days ;  and  now  the  Christian  dispensation
in  the  last  days.  The  first  two  are  now  off  the  stage,  and  shall  never  come  on  again ;
the  third  now  is  ;  and  after  it  there  shall  never  be  another.  3.  As  the  best  days  of
the  world  in  respect  of  the  greatest  advantages  attending  them.  The  last  works  of
God  are  always  the  greatest,  as  ye  may  see  in  the  account  of  the  Creation  (Gen.  i.) ;
so  the  circumstances  of  the  world  to  come  are  greater  than  those  of  this.  The  gos-
pel-dispeusation  far  excels  the  other  two,  in  clearness,  extensiveuess,  and  efficacy,
through  a  larger  measure  of  the  Spirit.  II.  The  difficult  and  perilous  times  that
come  on  in  gospel  DATS.  We  must  inquire  what  makes  these  perilous  times.  1.
An  old  controversy  lying  over  untaken  up.  They  that  are  in  debt  are  alwavs  in
danger.  The  Jews  were  from  generation  to  generation  murderers  of  their  prophets  ;
there  was  an  old  debt  on  the  head  of  the  generation  in  our  Saviour's  time  (Matt.
xxiii.  31) ;  and  made  their  time  perilous,  for  it  was  like  a  train  l^ing,  which  at  last
came  to  blow  them  up  (ver.  35).  So  good  Josiah's  days  were  perilous  times,  by
reason  of  an  old  controversy  laid  in  the  days  of  Manasseh  his  grandfather  (2  Kings
xxiii.  26).  Our  times  are  so,  by  reason  of  the  iniquity  of  the  late  times,  which  is
like  that  of  Baal-peor,  that  brought  "a  plague  on  the  congregation  of  the  Lord"
(Josh.  xxii.  17).  1.  Error  or  corruption  of  principles  spreading.  This  was  foretold
to  happen  in  the  latter  days  (1  Tim.  iv.  1).  2.  Immorahties  abounding.  (T.  Bos-
ton, D.D.)  Evil  of  the  last  days: — These  (evil  characters)  will  swarm  like  flies
in  the  decay  of  the  year.  (C.  H.  Spitrgeoii.)  Corruptions  within  .-—Not  so  much
on  the  account  of  persecutions  from  without  as  on  tbe  account  of  corruptions  within.
{M.  Henry.)  Traitors: — Two  traitors  within  the  garrison  may  do  more  hurt  to  it
than  two  thousand  besiegers  without.  (Ibid.)  Fidelity  in  evil  times : — The  worse
the  times  we  live  in  are,  the  greater  will  our  honour  be,  if  we  be  faithful.  It  was
Lot's  commendation  that  he  was  good  in  Sodom,  and  Job  in  an  heat  enish  Uz.  The
more  sin  abounds,  the  more  our  grace  should  abound;  and  the  more  sin  appears  in
the  world,  the  more  should  we  ap;  ear  against  it.  The  Lord  hath  done  more  for  us
of  thjs  last  age  of  the  world  than  He  ever  did  for  our  forefathers,  an- 1  therefore  He
expects  more  from  us  than  He  did  from  them  ;  where  He  bestows  much  He  looks
for  much  again  ;  where  we  bestow  double  cnst,  we  look  for  a  double  crop.  It  is  a
shame  for  us  if  we  do  not  do  our  work  setter  by  sunlight,  than  others  that  have  had
but  twilight.  {T.  Hall,  B.D.)  Sinniakex  the  times  bad: — It  is  worth  our  noting
tbat  the  apostle  doth  not  place  the  peril  and  hardness  of  the  last  times,  in  any
external  calamity  or  penal  evils,  as  sword,  pliigne,  famir.e,  persecution  ;  but  in  the
prodigious  sins  and  enormities  of  such  as  profess  religion.  Sin  is  the  evil  of  evils,
and  brings  all  other  evils  with  it.  Let  the  times  be  never  so  miserable,  and  the
Church  lie  under  sad  persecutions  ;  yet  if  they  be  not  sinful  tmes.tbey  are  not  truly
perilous  times,  but  rather  purging  and  purifying  times.  (Ibid.)  Sinners  swarm
even  in  gospel  days : — Vermin  of  ths  kind  will  tben  abound  everywhere  ;  weeds  grow
nowhere  so  rank  as  in  fat  soil.  (Ibid.)  Prudence  in  perilous  times: — Thia
spiritual  prudence  can  hurt  neither  pastor  nor  people  but  will  advantage  us  much.
This  pre-vision  is  the  best  means  of  prevention ;  in  vain  is  the  snare  laid  in  the  sight
of  a  bird.  Observe  God's  singular  love  unto  His  people,  in  that  He  warns  them  ol
perilous  times  long  before  they  come.  The  people  of  God,  and  specially  His
ministers,  His  Timothies,  should  be  so  prudent  as  to  know  and  observe  when
perilous  times  are  approaching,  as  the  prudent  man  foresees  the  evil  of  punishment


838  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (cha^.  u*

before  it  comes  (Prov.  xxii.  35).  (Ibid.)  Time  aiding  proficiency  in  iin: — As  it
ie  in  every  art,  by  length  of  time,  custom,  and  experience,  it  is  improved  to  a  greater
degree  of  fineness  and  exactness ;  so  it  is  in  this  of  sinning ;  time  and  experience
make  men  more  canning  in  ways  of  sin,  and  more  subtle  to  defend  them.  (Ibid.)
Making  the  times  better : — We  shoold  all  make  the  times  and  places  we  live  in  the
better,  and  not  the  worse,  for  us.    (Ibid.)

Ver.  2-5.  Men  shallbeloversof  their  own  selves. — The  natureand  kinds  of  self-love :

1.    SeLF-LOVB,  OONSIDBSBD  in  THB  OBNERAIi,  ABSTRAOTINQ  FBOM  PABTICULAB   OIBCDU-

BTAKCES,  IB  NEiTHBB  A  VICE  NOB  A  viBTUE.  It  is  nothing  but  the  inclination  of  every
man  to  his  own  happiness.  A  passionate  desire  to  be  always  pleased  and  well-satis-
fied, neither  to  feel  nor  fear  any  pain  or  trouble,  either  of  body  or  mind.  It  is  an
instinct  of  nature  common  to  all  men,  and  not  admitting  of  any  excess  or  abatement.
Self-love  directed  to,  and  pursuing,  what  is,  apon  the  whole,  and  in  the  last  result
of  things,  absolutely  best  for  us,  is  innocent  and  good ;  and  every  deviation  from
this  is  culpable,  more  or  less  so,  according  to  the  degrees  and  the  circumstances
of  it.  n.  When  we  blindly  follow  the  instinct  of  self-love,  coveting  everything
which  looks  fair,  and  running  greedily  upon  it  without  weighing  circumstances  or
considering  consequences ;  or  when,  to  get  rid  of  any  present  pain  or  uneasiness,
we  take  any  method  which  first  offers,  without  reflecting  how  dearly  we  may  pay  for
it  afterwards  ;  I  say,  when  we  do  thus,  then  it  is  that  oub  self-love  beguiles  us,
DEGENEBATES  INTO  A  VICIOUS,  OB  AT  LEAST,  SILLY  APPETITE,  and  comes  under  the  name
of  an  overweening,  excessive,  and  inordinate  self-love.  He  suffers  the  natural
instinct  of  self-love  to  carry  him  too  far  after  present  satisfaction,  farther  than  is
consistent  with  his  more  real  and  durable  felicity.  To  understand  the  nature  of
this  enchantment,  and  how  it  comes  to  pass  that  those  who  love  themselves  so  well,
can  thus  consent  to  ruin  themselves,  both  bodies  and  souls,  for  ever ;  let  us  trace  its
progress.  1.  To  begin  with  pride.  All  the  happiness  of  life  is  summed  up  in  two
articles — pleasing  thoughts  and  pleasing  sensations.  Now,  pride  is  founded  in  self-
flattery,  and  self-flattery  is  owing  to  an  immoderate  desire  of  entertaining  some
kind  of  pleasing  thoughts.  2.  Another  instance  of  inordinate,  ill-conducted  self-
love  is  sensuality.  This  belongs  to  the  body  more  than  to  the  mind,  is  of  a  gross
taste,  aiming  only  at  pleasing  sensations.  It  so  far  agrees  with  pride  that  it  makes
men  pursue  the  present  gratification  at  the  expense  of  the  public  peace  and  to  their
own  future  misery  and  ruin.  3.  A  third  instance  of  blind  and  inordinate  self-love
is  avarice  or  self-interestedness.  This  is  of  larger  and  more  diffusive  influence  than
either  of  the  former.  So  great  a  part  of  temporal  felicity  is  conceived  to  depend
upon  riches,  that  the  men  of  this  world  lie  nnder  the  strongest  temptations  to  this
vice  of  any.  If  the  case  be  such,  that  treachery  and  fraud,  guile  and  hypocrisy,
rapine  and  violence,  may  be  serviceable  to  the  end  proposed ;  the  blind  self-lover
will  charge  through  all  rather  than  be  defeated  of  his  covetous  designs,  or  bear  the
uneasiness  of  a  disappointment.  Thus  he  comes  to  prefer  his  own  private,  present
interest,  before  virtue,  honoar,  conscience,  or  humanity.  He  considers  not  what
would  be  good  for  him  upon  the  whole  and  in  the  last  result,  but  lives  extempore,
contrives  only  for  a  few  days,  or  years  at  most,  looking  no  farther.  The  height  of
his  ambition  reaches  not  beyond  temporal  felicity,  and  he  miscalculates  even  in
that.  IIL  CoNBiDEBATioNS  PBOPEB  TO  PBEVENT  OB  CURE  IT.  It  is  Very  evidect  that
the  self-lovers  are  not  greater  enemies  to  others  in  intention  than  they  are  in  effect
to  themselves.  Yet  it  is  not  less  evident  that  they  love  themselves  passionately  aU
the  tune,  and  whatever  hurt  they  do  to  their  own  selves  they  certainly  mean  none.
They  run  upon  it  as  a  horse  rushes  into  the  battle,  as  an  ox  goeth  to  the  slaughter,
and  as  a  bird  hasteth  to  the  snare,  and  know  not  that  it  is  for  their  life.  It  is  for
want  of  thinking  in  a  right  way  that  men  fall  into  this  fatal  miscouduct,  and
nothing  butserions  and  sober  thought  can  bring  them  out  of  it.  I  shall  just  suggest
two  or  three  useful  considerations,  and  then  conclude.  1.  We  should  endeavour  to
fix  in  our  minds  this  great  and  plain  truth,  that  there  can  be  no  such  thing  as  true
happiness,  separate  from  the  love  of  God  and  the  love  of  our  neighbour.  2.  A  second
consideration,  proper  to  be  hinted,  is,  that  man  is  made  for  eternity,  and  not  for
this  life  only.  No  happiness  can  be  true  and  solid  which  is  not  lasting  as  ourselves.
8.  To  conclude,  the  way  to  arrive  at  true  happiness  is  to  take  into  consideration
the  whole  extent  and  compass  of  our  being ;  to  enlarge  our  views  beyond  our  little
selves  to  the  whole  creation  round  us,  whereof  we  are  but  a  slender  part;  and  to
extend  our  prospect  beyond  this  hfe  to  distant  glories.  Make  things  future  appear
as  if  they  were  now  present,  and  things  distant  as  if  they  were  near  and  sensible.


CHAP.  III.]  II.  TIMOTHY.  239

(D.  Waterland,  B.D.)  Self-love : — 1.  Self-love  is  vicious,  when  it  leads  as  to
judge  too  favourably  of  our  faults.  (1)  Sometimes  it  finds  out  other  names  foi
them,  and  by  miscalling  them  endeavours  to  take  away  their  bad  qualities.  (2)
Sometimes  it  represents  our  sins  as  weaknesses,  infirmities,  the  effect  of  natural
constitution,  and  deserving  more  pity  than  blame.  (3)  Sometimes  it  excuses  them
upon  account  of  the  intent,  pretending  that  some  good  or  other  is  promoted  by  them,
and  that  the  motive  and  the  end  sanctify  the  means,  or  greatly  lessen  the  f aultiness
of  them.  (4)  It  leads  us  to  set  our  good  in  opposition  to  our  bad  qualities,  and  to
persuade  ourselves  that  what  is  laudable  in  us  far  outweighs  what  is  evil.  (4)  It
teaches  us  to  compare  ourselves  with  others,  and  thence  to  draw  favourable  conclu-
sions, because  we  are  not  so  bad  as  several  whom  we  could  name ;  it  shows  us  the
general  corruption  that  is  in  the  world,  represents  it  worse  than  it  is,  and  then  tells
U9  that  we  must  not  hope,  and  need  not  endeavour  to  be  remarkably  and  singularly
good.  2.  Our  self-love  is  irregular,  when  we  think  too  well  of  our  righteousness,
and  overvalue  our  good  actions,  and  are  pure  in  our  own  eyes.  3.  Our  self-love  is
blameable  when  we  overvalue  our  abilities,  and  entertain  too  good  an  opinion  o£
our  knowledge  and  capacity ;  and  this  kind  of  self-love  is  called  self-conceit.  One
evil  which  men  reap  from  it  is  to  be  disliked  and  despised.  The  reason  why  self-
conceit  is  so  much  disliked  is  that  it  is  always  attended  with  a  mean  opinion  of
others.  From  self-conceit  arise  rash  undertakings,  hasty  determinations,  stubborn-
ness, insolence,  envy,  censoriousness,  confidence,  vanity,  the  love  of  flattery,  and
sometimes  irreligion,  and  a  kind  of  idolatry,  by  which  a  man  worships  his  own
abilities,  and  places  his  whole  trust  in  them.  The  unreasonableness  of  this  con-
ceit appears  from  the  imperfections  of  the  human  understanding,  and  the  obstacles
which  lie  between  us  and  wisdom.  4.  Our  self-love  is  irregular  when  we  are  proud
and  vain  of  things  inferior  in  nature  to  those  before  mentioned,  when  we  value  our-
selves upon  the  station  and  circumstances  in  which  not  our  own  deserts,  but  favour
or  birth,  hath  placed  us,  upon  mere  show  and  outside,  upon  these  and  the  like
advantages  in  which  we  surpass  others.  This  conceit  is  unreasonable  and  foolish  ;
for  these  are  either  things  which  the  possessors  can  hardly  call  their  own,  as  having
done  httle  or  nothing  to  acquire  them,  or  they  are  of  small  value,  or  they  are  liable
to  be  irrecoverably  lost  by  many  unforeseen  accidents.  5.  Lastly,  our  self-love  is
vicious  when  we  make  our  worldly  interest,  convenience,  humour,  ease,  or  pleasure,
the  great  end  of  our  actions.  This  is  selfishness,  a  very  disingenuous  and  sordid
kind  of  self-love.  It  is  a  passion  that  leads  a  man  to  any  baseness  which  is  joined
to  lucre,  and  to  any  method  of  growing  rich  which  may  be  practised  with  impunity.
(J.  Jortin,  D.D.)      Self-love  : — I.  I  shall  endeavour  to  tkace  out  mobe  pabticulably

THE  WORKINGS  OF  THIS  NOXIOUS    PBINCIPLE,  AS   IT    RESPECTS  MATTEBS  OF  RELIGION  ;    for

it  is  said  of  these  lovers  of  themselves,  that  "they  have  the  form  of  godliness,
but  deny  the  power  thereof."  1.  Self-love  may  carry  men  out  in  desires  after
Christ  (see  Mark  i.  87 ;  John  vi.  26).  Many  would  partake  of  Christ's  benefits,  who
reject  His  government ;  receive  glory  from  Him,  but  give  no  glory  to  Him.  If  they
can  but  go  to  heaven  when  they  die,  they  care  not  how  little  they  have  of  it  before  ;
and  are  unconcerned  about  the  dominion  of  sin,  if  they  can  but  obtain  the  pardon
of  it ;  so  that  their  seeking  and  striving  are  now  over.  2.  Self-love  may  be  the  sole
foundation  of  men's  love  to,  and  delight  in,  God.  And  indeed  it  is  so  with  all  hypo-
crites and  formalists  in  religion.  Many  mistake  a  conviction  of  mind,  that  God  is
to  be  loved,  for  a  motion  of  the  heart  towards  Him  ;  and  because  they  see  it  to  be
reasonable  that  He  should  be  regarded  by  them,  they  imagine  that  He  is  so.  But
the  highest  regard  that  a  natural  man  can  have  to  the  Divine  Being,  if  traced  back
to  its  origin,  or  followed  to  its  varions  actings,  will  be  found  to  be  self-love.  3.
Self-love  may  be  the  principle  that  first  excites,  and  then  puts  fervour  and  ardency
into  our  prayers.  How  coldly  do  some  put  up  those  requests,  "  Hallowed  be  Thy
Name,  Thy  kingdom  come  "  ;  but  are  much  more  earnest  when  they  come  to  those
petitions  in  which  their  present  comfort  and  future  happiness  are  so  much  inter-
ested:  "Forgive  us  our  trespasses,'  and  "Give  us  our  daily  bread,"  "Let  me  die
the  death  of  the  righteous."  4.  Self-love  insinuates  itself  into  the  severer  acts  of
mortification  ;  nay,  it  often  runs  through  and  corrupts  the  whole  course  of  religious
duties.  It  is  like  the  dead  fly  which  taints  the  whole  box  of  precious  ointment.
From  this  principle  some  neglect  duties  as  burdensome,  and  only  seek  privileges ;
a  reward  without  labours,  victory  without  fighting.  5.  Self-love  runs  through  all
their  affections,  exertions,  and  actions,  with  respect  to  their  fellow-creatures.  If
they  rejoice  at  others'  prosperity,  it  is  because  they  themselves  may  be  benefited  by
it.     H,  on  the  other  hand,  they  grieve  at  their  calamities,  it  is  because  they  ara


240  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  in.

likely  to  be  sharers  in  them,  or  some  way  or  other  injured  by  them.  II.  From  what
has  been  said,  you  see  that  self-love  is  an  insindatiko  pbinciple,  appeakinq  vs

VABIOOS  FORMS,  EVEN  IN  THE  RELIGIOUS  WORLD,  AND  UNDER  MANY  ARTFUL  DISGUISES,
HARD  TO  BE  DISCERNED,  BUT  HARDER  STILL  TO  BE  GUARDED  AGAINST.      To  Stir  JOU  Up  tO

this,  let  me  set  before  you  some  of  the  evils  resulting  from  this  easily-besetting,  and
alas,  too  universally  prevailing  sin.  1.  It  is  the  root  of  hypocrisy.  So  far  as  self-
love  and  self-seeking  influence,  we  are  void  of  sincerity  and  integrity.  2.  It  pro-
motes pride,  envy,  strife,  uncharitableness,  and  an  evil  tamper  and  conduct
towards  all  with  whom  we  are  conversant.  A  man  who  loves  hims  If  too
well,  will  never  love  his  God  or  his  neighbour  as  he  ought.  3.  All  evil
may,  perhaps,  be  reduced  to  this  one  point :  All  our  desires,  passions,  pro-
jects, and  endeavours,  centred  in  self.  This  was  the  first  sin  :  "Ye  shall  be  as
gods";  and  it  has  continued  the  master-sin  ever  since.  It  is  the  corrupt
fountain,  sending  forth  so  many  impure  and  filthy  streams.  (B.  Beddome,M.A.)
A  sermon  against  self-love,  <£c.: — 1.  What  kind  of  self-love  is  it  which  St.  Paul  does
here  so  severely  censure  ?  2.  By  what  manner  of  influence  self-love  makers  times
and  seasons  become  perilous.  3.  What  times  the  apostle  means  by  the  Last  Days  ;
and  whence  it  is  that  self-love  operates  with  such  successful  prevalence  in  those  days
as  to  render  them  the  Evil  Days.  4.  What  reflections  are  fit  to  be  made  by  us,
upon  occasion  of  this  argument  in  relation  to  our  age,  and  to  ourselves,  and
our  present  affairs,  in  order  to  that  which  all  ought  to  fast  and  pray,  and  labour  for
the  stability  of  our  times  and  the  peace  of  Jerusalem  ?  I.  To  consider  what  kind
OF  SELF-LOVE  St.  Paul  SPEAKS  AGAINST  as  the  fountain  of  public  mischief  ;  for  there
is  a  self-love  which  is  a  very  natural  and  a  very  useful  principle.  No  man  ever  yet
hated  his  own  flesh ;  no  man,  without  the  loving  of  himself,  does  either  preserve  or
improve  himself.  If  Almighty  God  would  not  have  suffered  men  to  love  themselves,
He  would  not  have  moved  them  to  their  duty  by  their  personal  benefit,  and  especially
by  so  great  a  recompense  as  is  that  of  life  eternal.  It  would  conduce  to  the  felicity
of  men,  even  in  this  world,  if  they  truly  loved  themselves  ;  for  then  they  would  not
waste  their  fortunes  by  an  unaccountable  profuseness,  nor  destroy  their  bodies  by
the  extravagances  of  rage,  and  luxury,  and  lust.  The  self-love  here  condemned  by
St.  Paul  is  that  narrow  wicked  affection  which  either  wholly  or  principally  confines
a  man  to  his  seeming  personal  good  on  earth.  An  affection  which  either  opposcth
all  public  good,  or  at  least  all  that  public  good  which  comes  in  competition  with
man's  private  advantage.  Of  such  lovers  of  themselves  the  apostle  gives  a  very  ill
character  in  the  words  that  follow  the  text.  He  says  of  them,  in  ver.  2,  that  they
are  covetous  ;  their  heart  is  like  the  mouth  of  a  devouring  gulf,  which  sucks  in  all
into  itself  with  deep  and  unsatiable  desire.  He  continues  to  mark  them,  in  ver.  3,
as  persons  without  natural  affection,  as  people  who  have  no  bowels  for  the  miserable
part  of  mankind;  as  such  who  rejoice  at  a  public  wreck,  not  considering  the
loss  of  others,  nor  the  dismal  circumstances  of  it ;  but  minding  with  their
whole  intention  the  profit  which  they  may  gather  up  for  their  inhuman  selves.  He
adds,  in  the  same  verse,  that  they  are  despisers  of  those  who  are  good.  They  vilify
men  of  a  public  spirit.  II.  This  straight  and  uncharitable  affection  is  of  so  malig-
KANT  AN  INFLUENCE,  that  where  it  prevails  no  age  can  be  calm,  no  government
stable,  no  person  secure.  And  that  it  is  of  such  perilous  consequence  may  be
demonstrated  on  this  manner.  God,  who  is  good  and  does  good,  designed,  that
whilst  man  was  here  on  earth,  it  should  be  competently  well  with  him  in  case  of  hia
obedience,  though  He  intended  not  to  give  him  all  his  portion  in  this  life.  He
knew  that  men  could  not  subsist  apart  with  such  conveniences  as  they  might  obtain
by  being  knit  into  regular  societies.  He,  therefore,  united  them  in  civil  and  sacred
bodies,  that  by  conjoined  strength  they  might  procure  those  benefits  which,  in  a
separate  state,  and  by  their  single  selves,  they  could  not  come  at.  For,  consider,
how  void  of  comfort  a  life  of  entire  solitude  would  have  been  to  man  ;  with  what  a
life  of  fear  would  they  have  been  crucified  who  had  stood  perpetually  by  themselves
on  their  own  defence ;  with  what  a  Ufe  of  labour  and  meanness  would  men  have
been  burdened  if  every  one  of  them  must  have  been  his  own  only  servant;  if  every
ono  had  been  obliged  to  build  and  plant,  and  till  the  ground,  and  provide  food  and
physic  and  garments  for  himself  by  his  own  solitary  power.  And  how  coulJ  a  man
serve  himself  in  any  of  these  necessary  offices  in  times  of  sickr^css,  lameness,  de-
lirium, and  decrepit  old  age  ?  To  such  a  perilous  and  laborious  life  as  I  have  been
speaking  of,  indiscreet  and  vicious  self-love  tends  ;  for  as  far  as  men  do  mind  and
seek  themselves  alone,  so  far  they  dissolve  society  and  lessen  its  benefi'.s,  being
tathor  ill  it  than  of  it.     So  that  the  soul  which  animates  society,  whose  advantages


CHAP,  in.]  n.  TIMOTHY.  241

are  so  considerable,  is  the  great  and  generous  spirit  of  charity.  That  violates  no
compacts,  that  raises  no  commotions,  that  interrupts  no  good  man's  peace,  that
assaults  no  innocent  man's  person,  that  invades  no  man's  property,  that  grinds  no
poor  man's  face,  that  envies  no  man,  that  supplants  no  man,  that  submits  its
private  convenience  to  the  public  necessities.  Concerning  this  vile  affection,  St.
Paul  taught  that  it  would  possess  the  men  of  the  last  days.  III.  To  consider  what
TIMES  HE  MEANS  BY  THOSE  DATS,  and  in  what  sense  he  speaks  of  self-love  as  the  dis-
temper of  the  last  days,  seeing  it  has  been  the  disease  of  every  age.  By  the  last
days  he  means  the  last  age  of  the  world,  the  age  of  the  Messiah,  not  excluding  that
part  of  it  in  which  he  himself  Uved.  There  were  several  precedent  periods :  that
of  the  fathers  before  the  flood,  that  of  the  patriarchs  before  the  Law,  that  of  Moses
and  the  prophets  under  the  Law.  But  after  the  age  of  the  Messiah,  time  itself
shall  be  no  more.  To  this  age  all  evil  self-love  cannot  be  confined,  for  that  dotage
had  a  being  in  the  world  from  the  very  beginning  of  it.  The  murder  of  Cain  was
so  early,  that  he  sinned  without  example;  and  from  his  selfishness  his  murder
proceeded.  We  therefore  misunderstand  St.  Paul,  if  we  interpret  him  as  speaking,
not  of  the  increase,  but  of  the  being,  of  self-love  ;  for  it  is  not  its  existence,  but  its
abundance,  which  he  foretells.  What  he  wrote  has  been  true  in  fact,  from  the  times
of  Demas  and  Diotrephes,  to  this  very  hour.  Light  is  come  into  the  world,  a
glorious  gospel  which  shines  everywhere ;  and  men  love  darkness  rather  than  light,
and  shut  up  themselves  in  their  own  hard  and  rough  and  private  shells.  Selfish-
ne>>s  cannot  be  the  direct  natural  effect  of  the  gospel  of  Christ,  which,  of  all  other
dispensations,  depresseth  the  private  under  the  public  good.  The  age  of  the  Messiah
is  the  best  of  ages  in  His  design,  and  in  the  means  of  virtue  which  He  gives  the
world ;  and  if  the  men  of  it  be  worse  than  those  of  other  generations,  the  greater  is
the  aggravation  of  their  guUt,  whilst,  under  a  gospel  of  the  widest  charity,  they
exercise  the  narrowest  selfishness.  But,  however,  so  it  is :  whether  it  be  that  wicked
men,  by  a  spirit  of  contradiction,  oppose  charity  where  they  are  most  earnestly
pressed  to  it ;  or  that  the  devil,  having  but  a  short  time,  is  the  more  passionately
industrious  in  promoting  the  interests  of  his  kingdom ;  or  that  the  further  men  are
from  the  age  of  Divine  revelations,  the  less  firmly  they  believe  them.  It  concerns  us
then — IV.  To  make  sekious  reflections  upon  this  abgument,  and  to  suffer  our
selves  to  be  touched  with  such  deep  remorse  for  the  guilt  of  our  partiality,  that  God
may  be  appeased,  and  our  sins  pardoned,  and  our  lives  reformed,  and  that  perilous
times  may  be  succeeded  by  many  prosperous  days.  And — 1.  Let  us  give  glory  to
God,  and  take  shame  to  ourselves,  upon  the  account  of  that  selfish  principle  which
hath  long  wrought  among  us,  and  still  worketh.  2.  May  we  not  only  bewail  but
amend  this  great  defect  in  our  nature,  and  in  our  civil  and  Christian  duty.  (1)  The
regaining  of  a  public  spirit  is  at  all  times  worthy  our  care.  We  can  do  no  greater
thing  than  to  "  follow  God,  who  is  concerned  for  all,  as  if  they  were  but  one  man ;
and  for  every  single  person,  as  if  he  were  a  world."  God  hath  disposed  all  things
in  mutual  subseniency  to  one  another :  the  light,  the  air,  the  water,  are  made  for
common  good  ;  and  because  they  are  common,  they  are  the  less,  but  they  ought,  for
that  reason,  to  be  the  more  esteemed.  There  is  not  an  humble  plant  that  grows  to
itself,  or  a  mean  ox  that  treads  out  the  corn  merely  for  his  own  service ;  and  shall
man  be  the  only  useless  part  of  the  creation  ?  It  is  a  most  unworthy  practice,  upon
the  account  of  self-interest,  to  multiply  the  moral  perils  of  the  world,  whilst  there
are  inconveniences  enough  in  insensible  Nature.  It  is  enough  that  the  natural
seasons  are  tempestuous ;  men's  passions  should  not  raise  more  storms.  It  is
enough  that  famine  can  destroy  so  many ;  uncharitableness  should  not  do  it.  What
is  it  that  is  worthy  the  daily  thoughts  and  the  nightly  studies  of  a  man  of  under-
standing, and  of  an  excellent  spirit  ?  Is  it  the  supplanting  of  a  credulous  friend,  or
the  oppressing  of  an  helpless  neighbour  ?  Alas  1  these  are  designs  so  base  and  low,
that  he  who  calls  himself  a  man  should  not  stoop  to  them.  But  that  which  is  worthy
of  a  man  is  the  service  of  his  God,  his  Church,  his  country  ;  the  generous  exposing
of  himself  when  a  kingdom  is  in  hazard.  (2)  A  public  spirit,  as  it  ia  worthy  our
care  at  all  times,  so  at  all  times  it  needs  it.  For  it  requires  the  utmost  application
of  our  minds,  seeing  self-love  insinuates  with  great  art  and  subtlety  into  all  our
designs  and  actions.  {Thomas  Terdson,  D.D.)  Self-love  odioiis : — Here  you  see
how  far  self-love  is  from  being  proposed  to  our  practice,  when  you  find  it  standing
in  the  front  of  a  black  and  dismal  catalogue  of  the  most  odious  and  abhorred
qualities.  That  I  may  contribute,  if  possible,  to  the  making  men  less  tenacious,
and  more  communicative,  I  shall  make  it  my  present  business  to  set  the  two
characters  in  an  opposite  light,  and  to  show  —  I.  The  odiousness  of  self-loyk.

16


243  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  nx,

n.  The  ahubleness  of  a  genebous  and  pttblio  bpibit.  There  is,  indeed,  a  kind
or  degree  of  self-love  which  is  not  only  innocent,  but  necessary.  The  laws  of  nature
strongly  incline  every  man  to  be  solicitous  for  his  own  welfare,  to  guard  his  person
by  a  due  precaution  from  hurts  and  accidents  ;  to  provide  food  and  raiment,  and  all
things  needful  for  his  bodily  sustenance,  by  honest  industry  and  labour ;  to  re-
pair as  far  as  he  is  able,  such  decays  as  may  attend  his  bodily  constitution,  by
proper  helps  and  the  best  means  that  are  afforded  him ;  and  much  more  to  make  it
his  grand  concern  to  secure  the  everlasting  happiness  of  his  immortal  part.  Such
a  self-love  as  this  goes  little  farther  than  self-preservation,  without  which  principle
implanted  in  us  the  human  species  would  be  soon  lost  and  extinguished,  and  the
work  of  our  great  Creator  be  defeated.  But  that  which  St.  Paul  speaks  of  with
abhorrence  is  a  love  merely  selfish,  that  both  begins  and  terminates  in  a  man's  single
person,  exclusive  of  all  tender  regards  for  any  one  else :  this  is,  in  the  worst  and
most  criminal  sense,  taking  care  of  one  only.  If  we  will  but  look  into  our  own
nature,  and  reflect  on  the  end  and  design  of  our  creation,  the  reach  and  extent  of
our  fac'ilties,  our  subordination  to  one  another,  and  the  insufficiency  of  every  man
as  he  stands  by  himself  alone,  we  shall  soon  be  convinced,  that  doing  good  and
affording  each  other  reciprocal  assistance  is  that  for  which  we  were  formed  and
fashioned,  that  we  are  linked  together  by  our  common  wants,  as  well  as  by  incli-
nation, and  that  tenderness  of  disposition  and  natural  sympathy  that  is  implanted
in  us.  That  we  are  born  and  educated,  that  we  enjoy  either  necessaries  or  comforts,
that  we  are  preserved  from  perils  in  our  greener,  or  ever  arrive  at  riper  years,  next
under  the  watchfulness  and  protection  of  Almighty  God,  is  owing  to  the  care  of
others.  And  can  anything  be  more  just  and  reasonable  than  that  we,  too,  in  our
turn,  should  give  that  succour  we  have  received,  and  do,  not  only  as  we  willingly
would,  but  as  we  actually  have  been  done  unto  ?  There  is  a  certain  proportion  of
trouble  and  uneasiness,  as  well  as  of  pleasure  and  satisfaction,  that  must  of  necessity
be  borne  by  the  race  of  men ;  insomuch  that  he  who  will  not  sustain  some  share  of
the  former,  is  unworthy  to  partake  of  any  of  the  comforts  of  the  latter.  But  here
the  selfling  will  interpose,  and  say :  "  It  is  true  I  have  occasion  for  the  help  of
others,  and  the  help  of  others  I  have.  I  have  occasion  for  the  attendance  of
servants,  and  by  servants  I  am  attended.  I  want  to  be  supplied  with  those  con-
veniences of  life  which  artificers  provide  in  their  respective  occupations,  and  I  am
supplied  accordingly.  So  long  as  I  am  furnished  with  sufficient  store  to  pay  them
an  equivalent,  I  am  in  no  danger  of  being  left  destitute  of  anything  that  money  can
procure.  This  is  the  commerce  I  carry  on  in  the  world  ;  thus  I  approve  myself  a
social  member  of  the  commonwealth.  But  what  have  I  to  do  in  parting  with  my
substance  to  them  who  can  give  nothing  to  me  in  return  ?  "  And  sometimes  we  see
it  does  please  Almighty  God  to  make  examples  of  this  sort :  to  humble  such  haughty
and  self-confiding  men,  by  reducing  them  from  their  towering  height,  and  all  the
wantonness  of  prosperity,  to  the  extremity  of  want  and  misery.  And  whenever  this
happens  to  be  the  case,  who  are  then  bo  pitifully  abjected?  But  the  universal
hatred  which  such  a  person  naturally  contracts  will  not  always  be  suppressed,  nor
his  former  aversion  to  doing  good  offices  be  covered  by  a  charitable  oblivion,  nor
be  lost  under  the  soft  relentings  and  a  melting  commiseration  of  his  present
Bufferings.  In  short,  since  every  man  has  an  equal  right  to  confine  all  his  case
and  endeavours  to  the  promoting  his  own  separate  interest,  that  any  one  man  has,
what  must  be  the  consequence  if  such  a  narrow  way  of  thinking  and  acting  should
become  universal  t  Love  and  friendship  terminate  at  once  if  every  man  were  to
regard  himself  alone,  and  to  extend  his  care  no  farther  I  Such  a  situation  would
put  an  end  to  all  intercourse  and  commerce ;  men  would  be  destitute  of  all  confi-
dence and  security,  and  afraid  to  trust  each  other.  And  this  may  suffice  to  show
that  odious  and  malignant  quality  of  selfishness,  or  mere  self-love.  Let  us  now
consider — II.  The  amiableness  of  a  oenerous  and  public  spirit.  He  who  has  a
heart  truly  open  and  enlarged,  over  and  above  that  reasonable  thoughtfulness  and
contrivance  with  which  every  prudent  man  will  be  possessed,  about  providing  for
his  own,  and  how  to  proportion  his  expenses  to  his  revenue,  as  weU  as  how  to  obtain
more  ample  acquisitions,  if  fair  and  honourable  methods  of  advancing  his  fortunes
present  themselves  in  his  way ;  I  say,  beyond  this  domestic  care,  he  will  have  room
enough  in  his  thoughts  to  let  them  be  employed  sometimes  in  the  service  of  his
friends,  hia  neighbours,  and  his  country  ;  which  have  not  only  his  best  wishes  and
hearty  desires  for  the  success  of  their  aifairs,  but  he  makes  it  his  study  to  promote
their  welfare,  and  puts  himself  to  a  voluntary  trouble  and  expense  in  order  to  extri-
cate them  from  difficulties  and  free  them  from  dangers.     He  has  the  pleasure  of


CHA?.  m.]  n.  TIMOTHY.  243

reflecting  that  a  beneficial  act  is  done,  and  that  although  he  has  not  been  able  to
animate  others  to  promote  it  in  the  same  degree  with  himself,  he  has,  however,
been  instrumental  in  causing  some  good  to  be  done,  and  the  receivers  are  heartilj
welcome  both  to  his  pains  and  his  contributions.  This  may  appear  but  a  poor
satisfaction  to  little  and  grovelling  minds,  who  have  no  idea  of  any  joy  that  can
arise  from  the  reflection  on  anything  that  is  not  attended  with  present  profit,  and
look  upon  everything  as  a  losing  bargain  where  more  is  expended  than  received.
But  large  and  capacious  souls  have  far  nobler  sentiments  ;  they  know  how  to  value
and  enjoy  a  loss,  and  find  a  secret  pleasure  in  the  diminution  of  their  fortune  when
honourably  and  worthily  employed.  We  are  sure  that  God  Almighty,  who  gives
everything,  and  receives  nothing,  is  a  most  perfectly  blest  and  happy  being ;  and
the  nearer  we  resemble  Him  in  any  of  our  actions,  by  so  much  we  advance  our  own
happiness.  Such  a  friendly  promoter  of  the  good  of  others  may  survey  the  objects
of  his  love  with  some  degree  of  that  satisfaction  wherewith  God  beheld  His  work-
manship when  He  had  finished  the  several  parts  of  the  Creation,  and  pronounced
that  they  were  good.  And  as  for  a  man's  name  and  character,  who  would  not
rather  choose  not  to  have  it  mentioned  at  all,  than  not  mentioned  with  respect  ?
This  seems  to  be  the  only  end  that  is  sought  after  by  those  who  dehght  in  show  and
pomp ;  and  yet  this  very  end  might  be  much  better  compassed  by  another  way  than
by  that  which  they  affect.  For  does  it  not  give  a  sweeter  fragrancy  to  a  man's
name  ?  And  does  not  every  one  speak  of  him  with  higher  expressions  of  honour
and  esteem,  who  has  been  a  common  benefactor,  and  relieved  a  multitude  of
necessitous  persons?  {Andrew  Snape,  D.D.)  Self-love  the  great  cause  of  had
times : — 1.  To  inquire  what  this  self-love  is  which  the  apostle  here  speaks  of,
and  wherein  the  nature  and  evil  of  it  consists.  2.  To  show  that  wherever  such
self-love  spreads  and  becomes  general  there  must  needs  be  perilous  or  bad  times.  3.
To  use  several  arguments  to  prevent  men's  being  poisoned  and  over-run  with  this
dangerous  and  pernicious  principle  of  self-love.      L  Let  us  inquire  what  this

SELT-IiOVB   IS    which  THE   APOSTLE    HERE    SPEAKS   OF,    AND   WHEREIN    THE    NATUBB    AND

Evn.  OF  IT  CONSISTS.  Now  all  self-love  when  taken  in  an  ill  sense,  as  it  is  plain  this
is  here  by  the  apostle,  must  come  under  one  or  other  of  these  following  notions.
1.  Self-love  may  be  considered  in  opposition  to  a  love  of  God,  and  a  making  His
glory  and  the  interests  of  religion  the  principal  and  ultimate  end  of  all  our  designs
and  actions ;  to  our  loving  Him  with  all  our  hearts,  with  all  our  souls,  and  with
all  our  minds,  and  our  seeking  first,  or  before  all  other  things.  His  kingdom
and  righteousness.  And  then  we  may  be  properly  said  to  be  self-lovers  in  this
sense,  when  we  are  so  very  intent  upon  ourselves  and  our  own  interests  as  not
to  concern  ourselves  at  aU,  or  to  be  sure  not  much  and  chiefly  about  God  and
religion.  2.  Self-love  may  be  considered  in  opposition  to  that  honest  and
commendable  self-love  which  every  man  oweth  to  himself,  which  is  a  love  of
our  whole  beings,  soul  as  well  as  bodies,  and  of  every  part  of  them  in  due
measure  and  proportion  to  the  excellence  and  worth  of  them ;  and  then  it
signifieth  a  love  only  of  one  part  of  ourselves,  or  at  least  an  immoderate  and
disproportionate  love  of  one  part  above  any  or  all  the  rest.  And  in  this  sense  it  is
to  be  feared  most  men  are  guilty  of  self  love.  And,  agreeably  to  this  notion,  we  find
the  word  self  used  in  Scripture  to  signify  the  sensual  and  carnal  part  of  man.  3.
Self-love  may  be  considered  in  opposition  to  charity  or  a  love  of  our  brethren ;  and
then  it  signifieth  such  a  stinginess  and  narrowness  of  soul  as  will  not  suffer  us  to
have  any  concern,  or  take  any  care  for  anybody  but  ourselves,  such  a  temper  as  is
the  exact  reverse  of  that  which  the  apostle  commendeth,  which  seeketh  not  its  own,
but  the  things  of  another,  and  hardly  ever  thinks,  much  less  acts,  but  for  itself.
Nature  has  implanted  in  us  a  most  tender  and  compassionate  sense  and  fellow-
feeling  of  one  another's  miseries,  a  most  ready  and  prevailing  propension  and  in-
clination to  assist  and  relieve  them  ;  insomuch  that  pity  and  kindness  towards  our
brethren  have  a  long  time  passed  under  the  name  of  humanity,  as  properties
essential  to,  and  not  without  violence  to  be  sepai'ated  from,  human  nature.  And
then  as  to  reason,  what  can  possibly  be  more  reasonable  than  that  we  who  are  of
the  same  mass,  of  one  blood,  members  of  each  other,  and  children  of  the  same
Father,  should  love  as  brethren  ?  That  we,  who  live  in  a  very  fluctuating  and  un-
certain state,  and  though  rich  to-day,  may  be  poor  to-morrow,  should  act  so  now
towards  others  as  we  shall  then  wish  others  may  act  towards  us  ?  4.  And  then,
lastly,  as  to  religion,  especially  the  Christian,  besides  that  this  doth  acquaint  ui
with  a  new  and  intimate  relation  to  each  other  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  consequently  a
new  groand  and  obhgation  to  love  and  assist  each  other.    Nay,  so  great  a  value  do


244  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  m.

the  Scriptoies  set  upon  this  duty  of  mercy  or  charity  to  our  brethren,  that  wherever
they  give  ub,  either  La  the  Old  or  New  Testameut,  a  short  summary  of  religion,  this
is  sure  to  be  mentioned,  not  only  as  a  part,  but  a  main  and  principal  part  of  it.
Nay,  farther  yet,  it  sometimes  stands  for  the  whole  of  rehgion,  as  that  universal
name  of  righteousness  given  to  it  is  said  to  be  the  fulfilling  of  the  law.  5.  Self-love
may  be  considered  in  opposition  to  a  love  of  the  public  and  a  zeal  for  the  common
good,  aud  then  it  signifieth  a  preferring  of  our  own  particular  and  private  interests
to  those  of  the  whole  body.    n.  To  show  that  wherever  such  self-love  spreads

AND    BECOMES   GENERAL    THERE   MUST   NEEDS    BE   PERILOUS    OH  BAD   TIMES,        1.    I    Say,

self-love  will  make  men  neglect  the  pubUc  and  dechne  the  service  of  it,  especially
in  times  of  danger,  when  their  service  is  most  needed.  And  for  this  reason  wa
always  find  it  a  very  difficult  task,  if  not  impossible,  to  engage  such  men  in  any
public  service  merely  upon  a  prospect  of  doing  public  good.  They  will  use  a
thousand  little  shifts  and  artifices  to  get  themselves  excused.  Nay,  and  which  is
rare  in  self-lovers,  who  have  always  a  good  stock  of  self-conceit,  rather  than  fail,
they  will  speak  modestly  and  humbly  of  themselves,  and  plead  incapacity  and
want  of  ability  for  their  excuse.  But  never  is  this  so  plainly  to  be  seen  as  in  timea
of  public  danger,  when  there  is  most  occasion  for  their  assistance.  For  self-love  is
constantly  attended  with  a  very  great  degree  of  self-fear,  and  this  makes  mere
weather-cocks  of  such  people  as  are  acted  by  it,  continually  bandying  them  about,
hither  and  thither,  backwards  and  forwards,  and  never  suffering  them  to  fix  any-
where till  the  storm  is  over,  the  weather  begins  to  clear  up,  and  they  can  pretty
certainly  discarn  the  securest  side.  2.  That  though  they  do  preteud  to  serve  the
public,  yet  it  is  for  ther  own  private  ends,  and  consequently  their  self-love  will
suffer  them  to  ser^'e  it  no  farther  or  longer  than  these  shall  be  advanced  by  their
BO  doing.  And  this  but  a  very  poor  and  uncertain  service,  and  even  worse  than
none  at  all ;  for  their  supreme  end  being  their  own  private  interest,  all  other  ends
must  of  course  crouch  and  become  subordinate  to  this.  3.  Their  self-love  will
probably  turn  them  against  the  public,  and  instead  of  preserving  and  securing  it,
make  them  undermine  and  destroy  it ;  and  if  so,  it  is  still  better  they  should  have
no  concern  with  it,  because  the  more  concern  they  have  with  it  the  greater  will  be
their  opportunity  of  doing  mischief  to  it.  Self-love  is  a  very  tyrannical  and  domi-
neering  principle,  and  generally  makes  perfect  slaves  of  her  subjects,  and  carrieth
them  on  to  all  such  excesses  and  extravagances  as  she  shall  think  fit.  For,  alas  I
self-love  is  the  blindest,  as  well  as  the  greediest,  and  least  able  to  deny  itself  of  all
loves,  and  will  very  hardly  be  brought  to  see  any  objections  against  itself ;  or  at
least,  if  it  must  see  them,  it  will  accept  of  very  easy  answers  to  them,  and  be  a
wondrous  gentle  casuist  to  itself ;  so,  that,  if  there  but  come  a  good  lusty  temp-
tation in  our  way,  it  is  too  much  to  be  feared  that  our  self-love  will  close  with  it,  be
it  attended  with  never  such  hard  terms,  and  that,  out  of  eagerness  for  the  bait,
hook  and  all  will  go  down.    III.  To  use  all  the  arguments  we  can  to  prevent

men's  BEING  poisoned  AOT)  OVERRUN  WITH  THIS  DANGEROUS  AND  PERNICIOUS  PRINCIPLB.

And — 1.  As  to  ourselves,  there  cannot  certainly  be  a  better  argument  than  the
danger  which  we  were  brought  into  by  some  men's  immoderate  love  of  their  private
interest  in  the  late  reign.  2.  Let  us  consider  that  this  principle  of  self-love  is  a
very  foohsh  principle,  and  really  defeats  its  own  end.  For  this,  I  take  it  for  granted,
I  may  lay  down  as  a  maxim,  that  every  man's  private  good  is  best  secured  in  the
public,  and,  consequently,  whatever  weakens  the  public,  doth  really  weaken  every
private  man's  security ;  and,  therefore — 3.  This  self-love  is  a  most  base,  pitiful,  and
mean  principle,  and  will  certainly  make  us  odious  and  contemptible  in  the  sight
both  of  God  and  man.  {William  Dawes,  D.D.)  Sin  rmiltititdinous  : — See  here
what  a  concatenation  of  sins  there  is,  and  how  they  are  linked  together — self-lovers,
covetous,  boasters,  proud,  &c.  Sins  (especially  great  sins)  seldom  go  alone.  As
great  men  have  great  attendance,  so  great  sins  have  many  followers ;  and  as  he
that  admits  of  a  great  man  into  the  house  must  look  to  have  all  his  ragged  regiment
and  blackguard  to  follow  him,  so  he  that  admits  but  one  great  sin  into  his  heart
must  look  for  Gad,  a  troop  of  ugly  lusts  to  throng  in  after.  Sin  is  like  a  tryant,  the
more  you  yield  to  it,  the  worse  it  tyrannises  over  you.  ( T.  Hall,  B.D.)  Self-love
foolish : — This  is,  with  the  silly  bird,  to  mind  nothing  but  the  building  of  our  own
nests  when  the  tree  is  cutting  down  ;  and  to  take  more  care  of  our  private  cabin
than  of  the  ship  itself  when  it  is  sinking.  [Ihid.)  Self-love  hereditary : — Here-
ditary diseases  are  hardly  cured.  Self-love  is  hereditary  to  us ;  we  are  apt  to  have
high  conceits  of  ourselves  from  the  very  birth ;  till  grace  humble  and  abase  us,  all
eur  erowB  are  swans,  our  ignorance  knowledge,  our  folly  wisdom,  our  darknesa  light,


CHAP,  m.]  n.  TIMOTHY.  245

and  all  onr  own  ways  best  though  never  so  bad.  {Ibid.)  Self-love  a  manifold
disease : — This  is  a  disease  that  hath  many  other  diseases  included  in  it,  and  so  is
more  hard  to  cure.  Hence  spring  all  those  errors  and  heresies  which  are  so  rife  in
these  last  days.  (Ibid.)  Self-love  self-deceptive : — ^As  a  man  that  is  in  love  doth
think  the  very  blemishes  in  his  love  to  be  beautiful,  so  those  that  are  in  love  with
themselves,  and  dote  on  their  own  opinions,  think  their  heresy  to  be  verity,  and
their  vices  virtues.  This  will  bring  vexation  at  last ;  it  troubles  us  to  be  cheated
by  others  in  petty  matters,  bat  for  a  man  to  cheat  himself  wilfully,  and  that  in  a
matter  of  the  highest  concernment,  is  the  trouble  of  troubles  to  an  awakened
conscience.  {Ibid. )  Self-love  odious  to  God : — The  more  lovely  we  are  in  our
own  eyes,  the  more  loathsome  in  God's ;  but  the  more  we  loathe  ourselves,  the  more
God  loves  ns  (Jer.  xxxi.  18,  20).  {Ibid.)  Self-love  a  primary  sin: — This  sinful
self-love  is  set  in  the  front,  as  the  leader  of  the  file,  and  the  cause  of  all  those
eighteen  enormities  which  follow  :  'tis  the  root  from  whence  these  branches  spring,
and  the  very  fountain  from  whence  those  bitter  streams  do  issue.  {Ibid.)  Pious
self-love  communicative : — There  is  a  pious  and  religious  self-love,  considered  in
relation  to  God  and  the  common  good ;  thus  a  man  may  love  himself  as  an  instru-
ment of  God's  glory,  and  as  a  servant  for  the  good  of  others,  else  our  Saviour  would
never  set  our  love  to  ourselves  before  ns  as  a  pattern  of  our  love  to  our  neighbom'S,
Now,  upon  these  grounds,  and  in  relation  to  these  ends,  we  may  not  only  love  our-
selves, but  seek  ourselves  too.  This  love  spreads  and  dilates  itself  for  God  and  the
good  of  others.  The  more  noble  and  excellent  things,  the  more  communicative  and
diffusive  they  are  of  themselves.  The  sun  is  herein  a  more  noble  thing  than  a  torch,
and  a  fountain  than  a  ditch.  Christ  emptied  Himself  of  His  glory,  not  for  His  own,
but  for  our  benefit  (PhU.  xxiii.  6) ;  it  will  make  us  part  with  our  own  right  for
peace  (Gen.  xiii.  8, 9 ;  1  Cor.  vi.  7) ;  it  will  make  us  condescend  to  those  of  the  lower
sort  (Bom.  xii.  16),  not  seeking  our  own  profit,  but  the  profit  of  many  (1  Cor.  x.  33) ;
yea,  and  though  they  be  free,  yet  love  will  make  them  servants  to  all  (1  Cor.  ix.  19).
On  the  contrary,  self-love  contracts  the  soul,  and  hath  an  eye  still  at  self  in  all  its
nndertakings.  'Tis  the  very  hedgehog  of  conversation,  that  rolls  and  laps  itself
within  its  own  soft  down,  and  turns  out  bristles  to  all  the  world  besides.  {Ibid.)
On  self-conceit: — Sometimes  in  our  imagination  we  assume  to  ourselves  perfec-
tions not  belonging  to  us,  in  kind  or  degree.  Sometimes  we  make  vain
judgments  on  the  things  we  possess,  prizing  them  beyond  their  true  worth
and  merit,  and  consequently  overvaluing  ourselves  on  their  account.  There  is
indeed  no  way  wherein  we  do  not  thus  impose  on  ourselves,  either  assuming  false,
or  misrating  true  advantages,  so  that  our  minds  become  stuffed  with  fantastio
imaginations,  instead  of  wise  and  sober  thoughts,  and  we  misbehave  ourselves
towards  ourselves.  1.  We  are  apt  to  conceit  ourselves  on  presumption  of  our
intellectual  endowments  or  capacities,  whether  natural,  or  acquired,  especially
of  that  which  is  called  wisdom,  which  in  a  manner  comprehends  the  rest,
and  manages  them :  on  this  we  are  prone  to  pride  ourselves  greatly,  and
to  consider  that  it  is  presumption,  hardly  pardonable  to  contest  our  dictates:
yet  this  practice  is  often  prohibited  and  blamed  in  Scripture.  "  Be  not  wise  in
thine  own  eyes,"  saith  the  wise  man ;  and  "  Be  not  wise  in  your  own  conceits,"  saith
the  apostle.  If  we  do  reflect  either  on  the  common  nature  of  men,  or  on  our  own
constitution,  we  cannot  but  find  our  conceits  of  our  wisdom  very  absurd ;  for  how
can  we  take  ourselves  for  wise,  if  we  observe  the  great  blindness  of  our  mind,  and
feebleness  of  human  reason,  by  many  palpable  arguments  discovering  itself?  if  we
mark  how  painful  the  search,  and  how  difficult  the  comprehension  is  of  any  truth ;
how  hardly  the  most  sagacious  can  descry  any  thing,  how  the  most  learned  ever-
lastingly dispute,  about  matters  seeming  most  familiar  and  facile  ;  how  often  the
most  wary  and  steady  do  shift  their  opinions ;  how  dim  the  sight  is  of  the  most
perspicacious,  and  how  shallow  the  conceptions  of  the  most  profound ;  how  narrow
is  the  horizon  of  our  knowledge,  and  how  immensely  the  origin  of  our  ignorance  is
distended ;  how  imperfectly  and  uncertainly  we  know  those  few  things  to  which  our
knowledge  reacheth.  If  also  a  man  particularly  reflected  on  himself,  the  same
practice  must  needs  appear  very  foolish ;  for  that  every  man  thence  may  discover  in
himself  pecuhar  impediments  of  wisdom ;  every  man  in  his  condition  may  find
things  apt  to  pervert  his  judgment,  and  obstruct  his  acquisition  of  true  knowledge.
Such  conceitedness  therefore  is  very  absurd,  and  it  is  no  less  hurtful ;  for  many
great  inconveniences  spring  from  it,  such  as  gave  the  prophet  cause  to  denounce —
"  Woe  unto  them  that  are  wise  in  their  own  eyes."  It  hath  many  ways  bad  influ-
ence on  oar  souls,  and  on  oar  lives ;  it  is  often  our  case,  which  was  the  caae  of


218  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohaj.  iu.

Babylon,  when  the  prophet  said  of  it,  '•  Thy  wisdom  and  thy  knowledge  hath  per-
verted thee ;  for  thou  hast  said  in  thy  heart,  I  am,  and  none  else  beside  me."  It
is  a  great  bar  to  the  receiving  instruction  about  things  ;  for  he  that  taketh  himself
to  be  incomparably  wise,  will  scorn  to  be  taught.  It  renders  men  in  difficult
cases  unwilling  to  seek,  and  unapt  to  take  advice  ;  hence  he  undertaketh  and  easily
is  deceived,  and  incurreth  disappointment,  damage  in  his  affairs.  It  renders  us
very  rash  in  judging ;  for  the  first  show  of  things,  or  the  most  slender  arguments,
which  offer  tiiemselves,  being  magnified,  do  sway  our  judgment.  Hence  also  wa
persist  incorrigible  in  error  ;  for  what  reason  can  be  efficacious  to  reclaim  him
whose  opinion  is  the  greater  reason  ?  It  renders  men  peevish ;  also  insolent  in
imposing  their  conceits  on  others.  Hence  they  become  censorious  of  those  who  do
not  agree  with  their  notions.  2.  Again,  we  are  apt  to  prize  highly  and  vainly  our
moral  qualities  and  performances,  taking  ourselves  for  persons  of  extraordinary
goodness,  without  defects  or  blemishes ;  which  practice  is  both  foolish  and  mis-
chievous. It  is  very  foolish  ;  for  such  is  the  imperfection  and  impurity  of  all  men,
even  of  the  best,  that  no  man  who  strictly  searches  his  heart  can  have  reason  to  be
satisfied  with  himself  or  his  doings.  Every  man  is  in  some  degree  sinful ;  conceit
therefore  of  our  virtue  is  very  f ooUsh ;  and  it  breeds  great  mischiefs.  Hence  springs
a  great  carelessness  of  correcting  our  faults :  a  contempt  of  any  means  conducive
to  oar  amendment,  such  as  good  advice  and  wholesome  reproof.  It  breeds  arrog-
ance even  in  our  devotions  to  God,  like  that  of  the  conceited  Pharisee ;  also  a
haughty  contempt  of  others  :  it  disposes  men  to  expect  more  than  ordinary  regard
from  others ;  and  as  it  causes  a  man  to  behave  himself  untowardly  to  them,  so
thence  he  behaves  unseemiugly  towards  himself,  of  whom  he  becomes  a  flatterer,
and  profane  idolater.  3.  Self-conceit  is  also  frequently  grounded  on  other  inferior
advantages :  on  gifts  of  nature,  or  of  fortune ;  but  seeing  that  these  things  are  in
themselves  of  little  value,  and  serving  no  great  purpose  ;  seeing  they  are  not  com-
mendable, as  proceeding  from  chance  ;  seeing  they  are  not  durable  or  certain,  but
easily  may  be  severed  from  us,  the  vanity  of  self-conceit  founded  on  them  is  so
notoriom,  that  it  need  not  be  more  insisted  on.  (Isaac  Barrow.)  On  vain-glory: —
When  a  regard  to  the  opinion  or  desire  of  the  esteem  of  men  is  the  main  principle
from  which  their  actions  do  proceed,  or  the  chief  end  which  they  propound  to
themselves,  instead  of  conscience  of  duty,  love  and  reverence  of  God,  hope  of  the
rewards  promised,  a  sober  regard  to  their  true  good,  this  is  vain-glory.  Such  was
the  vain-glory  of  the  Pharisees,  who  fasted,  who  prayed,  who  gave  alms,  who  "  did
all  their  works  that  they  might  be  seen  of  men,"  and  from  them  obtain  the  reward
of  estimation  and  applause :  this  is  that  which  St.  Paul  forbiddeth  :  "  Let  nothing
be  done  out  of  strife  or  vain-glory. "  1.  It  is  vain,  because  unprofitable.  Is  it  not
a  foolish  thing  for  a  man  to  affect  that  which  Uttle  concerns  him,  and  by  which  he
is  not  considerably  benefited  ?  Yet  such  is  the  opinion  of  men  ;  for  how  do  we  feel
the  motions  of  their  fancy  ?  2.  It  is  vain,  because  uncertain.  How  easily  are  the
judgments  of  men  altered  I  how  fickle  are  their  conceits  1.  3.  It  is  vain  because
unsatisfactory ;  for  how  can  one  be  satisfied  with  the  opinion  of  bad  judges,  who
esteem  a  man  without  good  grounds,  commonly  for  things  which  deserve  not  re-
gard? 4.  It  is  vain,  because  fond.  It  is  ugly  and  unseemly  to  others,  who  despise
nothing  more  than  acting  on  this  principle.  5.  It  is  vain,  because  unjust.  If  we
seek  glory  to  ourselves,  we  wrong  God  thereby,  to  whom  glory  is  due  :  if  tbere  be
in  us  any  considerable  endowment  of  body  or  mind,  it  is  from  God,  the  author  of
our  being,  who  worketh  in  us  to  will  and  to  do  according  to  His  good  pleasure.
6.  It  is  vain  because  mischievous.  It  corrupts  our  mind  with  a  false  pleasure  that
chokes  the  purer  pleasures  of  a  good  conscience,  of  spiritual  joy  and  peace,  bring-
ing God's  displeasure  on  us,  and  depriving  us  of  the  reward  due  to  good  works  per-
formed out  of  a  pure  conscience,  &c.  "Verily  they  have  their  reward."  {Ibid.)  Sovie
general  remedies  of  self-love  : — 1.  To  reflect  on  ourselves  seriously  and  impartially,
considering  our  natural  nothingness,  infirmity,  unworthiness ;  the  meanness  and
imperfection  of  our  nature,  the  defects  and  defoimities  of  our  souls,  the  failings  and
misdemeauours  of  our  lives.  2.  To  consider  the  loveliness  of  other  beings  superior
to  us  ;  comparing  them  with  ourselves,  and  observing  how  very  far  in  excellency,
worth,  and  beauty  they  transcend  us.  (1)  If  we  view  the  qualities  and  examples  of
other  men,  who  in  worth,  in  wisdom,  in  virtue,  and  piety,  do  far  excel  us ;  their
noble  endowments,  what  they  have  done  and  suffered  in  obedience  to  God,  tbeir
self-denial,  their  patience,  how  can  we  but  in  comparison  despise  ourselves  ?  (2)  If
we  consider  the  blessed  angels  and  saints  in  glory — their  purity,  their  humility,
their  obedience— how  can  we  think  of  ourselves  without  abhorrence  7    (3)  Especiallj


CHAP.  III.]  11.  TIMOTHY.  247

if  we  contemplate  the  perfection,  the  purity,  the  majesty  of  God ;  how  must  thia
infinitely  debase  us  in  our  opinion  concerning  ourselves,  and  consequently  diminish
our  fond  affection  toward  things  so  vile  and  unworthy  ?  3.  To  study  the  acquisition
and  improvement  of  charity  toward  God  and  our  neighbour.  This  will  employ
and  transfer  our  affections ;  these  drawing  our  souls  outward,  and  settling  them  on
other  objects,  will  abolish  or  abate  the  perverse  love  toward  ourselves.  4.  To  con-
sider that  we  do  owe  all  we  are  and  have  to  the  free  bounty  and  grace  of  God :
hence  we  shall  see  that  nothing  of  esteem  or  affection  is  due  to  ourselves  ;  but  all
to  Him,  who  is  the  fountain  and  author  of  all  our  good.  6.  To  direct  our  minds
wholly  toward  those  things  which  rational  self-love  requireth  us  to  regard  and  seek :
to  concern  ourselves  in  getting  virtue,  in  performing  our  duty,  in  promoting  onr
salvation,  and  arriving  to  happiness  ;  this  will  divert  us  from  vanity  :  a  sober  self-
love  will  stifle  the  other  fond  self-love.  (Ibid.)  Self-centred : — Original  causa
of  all  wickedness,  so  that  they  make  their  own  I  the  centre  of  their  thinking,
feeling,  willing  and  doing.  (Van  Oosterzee.)  Self-love : — Such  a  love  of  self  as  to
lead  us  to  secure  our  salvation  is  proper.  But  this  interferes  with  the  rights  and
happiness  of  no  other  persons.  The  selfishness  which  is  condemned  is  that  regard
to  our  own  interests  which  interferes  with  the  rights  and  comforts  of  others ;  which
makes  self  the  central  and  leading  object  of  living ;  and  which  tramples  on  all  that
would  interfere  with  that.  As  such,  it  is  a  base,  and  hateful,  and  narrow  passion.
(A.  Barnes.)  Selfishness  common: — How  many  are  there  who  occupy  publio
places  with  private  spirits  ?  While  they  pretended  to  undertake  everything  for  the
good  of  others  it  has  appeared  that  they  undertook  nothing  but  for  the  good  of
themselves.  Such  suckers  at  the  roots  have  drawn  away  the  sap  and  nourishment
from  the  tree.  They  have  set  kingdoms  on  fire,  that  they  might  roast  their  own
venison  at  the  flames.  These  drones  steaUng  into  the  hive  have  fed  upon  the
honey,  while  the  labouring  bees  have  been  famished.  Too  many  resemble  ravenous
birds,  which  at  first  seem  to  bewail  the  dying  sheep  ;  but,  at  last,  are  found  picking
out  their  eyes.  These  people  never  want  fire,  so  long  as  any  yard  affords  fuel.
They  enrich  their  own  sideboard  with  other  men's  plate.  There  is  a  proverb,  but
none  of  Solomon's,  "  Every  man  for  himself  and  God  for  us  all."  But  where  every
man  is  for  himself,  the  devil  will  have  all.  Whosoever  is  a  seeker  of  himself  is  not
found  of  God.  Though  he  may  find  himself  in  this  Ufe,  he  will  lose  himself  in
death.  (T.  Seeker.)  Selfishness  condemned  by  philosophy  : — Plato  anticipated  one
half  of  a  Christian  doctrine  by  saying,  "  Ye  are  not  your  own,  but  the  State's."
{J.  F.  B.  Tinting,  B.A.)  The  Divine  Nemesis : — It  is  a  remarkable  revelation  of  the
Divine  Nemesis,  that  they  who,  with  the  denial  of  the  faith,  begin  not  seldom  with
the  beautiful  phrase,  that  they  are  zealous  for  morality,  and  wish  to  maintain  the
morals  of  the  gospel,  while  they  reject  dogma,  just  upon  this  road  advance  gradu-
ally to  the  most  decided  immorality.  He  who  digs  out  the  tree,  cannot  also  enjoy
the  fruit.  Emancipation  from  all  authority  theoretically  leads  practically  to  the
promulgation  of  the  rights  of  the  flesh.  (Van  Oosterzee.)  Covetous. — Covetous  : —
If  selfishness  be  the  prevailing  form  of  sin,  covetousness  may  be  regarded  as  the
prevailing  form  of  selfishness.  Entering  with  the  first  transgression,  and  violating
the  spirit  of  the  whole  law,  it  has  polluted  and  threatened  the  existence  of  each  dis-
pensation of  religion  ;  infected  all  classes  and  relations  of  society ;  and  shown
itself  capable  of  the  foulest  acts.  (J.  Harris,  D.D.)  Covetousness  seen  in  human
life: — Commerce  is  covetous;  competition  is  without  bounds;  rapid  fortunes,
sudden  falls,  speculations  without  end,  hazards,  excitements  for  gaining  under  all
forms ;  such  is  the  new  mode  of  satisfying  the  old  thirst  for  g"ld.  Industry  is
covetous  :  those  admirable  inventions  which  are  continually  succeeding  one  another
aim  less  at  the  progress  of  art  than  at  the  making  of  money ;  produced  by  the
hope  of  gain,  they  hasten  toward  gain.  Ambition  is  covetous  ;  that  solicitude  for
office  which  crowds  all  the  avenues  to  authority  aims  less  than  formerly  at  honour,
and  more  at  money.  The  struggle  of  parties  is  covetous.  Legislation  is  covetous  :
in  it  money  is  the  chief  comer-stone  ;  money  chooses  the  arbiters  of  our  social  and
poUtical  destinies.  Marriage  is  sometimes  covetous :  the  union  of  man  and  woman
becomes  a  secondary  matter.  Literature  is  covetous  ;  impatient  of  producing,  and
more  impatient  of  acquiring,  the  literature  of  the  present  day  spends  its  strength
in  unfinished,  defective,  extravagant  works,  perhaps  immoral  and  impious,  which
cater  for  the  tastes  of  the  multitude,  and  pour  into  the  hands  of  their  authors  streams
of  gold  unaccompanied  by  glory.  (A.  Monod,  D.D.)  Covetousness  barren  of  grace : —
We  may  as  soon  expect  a  crop  of  com  on  the  tops  of  barren  mountains,  as  a  crop  of
grace  in  the  hearts  of  covetous  cormorants.  (T.  Hall,  B.  D.)    Covetousneti  revealed  in


248  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ni.

talk  : — "  Out  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart  doth  the  mouth  speak."  (Matt.  xii.  34.)
"What  is  in  the  warehouse  will  appear  in  the  shop,  what  is  in  the  heart,  the  tongue
tells  .you.  As  is  the  man,  such  is  his  language ;  as  we  know  what  countryman  a  man
is  by  his  language ;  a  Frenchman  speaks  French,  &c.  So  we  may  guess  at  men  by
their  language ;  a  good  man  hath  good  language,  he  speaks  the  language  of  Canaan ;  an
evil  man  speaks  the  language  of  the  world  (Isa.  xxxii.  6.),  discourse  with  him  of  that,
and  he  is  in  his  element ;  he  can  talk  all  day  of  it,  and  not  be  weary :  but  talk  to
him  of  spiritual  things,  and  he  is  tanquam  piscis  in  arido,  out  of  his  element,  he
Lath  nothing  to  say.  It  is  a  sure  sign  men  are  of  the  world,  when  they  speak  only
of  the  world  (1  John  iv.  5).  (Ibid.)  Boasters. — Meanness  of  boasting  : — Lord
Bacon  told  Sir  Edward  Cooke  when  he  boasted,  "The  less  you  speak  of  your
greatness,  the  more  I  shall  think  of  it."  Mirrors  are  the  accompaniments  of
dandies,  not  heroes.  The  men  of  history  were  not  perpetually  looking  in  the  glass
to  make  sure  of  their  own  size.  Absorbed  in  their  work  they  did  it,  and  did  it  so
well  that  the  wondering  world  saw  them  to  be  great  and  labelled  them  accordingly.
(S.  Coley.)  Vain  boasting: — A  gourd  had  wound  itself  around  a  lofty  palm,
and  in  a  few  week  climbed  to  its  very  top.  "  How  old  mayest  thou  be  ?  "  asked  the
new-comer.  " About  a  hundred  years."  "About  a  hundred  years  and  no  taller?
Only  look  :  I  have  grown  as  tall  as  you  in  fewer  days  than  you  count  years  1 "  "I
know  that  very  well,"  replied  the  palm;  "  every  summer  of  my  life  a  gourd  has
climed  up  around  me,  as  proud  as  thou  art,  and  as  short-lived  as  thou  wilt  be."
Boasters: — This  sin  is  fitly  linked  to  the  former;  for  when  men  by  covetous
practices,  have  gained  riches,  then  they  begin  to  boast  and  glory  in  them  (Prov.
xviii.  11 ;  1  Tim.  vi.  17),  because  of  the  supposed  good  which  they  think  riches
will  procure  them,  as  friends,  honours,  fine  clothes,  fine  buildings.  The  Greek  word
is  diversely  rendered,  yet  all  tend  to  one  and  the  same  thing,  and  are  coincident ;  for
he  that  is  a  boaster  is  usually  a  vain-glorious,  lofty,  insolent,  arrogant  man :  it
notes  one  that  is  inordinately  lifted  up  with  a  high  esteem  and  admiration  of  his
own  supposed  or  real  excellencies  ;  and  thereupon  arrogates  and  assumes  more  to
himself  than  is  meet;  or,  one  that  boasts  of  the  learning,  virtues,  power,  riches,
which  he  hath  not,  and  brags  of  acts  which  he  never  did.  The  proud  man  boasts
of  what  he  hath,  and  the  boaster  brags  of  what  he  hath  not.  This  vice  is  op-
posed to  verity  ;  and  in  proper  speaking  it  consists  in  words,  rather  than  in  the  heart ;
for  as  pride,  in  exact  and  proper  speaking,  hath  relation  to  the  heart,  rather  than
the  words ;  so  this  sin  of  boasting  hath  relation  to  our  words,  rather  than  our
hearts  :  so  that  this  sin  is  the  daughter  of  pride,  for  when  pride  lieth  hid  in  the
heart,  it  shows  itself  by  arrogant  boasiings,  and  high-flown  words.  {T.  Hall,  B.B.)
Boasters  discontented  : — Thus  when  men  set  a  high  rate  upon  their  ovm  parts  and
perfections,  they  be  very  impatient  and  discontented,  if  others  will  not  come  to
their  price,  and  because  other  men  will  not,  they  will  canonise  themselves  for
saints.  [Ibid.)  Boasting  of  vice  : — It  is  dangerous  to  excuse  and  defend  sin,  but
to  boast  of  vices,  as  if  they  were  virtues,  is  the  height  of  villany.  (Ibid.)  Boast-
ing no  recommendation : — When  men's  mouths  are  so  full  of  i  heir  own  praise,  it  augura
an  emptiness  of  grace  within ;  full  vessels  make  little  noise,  when  empty  ones
sound  loud.  Empty  carts  make  a  great  rattle,  when  the  loaded  ones  go  quietly  by  yon  ;
your  poor  pedlars  that  have  but  one  pa<k,  do  in  every  market  show  all  they  have,
when  the  rich  merchant  makes  but  a  small  show  of  that  whereof  he  hath  great
plenty  within.  The  worst  mettle  rings  loudest,  and  the  emptiest  ears  of  corn  stand
highest.  Labour  therefore  for  the  contrary  grace  of  modesty.  (Ibid.)  Proud. —
Downfall  of  pride : — A  kite  having  risen  to  a  very  gieat  height,  moved  in  the  air  as
Btately  as  a  prince,  and  looked  down  with  much  contempt  on  all  below.  "What
a  superior  being  I  am  now  !  "  said  the  kite  ;  "who  has  ever  ascended  bo  high  as  I
have  ?  What  a  poor  grovelling  set  of  beings  are  all  those  beneath  me  I  I  despise
them."  And  then  he  shook  his  head  in  derision,  and  then  be  wagged  his  tail ;  and
again  he  steered  along  with  so  muth  state  as  if  the  air  were  all  his  own,  and  as  if
everything  must  make  way  before  him,  when  suddenly  the  string  hroke,  and  down
fell  the  kite  with  greater  haste  than  he  a  cended,  and  was  greatly  hurt  in  the  fall.
Pride  often  meets  with  a  downfall.  (Cobbin.)  Pride  abounding  : — And  is  not
this  the  master-sin  of  this  last  wnd  loose  age  of  the  world;  when  did  pride  ever
more  abound  in  city  and  country,  in  bo'ly  and  soul,  in  heart,  head,  hair,  habit ;  in
gestures,  vestures,  words,  works?  (T.  Hall,  B.D.)  Pride  hated  by  the  proud: —
It  is  80  base  a  sin,  that  even  the  proud  themselves  hate  it  in  others.  (Ibid.)  The
natural  heart  full  of  pride  : — Naturally  we  are  all  as  full  of  pride  as  a  toad  is  of
poison.    The  sea  is  not  more  full  oi  monsters,  the  air  of  flies,  the  earth  of  vermin.


CHAP,  in.]  II.  TIMOTHY,  249

and  the  fire  of  sparks,  than  our  corrupt  natures  are  of  proud,  rebellious  imagina-
tions against  God.  (Ihid.)  Pride  poisons  virtuous  actions: — It  is  the  poison  of
virtuous  actions ;  the  meat  may  be  good  in  itself,  but  if  there  be  poison  in  it,  it
becomes  deadly.  Praying,  preaching,  alms,  are  good  in  themselves,  but  if  pride
get  into  them,  it  leavens  and  sours  the  best  performances.  It  is  a  worm  that  devours
the  wood  that  bred  it.  He  that  is  proud  of  his  graces,  hath  no  grace;  his
pride  hath  devoured  it  all.  (Ibid.)  Blasphemers. — Gradation  in  sin : — He  tells
us,  men  shall  be  self-lovers,  silver-lovers,  boasters,  proud,  insulting  over  their
brethren,  and,  which  is  worse,  they  spare  not  God  Himself,  but  are  blasphemers  of
Him.  {Ibid.)  Blasphemy  ungrateful: — It  argues  the  highest  ingratitude  in
the  world  for  a  man,  like  a  mad  dog,  to  fly  in  the  face  of  his  master,  who  keeps  and
feeds  him,  and  to  use  that  heart  and  tongue  which  God  made  for  His  praise,  to  the
dispraise  and  disparagement  of  his  Creator,  to  load  Him  with  injuries,  who  every
day  loads  us  with  mercies,  and  to  curse  Him  who  blesseth  us.  What  greater  ingra-
titude? (Ibid.)  UntbaaMUl. — Enormity  of  ingratitude: — Philip,  King  of  Mace-
donia, caused  a  soldier  of  his,  that  had  offered  unkindness  to  one  that  had  kindly
entertained  him  to  be  branded  in  the  forehead  with  these  two  words,  Hoxpes  ingratus.
Unthankfulness  is  a  monster  in  nature,  a  solecism  in  manners,  a  paradox  in  divinity,
a  parching  wind  to  dry  up  the  fountain  of  further  favour.  (J.  Trapp.)  Con-
nection of  ingratitude  with  other  evils : — There  be  three  usual  causes  of  ingrati-
tude upon  a  benefit  received — envy,  pride,  covetousness ;  envy,  looking  more  at
others'  benefits  than  our  own ;  pride,  looking  more  at  ourselves  than  the  benefit ;
covetousness,  looking  more  at  what  we  would  have,  than  what  we  have.  (Bp.
nail.)  Ingratitude  mars  friendship  : — It  is  a  lump   of  soot,   which,  falling

into  the  dish  of  friendship,  destroys  its  scent  and  flavour.  (Basil.)  Without
natural  afTection. — Want  of  affection  : — Fontaine's  charncter  was  such  that
it  seemed  incompatible  with  strong  attachments.  He  married  at  the  persuasion
of  his  family,  and  left  his  wife  behind  him  when  he  went  to  live  at  Paris  at  the
invitation  of  the  Duchess  of  Bouillon.  His  only  son  was  adopted  by  Harley,  the
archbishop,  at  the  age  of  fourteen.  Meeting  the  youth  long  afterwards,  and  being
pleased  with  his  conversation,  he  was  told  that  this  was  his  son.  "  Ah,"  said  he
calmly,  "  I  am  very  glad  of  it."  Cruelty  to  children  : — Twice  in  six  months  one
father  had  to  be  sent  to  prison  whom  it  seemed  a  shame  to  send  at  all.  When  he
had  gone  his  second  time,  there  was  found  on  his  table  *'  The  Floating  Matter  of
the  Air,"  by  Tyndall,  with  his  book-mark  at  page  240,  to  which  he  had  read.  Had
you  passed  him  and  his  wife  together  in  the  street,  you  would  have  unconsciously
felt  a  certain  pride  in  the  British  workman ;  yet  was  he  not  ashamed  to  express
openly  a  desire  to  be  rid  of  the  tasks  and  limitations  his  children  set  to  his  life,
and  twice  in  one  night  he  gave  an  infant  of  fifteen  months  old  a  caning  for  crying
of  teething.  His  clenched  fist  could  have  broken  open  a  door  at  a  blow,  and  with
it,  in  his  anger,  he  feUed  a  child  three  years  and  a  half  old,  making  the  little  fellow
giddy  for  days,  and  while  he  was  thus  giddy  felled  him  again  ;  and  because  the
terrible  pain  he  infiicted  made  the  child  cry,  he  pushed  three  of  his  huge  fingers
down  the  little  weeper's  throat — "plugging  the  little  devil's  windpipe,"  as  he  laugh-
ingly described  it.  He  denied  none  of  the  charges,  and  boldly  cliimed  his  right —
the  children  were  his  own,  he  said.  (Contemporary  Review.)  Natural  affection:
— A  team  was  running  away  with  a  small  child,  when  a  mother,  seeii  g  its  danger,
cried  in  agony,  "  Stop  that  wagsjon,  and  save  the  child !  "  as  loud  as  she  could.  A
heartless  man  said,  "  Silly  woman  !  don't  fret  yourself  ;  it  isn't  your  child."  The
woman  replied,  '•  I  know  that ;  but  it's  somebody's  child."  Truce  breakers. —
Covenant  proof : — They  will  make  no  more  of  a  covenant  than  a  monkey  doth
of  his  collar,  which  he  can  slip  off  and  on  at  his  pleasure  In  the  last  days,
men  will  not  only  be  sermon-proof  and  judgment- proof,  but  covenant-proof;
no  bonds  so  strong,  so  sacred,  but  they  can  as  fasilv  break  them  as  Samson
did  the  borjds  of  the  Philistines.  It  is  not  personal,  sncramental,  or  national
vows  that  can  keep  the  men  of  the  last  times  within  the  circle  of  obedience.
(T.  Hall,  B.D.)  How  rightly  to  covenant : — Now  that  we  may  covenant
rightly,  we  must  do  it — 1.  Judiciously.  2.  Sincerely.  3.  Unanimously.  4.  Affec-
tionately, with — (1)  Fear.  (2)  Love.  (3)  Joy.  (Ibid.)  False  Accusers. —Fauifo
invented : — If  they  can  find  no  faults,  th-v  will  invent  some,  as  the  "levil  did  by
Job  (Job  ii.  9-11,  ii.  6),  and  this  properly  is  sUndering.  (Ibid.)  The  back-biter:
— As  those  buy  at  one  place  ami  sell  at  nnother,  so  these  peilling  devils  make  mer-
chandise of  their  words,  hearing  a  false  tale  at  one  house  and  selling  it  at  another.
The  back-biter  is  a  mouse  that  is  alwKV!^  t^nawing  on  the  good  name  of  his  neigh-


250  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  to.

boar.  Sometimee  he  whispers  in  secret,  and  anon  he  openly  defames,  yet  subtlely
covering  aU  with  a  deep  sigh,  professing  his  great  sorrow  for  such  an  (  ne's  fall ;
when  they  shonld  delight  in  the  virtues  of  others,  they  feed  upon  their  vices.  {Ibid.)
Aetiont  to  he  kindly  interpreted : — It  is  a  rule  in  heraldry,  and  it  holds  good  in
divinity,  that  in  blazoning  arms  and  ensigns  the  animals  must  be  interpreted  in
the  best  sense,  according  to  their  noble  and  generous  qualities — e.g.,  if  a  lion  or  a
fox  be  the  charge,  we  must  conceive  his  quality  represented  to  be  wit  and  courage,
not  rapine  and  pilfering.  So,  and  much  more,  in  blazoning  my  brother's  name,  I
must  find  out  what  is  best,  and  mention  that ;  if  I  meet  with  a  sin  of  infirmity  and
humane  frailty,  I  must  conceal  it;  it  is  the  glory  of  a  man  to  pass  it  by  (Prov.  xix.
11.)  {Ibid.)  Slander  poisonous: — It  is  the  custom  in  Africa  for  hunters,  when
they  have  killed  a  poisonous  snake,  to  cut  off  its  head  and  carefully  bury  it  deep  in
the  ground.  A  naked  foot  stepping  on  one  of  these  fangs  would  be  fatally  wounded ;
the  poison  would  spread  in  a  very  short  time  all  through  the  system.  This  venom
lasts  a  long  time,  and  is  as  deadly  after  the  snake  is  dead  as  before.  The  Bed
Indians  nsed  to  dip  the  points  of  their  arrows  in  this  poison ;  so,  if  they  made  the
least  wonnd,  their  victim  would  be  sure  to  die.  The  snake's  poison  is  in  its  teeth ;
but  there  is  something  quite  as  dangerous,  and  much  more  common,  in  com-
munities, which  has  its  poison  on  its  tongue.  Indeed,  your  chances  of  escape  from
a  serpent  are  greater.  The  worst  snakes  usually  glide  away  in  fear  at  the  approach
of  man,  unless  disturbed  or  attacked.  But  this  creature,  whose  poison  lurks  in
its  tongue,  attacks  without  provocation,  and  follows  up  its  victim  with  untiring
perseverence.  We  will  tell  you  his  name,  so  you  will  always  be  able  to  shun  him.
He  is  called  "  Slanderer."  He  poisons  worse  than  a  serpent.  Often  his  venom
strikes  to  the  life  of  a  whole  family  or  neighbourhood,  destroying  all  peace  and
confidence.     [Dictionary  of  Illustrations.)  Slander,  overruled : — After  reading

a  slanderous  article  in  an  evening  paper,  an  anonymous  friend  sent  to  the  Church
Missionary  Society,  as  a  protest,  a  cheque  for  £1,000.  Livingstone  said,  "  I  got
two  of  my  best  friends  through  being  ill-spoken  of."  (J.  F.  B.  Tinling,  B.A.)
Incontinent. — Rules  to  be  observed  in  our  feasting : — 1.  It  must  be  done  season-
ably. 2.  Soberly.  3.  Discreetly.  4.  Beligiously.  (T.  Hall,  B.D.)  How  to
know  a  drunkard : — Question  :  But  how  shall  we  know  a  drunkard  ?  Answer :
By  his  affections,   words,   and   actions.    (Ibid.)  Preservatives  against  incon-

tinency : — 1.  Take  heed  of  intemperance  in  eating  and  drinking ;  when  men  are
fed  to  the  full,  then,  like  pampered  stallions,  they  neigh  after  their  neighbours'  wives
(Jer.  V.  9 ;  Ezek.  xvi.  49).  Take  away  the  fuel,  and  the  fire  goeth  out ;  take  away
the  provender,  and  you  will  tame  the  beast.  Drunkenness  and  whoring  are  joined
together  (Prov.  xxiii.  31,  38  ;  Hos.  iv.  11.)  2.  Idleness  breeds  uncleanllness,
as  standing  pools  do  mud.  3.  Take  heed  of  evil  company ;  come  not  near  the
house  of  the  harlot  (Prov.  v.  8-11).  He  that  would  not  be  burnt,  must  not  come
too  near  the  fire.  4.  Set  a  watch  over  the  eyes.  The  devil  gets  into  our  hearts
by  these  windows  of  the  soul.  {Ibid.)  Fierce. — The  fierceness  of  sin : — This
is  the  thirteenth  sin  which  helps  to  make  the  last  days  perilous.  Men  will
then  more  especially  be  of  a  fierce,  rude,  savage,  barbarous,  inhuman  disposition.
They  will  be  cruelly  and  bloodily  disposed.  There  will  be  in  them  no  meekness
nor  mildness  to  regulate  the  passions ;  but,  like  brute  beasts,  they  will  be  ready
to  slay  all  such  as  oppose  them.  This  is  a  fruit  of  that  self-love  and  covetous-
ness  before  mentioned.     {Ibid.)  Wickedness  ferocious  : — This  verity  is  made

one  special  note  of  the  wicked  (Prov.  xii,  10,  xvii.  3 ;  Gen.  xlix.  7).  Hence  in
Scripture  they  are  compared  to  lions  (Job  iv.  10);  to  wolves  (Hab.  i.  8);  bears
(Prov.  xvii.  12) ;  horses,  which  must  be  restrained  from  hurting  with  bit  and  bridle
(Psa.  xxxii.  19) ;  serpents  (Psa.  Ixxiv.  13,  14) ;  dogs  (Phil.  iii.  2  ;  Matt.  vii.  6) ;
boars  (Psa.  Ixxx.  13) ;  threshers,  which  bruise  and  oppress  the  people  of  God  (Amos
i.  3) :  millers,  that  grind  them  with  their  cruelty  (Isa.  iii.  75) ;  and  to  butchers,
which  do  not  only  fleece,  but  slay  the  sheep.     (Ibid.)  Lessons  : — 1.  Then  let

men  get  grace,  that  breeds  humanity,  civility,  and  candid  carriage  towards  all.
Such  will  not,  dare  not,  hurt  their  brethren  in  body,  soul,  goods,  or  good  name
(Psa.  XV.  3).  We  need  not  fear  those  that  truly  fear  God.  2.  As  grace  will  keep
you  from  being  fierce  against  others  actively,  so  it  will  be  a  shield  to  keep  you  from
the  rage  of  fierce  men  passively  (Isa.  xxxiiL  15,  19).  It  is  disobedience  which
brings  fierce  men  against  a  people  (Dent,  xxviii.  50) ;  but  when  we  are  obedient,
God  will  restrain  their  rage,  and  bound  them,  as  he  doth  the  proud  waves  of  the
eea  (Job  xxxviii.  11).  3.  Admire  the  goodness  of  the  Lord,  who  preserves  His
lambs  in  the  midst  of  so  many  fierce  lions.    Did  not  the  great  Lord,  Keeper  of  the


CHAP,  m.]  II.  TIMOTHY.  251

world,  watch  His  vineyard  night  and  day,  the  boar  out  of  the  wood  would  eoon  lay
it  waste.  The  thorns  would  soon  over-top  this  lily,  and  the  birds  of  prey  devour
God's  turtle.  (Ibid.)  Despisers  of  those  that  are  good. — Antipathy  between  good
and  evil : — 1.  If  we  consider  that  strong  antipathy  and  enmity  which  is  between
the  righteous  and  the  wicked,  there  is  an  irreconcileable  war  and  hatred  between
them  (Gen.  iii.  15).  2.  In  respect  of  the  dissimilitude  of  their  manners.  They
have  contrary  principles,  practices,  ends,  and  aims.  3.  To  try  and  exercise  the
faith,  hope,  patience,  and  constancy  of  His  people  (Isa.  zxvii.  9 ;  2  Thess.  i.  4 ;
Dan.  xii.  10).  4.  To  wean  them  from  the  world.  It  is  easy  to  love  a  good  man
for  his  riches,  learning,  parts,  gifts ;  this  is  but  a  carnal  love,  and  springs  from
oamal  ends  and  principles  (James  ii.  1-4).  True  love  is  a  spiritual  love,  springing
from  spiritual  considerations ;  it  makes  men  love  the  saints  for  their  faith,  zeal,
<tc.,  and  not  for  any  by-respect.  (Ibid.)  Traitors. — Now  of  these  traitors  there
are  three  sorts — 1.  Traitors  political.  2.  Ecclesiastical.  3.  Domestical.  (Ibid.)
Fidelity : — Let  us  be  faithful  to  the  truth  of  God,  faithful  to  the  land  of  our  nativity,
and  faithful  in  all  our  relations.  Fidelity  is  the  chief  est  bond  of  human  society ;
take  away  this,  and  you  take  away  all  peace  and  commerce  from  amongst  men.  It  is
only  to  the  faithful  that  the  promises  run  (Psa.  xxxi.  32).  The  Lord  will  preserve
the  faithful,  and  make  them  to  abound  with  blessings  (Frov.  zxviii.  10).  {Ibid.)
William  Tyndale's  betrayal ; — The  immediate  agent  of  Tyndale's  troubles  is  known
to  have  been  an  English  ecclesiastic,  Phillips  by  name,  who  acted  the  part  of  a
Judas,  by  artfully  ingratiating  himself  into  the  translator's  confidence,  and  then
conspiring  with  Pierre  Dufief,  the  procureur  at  Brussels,  to  arrest  him.  The
martyr's  capture  was  effected  in  the  street,  as  Tyndale  and  Phillips  were  leaving
the  house  of  Po.vntz  to  dine  together.  Poyntz  had  expressed  to  his  friend  his  sus-
picions of  the  lurking  Englishman  ;  but  so  adroitly  did  PbUlips  act  the  hypocrite
by  affecting  zeal  for  the  Reformation  and  love  for  the  Bible,  that  he  found  himself
courted  and  trusted,  while  Tyndale  disregarded  all  warnings.  (Sword  and  Trowel.)
Heady. — In  the  last  days  men  will  be  heady,  hasty,  rash,  inconsiderate ;  they  will
be  carried  by  the  violence  of  their  lusts  without  wit  or  reason.  They  will  set  upon
things  too  high  and  too  hard  for  them,  like  young  birds  which,  flying  before  they
are  fledged,  fall  to  the  ground,  and  so  break  their  bones :  so  much  the  word  implies.
They  will  make  desperate  adventures  ;  they  wUl  be  rash  in  their  words  and  works,
precipitate  and  inconsiderate  in  all  their  undertakings  ;  what  they  do  will  be  raw,
rude,  indigested,  unconcocted.  Hence  the  word  is  rendered  "  rash  "  and  unadvised.
(T.  Hall,  B.D.)  Lovers  of  pleasures  more  than  lovers  of  God.— Lorcr*  of  plea-
sure described  and  warned : — I.  Wno  belong  to  this  ndmbeb.  1.  All  whose  fond-
ness  for  pleasure  leads  them  to  violate  the  commands  of  God — (1)  By  indulging  in
forbidden  pleasures.  (2)  By  inordinate  pursuit  of  pleasures  not  in  themselves
sinful  or  expressly  forbidden.  2.  All  who  are  led  by  a  fondness  for  pleasure  to
indulge  in  amusements  which  they  suspect  may  be  wrong,  or  which  they  do  not
feel  certain  are  right.  When  we  love  any  person  supremely,  we  are  careful  to
avoid  not  only  those  things  which  we  know  will  displease  him,  but  such  as  we
suspect  may  do  it.  3.  All  who  find  more  satisfaction  in  the  pursuit  of  worldly
pleasures  than  they  do  in  God's  service.  4.  All  who  are  deterred  from  immediately
embracing  the  Saviour,  and  commencing  a  religious  Ufe,  by  an  unwillingness  to
renounce  the  pleasures  of  the  world,  are  most  certainly  lovers  of  pleasures  more
than  lovers  of  God.  U.  Theib  sinful,  guiltv,  and  dangeboos  condition.  1.
That  the  apostle  considered  them  as  sinful,  in  no  common  degree,  is  evident  from
the  company  in  which  he  has  placed  them.  It  is  still  farther  evident  from  the
description  which  he  gives  of  them  in  some  of  the  verses  succeeding  the  text.  For
instsince,  he  there  informs  us  that  such  are  persons  of  corrupt  minds.  What  can
be  a  more  satisfactory  proof  of  a  corrupt  state  of  mind  in  a  rational,  immortal
being,  than  a  preference  of  unsatisfving,  transitory,  sinful  pleasures  to  his  Creator.
2.  In  the  second  place  the  apostle  informs  us  that  they  resist  the  truth.  This  they
must  do,  for  their  deeds  are  evil.  Such  persons  hate  the  truth,  because  the  truth
condemns  their  sinful  but  beloved  pleasures.  3.  Hence  they  are  represented  as
despisers  of  good  men.  They  consider  such  men,  whose  conduct  reproves  them,  as
the  enemips  of  their  happiness,  and  ridicule  them  as  rigid,  morose,  superstitious,
or  hypocritical  persons,  and  who  will  neither  enjoy  the  world  themselves,  nor  allow
others  to  do  it.  4.  Lastly,  the  persons  we  are  describing  are  represented  as  being
dead  in  trespasses  and  sins.  She  that  liveth  in  pleasure,  is  dead  while  she  liveth.
They  are  dead  as  it  respects  the  great  end  of  their  existence ;  dead  to  everything
tiiat  is  good ;  dead  in  the  sight  of  a  holy  God  ;  loathsome  to  Him  as  a  corpse  is  to


252  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m.

as,  and  as  unfit  for  the  society  of  the  living  Jehovah,  as  the  naturally  dead  are  (or
the  society  of  the  living.      {E.  Pay  son,  D.D.)  The  Christian  view  of  amuse  ■

merits: — I.  Amusement  is  to  be  used  as  eeobeation.  The  clerk  who  has  been
hours  at  the  desk,  the  mechanic  in  his  shop,  the  student  with  his  books,  will  take
exercise  and  bring  the  unused  muscles  into  play,  and  so  reinvigorate  the  frame,  or
the  weary  brain  will  be  soothed  by  the  excitement  and  absorption  of  some  game,  or
the  mind,  perplexed  with  life's  mysteries  and  sorrows,  will  wander  away  into  the
world  of  imagination  under  the  speU  of  some  master  spirit,  while  another  will
plunge  into  long-hidden  secrets  of  nature  revealed  by  our  modern  science,  and
wonderingly  learn  the  Creator's  wisdom,  power,  and  love.  But  do  you  observe  the
assumption  underlying  this  principle  ?  The  assumption  is,  that  you  are  hard  at
work  at  your  life's  task.  But  now,  supposing  you  have  found,  and  are  engaged  in,
your  life's  work,  apply  this  principle  of  amusement  as  recreation.  Nothing  is
lawfal  which  deteriorates  any  of  your  powers  or  hinders  the  effectual  discbarge  of
duty.  What  is  helpful  in  moderation  becomes  harmful  in  excess ;  amusement
begun  as  a  recreation  may  end  in  dissipation.  If  a  man  spends  his  holiday  in  toil-
some excursions  by  day  and  revellings  at  night,  and  returns  to  his  work  unfitted
for  hia  daily  caUing,  he  loves  pleasure  rather  than  God.  Had  he  loved  God
supremely,  he  would  have  always  kept  in  mind  that  he  was  having  a  holiday  to  fit
himself  for  the  due  discharge  of  his  God-given  work ;  but  he  has  thought  of  amuse-
ment for  its  own  sake,  and  has  been  abusing  it.  Further,  if  that  is  unlawful  which
dissipates,  that  which  corrupts  is  stiU  worse.  If  your  recreation  brings  you  neces-
sarily into  corrupting  companionships,  it  is  thereby  condemned,  and  it  is  to  be
renounced.  IL  We  must  obsebve  in  oub  eecbeations  the  golden  bulb  of  doing
TO  OTHEBS  AS  WB  WOULD  HAVE  THEM  DO  TO  US.  We  must  ask  at  what  cost  to  them-
selves do  others  produce  what  amuses  and  recreates  us.  If  your  amusement  demands
loss  of  modesty,  it  demands  what  must  harm  you,  as  well  as  injure  her  who  loses
modesty.  In  the  old  slave  days  our  fathers  and  mothers  denied  themselves  sugar,
refusing  to  eat  the  forced  produce  of  their  outraged  brothers  and  sisters.  But  this
principle  applies  still  more  widely,  not  only  to  woman,  but  to  man ;  not  only  to
human  beings,  but  to  animals  as  well ;  with  regard  to  all  these,  we  shall  require
that  our  recreation  involves  the  shame,  suffering,  and  ruin  of  none.  A  word  should
bs  said  with  regard  to  the  waste  of  time  involved  in  many  harmless  recreations.
{A.  N.  Johnson,  M.A.)  The  love  of  pleasure : — The  moral  effects  of  this  exorbitant
and  over-niastering  love  of  pleasure  are  very  awful.  In  cases  of  the  greatest  excess,
the  very  1  od^  gives  way  under  it.  Gluttony,  drunkenness,  licentiousness,  not  only
ecUpse  the  mental  lights,  and  scorch  the  moral  sensibilities  of  the  soul,  but  they
hasten  the  body  to  dissolution ;  they  dig  many  a  dishonoured  grave.  But  apart
from  these  physical  consequences,  and  even  in  those  cases  where  they  do  not  follow,
the  moral  effects  of  the  love  of  pleasure  are  very  sad.  Take  a  tree  that  needs  firm
rooting  and  fresh  air,  and  put  it  in  a  hothouse,  or  in  some  steamy  vaporous  place
where  no  winds  reach  it,  and  where  light  is  dim,  and  see  how  weak  and  how  faded
it  will  become.  Such  is  the  man  who  has  blotted  out  the  word  "  duty  "  from  the
plan  of  his  life,  and  written  "pleasure"  there  in  its  stead  ;  who  feels  life  no  longer
to  be  a  moral  strife,  with  God  and  goodness  as  its  end,  but  only  a  low  and  ignoble
endeavour  to  snatch  enjoyiuent  and  secure  comfort.  That  man  must  wither  even
while  he  seems  to  bloom ;  he  must  fall,  however  he  may  appear  to  rise ;  to  him
there  are  no  stirrings  of  noble  impulse,  no  victories  of  the  will,  no  clear  light  of
supreme  law.  Life  is  a  song,  a  play,  a  picture,  a  feast,  a  superficial  shallow  thing
— for  the  man  is  a  lover  of  pleasure  more  than  a  lover  of  God.  And  when  men  sink
thus  far,  it  is  very  hard  to  raise  them.  The  worm  is  at  the  heart  of  the  tree — the
corrosive  stain  is  beneath  the  surface — it  is  eating  the  metal  througli  and  through.
••  She  that  liveth  in  pleasure  is  dead  while  she  Uveth."  Dead  in  this  siu,  the  love
of  pleasure.  The  noblest  things  have  gone  now.  There  is  nothing  left  to  which
we  can  appeal.  I.  Fkom  such  turn  away,  not  only  from  the  wicked  men  described
in  the  passage,  but  from  pleasure  lovers.  Turn  away  from  them,  from  the  frivolous,
the  butterfiy  race,  who  find  no  seriousness  in  life,  who  take  no  time  for  thought,
who  have  no  spirit  of  prayer,  and  no  love  of  Goi  Such  people  can  do  you  only
harm.  If  they  were  willing  to  bless  you,  they  have  no  means  of  doing  it.  Their
life  is  a  scanty  rill;  and  if  you  find  that  you  cannot  influence  them,  then  turn  from
them,  lest  you  put  your  own  soul  in  peril.  II.  We  may  take  this  as  a  guiding  rule
of  invariable  and  universal  application — that  duty  is  to  stand  moballt  supbemb
m  OUB  life.  It  is  to  be  far  above  enjoyment  of  every  kind.  We  shall  never  be
safe  otherwise.   If  life  is  moral,  it  must  be  moral  all  through — from  its  lowest  to  its


CHAP,  ui.]  II.  TIMOTHY,  353

highest  things.  III.  There  must  be  self-denial  in  evert  troe  human  life.
We  are  not  safe  without  that.  We  shall  not  keep  our  life  wholesome,  green,  and
growing,  without  a  good  deal  of  self-denial  in  it.  Self-denial  is  like  the  pulling  of
the  reins  now  and  again,  just  to  see  that  we  have  those  fiery  coursers,  the  passions,
well  in  hand.  It  is  like  the  touching  of  the  helm  when  the  sea  runs  high,  or  the
tides  are  treacherous,  to  make  sure  that  the  ship  will  answer  to  it  if  there  should  be
sodden  need  to  turn  her  course.    IV.  The  love  op  God,  possessed  and  cultured,

WILL   CERTAINLY   SAVE   US   FROM   THE   DEGRADATION  AND  THE   DOOM   OF   SUCH   A  LIFE  AS

THAT  AGAINST  WHICH  WB  ARE  HERE  WARNED.  The  love  of  pleasure  is  not  put  in
the  text  against  the  love  of  God,  as  if  they  were  direct  opposites.  The  sin  is  to
love  pleasure  more  than  God ;  the  cure  is  to  love  God  more  than  pleasure,  and
pleasure  only  in  a  moderated  sense  in  Him.     {A.  Raleigh,  D.D.)  Amusements  :

— I.  The  SPIRIT  OF  amusements.  Amusements  are  dangerous  things.  Can  any
of  jou  explain  how  it  comes  to  be  that  in  amusements  in  general  there  is  such  a
lack  of  all  reference  to  God  ?  Where  is  the  party  that  will  more  brutally  resent  the
intrusion  of  religion,  or  flee  more  abashed  at  its  mention,  than  just  the  party  of
pleasure?  Instinctively  there  is  felt  an  incongruity  between  the  two.  The
startled  response  to  Mr.  Blackwood  in  a  ball-room,  I  take  to  be  the  outspeaking
of  the  universal  feeling — "  For  goodness'  sake,  Mr.  Blackwood,  don't  introduce  that
here  I "  In  the  lull  of  a  dance,  he  had  spoken  to  his  partner  something  about  the
Saviour.  This  utter  absence  of  God  in  amusements  is  an  ominous  symptom.  Aa
a  rule  they  are  thoroughly  secular.  Even  when  they  begin  with  a  mixture  of
religion,  how  soon  that  drops,  and  the  secular  takes  its  place.  The  natural  history
of  entertainments  has  been  one  away  from  God.  The  several  stages  of  their  course
have  been  religious,  semi-secular,  worldly,  the  profane,  the  lewd.  I  must  ask  you
Christians  to  look  that  fact  straight  in  the  face,  and  ponder  it  to  its  full  weight,
because  it  is  full  of  import.  To  me  it  is  a  revelation  of  the  spirit  of  all  these
amusements,  for  it  is  by  this  means  that  we  can  most  certainly  discern  the  spirit.
Generally  speaking,  the  initial  beginning  between  right  and  wrong  has  the  form  of
a  narrow  fork  hke  the  points  in  a  railway  line.  With  the  slightest  jolt,  you  are
shunted  from  one  track  to  the  other.  Can  you  determine  the  exact  point  when
you  have  left  the  right  line?  But  soon  as  the  divergence  grows  you  know  to
your  pains.  Two  seeds  are  before  you.  Each  has  within  it  a  hidden  germ,  the
image  and  ideal  of  a  great  tree.  Can  you  determine  their  species  in  the  seed  ?
You  may  not  be  able,  and  argument  will  be  useless.  But  plant  them,  and  when
one  has  grown  into  an  ash  and  another  into  a  maple,  then  the  difference  and  the
kind  is  patent.  Yet  these  seeds  were  specifically  diJEferent.  A  different  germ,  a
different  life  principle,  resided  in  each ;  and  they  could  grow  only  into  what  they
originally  were.  Each  had  a  potency  to  become  what  they  eventually  grew  into.
Your  pleasures  grow  from  a  germ,  a  spirit.  A  life  principle  pervades  the  whole.
I  refuse  to  argue  the  matter  at  a  microscopic  stage,  the  seed  difference,  the  narrow
railway  point.  Taking  the  Master's  great  principle,  we  know  them  by  their  fruit.
Can  that  be  right  which  needs  the  Bible  laid  aside,  prayer  neglected,  God  forgotten,
and  to  which  the  name  of  Jesus  is  a  jar?  U.  The  desire  for  pleasure  a  morbid
STUFTOM.  The  healthiest  tone  in  manhood  and  society  is'  when  people  are  busy,
when  they  are  bent  on  some  great  ideal,  and  do  not  need  to  be  amused.  Even  a
healthy  child  needs  far  less  to  be  amused  than  mothers  and  nurses  think.  Its  great
idea  of  amusement  is  to  do  something.  The  honest  workman,  the  colonist,  say,  in
a  new  country,  busy  in  felhng  timber,  reclaiming  land — his  own  now — erecting  hia
homestead,  and  in  other  works  of  homely  husbandry,  give  him  the  solace  of  his
wife's  society,  the  prattle  of  his  children,  his  Bible,  a  rest  in  the  evening,  and  the
church  on  Sabbath,  and  he  will  live  a  life  above  entertainment — a  hfe  of  sach
solid  satisfaction,  that  entertainments  would  be  a  mockery  to  it.  The  kingdom
that  is  at  its  best,  the  society  that  is  at  its  healthiest,  and  the  Church  of  God  at  its
most  useful  stage,  do  not  need  entertainments.  In  the  old  days,  when  old  Bome
was  slowly  climbing  the  splendid  height  of  mistress-ship  of  the  world,  her  citizens
were  sober,  frugal,  and  industrious.  Her  dictators  held  the  plough,  and  her  matrons
the  distaff.  Then  the  gladiatorial  shows  had  no  existence,  and  adultery  was
anknown.  The  men  were  freemen,  and  the  women  virtuous.  It  was  when  the
citizens  had  let  themselves  be  debauched  by  the  games  and  consented  to  be  amused,
that  they  sank  into  the  position  of  pubUc  beggars,  issuing  of  a  morning  from  their
squalid  cabins  for  their  daily  dole  of  the  pubhc  bread,  to  idle  away  the  livelong  day
on  the  benches  of  the  amphitheatre  and  circus,  with  an  occasional  lounge  in  the
public  baths,  doing  no  work,  all  labour  being  considered  degrading  as  the  lot  of


254  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.  m.

elaves.  Then  was  the  time  of  Bome's  decay,  till  at  last  they  lost  to  the  hardier
Goths  that  semblance  of  liberty  they  were  too  effeminate  to  defend.  Drill  your
minda,  steer  yonr  coarse  through  life  with  the  grand  helm  of  doty,  and  not  let
youraelres  roU  on  the  wave  of   self-indulgence  and  entertainment,     HI.  What,

THEN,   SHOULD  BE   THE   CHRISTIAN'S  ATTITUDE   TOWARDS  AMUSEMENTS  ?      In  answering

this,  let  me  distinguish  between  Christians  in  their  collective  capacity  as  the  Ghorch,
and  the  Christian  by  himself  as  an  individual.  As  for  the  Church  of  Christ,  or
Christians  collectively,  I  fail  to  see  that  she  has  got  anything  to  do  with  amuse-
ments whatever.  God  never  instituted  the  Church  to  amuse  people ;  so  to  speak,
it  is  outside  her  commission.  Since  Christians  cannot  go  down  to  the  world's
pleasures,  all  the  more  sedulously  should  they  cultivate  that  domain  which  relates
to  the  pleasant  in  their  own  religion ;  for  there  is  distinctly  a  pleasurable  depart-
ment in  Christianity.  The  restfulness,  the  kindness,  the  sincerity,  the  readiness
to  oblige  and  put  one's  self  about  to  please,  the  unfeigned  humility  and  readiness
to  commend — yea,  and  relish  for  all  that  beauty  so  copiously  strewed  in  nature
without.  The  cause  of  conversion  often  is  said  to  be,  "  These  Christians  seemed
BO  much  happier  than  I  was."  Instinctively,  somehow  or  other,  the  unsaved  feel
that  if  you  profess  religion  you  belong  to  another  party  from  them,  and  ought  to
be  better ;  and  when  they  see  you  indulging  in  the  amusements  they  indulge  in,
and  which  they  probably  have  a  shrewd  idea  are  not  just  the  right  thing,  they  are  the
first  to  feel  the  incongruity  and  to  wonder  at  you.  Their  idea  of  religion  is  taken
from  you,  and  you  are  found  false  witnesses  of  God.  Perhaps  the  impression  your
conduct  may  produce  on  their  minds  is  utter  scepticism  of  the  reality  of  all  vital
religion  whatever.  The  Christian  that  goes  down  to  worldly  pleasures  is  guilty  of
bringing  a  slander  on  his  religion.  lY.  Amusements  and  the  unsaved.  I  know  that
in  touching  yonr  amusements  I  am  touching  the  apple  of  your  eye.  1.  Let  me  tell
you  frankly,  then,  that  your  worldly  entertainments  and  amusements  are  sinful.
Sinful,  for  they  are  to  you  the  rivals  of  Christ,  and  keep  you  from  salvation — yea,
even  more  than  ridicule  and  persecution.  2.  They  are  also  unseasonable.  There
are  positions  in  life  in  which  all  acknowledge  that  anything  like  jollity  or  mirth  is
out  of  place.  If  a  man  has  committed  a  crime,  and  he  is  placed  in  the  dock  to  be
tried  for  his  life,  frivolity  and  laughter  would  be  counted  exceedingly  unbecoming.
If  yon,  as  the  Bible  tells  you,  are  a  sinner ;  if  you  have  done  things  that  have
angered  God  that  is  above,  and  if  His  wrath  is  abiding  in  your  souls,  is  mirth
seemly  in  your  state?  Sorrow,  repentance,  prayer,  a  turning  to  Christ,  realising
that  your  state  is  one  of  sin  against  the  Infinite  Jehovah — that  is  the  becoming
state  for  you  to  be  in.    {Alex.  Bisset,  M.A.)  Worldly  pleasures: — Worldliness

is  often  condemned  in  the  New  Testament.  It  is  not,  as  some  seem  to  think,  any
particular  object  or  pursuit.  It  is  nothing  external,  but  resides  in  ourselves.  It  is
a  condition  of  soul,  not  of  circumstance — a  mind  which  is  more  carnal  than
spiritual,  more  earthly  than  heavenly,  more  self-seeking  than  God-fearing.  Persons
who  have  no  relish  for  society,  or  mnsio,  or  public  amusements,  may  yet  be  intensely
worldly  in  the  prosecution  of  business,  in  the  gaining  and  spending  or  hoarding  of
money,  in  the  management  of  a  household,  in  the  manner  of  bearing  trials,  in
excessive  care,  in  intellectual  pursuits,  and  even  in  the  affairs  of  benevolence  and
religion.  It  is  especially  tested  in  the  selection  of  oar  pleasures  and  the  degree  in
which  they  are  indulged.  Pleasure-providing  is  a  trade  in  which,  as  in  others,
there  is  fierce  competition.  Many  places  of  amusement  are  not  remunerative,  and
every  effort  is  put  forth  to  increase  the  revenue.  For  this  end  the  lowest  tastes
must  be  pandered  to,  and  new  excitements  must  be  found.  Must  not  such  plea-
sures tend  to  oorrapt  a  nation  ?  Christians  cannot  hesitate  as  regards  their  own
daty.  We  do  not  denoance  pleasure  as  such.  Best  as  well  as  labour  is  from  God,
laughter  as  well  as  tears,  recreation  as  well  as  toil.  Pleasure  becomes  sin  when
we  are  "  lovers  of  pleasure  more  than  lovers  of  God."  This  is  always  the  case
when  our  pleasures  are  opposed  to  purity  and  piety.  Besides  this,  we  may  love
inordinately  that  which  is  in  itself  innocent  and  useful.  Excess  in  what  is  lawful
may  become  wron^;  by  violating  a  higher  obligation.  Whenever  we  find  that  our
pleasures  are  interfering  with  our  piety,  that  they  occupy  the  chief  place  in  our
minds,  that  we  are  loving  them  more  than  we  love  God,  then  we  may  be  sure  that
we  are  wrong,  whatever  the  nature  of  those  pleasures  may  be,  or  whatever  the
sanction  which  they  claim.  (Neivrnan  Hall,  LL.B.)  Carnal  pleatture  ruling  in
man: — Such  were  those  libertines  (James  v.  5 ;  2  Pet.  ii.  13;  Jude  iv.  18,  19).
Peradventure  they  may  give  God  some  external  worship  of  cap  and  knee ;  but  they
keep  their  hearts  and  best  rooms  for  their  carnal  lusts  and  pleasures.     (T.  Hallf.


CHAP,  ni.]  JI.  TIMOTHY.  255


B.D.)  Oodly  pleasure : — Many  are  so  bewitched  with  their  lusts  and  pleasures,
that  they  do  even  sacrifice  their  time,  wit,  wealth,  lives,  souls,  and  all  unto  them^
They  are  even  led  by  them  (2  Pet.  ii.  10),  as  an  ox  to  the  slaughter  (Prov.  vii.  22
23).  They  make  them  their  chiefest  good,  and  place  their  happiness  in  them
How  many  spend  their  precious  time  in  playing,  which  they  should  spend  in  pray
ing  and  in  serving  God  in  some  vocation.     (Ibid.)  The  poison  of  pleasure ; —

1.  That  sensual  pleasures  are  the  very  poison  and  bane  of  all  grace  in  the  soul ;
they  war  against  the  peace  and  purity  of  it  (1  Pet.  ii.  11) ;  they  blind  the  eye,  that
it  cannot  attain  to  saving  knowledge  (chap.  iii.  6,  7) ;  the  love  of  pleasures  eats  out
the  love  of  God  and  goodness  out  of  the  soul.  2.  It  is  these  sensual  pleasures  which
stop  the  ears  against  God's  call,  so  that  no  reason  nor  religion  can  work  on  men.
These  choke  the  good  seed  of  the  Word,  that  it  cannot  grow  (Luke  viii.  14).  That
is  the  best  pleasure  which  springs  from  the  knowledge  and  love  of  God.  We  call
not  upon  you  to  forsake,  but  to  change  your  pleasures.  Change  your  sordid,  sinful,
sensual  delights,  into  sublime,  spiritual,  and  noble  delights.  3.  The  better  to
wean  your  hearts  from  carnal  pleasures,  consider  the  vanity  and  shortness  of
them.  They  are  like  a  fire  of  straw — a  blast,  and  gone.  Do  not,  then,  for  a
mite  of  pleasure,  purchase  a  mountain  of  misery;  for  momentary  joys,  endure
eternal  sorrows.  4.  They  do  emasculate  and  weaken  the  mind.  Whoever  was
made  more  learned,  wise,  courageous,  or  religious  by  them  ?  They  rob  man  of  his
reason,  and  besot  him  (Hos.  iv.  11) ;  they  take  away  the  man,  and  leave  a  swine  or
beast  in  his  room.  5.  This  world  is  a  place  of  weeping,  conflicting,  labouring,  to
all  the  godly,  and  not  of  carnal  mirth  and  rejoicing ;  carnal  muth  must  be  turned
into  mourning  (James  iv.  9,  10) ;  the  way  to  heaven  lies  through  many  afiflictions.
6.  Consider,  those  sensual  pleasures  end  in  sorrow.  The  end  of  such  mirth  (what-
ever the  beginning  is)  is  sorrow.  Men  call  them  by  the  name  of  pleasures,  pastimes,
delights ;  but  in  God's  dictionary  their  name  is  Madness  (Eccles.  i.  17,  ii.  2),  Sorrow
(Prov.  xiv.  13) ,  and  is  attended  with  poverty.  (Ibid.)  Voluptas : — Voluptas,  the  god-
dess of  sensual  pleasures,  was  worshipped  at  Eome,  where  she  had  a  temple.  She  was
represented  as  a  young  and  beautiful  woman,  well  dressed  and  elegantly  adorned,
seated  on  a  throne,  and  having  virtue  under  her  feet.  This  representation  is  just
enough ;  the  love  of  pleasure  is  too  often  attended  with  the  sacrifice  of  virtue.
(C  Buck.)  Culling  pleasure : — The  world  may  have  many  pleasures ;  but  it
is  culling  flowers  from  the  enemy's  land,  and  we  Christians  must  take  care  that
no   nightshade  and  henbane  mix  unwittingly  with  our   garland.  Worldly

pleasures  vain : — Pleasures,  like  the  rose,  are  sweet,  but  prickly ;  the  honey  doth
not  countervail  the  sting ;  all  the  world's  delights  are  vanity,  and  end  in  vexation ;
like  Judas,  while  they  kiss  they  betray.  I  would  neither  be  a  stoic  nor  an  epicure ;
allow  of  no  pleasure,  nor  give  way  to  all ;  they  are  good  sauce,  but  nought  to  make
a  meal  of.  I  may  use  them  sometimes  for  digestion,  never  for  food.  {J.  Henshaw.)
Pleasure-mongers : — Better  be  preserved  in  brine  than  rot  in  honey.  These  plea-
sure-mongers are  at  last  as  the  worst  of  all.  Such  a  one  was  Catullus,  who  wished
aU  his  body  was  nose,  that  he  might  spend  aU  his  time  in  sweet  smells.  Such  was
Philoxenns,  who  likewise  wished  that  his  neck  was  as  long  as  a  crane's,  that  ha
might  take  more  delight  in  meats  and  drinks.  Such  was  Boccas,  the  poet,  who
said  that  he  was  born  for  the  love  of  women.  (J.  Trapp.)  Pleasure-loving
professors :  —  It  is  always  a  terrible  condemnation  of  a  church  member  that
no  one  should  suspect  him  of  being  one.  We  have  heard  of  a  young  lady
who  engaged  for  many  months  in  a  round  of  frivoUties,  utterly  forgetful  of  her
covenant  with  Christ.  One  Sunday  morning,  on  being  asked  by  a  gay  companion
to  accompany  him  to  a  certain  place,  she  declined  on  the  ground  that  it  was  the
communion  Sunday  in  her  own  church.  *«Are  you  a  communicant?"  was  the
cutting  reply.  The  arrow  went  to  her  heart.  She  felt  that  she  had  denied  the
Lord  who  died  for  her.  That  keen  rebuke  brought  her  to  repentance  and  a  recon-
version. Are  there  not  many  other  professors  of  Christ  who  appear  to  be  "  lovers
of  pleasure  more  than  lovers  of  God  "  ?     (T.  L.  Cuyler,  D.D.)  Emblem  of

worldly  pleasure  : — It  was  a  remarkably  hot  and  sultry  day.  We  were  scrambling
up  the  mountain  which  rises  above  the  east  shore  of  the  Dead  Sea,  when  I  saw
before  me  a  fine  plum-tree  loaded  with  fresh- blooming  plums.  I  cried  to  my  fellow-
traveller,  "Now,  then,  who  will  arrive  first  at  that  plum-tree?"  And  as  he  caught
a  glimpse  of  so  refreshing  an  object,  we  both  pressed  our  horses  into  a  gallop,  to
see  which  should  get  the  first  plum  from  the  branches.  We  both  arrived  at  the
same  time,  and  each  snatching  a  fine  ripe  plum  put  it  at  once  into  our  mouths,
when,  on  biting  it,  instead  of  the  cool,  delicious,  juicy  fruit  which  we  expected,  ouir


258  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in.

mouths  were  filled  with  a  dry,  bitter  dust,  and  we  sat  under  the  tree  upon  our
horses,  sputtering  and  "  hemming,"  and  doing  all  we  could  to  be  relieved  of  the
nauseous  taste  of  this  strange  fruit.  We  then  perceived,  to  my  great  delight,  that
we  had  discovered  the  famous  apple  of  the  Dead  Sea,  the  existence  of  which  has
been  doubted  and  canvassed  since  the  days  of  Strabo  and  Pliny,  who  first  described
it.  {R.  Curzon.)  Death  of  a  lover  of  pleasure : — Monsieur  de  L'Enclos,  a  man
of  talent  in  Pans,  educated  his  daughter  Ninon  with  a  view  to  the  gay  world.  On
his  death-bed,  when  she  was  about  fifteen,  he  addressed  her  in  this  language :  "  Draw
near,  Ninon ;  you  see,  my  dear  child,  that  nothing  more  remains  for  me  than  the
Bad  remembrance  of  those  enjoyments  which  I  am  about  to  quit  for  ever.  But,
alas  I  my  regrets  are  useless  as  vain.  You,  who  will  survive  me,  must  make  the
best  of  your  precious  time."

Ver.  5. — Having  a  form  of  godliness,  but  denying  the  power  — Form  and  power
of  godliness : — This  form  is  a  profession  of  religion  ;  the  outward  appearance  of
piety;  the  external  performance  of  holy  duties.  Its  power  is  the  inward  ex-
perience of  its  saving  efficacy ;  that  is  attested  by  a  holy,  heavenly  walk.  This
power  is  denied,  not  merely  by  the  declaration  of  the  lips,  but  by  all  those  actions
which  are  inconsistent  with  it,  and  which  prove  that  we  do  not  feel  its  influence.

I.    A    FOBM    OF    GODLINESS     IS    ABSOLUTELY    NECESSARY   IT    WE    WOULD    BE    SAVED.        We

are  unequivocally  commanded  to  assume  the  form  of  godliness ;  to  testify  by
external  acts  our  allegiance  to  the  Lord ;  and  to  attend  on  those  ordinances  and
Bacraments  which  He  surely  did  not  appoint  that  we  might  with  impunity  nef.'lect
them.  Say  not  that  you  secretly  and  in  your  hearts  worship  and  love  Him.
It  is  impossible  that  there  should  be  internal  piety  without  some  outward  mani-
festation of  it.  If  "  with  the  heart  man  beUeveth  unto  righteousness,  with  the
lips  confession  will  be  made  to  salvation."  Besides,  what  right  have  you  to  with-
hold the  acts  of  external  worship  from  Him  who  is  "the  God  of  all  flesh,"  as  well
as  the  "  Father  of  spirits  "  ;  who  made  your  body  as  well  as  your  soul ;  who  con-
fers upon  it  daily  mercies  :  who  purchased  it  by  the  sufferings  of  His  Son,  who,
when  He  was  offered  a  sacrifice,  not  only  endured  agonies  of  soul,  but  was  also
crucified  in  His  body ;  and  who  offers  at  the  last  great  day  to  raise  it  up  from  the
grave  and  crown  it  with  immortality  and  glory !  "  Glorify  Him  therefore  in  your
body  and  your  spirit,  which  are  His."  Without  the  form  of  godliness,  you  will
probably  render  yourselves  guilty  of  the  blood  of  smils  ;  be  accessory  to  the
eternal  perdition  of  some  who  are  dear  to  you.  There  is  no  one,  whose  example
has  not  some  influence  on  those  with  whom  he  associates.     II.  But  this   form  is

INSUFFICIENT,  UNLESS   IT   BE    UNITED   WITH    THE    POWER   OF    GODLINESS.       1.    This  mere

outward  service  is  a  worship  not  conformed  to  the  nature  of  God.  2.  It  is  not
conformed  to  the  commands  of  God  (Prov.  xxxiii.  26).  3.  It  is  not  con-
formed to  the  design  of  the  mission  of  the  Saviour,  and  the  gift  of  the  Holy
Spirit.  4.  It  is  not  conformed  to  the  nature  of  that  covenant  which  is  the  founda-
tion of  our  hopes  (Jer.  xxxi.  33.)  5.  It  is  not  conformed  to  the  examples  of  the  pious ;
all  of  whom  have  used  language  the  same  in  substance  with  that  of  Paul,  "  The  God
whom  I  serve  in  my  spirit"  (Rom.  i.  9).  6.  It  is  not  conformed  to  the  example  of
the  blessed  Redeemer ;  concerning  whom  none  can  be  so  blasphemous,  as  to  doubt
whether  His  whole  soul  was  engaged  in  doing  and  in  suffering  the  will  of  God.  7.
It  is  not  conformed  to  the  great  ends  of  religion.  These  are  to  deliver  the  soul
from  guilt,  to  renew  it,  to  re-impress  upon  it  the  imago  of  God,  to  make  us  meet
for  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light.  And  how  certain  is  it,  that  for  these
great  purposes  "bodily  exercise  profiteth  little."  (1  Tim.  iv.  8.)  III.  Yet  not-
withstanding THE  CLEAR  EVIDENCE  OF  THIS  TRUTH,  THERE  ARK  MANY  WHO  SATISFY
THEMSELVES    WITH   THE    FORM    WITHOUT    THE    POWER   OF  GODLINESS.       1.    At  their  head

must  be  placed  the  intentional  hypocrite,  who  knows  that  he  is  utterly  destitute  of
love  to  God  and  the  Redeemer,  who  has  no  desire  for  holiness,  but  who  assumes
the  mask  of  religion  to  cover  his  sinful  purposes.  2.  The  cold  formalist.  3.  The
Tain  enthusiast.  4.  The  worldly-minded  professor.  6.  The  bitter  sectarian.
6.  The  censorious  professor.  7.  The  unfruitful  professor.  (H.  KoUock,  D.D.)
Form  and  power. — I.  True  religion  is  godliness — i.e.,  moral  likeness  to  God.
II.  Godliness  has  its  form,  or  way  of  expressing  itself.  1.  Towards  God —
confession,  prayer,  praise,  worship.  2.  Towards  man — respect  for  the  right,
compassion  for  the  miseries,  and  a  loving  desire  for  the  happiness  of  all.  III.
Thb  forms  OF  GODLINESS  SOMETIMES  EXIST  WITHOUT  ITS  PowKR.  1.  There  is  ofteu
•  great  deal  of  external  worship  where  there  is  no  godly  devotion.     2.  There  is


CHAP,  m.]  JI.  TIMOTHY.  257

often  A  great  deal  of  external  philanthropy  where  there  is  no  godly  devotion.
IV.  Having  the  fobu  without  the  power  is  pkactioal  infidelity.  To  have
nothing  bnt  the  mere  form  is  to  deny  the  power.  1.  The  mere  form  mis-
represents i.Vie  power.  2.  The  mere  form  counteracts  the  power.  {Homilist.)
Form   and   jxncer. — I.    Eveby    gen0ine    existence   has    two    ohabacteristics —

BBSENCE    AND   FORM.       II.    ThB    ESSENCE    OF   EVERY   GENUINE     EXISTENCE    IS  A  POWER.

This  is  true  in  tha  highest  sense  of  godliness,  which  is  eminently  a  "  power  "  ;  and
the  greatest  among  men,  because  it  is  the  channel  whereby  we  communicate  with
the  truth  and  love  of  God  Almighty.  1.  It  is  a  formative  power.  Originating.
(1)  Forms  of  conception  (Eom.  IL  20).  (2)  Forms  of  words  to  express  the  con-
ceptions (2  Tim.  i.  13).  (3)  Forms  of  worship,  using  as  handmaids  the  kindred
fine  arts.  (4)  Forms  of  society,  embodying  the  grand  principles  of  godliness,  and
of  its  cognate  humanity.  2.  It  is  a  controlling  power,  especially  over  itself.  3.
It  is  a  benificent  power  over  others  for  their  instruction  and  quickening.  III.
Though  there  cannot  be  power  without  form,  there  may  be  form  without
POWER.  A  man  may  have  the  logic  and  words  of  godliness,  the  litany,  music,
architecture  of  godliness ;  but  if  he  have  not  godliness  itself  I  IV.  The  posses-
sion  OF  THE   form   without   THE   POWER   DISPOSES    TO     THE    DENIAL   OF    THE   POWEB.

He  who  has  the  form  alone  is  apt  to  be  deceived,  and  satisfied  with  appearances ;
he  resents,  as  an  impertinence  to  himself,  the  claims  of  anything  further:  he
denies  it.  1.  He  strives  to  ignore  it  (John  ix.  29).  2.  When  it  is  forced  on  his
notice  he  denies  its  existence  (John  ix.  32).  3.  When  this  is  impossible,  when
the  power  becomes  an  evident  fact,  he  clothes  it  with  misrepresentation,  obloquy,
ridicule  (Matt.  xii.  22).  4.  When  the  power  becomes  too  formidable  he  persecutes
it,  and  strives  to  counteract  and  annihilate  it.  "  Crucify  Him  I  "  (C.  Wills,  M.A.)
Form  of  godliness : — I.  There  is  such  a  thing  as  a  form  of  godliness.  1.  It
is  natural.  2.  Beautiful.  3.  Advantageous.  H.  A  form  of  godliness  hat
exist  without  its  vital  POWEB.  1.  This  is  possible.  Church  at  Laodicea.  2.
A  lamentable  fact.  3.  Most  alarming  consequences.  (1)  There  will  be  no
searchings  of  heart.  (2)  No  pungent  sorrow  for  sin.  (3)  No  love  to  truth.  (4)
No  conformity  to  the  Divine  will.    III.  The   possession   of  a  mere   form    or

GODLINESS  does  NOT  ENTITLE  A  PERSON  TO  CHRISTIAN  FELLOWSHIP.  1.  The  for-
malist has  no  sympathy  with  the  sentiments  of  true  Christians.  2.  He  would  de-
tract from  their  usefulness.  3.  He  is  unfit  for  any  exalted  pleasure.  {J.  H.  Hughes.)
The  form  of  godliness :  In  these  words  the  apostle  tells  us — 1.  What  these
men  have,  viz.,  a  form  of  godliness.  2.  What  they  want,  viz.,  the  power
of  it.  3.  How  we  must  behave  ourselves  towards  them,  viz.,  we  must  shun
their  society;  from  such  turn  away.  For  the  first,  they  have  a  vain  and
empty  show  of  faith  and  holiness.  They  are  not  men  without  the  pale  of
the  Church,  such  as  heathens  and  Jews,  which  are  open  enemies  to  the
gospel;  but  they  have  a  form  of  godliness,  an  external  profession  of  religion
in  words,  ceremonies,  and  gestures;  they  make  great  shows,  and  put  on
the  vizard  of  piety;  like  stage  players,  they  act  the  part  of  a  king,  but  strip
them  of  their  robes,  and  they  are  beggarly  rogues.  They  have  not  the  true
form  and  essence  of  godliness,  which  consists  in  an  inward  change,  and  doth
denominate  and  give  being  to  things :  but  they  have  formahty  or  an  outward  show
and  shadow  of  holiness.  Like  pictures  and  images,  which  have  an  external  show
and  shape  of  a  man,  whose  lineaments  and  proportion  may  be  so  drawn  to  the
life,  that  there  wants  nothing  but  life  indeed  to  act  them :  they  will  be  great  pro-
fessors, and  look  what  a  sincere  Christian  hath  in  substance,  that  have  these  for-
malists in  semblance,  they  have  no  life,  no  power,  no  principle  of  operation  in
them.  (r.  Hall,  B.D.)  Profession  in  excess  of  sanctification: — The  complaint
is  general,  there  is  not  that  mortiii cation,  self-denial,  and  circumspect  walking  as
formerly.  There's  more  light,  but  less  life ;  more  shadow,  but  less  substance ;
more  profession,  but  less  sanctification,  than  formerly.  There  is  more  fasting,
praying,  preaching  ;  but  where' s  the  practice  and  power  of  religion  ?  As  Isaac
said  to  Abraham,  behold  the  wood,  but  where's  the  lamb  ?  So  behold  the  duties,
but  where,  oh  where's  the  life,  the  power,  the  truth  of  what  is  done  ?  The  voice
is  Jacob's  voice,  but  the  hands  are  the  hands  of  Esau  ;  for  they  deny  the  power  of
religion  not  only  in  their  hearts,  but  also  in  their  works  (Titus  i.  16 ;  1  Tim.  v.  8).
They  so  live,  as  if  godliness  were  but  an  airy  notion,  and  a  matter  of  fashion,
without  all  force  or  efficacy.  {Ibid.)  Self-love  tinder  a  form  of  holiness : — The
text  may  be  considered  two  ways — relatively  or  absolutely.  1.  Relatively,  as  it
relates  to  the  eighteen  sins  before  mentioned  ;  so  this  sin  is  the  cloak  to  hide  and

17


358  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOB.  [chap.  in.

cover  them  all;  men  will  be  lovers  of  themselves,  but  under  a  form  of  godliness.
Hence  observe — that  a  man  may  have  a  form  of  godliness,  and  yet  live  in  all
manner  of  wickedness.  It  is  true,  the  power  of  godliness  cannot  consist  with  the
power  of  ungodliness;  but  the  more  the  power  of  godliness  is  lifted  up  in  the
soul,  the  more  the  power  of  ungodliness  will  be  suppressed  ;  as  the  house  of  David
grows  stronger  and  stronger,  so  the  house  of  Saul  grows  weaker  and  weaker.  But
yet  the  form  of  godliness  may  stand  with  the  power  of  ungodliness.  A  man  may
be  a  glorious  professor  in  the  highest  form,  and  yet  a  puny  in  the  form  of  grace.  He
may  be  a  blazing  comet  for  profession,  and  yet  be  a  devil  incarnate  in  life  and  con  •
versation.  (Ibid.)  The  fair  covering  the  foul: — They  put  on  a  fair  glove
on  a  foiU  hand,  and  get  on  the  vizard  of  holiness  better  to  deceive.  {Ibid.)
Satan  covers  sin : — The  devil  cannot  endure  that  sin  should  be  seen  in  its
proper  dress,  for  then  it  would  be  so  odious  that  all  men  would  abhor  it;
the  devil,  therefore,  puts  a  garment  and  cover  upon  it.  (Ibid.)  Profession
cannot  carry  men  to  heaven  : — This  may  as  soon  carry  you  to  heaven  as  a
dead  horse  can  carry  a  man  a  journey,  a  painted  ship  save  a  man  from
drowning,  a  painted  helmet  save  the  head  from  wounding,  or  painted  food
keep  a  man  from  starving.  (Ibid.^  Formalism : — 1.  His  knowledge  is  merely
notional,  discursive,  and  speculative,  it  is  in  his  head,  and  not  in  his  heart.
Hence  it  is  called  a  form  of  knowledge,  i.e. ,  a  mere  empty  shadow  and  show  of
knowledge  (Bom.  ii.  20).  But  he  that  hath  the  power  of  godliness  hath  a  rooted,
affective,  saving,  sanctifying,  experimental,  practical  knowledge.  He  knows
Christ  as  the  truth  is  in  Him  (Eph.  iv.  21) ;  he  knows  and  doth  Christ's  will
(John  xiii.  17).  It  is  a  soul-convincing  and  converting,  a  sin-crucifying  and  con-
quering light  (Ephes.  v.  14).  It  is  not  a  dim,  glimmering,  vanishing,  lip;ht;  but
a  thorough,  soul-awakening,  soul  enlivening  light.  2.  The  formalities,  obedience
and  practice,  is  merely  external  in  words  and  shows ;  in  their  deeds  they  deny  the
power  of  godliness,  they  live  as  if  godliness  were  but  an  empty  name  and  matter  of
fashion,  void  of  all  force  and  efficacy.  Such  are  like  a  wicked  minister  in  a  white
surplice,  extime  linens,  intim^  lanius,  fair  without,  but  foul  within,  or  like  an  inn
that  hath  an  angel  without  and  a  devil  within.  Of  such  we  may  say  as  Erasmus
said  of  a  friar's  cowl — it  covers  a  multitude  of  sins.  He  comes  short  in
all  ordinances :  if  he  read,  pray,  hear,  or  frequent  the  sacrament,  it  is  all
pro  forma — God  is  nigh  to  their  mouths,  but  far  from  their  hearts.  {Ibid.)
Helps  against  formality  : — 1.  Go  unto  God,  who  is  a  quickening  Spirit,  and  beseech
Him  to  quicken  thy  dead  heart  So  did  David,  Psa.  cxix.  God  can  make  dry
bones  to  live.  2.  Act  and  use  your  graces,  this  is  the  way  to  increase  and  quicken
them,  bring  good  motions  into  resolutions  and  actions ;  blow  till  the  spark  become
a  flame.  This  stirring  is  painful,  but  gainful.  3.  Delight  in  quickening  company,
get  acquaintance  with  humble,  holy,  active  men,  and  shun  the  company  of  dead,
formal,  earthly-minded  men ;  we  must  stand  up  from  the  dead  before  Christ  will
give  us  life  (Eph.  iv.  14).  There  is  a  quickening  virtue  in  the  society  of  God's
people.  As  one  living  coal  sets  his  fellow  on  fire,  so  God  hath  ordained  the  gifts
and  graces  of  His  people  for  the  benefit  of  others,  that  those  who  dwell  under  their
shadow  might  return  (Hos.  xiv.  7).  4.  Get  sincerity,  for  therein  lies  much  of  the
very  power  of  godliness.  Let  your  faith,  love,  obedience,  be  unfeigned,  and  with-
out hypocrisy.  Be  not  only  nominal  and  formal,  but  be  real  Christians,  be  Israelites
indeed.  Christ  says  to  us  as  Alexander  said  to  one  of  his  name — either  fight  like
Alexander,  or  never  bear  his  name ;  so  either  act  like  Christians,  or  else  put  off
that  name.  To  quicken  you,  consider  that  this  grace  is :  commanded,  commended,
rewarded.  5.  It  is  the  grace  of  our  graces,  it  is  not  properly  a  distinct  grace,  but
the  perfection  of  them  all.  If  a  man  have  faith,  repentance,  obedience,  if  they
be  not  sincere,  they  are  worth  nothing.  A  pearl  if  counterfeit  is  good  for  httle.
Gold,  if  mixed  with  brass  or  baser  mettle,  is  debased.  It  is  sincerity  that  puts  a
lustre  on  all  our  duties.  It  is  the  salt  that  seasons  them  and  makes  them
savoury.  6.  Let  the  noise  of  God's  judgments  awaken  thee  out  of  thy  sleepy
formality ;  if  a  man  be  in  a  dead  sleep,  a  great  noise  will  awaken  him.
Ood's  judgments  have  a  voice,  and  we  should  mark  what  it  says.  (Ibid).
The  form  and  the  poicer  of  godliness: — Godliness,  what  is  it?  It  is,  as  the
rery  word  implies,  God-likeness.  Godliness  is  the  God  in  the  man ;  godliness  is
the  man  being  like  liis  God ;  and  seeing  that  this  image  has  been  lost,  godliness
in  man  now  is  a  restored  godliness — restored  through  the  mediation  of  Christ
Jesus,  and  by  the  ministrations  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  I.  In  our  text  we  read  of  thb
TOBM  ov  QODLiMESs  wiTuoux  THB  FOWEB — without  that  powei  whioh  belongs  to


CHIP,  in.]  II.  TIMOTHY.  259


the  fonn,  and  which  oaght  to  be  inseparable  from  that  form.  If  you  pick  up  an
empty  shell,  you  know  that  there  has  been  a  living  creature  in  that  shell :  just  so
there  is  a  power  belonging  to  the  external  form  of  godliness  ;  but  the  two  things
may  exist  apart.  Many  examples  might  be  given  of  form  without  power.  Take  a
statue  representing  some  man  ;  it  is  a  form  without  power.  There  is  the  form  of
the  eye,  but  no  power  of  sight ;  there  is  the  form  of  the  ear,  but  no  power  of
hearing ;  there  is  the  form  of  the  mouth,  but  no  power  of  speech ;  there  is  the
form  of  the  arm,  and  of  the  hand,  but  no  power  of  working ;  there  is  the  form  of
the  legs  and  of  the  feet,  but  no  power  of  walking.  There  is  the  form  that  does
embody  life,  but  there  is  no  power  of  life  in  that  form.  And  a  painting,  if  it  be  a
portrait,  is  a  form  without  power.  Thus  in  the  form  of  godliness  there  is  the  ap-
pearance of  spiritual  knowledge  without  the  knowledge ;  the  appearance  of  the  soul
listening  to  God  and  hearkening  to  the  voice  of  His  word,  without  the  attentive  ear;
the  appearance  of  a  nature  breathed  into  again  by  the  spirit  of  life,  although  still  dead
in  trespasses  and  sins,  and  therefore  without  life.  The  outward  appearance  of
godliness — what  then  may  it  be  ?  1.  It  is  the  appearance  of  faith  in  the  doctrines
which  are  according  to  godliness.  And  where  shall  we  find  the  appearance  of
faith  without  faith  ?  Why  here.  These  doctrines  may  be  held  in  some  articles,  or
creeds,  or  theological  writings,  by  the  intellect  alone.  They  may  be  understood  as
statements,  and  held  by  the  understanding  without  being  spiritually  and  reli-
giously appreciated ;  and  they  may  be  held  by  the  tongue.  2.  The  outward
appearance  of  godliness  may  be  the  appearance  of  sympathy  with  the  ordinances
and  institutions  which  are  intended  alike  to  express  and  to  cherish  godliness.  3.
Or  the  form  of  godhness  may  be  the  appearance  of  obedience  to  the  laws  which
are  the  requirements  of  godliness.  Now  these  may  be  fulfilled  in  the  letter  and
broken  in  the  spirit.  For  example,  I  may  love  my  fellow-creature  in  word  and
in  tongue,  and  fail  to  do  it  in  deed  and  in  truth.  4.  There  may  be  also
the  appearance  of  oneness  with  the  godly  through  associating  with  such
without  communion  of  spirit.  Many  things  may  lead  me  to  associate  with  the
godly — things  which  are  not  Christian,  considerations  which  are  not  Christian
motives.  I  may  associate  with  a  man  who  is  a  godly  man,  because  he  happens
to  be  very  intelligent,  a  well-read  man,  a  man  of  exquisite  taste,  and  I  may  fancy
that  I  mi^e  him  my  companion.'because  of  his  godliness.  The  godliness  of  the  man
is,  however,  an  accident  of  my  association  with  him.  The  probability  is  that  if  the
man  were  ungodly,  I  should  associate  with  him  still  for  his  intellectuality  ;  for  while
he  stands  on  my  right  hand,  and  I  associate  with  him,  there  is  a  man  on  my  left,
not  80  well  educated,  not  so  refined,  who  is  more  godly  than  my  well-educated  friend,
and  I  pass  him  by.  I  might  with  immense  advantage  to  myself  associate  with  that
man,  but  I  do  not ;  his  godliness  is  no  attraction  to  me.  Now  what  does  this  show  ?
Why  it  shows  that  I  have  the  appearance  of  oneness  with  the  godly,  without  the
affection  for  the  image  of  God,  which  would  bring  me  into  profitable  contact  with  all
who  really  have  and  who  manifest  that  image.  5.  Further,  there  may  be  the  appear-
ance of  enjoyment  of  the  blessedness  of  godliness ;  and  this  appearance  may  be
made  in  speech  and  in  tongue,  and  in  a  cheerful  face  on  religious  occasions.
'*  Having  the  form,  but  denying  the  power."  II.  Now  where  is  the  power  ?  The
power  of  godliness  is  true  faith  in  the  doctrines  which  are  according  to  godliness  ;
the  power  of  godliness  is  worship  in  spirit  and  in  truth ;  is  doing  the  will  of
God  from  the  heart ;  is  love  for  the  godly  as  godly  persons  ;  is  joy  in  God  as  God ;
and,  I  may  add,  the  power  of  godliness  is  that  external  godliness  which  is  the  fruit
of  an  internal  godliness.  .  .  .  III.  Now,  listen  to  this  exhortation  :  "  From
such  turn  away."  You  know  that  this  is  not  fashionable  advice.  The  advice  now-
adays given  is,  Turn  away  from  no  person,  as  a  protest  against  the  principles  and
character  of  that  person — especially  if  that  person  be  much  thought  of,  or  be  in  a
high  position ;  or  be  rich,  or  from  any  cause  popular.  Now,  it  strikes  me  that  for
our  soul's  health,  and  especially  for  our  uprightness,  we  need  translate  into  action
some  of  these  directions  which  demand  separation.  Let  us,  therefore,  solemnly  look
at  the  conduct  to  be  pursued.  1.  You  see  the  precept  before  us  requires  us  to  form
ft  judgment  of  the  character  of  others.  You  must  do  so,  or  you  cannot  obey  this
precept.  Elsewhere  you  are  forbidden  to  judge,  but  you  are  to  bring  into  harmony
that  prohibition  with  this  direction.  You  are  to  do  both.  It  often  strikes  me  aa
exceedingly  odd,  that  men  who  object  very  much  to  our  forming  judgments  of  the
character  of  others  in  religious  matters,  do  form  judgments  of  the  characters  of
others  in  commercial  matters.  A  young  man  applies  for  a  situation,  and  tha
employer,  who  happens  to  object  to  an}*  judgment  being  formed  aa  to  the  religioaa


260  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (chap.  m.

life  of  another,  will  thoroughly  investigate  the  character  of  that  young  man — not
hie  business  habits  merely,  but  everything  about  him — all  his  moral  habits,  an.l,  it
may  be,  even  his  religious  tendencies  and  dispositions.  Well,  if  the  thing  be  right
in  one  sphere,  why  is  it  not  right  in  another  ?  If  it  have  God's  sanction  in  one
sphere,  why  has  it  not  God's  sanction  in  another  ?  2.  By  the  text,  too,  we  are
required  to  act  upon  an  unfavourable  judgment  when  that  judgment  is  unfavourable.
You  decide  that  certain  persons  have  the  form  of  godliness,  but  are  denying  the
power,  and  from  such  you  are  to  turn  away.  What  does  this  show  ?  This  shows
that,  so  far  as  we  can  secure  it,  the  communion  of  Christians  must  be  pure.  But
let  US  look  again  at  this  precept.  "  From  such  "  let  the  confessedly  religious  man
"  turn  away  " — from  the  men  who  have  the  form  of  godliness  without  the  power.
8.  From  such  let  the  inquirer  turn  away,  he  will  learn  nothing  of  these.  And  from
iuch,  let  the  really  religious  man,  as  a  matter  of  stern  duty  in  every  sphere,  turn
away  where  his  association  with  such  would  seem  to  be  a  sanction.  (S.  Martin.)
Religion  more  than  formality : — I.  The  "poweb"  aw  godliness  is  here  dis-
TINGTJ18HED  FEOM  THE  MERE  "  FORM  "  :  and  indeed  it  is  easy  to  show  the  difference
between  them.  The  one  is  the  name — the  other  is  the  thing ;  the  one  is  the
appearance — the  other  is  the  reality.  The  one  is  the  body — the  other  is  the  soul,
that  inspires  every  member,  and  penetrates  every  particle  of  the  frame.  Behold
then  the  life  of  the  real  Christian,  and  trace  the  operation  of  the  power  of  godliness
there.  1.  It  appears  with  regard  to  the  ordinances  of  divine  worship.  Others  who
have  only  the  form,  come  without  expectation  and  prayer,  and  return  without  reflec-
tion and  concern ;  they  are  satisfied  with  their  attendance — but  he  is  not.  He  is
anxious  to  derive  spiritual  advantage  from  it :  he  enters  the  closet  before  he  ap-
proaches the  temple,  and  his  language  is,  *'  0  that  I  knew  where  I  might  find  Him,
that  I  might  come  even  to  His  seat !  "  2.  It  appears  with  regard  to  the  dissipations
sf  the  world.  He  voluntarily  resigns  those  amusements  in  which  he  once  placed  bo
much  of  his  happiness :  and  returns  no  more  to  them.  And  why  ?  If  he  were
mindful  of  the  country  whence  he  came,  he  has  opportunity  to  return  :  he  is  sur-
rounded with  the  same  allurements  as  others — why  then  does  he  not  engage  in  these
diversions  again  ?  Because  he  has  found  something  infinitely  more  noble  and  more
■atisfying.  And  a  greater  good  has  power  to  abolish  the  impressions  of  a  less.
When  the  sun  arises,  the  stars  disappear.  And  the  grapes  of  Eshcol  cause  ua  to
forget  the  leeks  and  onions  of  Egypt.  3.  You  may  see  it  in  the  mortification  of  sin.
He  denies  himself  ;  he  crucifies  the  flesh  with  the  affections  and  lusts ;  he  plucks
out  a  right  eye,  and  cuts  off  a  right  hand.  You  may  see  it  in  what  he  is  willing  to
sacrifice  and  to  suffer.  Read  history :  read  the  book  of  martyrs ;  read  the  eleventh
chapter  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews — and  see  what  the  force  of  this  powerful
principle  can  accomplish.  4.  The  vigour  of  this  principle  appears  also  in  other
sufferings.  How  many  are  there  at  this  moment,  enduring  a  variety  of  grief  in
private,  whose  names  will  never  be  published  in  history,  but  who,  in  the  eye  of
God,  are  greater  than  the  admired  heroes  of  the  age  1    II.  Inquire  whence  it  is

THAT    80    MANY    WHO    DENT    THE   POWER  ABE   STILL   DISPOSED   TO   MAINTAIN   THE   FORM.

1.  The  form  of  godliness  requires  no  strenuous  exertions ;  demands  no  costly  sacri-
fices. It  is  the  power  of  it  that  renders  the  Christian  hfe  a  *'  striving  to  enter  in  at
the  strait  gate  "  ;  a  "  wrestling  with  principalities  and  powers  " ;  a  "  running  the  race
that  is  set  before  us  " ;  a  "  fighting  the  good  fight  of  faith."  And  it  is  this,  too,  that
incurs  opposition  from  the  world.  It  will  indeed  be  acknowledged  that  sometimes  the
Tery  form  draws  forth  the  rancour  of  others :  and  of  all  people  those  are  most  to  be
pitied  who  are  persecuted  for  what  they  have  not ;  who  are  reproached  as  Christians
■without  deserving  the  honour.  But  upon  a  nearer  inspection  of  these  mere  for-
malists, the  world  is  generally  made  quite  easy.  They  see  that  they  were  mistaken
in  the  characters ;  they  find  that  they  are  "  of  their  own,"  though  wearing  a  religious
uniform.  2.  Persons  are  sometimes  induced  to  take  up  the  form  of  godliness
through  the  influence  of  their  connections.  From  some  of  them  they  feel  the  influ-
ence of  authority ;  from  some,  the  influence  of  friendship ;  from  some  the  influence
of  business.  "  Hence,"  says  M.  Henry,  "  they  assume  a  form  of  godliness  to  take
their  reproach,  but  not  the  power  of  it  to  take  away  their  sin."  3.  They  avail
themselves  of  the  form  of  godliness  to  preserve  peace  within.  For,  without  some-
thing of  religion,  conscience  would  rage  and  clamour  ;  but  by  means  of  this,  it  is
amused  and  quieted ;  and  this  renders  it  so  extremely  dangerous.  ( W.  Jay.)
Qodlinett — its  form  and  its  power: — I.  By  the  form  of  oodlinbss  mat  bb
raoPKBLY   undebstood,  not   only   a  specious  practice  of  belioious  duties,  «x-

UBITBD     to    public    notice,   but     all     EXTEBNAL    acts   of   WOBSHIP,   all   BITKS   AMD


CHAP.  ID.]  II.  TIMOTHY.  261

CEBEMONiEB,  all  Stated  observances,  and  all  compliance  with  temporary  and  local
injunctions  and  regularities.  In  ages  and  countries  in  which  ignorance  has  pro-
duced, and  nourished,  superstition,  manj  artifices  have  been  invented  of  practising
piety  without  virtue,  and  repentance  witbout  amendment.  As  almost  every  man  is,
by  nature  or  by  accident,  exposed  to  danger  from  particular  temptations,  and  dis-
posed to  some  vices  more  than  to  others ;  so  all  are,  either  by  disposition  of  mind,
or  the  circumstances  of  life,  inclined  or  compelled  to  some  laudable  practices.  Of
this  happy  tendency  it  is  common  to  take  advantage,  by  pushing  the  favourite,  or
the  convenient,  virtue  to  its  utmost  extent,  and  to  lose  all  sense  of  deficiency  in  the
perpetual  contemplation  of  some  single  excellence.  II.  The  poweb  of  godliness
IS  contained  in  the  love  of  God  and  of  our  neighboub  ;  in  that  sum  of  religion  in
which,  as  we  are  told  by  the  Saviour  of  the  world,  the  law  and  the  prophets  are
comprised.  1.  The  love  of  God  will  engage  us  to  trust  in  His  protection,  to  acquiesce
in  Hie  dispensations,  to  keep  His  laws,  to  meditate  on  His  perfection,  and  to  declare
our  confidence  and  submission,  by  profound  and  frequent  adoration,  to  impress  Hia
glory  on  our  minds  by  songs  of  praise,  to  inflame  our  gratitude  by  acts  of  thanks-
giving, to  strengthen  our  faith,  and  exalt  our  hope,  by  pious  meditations,  and  to
implore  His  protection  of  our  imbecility,  and  His  assistance  of  our  frailty  by
humble  supplication ;  and  when  we  love  God  with  the  whole  heart,  the  power  of
godliness  will  be  shown  by  steadiness  in  temptation,  by  patience  in  affliction,  by
faith  in  the  Divine  promises,  by  perpetual  dread  of  sin,  by  continual  aspirations
after  higher  degrees  of  holiness,  and  contempt  of  the  pains  and  pleasures  of  the
world,  when  they  obstruct  the  progress  of  reUgious  excellence.  2.  The  power  of
godliness,  as  it  is  exerted  in  the  love  of  our  neighbour,  appears  in  the  exact  and
punctual  discharge  of  all  the  relative  and  social  duties.  He  whom  this  power
actuates  and  directs,  will  regulate  his  conduct,  so  as  neither  to  do  injury,  nor
willingly  to  give  offence.     III.  How  fab  it  is  necessaby  to  the  Chbistian  life,

THAT     THE    FOBH    AND   POWER   OF   GODLINESS   SHOULD   SUBSIST  TOOETHEB.      It   may   bs

with  great  reason  affirmed  that,  though  there  may  be  the  appearance  of  godliness
without  the  reality,  there  can  hardly  be  the  reality  without  the  appearance.  The
form  of  godliness,  as  it  consists  in  the  rites  of  religion,  is  the  instrument  given  u9
by  God  for  the  acquisition  of  the  power ;  the  means  as  well  as  the  end  are  prescribed ;
nor  can  he  expect  the  help  of  grace,  or  the  Divine  apprc^bation,  who  seeks  them  by
any  other  method  than  that  which  infinite  wisdom  has  condescended  to  appoint.
(John  Taylor,  LL.D.)  Of  the  form  and  the  power  of  godliness  : — The  word
^op0a)(Tti',  which  is  here  translated  "  form,"  signifies  the  show  or  image  of  a  thing,
which  is  dead  and  ineffectual :  in  opposition  to  the  reality  and  life,  which  is  quick
and  powerful.  And,  I  think,  this  word  is  but  once  more  used  in  the  New  Testa-
ment, and  much  in  the  same  sense  ;  viz.,  for  an  empty  and  ineffectual  knowledge
of  religion  without  the  practice  of  it  {Eom.  ii.  17-20,  21).  I.  To  show  wherein  a
FOBM  OF  GODLINESS  DOTH  CONSIST.  In  general  it  consists  in  an  external  show  and
profession  of  rehgion,  or  of  any  eminent  part  of  it,  or  of  that  which  is  reputed  to  be
60.  1.  An  external  devotion.  2.  An  orthodox  profession  of  the  Christian  faith.
3.  Enthusiasm  and  pretence  to  inspiration.  4.  A  great  external  show  of  mortifica-
tion. 5.  An  imperfect  repentance  and  partial  reformation.  6.  The  appearance  and
ostentation  of  some  particular  grace  and  virtue.  7.  A  great  zeal  for  some  party,
or  opinions,  or  circumstances  of  religion.  8.  Silliness  and  freakishness,  and  either
a  pretended  or  real  ignorance  in  the  common  affairs  and  concernments  of  human
life.  9.  Much  noise  and  talk  about  religion.  II.  Whebein  the  power  of  godli-
ness DOTH  CONSIST.  1.  A  due  sense  of  God,  and  suitable  affections  towards  Him.
This  is  the  principle  and  fountain  of  all  religion,  from  whence  all  actions  of  piety
and  goodness  do  spring.  2.  A  sincere  and  diligent  use  of  the  means  and  instru-
ments of  rehgion,  such  as  prayer,  reading,  and  hearing  the  Word  of  God,  and
receiving  the  sacraments.  3.  A  firm  and  steady  resolution  of  well-doing.  This  is
the  result  of  a  true  and  sincere  repentance,  and  the  gi'eat  principle  of  a  new  life  ;
and  if  it  be  firm  and  steadfast,  it  vsdll  derive  its  influence  into  all  our  actions  ;  but
if  it  be  wavering  and  inconsistent,  it  is  only  the  occasion  of  a  religious  mood  and
fit,  but  not  the  principle  of  a  religious  state.  4.  As  the  proper  and  genuine  effect
of  all  these,  the  practice  of  a  good  Ufe,  in  the  several  parts  and  instances  of  it.
(1)  In  the  mortifying  of  our  lusts,  the  lusts  of  intemperance  and  uncleanness,
covetousness,  and  ambition.  He  that  is  a  slave  to  any  of  these,  his  religion  is  but
a  form,  how  glorious  a  show  soever  it  may  make.  (2)  In  the  subduing  of  our
passions,  wrath,  hatred  malice,  envy,  and  revenge.  (3)  In  the  government  of
our  tongues.    (4)  In  the  several  virtues  of  a  good  life,  in  opposition  to  these  and  all


262  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  nt

other  vices ;  such  as  are  the  truth  and  justice,  humility  and  meekness,  patience
and  oontentedness  with  our  condition,  peaceableness  and  charity  to  those  tiiat  are
in  want  and  necessity,  a  readiness  to  forgive  our  enemies,  and  an  auiversal  love
and  kindness  to  all  men.    III.  Some  marks  whebeby  we  may  know  when  thesb

ABE    SEPAKAXED,    WHEN     THERE    IS    A   FORM   OF   RELIGION    WITHOUT   THE   POWER  OF  IT.

1.  He  hath  only  "  a  form  of  godliness,"  who  minds  merely  the  external  part  of
religion,  without  any  inward  sense  of  it.  2.  He  that  useth  only  the  means  of
religion,  without  regard  to  the  end  and  effect  of  it.  3.  He  that  is  grossly  and
knowingly  defective  in  the  practice  of  any  part  of  it.     IV.  That  a  form  of  oodli-

NESB,   WITHOUT    THE    POWER    OP    IT,   IS    INSIGNIFICANT    TO    ALL   THE   GREAT   ENDS   AMD

PURPOSES  OF  RELIGION.  The  great  ends  that  men  can  reasonably  propound  to
themselves  in  being  religious,  are  these  three :  1.  The  pleasing  of  God.  2.  The
peace  and  tranquillity  of  our  own  minds.  3.  The  saving  of  our  souls.  Now  a  form
of  godliness,  without  the  power  of  it,  is  unavailable  to  all  these  purposes.  V.
That  he  who  takes  upon  him  a  form  op  religion,  without  the  power  of  it,
doth  not  only  lose  all  the  considerable  advantages  op  religion,  but  he  hath
TWO  OEEAT  DISADVANTAGES  BY  IT.  1.  He  hath  the  troublo  of  making  a  show  and
appearance  of  rehgion,  without  the  real  benefit  of  it.  2.  He  incurs  a  heavier
sentence  upon  this  account,  that  he  hath  a  form  of  religion,  and  yet  is  destitute  of
the  power  of  it.  Concluding  inferences :  1.  To  take  heed  of  mistaking  the  form  of
religion  for  the  power  of  it.  2.  To  take  heed  of  being  captivated  and  seduced  by
those  who  have  only  a  form  of  godUness.  3.  To  persuade  men  to  mind  the  Ufa,
and  power  and  substance  of  religion.  {Archbp.  Tillotson.)  The  form  of  godliness
tcithmit  the  power : — I.  The  men.  1.  What  they  had — "A  form  of  godliness."
(1)  What  is  a  form  of  godliness  ?  (a)  Attention  to  the  ordinances  of  religion,  (b)
Attendance  with  the  assemblies  of  God's  people,  (c)  A  great  deal  of  religious  talk
Tongue-godhness  is  an  abomination  if  the  heart  be  destitute  of  grace,  (d)  More
than  this,  some  have  a  form  of  godliness  upheld  and  pubUshed  by  religious  activity.
It  is  possible  to  be  intensely  active  in  the  outside  work  of  tbe  Church,  and  yet  to
know  nothing  of  spiritual  power.  (2)  But  now,  as  these  people  had  not  the  power
of  godliness,  how  did  they  come  to  hold  the  form  of  it  ?  (a)  Some  come  by  the
form  of  godliness  in  an  hereditary  way.  Their  ancestors  were  always  godly  people,
and  they  almost  naturally  take  up  with  the  professions  of  their  fathers.  This  is
common,  and  where  it  is  honest,  it  is  most  commendable.  But  remember,  not
generation,  but  regeneration,  makes  the  Christian.  (6)  Others  have  accepted  the
form  of  godliness  by  the  force  of  authority  and  influence.  There  is  danger  lest  we
fail  to  have  personal  repentance  and  personal  faith,  and  are  content  to  lean  upon  the
opinions  of  others,  (c)  So  have  I  seen  the  form  of  godliness  taken  up  on  account  of
friendships.  Many  a  time  courtship  and  marriage  have  led  to  a  formal  rehgious-
ness,  lacking  heart,  {d)  I  do  not  doubt  that,  in  these  silken  days,  many  have  a  form
of  godliness  because  of  the  respect  it  brings  them,  (e)  Certain  persons  assume  the
form  of  godUness  from  a  natural  religious  disposition.  They  could  not  be  happy
unless  they  were  attending  where  God  is  worshipped,  nor  unless  they  were  reckoued
among  the  behevers  in  Christ.  They  must  play  at  religion,  even  if  they  do  not
make  it  their  life  business.  {/)  From  the  days  of  Iscariot  until  now,  some  have
taken  up  the  form  of  godliness  to  gain  thereby.  To  make  gain  of  godliness  is  to
imitate  the  son  of  perdition,  {g)  A  form  of  godliness  has  come  to  many  because  it
brings  them  ease  of  conscience,  and  they  are  able,  like  the  Pharisee,  to  thank  God
that  they  are  not  as  other  men  are.  2.  What  they  did  not  have — "The  power."
(1)  What  is  that  power  ?  God  Himself  is  the  power  of  godliness.  The  Holy  Spirit
is  the  life  and  force  of  it.  (2)  What  is  the  general  history  of  those  who  have  not
this  power  ?  Well,  their  course  usually  runs  thus :  they  do  not  begin  with  denying
the  power,  but  they  begin  by  trying  to  do  without  it.  They  try  to  persuade  them-
selves that  they  have  been  changed :  they  accept  emotion  as  regeneration,  and  a
belief  of  doctrine  for  belief  in  Christ.  Ii  is  rather  hard  at  first  to  reckon  brass  as
gold,  but  it  grows  easier  as  it  is  persisted  in.  At  the  first  they  are  a  good  deal
suspicious  of  themselves,  but  they  industriously  kill  every  question  by  treating
it  as  a  needless  doubt.  Thus,  by  degrees,  they  beUeve  a  lie.  The  next  step  ia
easy  :  they  deceive  themselves,  and  come  to  believe  that  they  are  surely  saved.
At  last  they  take  the  daring  step  of  denying  the  power.  Being  without  it  them-
selves, they  conceive  that  others  are  without  it  also.  They  get  on  very  well
without  any  supernatural  power,  and  others,  no  doubt,  do  the  same  ;  only  they  add
a  little  cant  to  it  to  please  the  very  godly  folk.  They  practically  deny  the  power  in
their  lives,  so  that  those  who  see  them  and  take  them  for  Christians  say,  "  Then


OHAT.  ni.1  II.  TIMOTHY,  263

really  is  nothing  in  it ;  for  these  people  are  as  we  are.  They  have  a  tonch  of  paint
here,  and  a  little  varnieh  there,  but  it  is  all  the  same  wood."  Practically,  their
actions  assnre  the  world  that  there  is  no  power  in  Christianity ;  it  is  only  a  name.
Very  soon,  privately,  in  their  hearts  they  think  it  is  so,  and  they  invent  doctrines
to  match.  By  and  by,  in  some  cases,  these  people  profanely  deny  the  Divine
power  of  our  only  faith,  and  then  they  become  the  greatest  enemies  of  the  Cross  of
Christ.  II.  The  wicked  tolly  op  this  HTPOCBmcAL  conduct.  1.  They  degrade
the  very  name  of  Christ.  If  there  is  no  spiritual  power  in  godliness,  it  is  worth
nothing.  2.  There  is  no  value  in  such  a  dead  form.  I  have  read  that  the  swan
was  not  allowed  to  be  offered  upon  the  altar  of  God,  because,  although  its  feathers
Are  as  white  as  snow,  yet  its  skin  is  black.  God  will  not  accept  that  external
morality  which  coaceals  internal  impurity.  3.  There  is  no  use  in  mere  formality.
In  the  depth  of  winter,  can  you  warm  yourself  before  a  painted  fire  ?  Could  you
dine  off  the  picture  of  a  feast  when  you  are  hungry  f  4.  There  is  no  comfort  in  it.
The  form  without  the  power  has  nothing  in  it  to  warm  the  heart,  raise  the  spirits,
or  strengthen  the  mind  against  the  day  of  sickness,  or  in  the  hour  of  death.  6.  To
have  the  form  of  godliness  without  the  power  of  it,  is  to  lack  constancy  in  your
religion.  You  never  saw  the  mirage,  but  those  who  have  travelled  in  the  East,
when  they  come  home  are  sure  to  tell  you  about  it.  It  is  a  very  hot  and  thirsty
day,  and  you  are  riding  on  a  camel.  Suddenly  there  rises  before  you  a  beautiful
scene.  Just  a  little  from  you  are  brooks  of  water,  flowing  between  beds  of  osiers
and  banks  of  reeds  and  rushes.  Yonder  are  palm  trees  and  orange  groves.  Yes,
and  a  city  rises  on  a  hill,  crowned  with  minarets  and  towers.  You  are  rejoiced,
and  ask  your  guide  to  lead  you  nearer  to  the  water  which  glistens  in  the  sun.  He
grimly  answers,  "Take  no  notice,  it  is  the  mirage.  There  is  nothing  yonder  but
the  bumiuK  sand."  You  can  scarce  believe  him,  it  seems  so  real ;  but  lo,  it  is  all  gone,
like  a  dream  of  night.  So  unsubstantial  is  the  Lope  which  is  built  upon  the  form  of
godliness  without  the  power.  The  white  ants  will  eat  up  all  the  substance  of  a  box,
and  yet  leave  it  standing,  till  a  touch  causes  the  whole  fabric  to  fall  in  dust :  beware
of  a  profession  of  which  the  substance  has  been  eaten  away.  Believe  in  nothing
which  has  not  the  stamp  of  eternity  upon  it.  6.  In  reality,  this  kind  of  religion
is  in  opposition  to  Christ.  It  is  Jannes  and  Jambres  over  again :  the  magician  of
hypocrisy  is  trj  ing  to  work  miracles  which  belong  to  God  ordy.  Nobody  can  do  so
much  damage  to  the  Church  of  God  as  the  man  who  is  within  its  walls,  but  not
within  its  life.  7.  This  nominal  godliness,  which  is  devoid  of  power,  is  a  shameful
thing.    {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)        The  power  of  godliness :   I.  Godliness  is  powerful

BECAUSE  IT  IS  THE  EMBODIMENT  OF  GoD.  U.  GODLINESS  IS  FOWEBFUL  BECAUSE  IT
IS  A  NEW  BIBTH  TO  BIGHTEOUSNESS,  TBUTH,  AND  LOVE.  HI.  GoDLINESS  IS  POWERFUL
BECAUSE   IT  IS  A  GROWTH.       lY.    GODLINESS  IS  POWERFUL   BECAUSE   IT   IS  A   PERSONAL

FBOPEBTY.  YoQ  SCO  upon  the  desk  of  that  organ  a  music  book ;  but  the  book  does
not  sing.  The  gospel  is  like  a  music  book.  Here  are  the  rules  for  the  harmony
of  life.  Godliness  is  singing  from  the  book  of  Christ;  it  is  playing  upon  the
heavenly  harp;  it  is  putting  the  music  of  God  into  one's  own  life.  (W.  Birch.)
Motives  and  diisuanves  from  familiarity  with  wicked  men: — 1.  Consider  that  fami-
liarity with  wicked  men  will  make  us  Hke  them,  we  are  very  apt  to  resemble  those
that  we  converse  with,  and  as  he  that  walks  with  wise  men  shall  be  wiser
(Prov.  xiii.  20),  so  he  that  walks  with  wicked  men  shall  be  worse.  The  best
mettles,  when  mixed  with  baser,  are  embased  thereby;  laiiz  gold  with  brass
or  silver  with  copper,  and  you  debase  the  coin;  for  saints  to  familiarly  join
with  the  limbs  of  Satan,  not  only  endangers,  but  debaseth  them.  Man  is  a  poor,
weak,  nnconstant  creature,  and  apt  to  go  astray,  and  therefore  we  should  shun
temptations.  2.  This  familiarity  with  them  may  harden  them  in  their  sin,  God
hath  ordained  our  separation,  and  withdrawing  ourselves  from  them,  as  a  means  to
humble  them,  and  turn  them  from  sin  (1  Thess.  v.  22.)  3.  There  is  no  comfort  to
be  found  in  such  society ;  when  trouble  comes,  miserable  comforters  are  they  all.
When  Judas  fell  into  trouble  of  conscience,  he  ran  to  his  wicked  associates,  but
see  what  miserable  comforters  they  are  to  him  in  his  extremity  (Matt,  xxvii.  4).
4.  It  is  a  dishonour  to  our  Lord  and  Master  to  be  familiar  with  known  traitors  and
rebels  to  Him.  Every  wicked  man  rebels  against  God.  6.  It  is  impossible  that
ever  we  should  be  good  so  long  as  we  delight  in  wicked  company.  6.  By  familiarity
with  such  we  do  not  only  endanger  our  spiritual,  but  our  temporal  estate  also.
(Ibid.)  Form  and  power : — I  do  not  suppose  that  these  words  need  much  explana-
tion. "  Godliness,"  in  the  New  Testament,  means  not  only  the  disposition  which  we
Mil  piety,  but  the  conduct  which  flows  from  it,  and  which  we  may  call  practical


264  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  nb

religion.     The  form  or  outward  appearance  of  that  we  all  understand.    But  what
is  the  "  denying  the  power  thereof "  ?    It  does  not  consist  in  words,  but  in  deeds.
In  these   latter  epistles  we  find   ••denying"   frequently   used  as   equivalent  to
•'  abjuring,"  renouncing,  casting  off.    For  instance,  in  a  passage  singularly  and
antithetically  parallel  to  that  of   my  text,  we  read  ••denying   ungodliness  and
worldly  lusts,"  which  simply  means  throwing  off  their  dominion.     I.  Observe  Tffa
SAD  FKEQUENCY  OF  SUCH  A  CONDITION.     Wherever  any  great   cause  or  principle  is
first  launched  into  the  world,  it  evokes  earnest  enthusiasm,  and  brings  men  to
heroisms   of    consecration   and  service.     And    so,   when  Christianity  was    first
launched,  there  was  less  likelihood  of  its  attracting  to  itself  men  who  were  not  in
earnest,  and  who  were  mere  formalists.     As  years  go  on,  the  primitive  enthusiasms
die  out,  and  the  cause  which  was  once  all  freshly  radiant  and  manifestly  heaven-
born  becomes  an  earthly  institution,  there  is  a  growing  tendency  to  gather  round
it  all  sorts  of  superficial,  half-and-half  adherents.    And  every  church  has  its  full
share  of  such  people  ;  loose  adherents,  clogs  upon  all  movement,  who  bring  down
the  average  of  warmth  like  the  great  icebergs  that  float  in  the  Atlantic  and  lower
the  temperature  of    the  summer   aU   over  Europe.      They  make    consecration
"eccentric  ";  they  make  consistent,  out-and-out  Christian  living,  ••odd,"  "  unlike
the  ordinary  thing."     And  they  pull  down  the  spirituality  of  the  Church  almost  to
the  level  of  the  world.    II.  Think,  next,  of  the  undekground  working  of  this
EVIL.     These  people  about  whom  Paul  is  speaking  in  my  text  were,  I  suppose,
mostly,  though  by  no  means  exclusively,  conscious  pretenders  to  what  they  did  not
possess.    But  the  nuuiber  of  hypocrites,  in  the  full  sense  of  the  word,  is  amazingly
small,  and  the  men  whom  you  would  brand  as  most  distinctly  so,  if  you  came  to
talk  to  them,  would  amaze  you  to  find  how  entirely  ignorant  they  were  of  the  fact
that  they  were  dramatising  and  pretending  to  piety,  and  that  there  was  next  to  no
reality  of  it  in  them.     A  very  little  bit  of  gold,  beaten  out  very  thin,  will  cover
over,  with  a  semblance  of  value,  an  enormous  area.    And  men  beat  out  the_  little
modicum  of  sincerity  that  they  have  so  very  thin  that  it  covers,  and  gives  a
deceptive  appearance  of  brilliancy  and  solidity  to  an  enormous  amount  of  windy
flatulence  and  mere  pretence.  The  worse  a  man  is,  the  less  he  knows  it.  The  more
completely  a  professing  Christian  has  lost  his  hold  of  the  substance  and  is  clinging
only  to  the  form,  the  less  does  he  suspect  that  this  indictment  has  any  application
to  him.    The  more  completely  a  man's  limbs  are  frost-bitten  the  more  comfortable
and  warm  they  are,  and  the  less  does  he  know  it.    I  need  say  little  about  the
reasons  for  this  unconsciousness.     We  are  all  accustomed  to  take  very  lenient
views,  when  we  take  any  at  all,  of  our  own  character ;   and  the  tendency  of  all
conduct  is  to  pull  down  conscience  to  the  level  of  conduct,  and  to  vindicate  that
conduct  by  biassed  decisions  of  a  partial  conscience.     The  underground  enemies
of  our  Christian  earnestness  are  far  more  dangerous  than  the  apparent  and  manifest
antagonists  ;  and  there  are  many  men  amongst  us  who  would  repel  with  indigna-
tion a  manifest  assault  against  their  godliness,  who  yield  without  resistance,  and
ijmost  without  consciousness,  to  the  sly  seductions  of   unsuspected  evil.    The
arrow  that  flies  in  darkness  is  more  deadly  than  the  pestilence  that  wasteth  at
noonday.    III.  Further,    notice  the   eveb-opekatinq   causes  that  produce  this
CONDITION.   1. 1  suppose  that  one,  at  any  rate,  of  the  main  examples  of  this  "  form  "
was  participation  in  the  simple  worship  of  the  primitive  Church.     And  although
the  phrase  by  no  means  refers  merelv  to  acts  of  worship,  still  that  is  one  of  the
main  fields  in  which  this  evil  is  manifest.     Alany  of  us  substitute  outward  connec-
tion with  the  Church  for  inward  union  with  Jesus  Christ.     All  external  forms  have
a  tendency  to  assert  themselves,  and  to  detain  in  themselves,  instead  of  helping  to
rise  above  themselves,  our  poor  sense-ridden  natures.     Seeing  that  the  purest  and
the  simplest  of  forms  may  become  like  a  dirty  window,  an  obscuring  medium  which
shuts  out  instead  of  lets  in  the  light,  it  seems  to  me  that  the  Churches  are  wisest
which  admit  least  of  the  dangerous  element  into  their  external  worship,  and  try  to
have  as  little  of  form  as  may  keep  the  spirit.     I  know  that  simple  forms  may  be
abused  quite  as  much  as  elaborate  ones.     Let  us  be  very  sure  that  we  do  not  substi-
tute Church  membership,  coming  to  chapel,  going  to  prayer-meeting,  teaching  in
Sunday  schools,  reading  devout  books,  and  the  like,  for  the  inward  submission  to
the  power.    2.  Another  cause  always  operating  in  the  tendency  which  all  action  of
every  kind  has  to  escape  from  the  dominion  of  its  first  motives,  and  to  become
merely  mechanical  and  habitual.     Habit  is  a  most  precious  ally  of  goodness,  but
habitual  goodness  tends  to  become  involuntary  and  mechanical  goodness,  and  so  to
eeaae  to  be  goodness  at  all.    And  the  more  that  we  can,  in  each  given  case,  make


CHAP.  III.]  II.  TIMOTHY.  265

each  individual  act  of  godliness,  whether  it  be  in  worship  or  in  practical  life,  the
result  of  a  fresh  approach  to  the  one  central  and  legitimate  impulse  of  the  Christian
life,  the  better  it  will  be  for  ourselves.  3.  And  then,  still  further,  there  is  the
constant  operation  of  earth  and  sense  and  daily  duties  and  pressing  cares,  which
war  against  the  reality  and  completeness  of  our  submission  to  the  power  of  godli-
ness. Grains  of  sand,  microscopically  minute  in  the  aggregate,  bury  the  temples
and  the  images  of  the  gods  in  the  Nile  Valley.  The  multitude  of  small  cares  and
duties  which  are  blown  upon  us  by  every  wind  have  the  effect  of  withdrawing  us,
unless  we  are  continually  watchful,  from  that  one  foundation  of  all,  the  love  of
Jesus  Christ  felt  in  our  daily  lives.  IV.  So,  lastly,  let  me  point  yon  to  thb
DISCIPLINE  WHICH  MAT  AVEBT  THIS  EVIL.  1.  First  and  foremost,  I  would  say  let  us
cherish  a  clear  and  continual  recognition  of  the  reality  of  the  danger.  Forewarned
is  forearmed.  Rigid,  habitual  self-inspection,  in  the  light  of  God's  Word,  is  an
all-important  help  to  prevent  this  sliding  into  superficiality  of  our  Christian  life.
In  a  country  which  is  only  preserved  by  the  dykes  from  being  swallowed  up  by  the
sea  the  minutest  inspection  of  the  rampart  is  the  condition  of  security,  and  if  there
be  a  hole  big  enough  for  a  mouse  to  creep  through  the  water  will  come  in  and  make
a  gap  wide  enough  to  drown  a  province  in  a  little  while.  And  so,  seeing  that  we
have  such  dangers  round  about  us,  and  that  the  most  formidable  of  them  all  are
powers  that  work  in  the  dark,  let  us  be  very  sure  that  our  eyes  have  searched,  as  well
as  we  can,  the  inmost  corners  of  our  lives,  and  that  no  lurking  vermin  lie  beneath
the  unturned-up  stones.  2.  And  then,  lastly,  and  as  that  without  which  all  else  ia
vain,  let  us  make  continual  and  earnest  and  contrite  efforts  day  by  day  to  renew  and
deepen  our  personal  communion  with  Jesus  Christ.  He  is  the  source  of  the  power
which  godliness  operates  in  our  lives,  and  the  closer  we  keep  to  Him  the  more  it
will  flood  our  hearts  and  make  us  real,  out-and-out  Christians,  and  not  shallow  and
self-deceived  pretenders.  The  tree  that  had  nothing  but  leaves  upon  it  hid  its
absence  of  fruit  by  its  abundance  of  foliage.  The  Master  came,  as  He  comes  to
you  and  to  me,  seeking  fruit,  and  if  He  finds  it  not  He  will  perpetuate  the  barrenness
by  His  blasting  word,  "No  fruit  grow  upon  thee  henceforward  for  ever."  {A.  Maclaren,
D.D.)  Forms  of  religion  necessary : — 1 .  Forms  are  necessary  to  religion  as  the  means  of
its  manifestation.  As  the  invisible  God  manifests  His  nature — His  power,  wisdom,
and  goodness,  in  visible  material  forms,  in  the  bright  orbs  of  heaven,  in  the  ever-
lasting hills,  in  the  broad  earth  with  its  fruits  and  flowers,  and  in  all  the  living
things  which  He  has  made, — so  the  invisible  soul  of  man  reveals  its  convictions
and  feelings  in  the  outward  acts  which  it  performs.  A  form  is  the  flag,  the  banner,
the  symbol  of  an  inward  life ;  it  is  to  a  religious  belief  what  the  body  is  to  the  soul ;
as  the  soul  would  be  utterly  unknown  without  the  body,  so  religion  would  be  un-
known without  its  forms,  a  light  hidden  under  a  bushel,  and  not  set  up  in  a  candle-
stick that  it  may  give  light  to  all  that  are  in  the  house.  2.  Forms  are  necessary
not  only  to  the  manifestation  of  religion,  but  to  its  nourishment  and  continued
existence.  A  religion  which  expressed  itself  in  no  outward  word  or  act  would  soon
die  out  of  the  soul  altogether.  The  attempt  to  embody  truth  and  feeling,  to  express
it  in  words  and  actions,  is  necessary  to  give  it  the  character  of  living  principle  in  the
soul :  in  this  respect  forms  are  like  the  healthy  exercise  which  at  once  expresses  and
increases  the  vigorous  life  of  the  body,  or  they  may  be  compared  to  the  leaves  of  a
tree,  which  not  only  proceed  from  its  inward  life,  but  catch  the  vitalising  influences
of  the  light,  the  rain,  and  the  atmosphere,  and  convey  them  down  to  the  root.^  3.
What,  then,  is  that  formalism  which  is  everywhere  in  the  Scripture,  and  especially
in  the  discourses  of  our  Lord,  described  as  an  offence  and  an  abomination  in  the
sight  of  God  ?  It  is  the  substitution  of  the  outward  rite  in  the  place  of  the  inner
spirit  and  life  of  the  soul ;  it  is  the  green  leaf  which  still  hangs  upon  the  dead
branch  which  has  been  lopped  off.  (Christian  Age.)  Form  without  power: —
Some  years  ago  the  captain  of  a  Greenland  whaling  vessel  found  himself  at  night
surrounded  by  icebegs  and  "  lay -to"  till  the  morning,  expecting  every  moment  to
be  ground  to  pieces.  As  the  morning  dawned  he  sighted  a  ship  at  no^  great
distance.  Getting  into  a  boat  with  some  of  his  men  he  carefully  picked  his  way
through  the  lanes  of  open  ice  towards  the  mysterious  looking  craft.  Coming  along-
side he  hailed  the  vessel  with  a  loud,  "  Ship  ahoy  I  "  but  there  was  no  response.
He  looked  through  the  porthole  and  saw  a  man,  evidently  the  captain,  sitting  at  a
table  as  if  writing  in  a  log-book.  He  again  hailed  the  vessel,  but  the  figure  moved
not.  It  was  dead  and  frozen  1  On  examination  the  sailors  were  found,  some  frozen
among  the  hammocks,  others  in  the  cabin.  From  the  last  entry  in  the  log-book  11
appeared  this  vessel  had  been  drifting  about  the  Arctic  seas  for  thirteen  years — a


266  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  m,

floating  sepnlchre,  manned  by  a  frozen  crew.  And  there  are  sonls  to-day  who  have
refused  the  Divine  offer  of  life,  forsaken  the  centres  where  they  were  warmed  with
hallowed  influences,  and  drifted  into  the  chilling  regions  of  Arctic  darkness  and
frost.  Many  of  these  have  certain  appearances  of  Christian  life,  and  a  name  to  live.
(Christian  Journal.)  A  deceptive  form  : — On  the  farm  of  Manorlees,  in  Fifeshire,
and  in  the  house  of  Mr.  Alexander  Gibson,  a  large  and  very  tempting  ham  hung
from  one  of  the  rafters  running  across  the  ceiling.  In  the  same  house  there  was  a
rat,  whose  taste  lay  strongly  in  the  direction  of  ham,  and  this  rat,  with  rare
instinct,  gnawed  a  hole  in  the  woodwork  directly  over  the  tempting  morsel,  and,
descending,  ate  itself  into  the  inside  of  it.  How  long  the  excavating  went  on  is  not
known,  but  one  day  the  housewife  foimd  it  necessary  to  commence  operations  on
the  bam,  when,  on  lifting  it  down,  out  bolted  the  depredator.  The  ham  was  a
perfect  shell,  skin  and  bone  only  remaining  to  show  its  form.  The  animal,  after
feeding  sumptuously,  had  commenced  to  build  a  nest  inside.  This  anecdote  is  not
simply  amusing;  it  serves  well  to  illustrate  the  operation  of  secret  sin,  eating  away
our  spiritual  life  till  nothing  remains  but  a  deceptive  form  of  godliness — the  mere
rind  and  shell  of  religion.  {Christian  Herald.)  Form  without  power: — Across
your  path,  and  on  tbe  ground,  lies  stretcbed  out  in  death,  a  mighty  tree,  tall  and
strong — fit  mast  to  carry  a  cloud  of  canvas,  and  bear  unbent  tbe  strains  of  tempests.
You  put  your  foot  lightly  on  it;  and  how  great  your  surprise  when,  breaking
through  the  bark,  it  sinks  deep  into  the  body  of  the  tree — a  result  much  less  owing
to  the  pressure  of  your  foot  than  to  the  poisonous  fungi  and  foul,  crawling  insects
that  have  attacked  its  core.  They  have  left  the  outer  rind  uninjured — but  hollowed
out  its  heart.  Take  care  your  heart  is  not  hollowed  out,  and  nothing  left  you  bat
the  cmst  and  shell  of  an  empty  profession.  {T.  Guthrie,  D.D.)  Religion,  false
and  true : — A  painter  has  undertaken  to  portray  on  his  canvas  flames  of  fire.  He
does  it  so  exactly  that  you  can  hardly  detect  it  from  real  flames.  But  look  !  you
see  flies  and  other  insects  parsing  across  it;  tbey  could  never  pass  across  real
flames.  Just  so  spiritual  insects,  in  the  shnpe  of  sins,  will  pass  across  the  mere
professor,  which  they  could  never  do  across  one  who  had  the  power  of  real  religion
in  his  heart;  the  former  has  but  the  "form"  of  flames  "of  godliness,"  the
influential    power   is  wanting.      {Dr.   Jenkyn.)  Hollow  professors: — Hollow

professors  are  as  hollow  trees  in  an  old  wood — tall,  but  pithless,  sapless,  unsound.
Their  formality  is  fitly  compared  to  a  bulrush,  whereof  the  colour  is  fresh,  the  skin
Fmooth  :  he  is  very  exact  that  can  find  a  knot  in  a  bulrush  (Isa.  IviiL  6).  But
peel  it,  and  what  shall  you  find  within  but  a  kind  of  spongeous,  unsubstantial
substance?  These,  as  if  religion  were  a  comedy,  do  in  voice  and  gesture  act
Divine  duties,  in  heart  renounce  them.  Hypocrites  only  act  religion,  play  devotion ;
like  they  are  to  the  ostrich,  saitb  Hut;o,  which  hath  wings,  but  flies  not.  The
swan  in  the  Law  was  rejected  for  sacrifice  because  of  her  black  skin  under  white
feathers.  Art  may  take  a  man  more  than  nature ;  but  with  God,  the  more  art  the
less  acceptance  :  He  loveth  truth  in  the  inwards  (Psa.  li.  6).  {J.  Trapp.)  For-
malism not  religion : — A  hypocrite  is  a  contemptible  person,  whether  he  is  In  the
Church  or  out  of  it;  whether  he  is  deceiving  in  the  name  of  respectability  or
religion.  He  is  not  a  Christian  any  more  than  a  crocodile  is  a  nightingale  or
a  fungus  is  a  lily.  Formalism  in  religion: — A  gentleman  once  entered  a
hall  with  his  son.  They  saw  a  number  of  well-dressed  people — some  of  them
standing  toge  her  in  groups,  others  apart;  some  sitting  in  various  postures.  The
son's  attention  was  fixed  by  a  pleasant-looking  gentleman,  somewhat  gaudily
dres-spd.  He  said,  "Father,  who  is  that  gentleman?  He  seems  a  mild,  pleasant-
looking  person;  but  what  a  singular  dress  he  wears  1  Who  is  he?"  "Ask  the
gentleman  \hr>  stands  near  you,"  said  the  father.  "If  you  please,  sir,  can  you
inform  me  who  that  f;entleman  opposite  is  ?  "  No  answer.  The  boy  thinks  it  strange.
At  last  the  father  tells  him,  "  My  son,  those  are  only  wax  figures  :  there  is  no  life
in  them ;  they  are  all  outside,  very  fair  to  look  at,  but  there  is  no  soul,  no  life :
they  are  outside  and  nothing  else."  So  it  is  with  those  who  have  no  internal
religion.  {Dictionary  of  Illustrations.)  False  profession: — Phamaces,  the  son
of  Mithridates,  the  king  of  Pontus,  sending  a  crown  to  Caesar  at  the  time  he  was  in
rebellion  against  him,  he  refused  the  present,  saying,  "  Let  him  first  lay  down  his
rebellion,  and  then  I  will  receive  his  crown."  There  are  many  who  set  a  crown  of
glory  upon  the  head  of  Christ  by  a  good  profession,  and  yet  plant  a  crown  of  thorns
upon  His  head  by  an  evil  conversntion.  (T.  Seeker.)  Danger  of  the  ojpce  of
preacher : — There  is  always  danger  to  thuse  who  have  to  talk  much  about  religion
that  their  religion  may  become  that  of  the  head,  rather  than  the  true  religion  ol


CHIP,  m.]  II.  TIMOTHY.  267

the  beart.  I  have  fotrnd  it  neceseary  myself  to  dedicate  an  hoar  or  two  at  mid-
night to  Berious  meditation,  self-examination,  and  prayer.  {Dean  Hooh.)
Formalism : — Some  may  live  npon  forms,  but  there  is  no  dying  upon  forms.
Formalists,  like  Pharaoh's  lean  kine,  are  full-fed,  yet  lean.  To  pursue  the  ways
of  God  with  a  guilty  conscience  is  Satan's  great  receipt  for  perpetual  failure.

Ver.  6. — ^Lead  captive  silly  women. — Creeping  into  houses: — The  expression
"  which  creep  into  houses,"  although  perfectly  natural,  and  one  which,  even  in
these  Western  countries,  could  be  used  with  propriety  to  express  the  method
in  which  these  deceiving  and  perverting  men  make  their  way  into  households,  yet,
when  we  remember  the  comparative  state  of  seclusion  in  which  women  usually
lived,  and  still  live,  in  Eastern  lands,  the  words  used  by  Paul  acquire  an  increased
force.  Special  fraud  and  deceit  was  needful  for  these  false  teachers  to  creep  into
the  women's  apartments  in  Asia.  {H.  D.  M,  Spence,  D.D.)  Sneakiness: —
Cheaters  must  get  some  credit  before  they  can  cozen ;  and  all  falsehood,  if  not
founded  in  some  truth  would  not  be  fixed  in  any  belief.  (T.  Fuller.)  Woman  and
sin : — There  lies  in  the  womanly  character  the  foundation ;  as  for  the  highest
development  of  the  power  of  faith,  so  also  for  the  highest  revelation  of  the  power
of  sin  (oomp.  Eev.  xvii.).  Josephus  also  states  that  the  Pharisees  especially  had
found  mnch  support  amongst  women  ("Antiq."  xvii.  2).  Compare  the  accoimt,
moreover,  of  the  rich  Fulvia  of  Eome,  who  was  induced  by  two  Jewish  impostors  to
furnish  a  considerable  sum  of  gold,  under  the  supposition  that  it  was  for  the  temple
at  Jerusalem  ("  Antiq."  xviii.  3).  {Van  Oosterzee.)  Impostors: — 1.  As  they  are
impudent,  so  they  are  of  a  fraudulent,  subtle,  sly,  insinuating  temper ;  they  vent
not  their  errors  openly  (especially,  not  at  first)  but  they  secretly  and  slily  creep
into  private  houses,  and  there  they  sell  their  wares  (Jude  4),  they  privily  bring  in
damnable  heresies  (2  Pet.  ii.  1 ;  Gal.  ii.  4).  Trutn  loveth  the  Ught  and  seeks
no  comers.  2.  These  impostors  observe  a  method  in  seducing  silly  women,  who,
being  the  weaker  sex,  are  sooner  won  over  to  their  way,  as  being  less  able  to  withstand
the  shock  of  a  temptation.  As  warriors  go  about  a  city  observing  where  the  wall  is
weakest,  lowest,  and  unguarded,  and  there  they  make  their  greatest  assault ;  and
as  thieves  set  not  upon  strong,  armed  men,  but  upon  weak,  unarmed  ones,  so
seducers  love  not  to  set  upon  strong,  grounded,  judicious,  discerning  Christians,
but  it  is  the  weak  and  ignorant  which  cannot  discern  their  frauds,  but  like  children
are  tossed  to  and  fro  with  every  wind  of  doctrine,  that  become  their  prey  (Prov.  xiv.
15;  Eom.  xvi.  18;  Eph.  iv.  14)  ;  man  is,  or  at  leastwise  should  be,  more  strong  and
prudent  to  resist  temptations  than  women  are.  They  catch  not  grave  and  truly
pious  matrons,  but  light  women  which  prefer  their  lusts  before  Christ.  It  is  the
light  chaS  which  is  tossed  with  every  wind,  when  the  massy  wheat  abides  in  the
floor.     (T.  Hall,  B.D.)

Yer.  7.  Ever  learning,  and  never  able  to  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  tmth. —
Ever  learning,  never  attaining  : — This  is  one  of  the  features  of  the  "  perilous  times  "
of  the  "  last  days."  "  Men  shall  be  selfish."  This  lies  at  the  root  of  all.  Self
enthroned  where  God  ought  to  be — self  pampered,  to  the  neglect  alike  of  dnty
and  charity — this  will  explain  anything  in  the  longest  and  blackest  list  of  vices.
The  text  presents  another  characteristic  of  the  perilous  times.  These  selfish  men,
without  natural  affection,  despisers  of  all  that  is  good,  lovers  of  pleasures  more  than
lovers  of  God,  yet  tenacious  of  the  form  of  that  godliness  of  which  they  have
utterly  set  at  nought  the  power,  shall  exercise  a  strange  empire,  none  the  less,  over
the  homes  and  over  the  lives  and  over  the  consciences  of  women.  Professing  them-
selves religious,  calling  themselves  teachers  of  truth,  they  will  insinuate  themselves
into  houses,  and  captivate  by  their  offers  of  an  indulgent  and  accommodating  Chris-
tianity, just  those  who  need  above  aU  others  a  discipline  of  plain  speaking — silly
women  laden  with  sins,  led  this  way  and  that  waj  by  divers  lusts.  It  is  of  these
captives,  these  victims,  of  a  debased  and  degenerate  teaching,  that  the  words  of  the
text  were  written.  There  are  those  who,  though  they  are  ever  learning,  are  never
able  to  arrive  at  this  sort  of  knowledge  of  truth.  They  are  not  careless  hearers,
iJiey  are  not  inattentive  readers,  they  are  not  uninterested  inquirers.  If  they  were
this,  the  wonder  of  the  non-attainment  would  be  at  an  end.  But  there  is  a  wonder.
The  cry  and  the  complaint  is,  "  I  am  always  learning.  I  never  allow  a  new  book,
which  promises  light  upon  some  part  of  the  truth,  to  escape  my  notice.  I  am  athirst
for  knowledge ;  I  would  give  all  I  possess  to  be  quite  sure."  1.  There  is  in  some
Blinds  an  impatience  of  process  and  progress,  fatal  of  itself  to  eafe  and  solid  attain-


268  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in.

ment.    **  By  little  and  little"  is  the  motto  of  the  spiritual  dealing,  whether  it  be  in
the  "  putting  out  of  enemies"  or  in  the  discovery  of  truth.     2.  Another  cause  of
disappointment  lies  in  confusion  of  thought  as  to  the  nature  of  spiritual  certainty.
If  God  speaks,  certainly  He  will  give  me  proof  of  it ;  but  a  proof  in  the  same  region
and  in  the  like  material  with  the  thmg  to  be  proved ;  not  an  evidence  of  sight,
touch,  or  smell,  as  to  things  which,  by  their  very  hypothesis,  he  outside  it,  but  an
evidence  appealing  to  conscience,  heart,  and  soul,  as  He  made  each  ;  satisfying  the
whole  (not  one  part)  of  me,  that  the  thing  of  which  He  gives  me  the  infonnation  is
beneficial,  is  wholesome,  is  good  for  me — and,  because  good,  therefore  also  true.     3.
A  further  error  contributes,  in  many,  to  this  defeat  of  knowing,  and  it  is  the  want
of  instant  action  on  the  footing  of  the  thing  learned.   Many  men  listen  to  a  sermon
without  the  slightest  intention  of  doing  any  one  single  thing  in  consequence.    A
man  has  been  interested  in  a  treatise  upon  Prayer,  upon  Inspiration,  upon  the  Atone-
ment.   He  closes  the  book  with  a  feeling  of  satisfaction — now  he  can  give  a  reason
for  the  hope  that  is  in  him.  Yet  he  feels  that  he  has  not  "come  to  the  knowledge  "
of  that  truth.     It  is  not  a  part  of  him.     It  does  not  enter  into  his  thought,  mind,
and  life.     It  does  not  influence  him  ;  it  has  not  flowed  into  him — for  that  is  influ-
ence ;  it  will  not  flow  out  from  him  into  any  one  else.     Why  is  this  ?    Because  he
has  not  acted  upon  the  thing  learned.     He  has  not  carried  out  the  acquisition  of
the  head  into  the  heart,  if  that  is  its  province ;  or  into  the  conduct,  if  its  region  of
operation  is  there.     A  man  powerfully  impressed  with  the  reasonableness  of  prayer
will  instantly  set  himself  to  pray  with  a  new  stimulus  and  a  new  intensity.    If  he
does  not  he  may  have  "  learned"— as  St.  Paul  would  have  us  distinguish — but  he
cannot  be  said  to  "  know."    A  man  who  has  received  a  new  instruction  on  the  sub-
ject of  inspiration,  forthwith  opens  his  Bible,  kneels  on  his  knees  with  it,  feels  the
breath  of  God  in  it  all  as  he  reads,  and  echoes  each  sentence  of  it  in  earnest  prayer.
(Dean  Vaughan.)    Ever  learning,  and  never  able  to  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the
truth : — The  case  here  represented  may  perhaps  strike  us  as  having  something  in  it
rather  extraordinary.     That  they  who  take  no  pains  to  learn  should  never  grow
wiser  is  what  we  can  readily  understand,  but  that  there  should  be  those  who  do
labour  in  the  work  of  rehgion  and  yet  never  succeed  is  surely  not  a  httle  remark-
able.   Strange,  however,  as  it  may  on  the  first  view  appear,  the  case  is  by  no  means
nncommon.    It  will,  then,  be  useful  to  investigate  the  causes  of  this.    We  may
lay  it  down  for  a  certain  truth,  that  it  is  not  owing  to  anything  unattaiuable  in  the
object  itself.   1.  The  knowledge  which  is  necessary  to  salvation  is  open  to  the  most
ordinary  capacity.    The  great  leading  truths  of  the  Bible  are  plain  and  simple,  and,
where  the  mind  is  in  a  right  disposition,  are  easily  understood.     2.  The  knowledge
of  the  truth  is  not  unattainable,  because  we  have  the  promise  of  Christ  that  it
shall  be  imparted  to  every  one,  be  his  condition  what  it  may,  who  is  sincere  in  seek-
ing it.  Without  Divine  illumination  it  is  impossible  for  any  human  beiug  to  become
wise  unto  salvation.    But  this  illumination  God  is  willing  to  pour  upon  the  minds
of  all  who  call  upon  Him  for  that  purpose.     The  causes  of  their  failure  are  to  be
traced  entirely  to  themselves.     (1)  One  great  cause  of  their  coming  short  of  saving
knowledge  is  this— that  they  do  not  seek  it  in  the  right  way.     In  the  Bible  God's
will  is  revealed  to  us,  but  to  understand  the  Bible,  and  tu  derive  effectual  and  saving
inf"i-mation  from  it,  we  must  have  recourse  to  the  Author  of  the  Bible.    But  this
method  the  persons  of  whom  we  are  speaking  do  not  pursue.    Keason,  with  them,
is  all-sufficient.     Reason,  they  think,  is  equal  to  the  investigation  of  every  subject ;
and  the  consequence  is,  that  what  reason  cannot  account  for,  what  reason  cannot
comprehend,  they  refuse  to  admit.     "  The  meek  will  He  guide  in  judgment ;  and
the  meek  will  He  tetich  His  way."  (2)  Another  reason  why  men,  though  continually
learning,  come  not  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth,  is  that  they  make  a  wrong  use  of
the  means  of  knowledge  ;  that  is,  they  mistake  the  means  for  the  eud— they  mis-
take the  means  of  religion  for  religion  itself.     They  have  hitherto  satisfied  them-
Belves  with  the  performance  of  the  outward  duties  of  prayer,  reading,  and  bearing,
without  ever  looking  further  ;  without  ever  asking  themselves  seriously,  "What  do
we  these  things  for?    Have  the  ordinances  of  religion  produced  in  us  any  of  the
effects  for  which  they  were  designed?  "     (3)  The  secret  love  of  sin  is  another  ob-
struction to  the  attainment  of  saving  knowledge.     God  tells  the  house  of  Israel  that
He  will  not  be  inquired  of  by  them  because  they  "  set  up  their  idols  in  their  heart,
and  put  the  stumbling-block  of  their  iniquity  before  tLeir  f  ace."  '*  If  any  man  will  do
His  will  he  shall  know  of  the  doctrine  whether  it  be  of  God."     "  The  secret  of  the
Lord  is  with  them  only  that  fear  Him."     (4)  They  refuse  to  obey  their  convicaons.
Tb«y  do  not  act  up  to  the  light  they  possess.     (J.  Boucher,  M.A.)        Caution


CHAP.  III.]  II.  TIMOTHY.  269

against  enticement  from  the  truth: — 1.  I  wish  this  were  not  the  sin  of  silly  men  as
well  as  of  silly  women,  to  be  always  learning,  yet  never  come  to  the  knowledge  of
the  truth  ;  how  many  are  men  in  years,  yet  children  in  understanding  (1  Cor.  xiv.
20).  And  when  for  the  time  they  might  have  been  teachers,  they  had  need  to  be
taught  the  elements  of  rehgion  (Heb.  v.  12).  Though  the  knowledge  of  the  best  in
this  life  be  imperfect,  and  we  are  always  learners  here,  yet  we  must  strive  toward
perfection  and  not  always  stick  in  the  place  of  bringing  forth  (Hos.  xiii.  13) ;  nor
be  like  a  horse  in  a  mill,  still  going  round  in  the  same  place  ;  or  like  a  picture  that
grows  not,  but  is  the  same  now  that  it  was  twenty  years  ago.  Such  barren  trees  are
nigh  to  cursing  (Luke  xiii.  9),  and  such  unprofitable  learners  are  left  by  God  justly
to  the  power  of  seducers,  as  malefactors  are  to  jailers.  This  is  the  true  cause  of  all
those  errors  and  sins  amongst  us  (Psa.  xcv.  10  ;  Jer.  ix.  3  ;  Matt.  xxii.  19).  As  for
ourselves,  let  us  inquire  for  the  good  way,  and  when  we  have  found  it,  sit  not  still,
but  be  walking  from  knowledge  to  knowledge,  from  grace  to  grace,  and  from  strength
to  strength,  till  at  last  we  come  to  our  celestial  Sion.  2.  Since  seducers  are  so  ready
to  seduce  women,  how  careful  should  that  sex  be  to  shun  conversing  or  disputing
with  them.  Let  every  one  know  his  own  strength,  and,  if  he  be  wise,  keep  within
his  own  bounds.  3.  Since  women  often  are  Satan's  instruments,  by  which  he
seduceth  many,  take  heed  of  women ;  let  not  those  syrens  enchant  thee  so  as  to  leap
into  the  depths  of  errors.  Consider  how  many  of  thy  betters  have  fallen  by  them.
Whosoever  they  be  that  seek  to  draw  thee  from  thy  God,  let  thy  heart  and  thy  hand
be  against  them  (Deut.  xiii.  6,  8,  9).  (T.  Hall,  B.D.)  Unsanctified  education  :^
There  is  a  right  and  wrong  way  of  looking  at  everything.  As  a  rule,  whatever  is
most  valuable  in  its  use  is  most  harmful  in  its  abuse.  The  keener  the  surgeon's
knife,  the  more  serviceable  it  is  in  skilled  hands,  but  the  more  dangerous  in  hands
unskilled.  Education — learning — is  of  the  utmost  value,  rightly  acquired  and
rightly  used.  Misapplied — used  as  an  end,  not  a  means — it  is  a  cogent  factor  of
evil.  1.  It  is  unsatisfactory  and  embittering.  As  a  man  who  ascends  the  moun-
tain-side far  enough  to  enter  the  blinding  mists,  but  not  far  enough  to  overlook
them,  so  is  the  man  of  godless  learning.  2.  It  destroys  the  humility  and  childlike
simplicity  so  essential  to  a  knowledge  of  real  truth.  3.  It  is  inefficient  to  cleanse
from  sin.  Science,  philosophy,  all  the  learning  of  all  the  schools  cannot,  with-
out Christ's  atonement,  regenerate  sinful  man.  Give  us,  then,  education ;  but  let
it  be  complete,  as  far  as  it  goes — moral  building  up  as  well  as  intellectual.  Cried
Grotius,  the  eminent  historian,  on  his  death-bed  :  "  Ah  I  I  have  consumed  all  my
life  in  a  laborious  doing  of  nothing.  I  would  give  all  my  learning  and  honour  for
the  plain  integrity  of  John  Urick  " — a  poor  man  of  remarkable  piety.  {Homiletie
Monthly.)  Resultless  study  : — ^What  would  be  thought  of  a  chemist  who  should
conduct  an  experiment  day  after  day,  making  a  number  of  little  variations  in  his
method,  but  always  withholding  the  deciding  element  from  the  crucible,  or  else  per-
sistently refusing  to  look  at  the  result  ?  Or  what  would  be  thought  of  a  merchant
always  reckoning  up  his  figures,  but  never  writing  down  the  final  sums  ?  Or  what
of  a  captain  who  should  sail  his  ship  in  a  circle  ?  Or  of  a  traveller  always  on  the
road,  never  reaching  home  or  inn?  (A.  Raleigh,  B.D.)  Activity  without  pro-
gress : — Two  sailors  happened  to  be  on  a  military  parade-ground  when  the  soldiers
were  at  drill,  going  through  the  evolution  of  marking  time.  One  sailor,  observing
the  other  watching  the  movement  of  the  company  very  attentively,  with  eves  fixed
and  arms  akimbo,  asked  him  what  he  thought  of  it.  "  Well,  Jack,"  replied  his
comrade,  "I  am  thinking  there  must  be  a  pretty  strong  tide  running  this  morning,
for  these  poor  fellows  have  been  pulling  away  this  half-hour,  and  have  not  got  an
inch  ahead  yet."  No  further  on  the  road : — "  How  wise  I  am  I  "  cried  the  finger-
post  to  a  willow-stump  by  his  side.  "  Are  you ?  "  said  the  willow.  "  Am  I?  "  in-
dignantly  retorted  the  post.  "  Do  you  see  my  arms  ?  Are  not  the  name  to  the  great
town,  and  road  to  it.  and  distance  from  it,  plainly  written  there?  "  ••Ah,  yes  1  "
said  the  willow.  •'  Then  you  must  acknowledge  how  superior  I  am  to  you.  Why !
I  am  a  public  teacher."  •'  True,  indeed,"  answered  the  willow,  ••  and  learned  you  are ;
but,  as  to  wisdom,  I  see  little  difference  between  you  and  me.  You  know  the  way
to  the  city,  I  believe,  and  are  the  means  of  enabling  many  to  find  it ;  but  here  you
have  stood  these  twenty  years,  and  I  don't  see  that  you  have  got  a  step  farther  on
the  road  than  I  have,  who  don't  profess  to  understand  anything  about  it."  (Original
FahUt.)

Vers.  8,  9.  As  Jannes  and  Jambres  withBtood  Hoses. — Jannes  and  Jambres : — I.
Ths  natcbb  of  ihb  opf  osition  offered  by  these  uen  to  Moses.     Yon  do  not  find


270  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip,  nr

that  they  tried  to  mate  light  of  the  miracles  of  Moses,  or  call  in  question  their
gennineness,  or  anything  of  the  sort.  No,  they  simply  tried  by  imitations  to
depreciate  the  value  of  the  real.  They  so  surrounded  the  true  diamond  with  cut
glass  copies  that  in  the  eye  of  an  undisceming  public  it  was  difficult  to  tell  the
difierence.  This  is  the  kind  of  resistance  the  Church  has  to  struggle  against  in  the
present  day.  The  old,  rough,  brutal,  physical  opposition  has  passed  away.  It
would  be  folly  on  the  part  of  Satan  to  try  and  use  such  weapons  now.  Like  a
skilful  angler  he  suits  the  fly  on  his  hook  to  the  season  of  the  year.  Variety,  if  not
pleasing,  is  profitable  to  him  in  this  respect.  Having  failed  to  do  away  with
Christians,  he  now  seeks  to  make  the  whole  world  Christian  after  his  sort.  Stamp-
ing out  the  genuine  having  proved  an  utter  failure,  he  now  seeks  to  swamp  them
with  imitations  of  his  own  manufacture.  II.  The  intxuenoe  ot  Jannes  and  Jambkes.
Jannes  and  Jambres  wield  an  immense  power  in  the  present  day,  and  it  is  no  use
shutting  our  eyes  to  the  fact.  Jannes  is  not  to  be  got  rid  of  with  a  laugh,  nor
Jambres  with  a  smile  of  indifference.  Their  existence  is  a  source  of  constant
danger,  and  their  presence  in  the  professing  Church  does  more  to  paralyze  its  testi-
mony than  all  the  outward  opposition  and  persecution  it  has  ever  met.  This  form
of  Satanic  resistance  is  an  awful  proof  of  the  deep-sightedness  of  the  great  adversary.
He  knows  that  nothing  can  possibly  deaden  the  power  of  the  Church's  testimony  more
than  flooding  it  with  a  number  of  cold  formalists,  who  in  the  eyes  of  the  world  can  do
as  much  as  the  genuine  Christian.  And  then  when  the  world  detects  they  are  but
Bhams  and  finds  that  it  has  been  deceived,  so  much  the  better  for  him,  for  he  knows
that  the  whole  Church  will  be  judged  by  the  impostors,  andall  put  dowii  as  belonging
to  the  same  family.  Counterfeits  destroy  confidence.  This  is  true  in  everything.
It  is  unprincipled  rogues  that  make  it  so  hard  for  honest  men  to  get  their  bread.
It  is  quackery  that  keeps  the  true  medicine  out  of  the  field.  It  is  bubble  joint-stock
companies  that  eat  out  all  commercial  trust,  and  make  the  very  name  to  many  a
synonym  for  fraud.  Everywhere  the  true  and  real  are  suffering  through  the
influence  of  the  false  and  base  imitations.  I  have  heard  an  anecdote  somewhere  that
80  exactly  sets  forth  the  idea  I  have  in  my  mind  I  cannot  but  tell  it.  One  gentle-
man made  a  wager  with  another  that  if  he  stood  on  London  Bridge  with  a  tray
full  of  sovereigns  and  offered  them  to  the  public  for  sixpence  each,  he  would  not  sell
half  a  dozen  of  them  in  the  day.  All  day  long  the  man  cried  out,  •'  Eeal  sovereigns
for  sixpence,"  and  declared  with  all  earnestness  that  he  could  guarantee  their
gennineness.  Of  course  no  one  believed  him  and  he  sold  none.  Why  ?  Because
the  public  had  so  often  seen  sham  sovereigns  for  sale  that  it  never  doubted  they
were  the  same.  The  gilt  having  come  first  had  destroyed  all  faith  in  the  gold.
Just  80  in  the  spiritual  world.  The  existence  of  Jannes  and  Jambres  eats  out  all
faith  in  the  reality  of  any  Christian  life.  III.  The  end  or  thejb  resistance.
They  were  put  to  shame  (see  Exod.  viii.  18).  Ah  Jannes,  it  must  have  been  a  bitter
moment  when  you  stood  convicted  before  all  of  being  an  impostor  1  How  complete
the  collapse  of  their  pretensions.  So  shall  it  be  with  their  followers  of  to-day.  This
Paul  most  distinctly  states  in  the  verse  following  our  text,  "  But  they  shall  proceed
no  further:  for  their  folly  shall  be  manifest  unto  all  men  as  theirs  also  was."
"  Folly  "  ?  No  other  word  could  better  describe  their  resistance.  _  The  hypocrite  is
of  all  fools  the  greatest.  He  is  almost  certain  to  be  unmasked  in  time,  and  even
Ehoold  he  carry  on  the  horrible  deception  unto  the  last,  what  shall  it  profit  him
when  God  caUeth  for  his  soul  ?  Now  just  as  Jannes  and  Jambres  failed  to  do  all
that  Moses  did,  so  there  are  some  things  that  the  mere  formalist  can  never  accom-
plish. I  will  but  mention  two.  1.  He  has  no  power  to  bear  trouble  with  joyf  ulness.
His  whole  life  being  one  of  externals,  when  he  is  driven  by  force  of  circumstances  to
seek  his  joy  in  the  life  within,  he  fails,  and  fails  utterly,  for  there  is  no  life  there.
A  sham  Christianity  withers  up  in  days  of  trouble.  It  has  no  arms  to  put  beneath
a  man  when  the  dark  waters  of  sorrow  roll  and  surge  around  him.  No,  it  can  do
none  of  these.  It  fails  like  the  magicians  when  needed  the  most.  The  "  form  "
may  do  for  bright  and  sunny  days  when  sorrow  and  sickness  are  unknown,  but  it
requires  the  "  power  "  to  triumph  in  the  winter  night,  and  to  "  take  joyfully  the  spoil-
ing of  the  goods."  Put  a  Jannes  or  Jambres  amidst  a  number  of  anxious  souls,  and
tell  him  to  speak  to  them  and  point  them  the  way  of  peace.  See  how  he  fails.  2.
If  not,  I  pray  you  to  remember  that  Jannes  and  Jambres  were  included  in  the  doom
of  the  Egyptians.  When  the  angel  of  death  walked  through  the  streets  of  Egypt,
there  was  no  exception  made.  The  form  of  religion  does  not  save — the  appearance
of  piety  is  of  no  avail.  (A.  O.  Brown.)  Menmuat  guard  against  error : — This
must  teach  us  to  keep  our  judgments  pure,  and  our  understandings  dear,  for  it  il


CHAP,  in.]  n.  TIMOTHY,  271

our  gtiide,  and  if  that  mislead  us,  we  must  needs  fall  into  the  ditch.  Cormption  in
judgment  (in  some  respects)  is  worse  than  corruption  in  manners,  especially  when
the  mind  hath  been  enlightened  with  the  knowledge  of  the  truth  ;  for  this  is  the
root  of  those  corrupt  manners  that  are  amongst  us.  In  the  time  of  the  Law,  the
leprosy  in  the  head  was  of  all  other  leprosies  the  most  dangerous  and  destructive  ;
the  man  that  had  it  in  his  hand  or  feet  was  unclean,  but  if  it  were  in  his  head  then
he  was  to  be  pronounced  utterly  unclean  (Lev.  xiii.  44).  Hence  the  Scripture  givea
so  many  caveats  against  errors  and  erroneous  ones  (Dent.  xiii.  3  ;  Philip,  iii.  2;  Col.
ii.  8 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  17 ;  Matt.  vii.  13).  Beware  of  false  prophets ;  the  word  implies
•  diligent  study  and  singular  care,  lest  we  be  caught  by  such  subtle  adversaries.
Keep  your  judgments  pure.  1.  There  have  been  false  teachers  in  all  ages  to  oppose
the  truth  and  the  professors  of  it.  As  Jannes  and  Jambres  here  oppose  Moses,  a
meek,  a  learned,  a  faithful  servant  in  all  God's  house.  2.  That  as  the  devil  hath  his
Jannes  and  Jambres  to  oppose  the  truth,  so  God  hath  His  Moses  and  Aaron  to
nphold  it.  As  the  devil  hath  his  domestic  chaplains,  so  God  hath  His  armed
champions;  and  as  the  deAdl  raiseth  up  oppressors,  so  God  sends  saviours.  3.
A  corrupt  head  and  a  corrupt  heart  usually  go  together;  no  sooner  are  men's
minds  corrupted,  but  presently  it  follows  they  are  reprobate  concerning  the  faith  ;
and  if  once  men  make  shipwreck  of  faith,  they  will  soon  part  with  a  good  conscience
too.  Corrupt  principles  breed  corrupt  practices ;  and  corrupt  practices  teach  men  to
invent  corrupt  principles.  Be  sure,  then,  to  keep  your  heads  free  from  error,  if  ever
you  would  have  your  hearts  and  hands  pure  from  sin.  4.  That  false  teachers  are
very  dangerous  persons — they  are  not  such  meek,  innocent,  harmless  persons  as
some  imagine.  The  apostle  here  tells  us  that  they  are  impudent,  fraudulent,
resisters  of  the  truth,  men  of  corrupt  heads,  hearts,  and  hands  ;  and  what  could  he
say  more  unless  he  should  call  them  devils  ?  and  so  he  doth  (ver.  3),  in  the  last
days,  men,  especially  seducing  men  (for  all  these  nineteen  sins  are  applicable  also  to
the  false  teachers  of  the  last  times,  as  appears  by  the  context  (vers,  5,  6).  These
study  to  please  men,  and  therefore  they  are  no  servants  of  Christ  (GaL  i.  10),  all
their  fine  speeches  are  but  like  poison  given  in  honey,  which  destroys  more  swiftly.
They  set  a  gloss  upon  their  false  tenets  as  tradesmen  do  upon  their  bad  stuffs  to
make  them  sell  the  better.  They  can  cite  Scripture  to  draw  you  from  Scripture,
and  tempt  you  to  be  irreligious  by  religious  arguments  misapplied.  This  is  the
devil's  great  masterpiece  which  he  hath  now  upon  the  wheel,  he  carries  his  deadliest
poison  in  a  golden  cup  (Rev.  xvii.  4).  5.  They  wrest  and  abuse  the  Scriptures  for
their  own  ends.  They  do  violence  to  the  Law  (Zeph.  iii.  4),  they  wrest  and  wring  it,
they  add,  they  detract,  they  change  the  sense,  they  set  it  on  the  tenters  to  fit  it  to
their  fancies,  they  turn  it  this  way  and  that  way  as  may  best  serve  their  purposes ;
they  set  it  on  the  rack,  and  so  make  it  speak  what  it  never  thought.  They  compel
the  Scriptures  to  go  two  miles,  which  of  themselves  would  go  but  one.  They  deal
with  them  as  chemists  do  with  natural  bodies,  which  they  torture  to  get  that  out  of
them  which  God  and  nature  never  put  into  them  (2  Pet.  iii.  16).  6.  They  seek
their  own  glory,  not  God's.  They  cry  up  nature,  and  decry  grace,  they  cry  up  a
light  within  them  (which  is  no  better  than  darkness),  and  cry  down  God's  word
without  them,  Simon  Magus  sets  up  himself  instead  of  God  (Acts  viii.  9,  10),  they
drive  at  self  in  all  their  actings  (Rom.  xvi.  18 ;  2  Pet.  ii.  3,  14).  Impostors  are
always  great  self-seekers.  These  are  contrary  to  God's  faithful  ministers.  {T.
Hall,  B.D.)  Resistance  of  the  truth: — 1.  Its  weapons.  2.  Its  sworn  comrades.
3.  Its  stubbornness.  4.  Its  final  fate.  {Van  Oosterzee.)  Bounds  set  to  spread  of
error : — As  God  set  bounds  to  the  sea,  saying.  Hitherto  shall  ye  come  but  no  further,
and  here  shall  thy  proud  waves  be  stayed  (Job  xxxviii.  11),  so  He  limits  the
malice  and  madness  of  men  how  far  they  shall  prevail ;  He  only  can  stop  these  seas
of  error,  and  bound  these  floods  of  false  doctrine  which  are  ready  to  overflow  the
face  of  the  world.  (T.  Hall,  B.D.)  Deceivers  subject  to  providence  of  God : — Our
comfort  is  that  both  the  deceivers  and  the  deceived  are  ordered  by  the  providence
of  God  (Job  xii.  16) ;  He  sets  down  the  time  when  they  shall  begin,  and  limits  them
how  long  they  shall  continue,  He  orders  how  far  men  shall  deceive,  and  to  what
height  they  shall  come  and  prevail,  and  when  to  stop  them,  that  they  may  proceed
no  further  :  for  as  the  maliciousness,  so  the  deceivableness  of  men  would  know  no
bounds  if  God  did  not  bound  it ;  but  because  He  doth,  therefore  though  they  would,
yet  they  shall  proceed  no  further.  No  man  can  do  good  till  God  assist  him,  and  no
man  shall  do  hurt  when  God  will  stop  him  (Rev.  xx.  3).  (Ibid.)  Heresies  short-
lived  .-—Heresies  are  seldom  long-lived — such  meteors  last  not  long,  such  mushrooms
soon  vanish  ;  witness  Becold,  KnipperdoUing,  Phifer,  &c.      Though  for  a  time  they


272  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m.

may  deceive  many,  yet  in  ashorttime  God  discovers  their  hypocrisy  to  their  reproach.
(Ibid.)  Error  vanisheth,  truth  increaseth  : — Heresy  is  like  a  cloud  which  for  a
little  time  darkens  the  Church,  and  then  vanisheth.  But  truth,  though  it  meet  with
opposition  at  first  and  hath  few  followers,  yet  increaseth  and  prevails  against  all
opposition.  It  hath  its  plus  ultra,  it  is  perpetual  and  endures  for  ever  (Ibid.)
Impudent  error  near  its  end: — Pride  and  impudence,  tbey  do  not  only  preach  but
print  their  blasphemy :  a  sign  their  end  is  near.  Smoke,  the  higher  it  riseth  the
sooner  it  is  scattered  (Psa.  Ixviii.  1,  2).  (Ibid.)  The  fall  of  error : — They  shall
fall — 1.  Irrecoverably.     2.   Easily.     3.  Suddenly.      4.  Surely.      {Ibid.)  False

teachers  exposed : — Observe,  that  God  will  overthrow  false  teachers,  by  discovering
their  coverings  and  malting  known  their  delusions  to  the  world.  As  a  disease
discovered  is  half  cured,  so  an  error  discovered  is  half  conquered.  Usually  before
God  overthrows  wicked  men  He  discovers  their  vileness  first,  that  the  glory  of  His
justice  may  be  the  more  apparent,  and  His  people  may  come  out  from  amongst
them.  (Ibid.)  A  faithjul  ministry  the  best  safeguard  against  error : — When  the
Bun  ariseth  the  clouds  scatter,  and  where  the  Son  of  Eighteousness  is  powerfully
preached  and  published,  heretics  hide  themselves,  and  dare  not  make  that  open  sale
of  their  wares  as  they  do  in  dark  corners.  Let  us  therefore  pull  off  their  masks  of
liberty,  their  sleeves  of  sanctity,  and  their  trappings  of  hypocrisy :  let  us  expose
their  error,  stripped  and  naked  in  their  own  natural  deformity,  and  they  will  soon  be
exploded  by  all,  so  that  they  shall  proceed  no  further.  (Ibid.)  Error  utilised  and
subjugated  at  last : — He  is  infinitely  just,  though  His  ways  be  secret  and  full  of
darkness  to  us,  yet  they  are  always  just.  When  clouds  and  darlcness  are  round
about  Him,  then  righteousness  and  judgment  are  the  habitation  of  His  throne  (Psa.
xcvii.  7).  He  can  make  a  medicine  of  the  poisonous  oppositions  of  wicked  men,
their  malice  shall  be  as  horse-leeches  to  suck  out  the  bad  blood,  as  a  file  to  take  off
the  rust,  as  rubbish  to  cleanse  the  vessel  and  wash  away  the  filth,  and  as  a  touch-
stone to  try  the  graces  of  His  children.  And  though  His  providences  seem  to  cross
His  promises,  yet  wait  the  conclusion,  and  you  shall  see  and  say  He  hath  done  all
things  well.  We  see  in  a  clock  though  the  wheels  run  cross  and  contrary  one  to
another,  yet  they  all  conduce  to  the  going  of  the  clock.  Joseph's  imprisonment  is
the  way  to  his  preferment,  and  Jonali's  drowning  was  the  means  to  save  him  from
drowning.  We  must  not  judge  of  God's  actions  before  they  be  formed  and  finished.
(Ibid.)  Their  folly  shall  be  manifest  unto  all. — The  efficiency  of  the  Divine
Government  seen  in  the  limitations  of  wickedness : — 1.  This  is  seen  in  the  manifest
folly  of  sin.  Sin  is  always  folly,  but  this  is  not  always  made  manifest  in  the  course
of  human  affairs.  But  God's  government  is  such  that,  though  the  folly  of  sin  be
not  in  every  case  made  manifest,  it  is  always  made  clear  that  God  thwarts  the  designs
of  wicked  men,  no  matter  how  ingenious  they  may  be.  Men  play  the  knave,  only
to  show  themselve?  fools.  Their  deeds  ever  pass  in  review  before  the  never-closing
eye  of  Him  who  holds  every  destiny  in  His  hand.  Under  every  wise  system  of
government  sin  is  demonstrated  to  be  folly,  though  it  may  not  always  be  exposed.

2.  One  of  the  declared  principles  of  this  effective  government  is,  that  crime  shall
be  its  own  warning.  There  are  earnests  of  penalties  and  promises  of  penalties,  no
less  pronounced,  in  every-day  life,  than  in  the  written  moral  code,  the  latter  to
follow  us  hereafter.  The  trial  and  punishment  of  law-breakers  remain  unfinished
here,  though  there  are  generally  enough  admonitions  to  associate  sin  with  approach-
ing danger.  Owing  to  the  cross-workings  of  law  upon  law,  here  the  danger  is  not
BO  apparent ;  but  the  Divine  economy  marks  its  criminals  before  they  are  arraigned.

3.  Sin  is  often  limited  by  exposure,  pain,  and  special  judgments,  so  that  God  Him-
self becomes  the  greatest  restraint.  Destruction  of  Sennacherib's  army.  4.  Divine
grace  often  limits  sin  in  action.  Conversion  of  Paul.  Lessons  : — 1.  If  there  is  a
limit  to  wickedness,  and  to  wicked  men,  in  their  course,  there  must  be  a  limit  to
individual  sins.  The  believer  has  to  struggle  more  or  less  with  sin  while  in  this
world,  but  there  will  be  an  end  of  all  that  conflict.  2.  Living  under  such  a  govern-
ment, how  unwise  to  lead  wicked  lives  !  3.  The  Christian  can  be  faithful  and
energetic  in  his  work.  Sin  is  sure  to  fail,  and  righteousness  to  succeed.  (W.  M.
Barbour,  D.D.)  The  true  nature  of  scepticism : — Some  time  ago  I  was  a  little
alarmed  at  the  stealthy  progress  which  that  accursed  system — seculariem — was
making  in  Lancashire.  But  God  settled  it.  God  sent  us  the  cotton  famine  ;  that
settled  it :  and  secularism  has  never  rallied  since.  When  the  secularists  used  to
come  out  to  meet  us,  they  said  to  the  people,  "  Don't  listen  to  these  men  ;  all  they
want  is  your  money.  All  their  talk  is  about  the  next  world.  They  do  not  care
about  this.  They  do  not  care  about  your  having  food,  clothes,  and  healthy  homes."


CBAF.m.]  n.  TIMOTHY,  273

And  thus  we  were  taunted  everywhere.  Then  occurred  the  outbreak  of  that  terrible
cotton  famine.  Where  were  the  secularists  then  ?  Like  the  Arabs  of  the  desert,
they  folded  up  their  tents  and  silently  stole  away.  And  they  who  had  said  it  was
their  special  mission  to  deal  with  temporalities,  forgot  all  temporalities  but  their
own,  and  came  up  to  London  to  lecture  upon  anything — "  admission  threepence."
(C.  Garrett.)  Manifest  folly  : — Dr.  John  Hall,  in  one  of  his  sermons,  compared
the  attacks  of  infidelity  upon  Christianity  to  a  serpent  gnawing  at  a  file.  As  ho
kept  on  gnawing,  he  was  greatly  encouraged  by  the  sight  of  the  growing  pile  of
chips,  till,  feeling  pain  and  seeing  blood,  he  found  that  he  had  been  wearing  his
own  teeth  away  against  the  fiile,  but  the  file  was  unharmed.  The  folly  of  opposition
to  Christ : — You  have  heard  of  the  swordfish.  It  is  a  very  curious  creature,  with  a
long  and  bony  beak  or  sword  projecting  in  front  of  its  head.  It  is  also  very  fierce,
attacking  other  fishes  that  come  in  its  way,  and  trying  to  pierce  them  with  its  sword.
The  fish  has  sometimes  been  known  to  dart  at  a  ship  in  full  sail  with  such  violence
as  to  pierce  the  solid  timbers.  But  what  has  happened  ?  The  silly  fish  has  been
killed  outright  by  the  force  of  its  own  blow.  The  ship  sails  on  just  as  before,  and
the  angry  swordfish  falls  a  victim  to  its  own  rage.  But  how  shall  we  describe  the
folly  of  those  who  oppose  the  cause  of  Christ  ?  They  cannot  succeed ;  like  the
swordfish,  they  only  work  their  own  destruction.  (G.  S.  Boioes.)  Error  cannot  stand  :
— Error  is  a  palace  of  ice,  which  at  last  must  melt  and  tumble  down  necessarily,
when  but  one  ray  of  the  sunlight  of  truth  penetrates  it.  (Van  Oosterzee.)  The
gospel  and  its  enemies  : — Luther  heard  one  day  a  nightingale  singing  very  sweetly
near  a  pond  full  of  frogs,  who,  by  their  croaking,  seemed  as  though  they  wanted  to
silence  the  melodious  bird.  The  Doctor  said,  "  Thus  'tis  in  the  world  ;  Jesus  Christ
is  the  nightingale,  making  the  gospel  to  be  heard ;  the  heretics  and  false  prophets
are  the  frogs,  trying  to  prevent  his  being  heard."    (Table  Talk.)

Vers.  10,  11.  But  thou  hast  fully  known  my  doctrine,   manner  of  life. —

Apostolic  imitation : — 1.  Doctrine.  2.  Conversation.  3.  Purpose.  4.  Faith.  5.  Long-
suffering.  6.  Love.  7.  Patience.  8.  Persecutions.  9.  Afidictions.  (T.  Hall,  B.D.)
Precedents  better  than  precepts  : — Now  since  we  are  more  easily  led  by  precedents
than  by  precepts,  the  apostle  propounds  his  own  example  for  our  imitation,  wherein
we  have  the  lively  pattern  and  portraiture  of  a  faithful  pastor,  whose  office  it  is
not  only  to  preach  sound  doctrine,  but  also  to  practise  what  he  preacheth  in  liia
own  life,  that  so  he  may  be  able  to  speak  from  the  heart  to  the  hearts  of  his
people,  and  may  not  bring  his  food  as  birds  do  to  their  young  ones — in  their  beaks,
not  in  their  breasts.  (Ibid.)  The  example  of  superiors  powerful : — In  that  Paul
propounds  his  own  example  for  Timothy  to  consider  and  follow.  That  the  pious
example  of  the  godly  must  be  imitated  by  us.  Younger  ministers  especially  must
observe  the  doctrine  and  conversation,  the  pious  ways  and  walking  of  the  elder  and
graver  ministers,  and  must  follow  them.  Aged  Paul  propounds  his  virtues  to
young  Timothy  for  imitation.  Many  young  men  praise  the  gravity,  solidity,
wisdom,  industry,  mortification,  and  self-denial  of  ancient  ministers,  but  they  do
not  follow  them.  They  deal  by  them  as  the  world  doth  by  honesty,  they  praise  it,
but  they  never  practise  it.  As  Gideon  said  to  his  soldiers  ( Judg.  vii.  17),  "  Look
upon  me,  and  do  likewise" ;  so  you  that  are  young  and  unsettled,  rash,  and  conceited,
look  upon  the  doctrine,  discipline,  hair,  habit,  ways  and  works  of  the  holy,  and
the  grave ;  follow  them  now  you  are  young,  and  then  you  will  be  good  long.  Great
is  the  power  of  the  example  of  superiors,  (md.)  A  copy  to  write  by : — God  hath
set  them  before  us  as  our  copy  to  write  by,  and  our  pattern  to  live  by,  and  we  must
answer  not  only  for  sinning  against  the  light  of  the  word,  but  against  the  light  of
good  example  also.  It  will  be  one  day  said,  "  You  had  such  and  such  to  go  before
you  in  paths  of  piety,  and  yet  you  would  not  follow."  The  faithful  are  called
witnesses  (Heb.  xii.  1 ;  Rev.  xii.).  Now  if  we  walk  contrary  to  their  light  they  will
witness  against  us,  as  Noah  and  Lot  did  against  the  sinners  of  their  age ;  but  if  we
walk  answerable  to  their  light  they  will  witness  for  us.  Their  practice  may
comfort  and  confirm  us  in  God's  way ;  they  declare  the  possibility  of  obtaining  such
a  grace,  and  make  it  thereby  the  more  easy,  when  we  have  seen  it  done  before  us.
If  a  man  have  a  torch  to  light  him  in  a  dark  and  dangerous  path,  how  glad  is  he :
the  godly  shine  like  lights  in  the  midst  of  a  crooked  generation  (Phil.  ii.  15,  16),
their  hfe  is  a  commentary  on  the  Scripture.  Now  since  the  nature  of  man  is  apter
to  be  guided  by  example  then  precept,  therefore  God  hath  prepared  abundance  of
glorious  examples  for  our  imitation,  and  thus  the  saints  that  are  now  at  rest  and
triumphant  in  glory,  their  lives  are  to  be  our  looking-glasses  to  dress  ouselves  by,

18


274  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in.

our  oompasB  to  sail  by,  and  our  pillar  of  a  olond  to  walk  by.    {Ibid.)        We  rmut
come  up  to  the  best  patterns  : — We  can  have  no  excuse  in  these  days  of  light  if  we
come  not  up  to  the  best  patterns,  because  we  have  more  of  the  spirit,  more  light,
and  more  clear  manifestation  of  God  than  they  had.    {Ibid.)         The  best  patterns
defective : — The  saints  have  had  their  failings,  and  the  best  have  a  great  deal  of  the
old  Adam  in  them.     They  are  pillars  of  cloud  for  us  to  walk  by,  but  this  cloud
hath  its  dark  part,  which  if  we  follow  we  shall  fall  as  they  did.      There  are
four  sorts  of  actions  which  the  Scripture  tells  us  were  done  by  saints.    {Ibid.)
Both  doctrines  and  graces  must  be  good : — Our  Saviour  by  the  truth  of  His  doctrine
proved  Himself  to  be  sent  of  God  (John  vii.  16,  17,  18,  and  xii.  49,  50).    Paul
commands  Timothy  to  keep  the  pattern  of  wholesome  words  (2  Tim.  ii.  13),  and
Titus  must  be  careful  in  appointing  ministers  for  the  Church,  to  choose  such  as  hold
the  faithful  word  (Titus  i.  7, 9).     Moral  virtues  may  be  found  with  a  false  faith;  let
not  those  apples  of  Sodom  deceive  you,  for  as  there  may  be  good  doctrine  where  the
life  is  bad,  so  there  may  be  false  doctrine  where  the  life  is  seemingly  good.    Look,
therefore,  in  the  first  place  to  the  doctrine,  and  in  the  second  place  to  the  virtues
which  seem  to  commend  it.    So  doth  Paul  here  ;  first  he  tells  you  his  doctrine  was
Bound,  and  now  he  comes  to  declare  his  graces,  and  how  he  lived.     {Ibid.)
Patience  in  ministers  : — A  little  patience  will  not  do,  for  we  have  no  little  enemies
to  oppose  us — it  must  be  all  patience  and  all  strength.    This  also  is  a  virtue  very
requisite  for  a  minister,  who  hath  to  do  with  all  sorts  of  men  ;  some  are  dull,  some
froward,  some  weak,  some  wayward;  so  that  without  patience  there  is  no  good  to
be  done.    It  is  for  pusillanimous  spirits  to  be  always  murmuring,  complaining,
and  seeking  revenge.     The  weakest  creatures  are  most  vindictive.    This  is  an
ornament  of  great  worth,  not  only  in  the  sight  of  man,  but  also  of  God  (1  Pet.  iii.  4).
Without  it  we  are  unfit  for  duty,  as  the  troubled  sea  unfit  for  voyage.    Without  it
we  double  and  increase  our  burthens ;  like  a  wild  bull  in  a  net,  or  the  untamed
heifer,  we  may  gall  our  necks,  but  never  break  the  yoke.    Without  patience  no
grace  is  perfect,  faith  hath  but  half  its  strength,  and  hope  is  feeble  (Jas.  i.  4).    By
our  patience  we  please  God,  displease  the  devil,  rejoice  the  angels,  and  many  times
melt  and  convert  our  enemies.    By  this  means  we  heap  coals  of  conversion  or  coals
of  confusion  upon  their  heads  (Kom.  xii.  20).    This  wiU  keep  us  good  in  a  bad
condition,  so  that  a  man  enjoys  himself  when  he  hath  nothing  else ;  and  though
he  have  nothing,  yet  is  as  one  that  possesseth  all  things.    The  consideration  of
this  made  Tertullian  to  cry,  "  Farewell  all,  so  I  may  but  get  patience."    {Ibid.)
Christian  consistency : — Paul  did  not  pull  down  by  his  living  what  he  built  up  by
his  preaching.     {M.  Henry.)        Life  an  eloquent  sermon : — Of  Donne's  romantic
career  it  has  been  said  that  his  life  is  more  poetical  than  his  poetry.     We  might
without  exaggeration  adapt  this  epigram  to  his  preaching,  and  say  that  his  life  was
a  sermon  more  eloquent  than  all  his  sermons.    If,  then,  I  were  asked  to  describe
in  few  words  the  secret  of  his  power  as  a  preacher,  I  should  say  that  it  was  the
contrition  and  the  thanksgiving  of  the  penitent  acting  upon  the  sensibility  of  the
poet.     {Bp.  Lightfoot.)         The  preaching  that  tells  : — There  is  a  legend  which  tells
now  a  saint  once  in  vision  saw  a  band  of  Franciscan  friars  standing  round  Jesus  in
heaven.     He  noticed  that  the  lips  of  each  were  crimson.     He  asked  the  meaning  of
this,  and  to  him  the  Lord  said,  "  These  are  the  great  preachers  of  my  Cross,  for
the  story  of  My  redeeming  love  only  comes  with  power  over  lips  that  are  red  with
My  precious  blood."     Yes  ;  the  preaching  that  will  save  preacher  and  hearers  is
the  preaching  that  comes  from  crimson  lips.     {British  Weekly.)        The  stimulus
of  example  : — The  other  evening  a  gentleman  told  me  that  he  went  into  the  room
where  his  son  was  taking  lessons  in  singing,  and  found  the  tutor  urging  the  boy  to
sound  a  certain  note.     Every  time  the  lad  made  the  attempt,  however,  he  fell
short,  and  his  teacher  kept  saying  to  him,  •'  Higher  1  higher  1  "  but  it  was  all  to  no
purpose  until,  descending  to  the  tone  which  the  boy  was  sounding,  the  musician
accompanied  him  with  his  own  voice,  and  led  him  gradually  up  to  that  which  h*
desired  him  to  sing  ;  and  then  he  sounded  it  with  ease.    (W.  M.  Taylor,  DM.)

"  Example  is  a  living  law,  whose  sway
Men  more  than  all  the  written  laws  obey."

{Old  Poet.)

Example  Is  the  school  of  mankind,  and  they  will  learn  at  no  other.  (Burh*.)
The  power  of  a  godly  life  : — "  Whenever  I  read  Scripture,  a  thousand  atheistical
thoughts  were  injected  in  my  soul.  .  .  .  Being  in  Mr.  T.  H.'s  house,  a  godly  and


CHA».  ra.l  II.  TIMOTHY,  275

prudent  man,  his  company  did  me  much  good  ...  For  the  universal  carnality  of
professors,  with  their  discouragements,  living  so  short  of  their  principles,  did  much
help  forward  my  atheism,  as  it  made  me  think  that  a  saint  was  but  a  fancy ;  but
truly  I  thought  mine  eyes  saw  something  of  a  saint  and  New  Testament  spirit  in
him,  and  was  something  persuaded,  by  feeling  his  holiness,  his  cheerf alness  in
God,  and  his  deep  reach  in  spiritual  mysteries,  that  there  was  a  God,  and  a  holiness
attainable."  {Life  of  James  Fraser  of  Brea.)  Cassoch  and  character : — I  like
that  remark  of  Whitfield's,  when  some  one  of  a  bad  character  wondered  how  he
could  preach  without  a  cassock.  "  Ah,"  he  said,  "  I  can  preach  without  a  cassock,
but  I  cannot  preach  without  a  character."  {G.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Patd's  path  of
suffering : — The  path  of  suffering  of  the  apostle  Paul  a  revelation — 1.  Of  the  power
of  sin  which  pursued  him.  2.  Of  the  greater  power  of  faith  which  sustained  him.
3.  Of  the  omnipotence  of  the  Lord  who  deUvered  him  out  of  all.  (Vom  Oosterzee.)
Commands  should  be  enforced  by  example  : — During  the  siege  of  Sebastopol  Gordon
was  one  day  going  the  round  of  the  trenches  when  he  heard  an  angry  altercation
between  a  corporal  and  a  sapper.  On  inquiring  the  cause,  he  learnt  that  the  men
were  instructed  to  place  some  gabions  on  the  battery,  and  that  the  corporal  had
ordered  the  sapper  to  stand  on  the  parapet,  where  he  would  be  exposed  to  the
enemy's  fire,  and  to  place  the  gabions,  while  he,  perfectly  sheltered,  handed  them
up  from  below.  Gordon  at  once  jumped  upon  the  parapet,  ordering  the  corporal
to  join  him,  while  the  sapper  handed  them  the  gabions.  When  the  work  was  done,
and  done  under  the  fire  of  the  watchful  Eussian  gunners,  Gordon  turned  to  the
corporal  and  said,  '•  Never  order  a  man  to  do  anything  that  you  are  afraid  to  do
yourself, "  Wicked  men  hate  the  good : — All  wicked  men  hate  the  good,  as  all  wolves
do  the  sheep.  (T.  Hall,  B.D.)  Persecution  beneficial: — Such  shakings  make
way  for  Christ  (Hag.  ii.  7).  The  Church,  like  a  quick-set  hedge,  grows  the  thicker
for  cutting,  this  vine  is  the  better  for  bleeding,  and  this  torch  bums  the  better  for
beating.  The  more  Pharaoh  oppressed  the  Israelites  the  more  they  increased
(Exod.  i.  12).  {Ibid.)  Deliverances  to  be  noted  : — Not  only  our  dangers,  but  also
our  dehverances  must  be  observed  and  recorded  by  us.     {Ibid.)

Ver.  12.  All  that  will  liviB  godly  In  Christ  Jesus  shall  suffer  persecution. — A
Christian  is  not  a  favourite  with  the  world : — Who  can  help  admiring  the  frankness
of  Scripture  ?  It  shows  us  the  difficulties  as  well  as  the  enjoyments  of  religion ;
the  sacrifices  it  requires,  as  well  as  the  rewards  it  insures.  This  is  perfectly  just,
and  in  every  way  profitable.  I.  The  life  described.  It  may  be  taken  with  two
distinctions.  1.  It  is  not  merely  a  moral  life,  but  a  godly  one.  We  by  no  means
depreciate  morality.  A  man  cannot  be  religious  without  being  moral,  but  he  may
be  moral  without  being  religious.  It  is  well  to  be  a  good  master,  a  good  neighbour,
a  good  subject — but  how  are  you  disposed  towards  God  ?  2.  It  is  not  merely  a
godly  life,  but  a  Christian  one.  We  are  not  only  to  hve  godly,  but  to  live  godly
"  in  Christ  Jesus ;  "  i.e.,  in  all  our  religious  concerns — To  be  governed  by  the
revelation  of  Jesus  Christ — To  be  conformed  to  the  example  of  Jesus  Christ — To  be
actuated  by  the  grace  of  Jesus  Christ — And  to  depend  on  the  mediation  of  Jesus
Christ.  II.  The  condition  announced  as  the  consequence  of  the  life
DESCRIBED.  "  Shall  suffcr  persecution."  1.  That  ever  since  the  Fall  there  has
been  an  irreconcilable  enmity  between  the  ••  seed  of  the  woman  and  the  seed  of  the
serpent";  that  "man  being  alienated  from  the  life  of  God,"  loves  nothing  thai
reminds  him  of  God ;  that  the  tempers  and  actions  of  the  righteous  necessarily
reprove  and  upbraid  the  wicked  ;  that  their  endeavours  to  save  disturb  them  in
their  sins;  tbat  the  gospel  condemns  the  worldly  as  well  as  the  vicious,  and  the
formal  as  well  as  the  negligent ;  that,  as  there  is  nothing  in  Christianity  that
flatters  sin,  so  there  is  nothing  that  flatters  self ;  and  that  every  man  is  naturally
as  self-righteous  as  he  is  depraved.  2.  To  this  we  may  add  another  source  of  the
inevitableness  of  persecution.  It  is  taken  from  the  Christian  himself.  Suffering  is
necessary  for  his  trial  and  his  triumph.  Without  this  how  could  he  prove  that  he
loves  God  better  than  friendship,  reputation,  wealth,  or  life?  How  could  he  over-
come evil  with  good  ?  It  is  warfare  that  mates  a  good  soldier.  A  Christian  is  like
the  firmament,  and  it  is  the  darkness  of  affliction  that  makes  his  starry  graces  to
shine  out.  He  is  like  those  herbs  and  plants  that  best  effuse  their  odours  when
bruised.  Concluding  reflections: — 1.  There  are  some  who  suffer  persecution  that
do  not  Hve  godly  in  Christ  Jesus.  The  people  of  the  world  cannot  easily  distinguish
between  "  the  form  of  godliness  and  the  power,"  and  therefore  the  pretending  and
the  sincere  frequently  fare  alike.    The  hypocrite  loses  heaven  for  the  sake  of  earth.


276  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [coap.  ui.

and  earth  for  the  sake  of  hea\e  i,  and  is  of  all  creatures  the  most  miserable.  2.
With  what  caution  and  prayer  should  we  assume  a  profession  of  reUgion  I  3.  If  any
man  suffer  as  a  Christian,  let  him  not  be  ashamed,  but  let  him  glorify  God  on  this
behalf.  It  gives  you  an  opportunity  to  prove  your  thankfulness  for  His  goodness,
and  your  adherence  to  His  gospel.  4.  But  what  shall  we  say  to  persecutors  ?  If
you  feel  enmity  against  the  godly,  and  would  injure  them  were  it  in  your  power,  it
IS  *•  a  token  of  perdition."  You  may  now  be  placed  above  them  in  circumstances ;
and  may  love  to  misrepresent  and  to  vihfy  them.  But  "  their  Redeemer  is  mighty,"
He  is  "  near  that  justifieth  them."  He  "  will  plead  their  cause."  He  that
"  toucheth  them,  toucheth  the  apple  of  His  eye."  (W.  Jay.)  Persecution  of
Christians  by  the  world : — The  greater  part  of  our  sufferings  are  not  distinguishable
from  the  common  afflictions  of  life ;  and  many  of  the  trials  that  some  foolish
professors  frequently  charge  on  religion,  reUgion  would  teach  them  to  avoid,  if  its
admonitions  were  regarded.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  it  must  be  allowed — 1.  That
human  nature  is  essentially  the  same  in  every  age ;  and  that  a  tiger  may  be  chained
and  not  changed.  Under  every  form  of  government  "  the  heart  is  deceitful  above
all  things,  and  desperately  wicked."  And  where  there  is  a  strong  active  propensity
against  anything  (as,  in  this  case,  there  must  be  against  real  godliness),  it  will  show
itself  as  opportunity  offers ;  and  such  opportunity  there  must  be  in  a  world  like
this.  2.  That  persecution  admits  of  various  degrees.  It  includes  every  kind  of
injury  or  vexation,  from  a  fiery  stake  to  a  scornful  sneer.  How  often  has  genuine
religion  produced  the  loss  of  friendship,  or  chilled  the  warmth  of  attachment  into
cold  civility  I  Where  power  is  possessed,  it  is  frequently  exerted  as  far  as  safety  or
a  regard  to  appearances  will  allow.  This  is  seen  in  the  attempts  of  husbands,
parents,  and  masters,  to  restrain  from  following  their  rehgious  convictions  their
wives,  their  children,  and  their  servants.  With  regard  to  relations,  a  Christian
will  sometimes  find  a  greater  trial  in  their  affections  than  in  their  frowns.  Here  is
a  mother,  in  all  other  respects  tender  and  kind  ;  she  takes  her  daughter  aside,  and
weeps  to  think  she  should  favour  a  doctrine  "everywhere  spoken  against."  3.  If
modem  Christians  frequently  escape  persecution,  may  it  not  be  asked  whether,  in
many  instances,  it  does  not  arise  from  their  less  fully  exemplifying  the  spirit  of
their  rehgion  than  the  primitive  Christians  did  ?  (1)  The  one  is  concealment.
This  is  dastardly  and  mean.  We  should  never  be  drawn  out  of  a  corner  by  the
praise  of  man,  nor  be  driven  into  a  corner  by  the  fear  of  man.  (2)  The  other  is
accommodation.  And  it  is  awful  to  think  how  one  doctrine  and  usage  after  another
has  been  given  up  1  Christianity,  says  one,  will  never  be  received  by  Jews  and
Mahometans,  while  you  "honour  the  Son  as  you  honour  the  Father."  It  will
never  be  acceptable,  says  another,  to  men  of  taste  and  learning,  till  you  abandon
the  barbarous  notion  of  the  atonement  and  of  original  sin.  Now,  upon  this  plan,
what  would  be  left  after  all  the  objectors  were  satisfied  ?  Christianity  allows  of  no
alteration.  It  needs  none.  The  change  required  therefore  is,  where  it  ought  to  be —
in  the  world.  ( W.  Jay. )  A  good  man  a  good  mark  for  the  arrow : — The  better  the  man,
the  sooner  persecuted  ;  the  devil  shoots  his  arrows  at  the  whitest  marks,  {T.  Hall,
B.D.)  A  good  man  a  miracle  of  preservation ; — It  is  a  miracle  of  mercy  to  consider
how  the  lily  subsists  in  the  midst  of  so  many  briars  and  thorns,  how  the  Lord's
wheat  grows  in  the  midst  of  so  many  tares,  how  His  doves  live  in  the  midst
of  so  many  birds  of  prey,  and  His  lambs  in  the  midst  of  so  many  roaring  lions.
Were  not  the  Almighty  her  defence,  those  bands  of  ungodliness  would  soon  destroy
her,  (Ibid. )  God  Jwnoured  by  His  suffering  servants  : — Hereby  we  honour  God,
and  BO  bring  honour  to  ourselves.  God  hath  much  honour  by  His  suffering
servants,  when  out  of  love  to  Him  they  can  sacrifice  their  lives  and  estates  for  Him,
God  glories  in  such ;  as  He  suffers  in  their  sufferings  so  He  triumphs  in  their
conquests,  (Ibid.)  Beat  when  worst: — God  is  pleased  to  reserve  the  sweetest
manifestations  from  the  bitterest  afflictions.  The  fountain  runs  most  sweetly
when  the  cistern  is  broken.  When  comforts  are  most  needed  they  will  be  most
prized.  The  traveller  in  summer,  when  the  sun  shines,  casts  off  his  cloak,  but  in
winter,  or  when  the  wind  blows  hard,  he  wraps  it  closer  to  him.  So  when  we
bathe  ourselves  in  creature  comforts  we  value  not  the  promises  of  God,  but  when
we  are  stripped  of  all  then  we  look  after  God.  When  the  salt  waters  are  dried  up,
then  there  are  fresh  springs  in  God.  (Ibid.)  The  good  7nan  happy  in  adversity,
the  bad  man  miserable  in  prosperity : — See  the  happiness  of  a  child  of  God.  Take
him  at  worst,  and  he  is  better  than  a  wicked  man  at  best.  The  one  in  prosperity
hath  no  joy,  the  other  in  adversity  is  full  of  joy.  (Ibid.)  Brave  martyrdom:—'
At  Perth,  in  1554,  there  were  three  male  prisoners  and  one  woman — Helen  Stirk —


CHAP,  m.]  n.  TIMOTHY.  277

put  to  death  for  their  adherence  to  the  gospel  of  Jesns.  The  latter  was  taken  to
see  her  husband  suffer  before  she  followed  him.  They  embraced  under  the  gallows.
'•  Husband,"  she  said,  "  we  have  lived  together  many  joyful  days;  but  this  day  in
which  we  must  die  ought  to  be  most  joyful  to  us  both,  because  we  must  have  joy
for  ever.  Therefore  I  will  not  bid  you  good-night.  Certainly  we  shall  meet  again
in  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  The  executioners  seized  their  prey,  and  she,  too,  was
then  led  away  to  be  drowned.  When  she  reached  the  water's  edge  she  gave  the
child  to  a  nurse,  she  was  hurled  in,  and  the  justice  of  the  Church  was  satisfied.

Ver.  13.  But  evil  men  and  seducers  shall  wax  worse. — Graduating  in  un-
godliness : — 1.  If  we  consider  wicked  men  as  they  are  in  themselves,  they  are  all
strongly  bent  to  apostasy ;  every  day  they  grow  worse  and  worse.  As  godly  men  are
graduates  in  God's  school,  growing  from  strength  to  strength,  and  from  one  degree
of  grace  unto  another,  till  they  become  perfect  men  in  Christ,  every  sermon
makes  them  better,  and  every  ordinance  improves  them.  So  wicked  men  are
graduates  also,  and  take  degrees  in  the  devil's  school ;  they  stand  not  at  a  stay,  but
they  grow  from  evil  to  worse.  As  he  that  is  righteous  will  go  on  and  be  more
righteous,  so  he  that  is  filthy  will  go  on  in  his  filthrness  (Eev.  xxii.  11).  It  is  the
proper  character  of  wicked  men  that  they  fall  away  more  and  more  (Isa.  i.  6 ;
Prov.  i.  22).  2.  But  secondly,  let  us  consider  them  specifically  and  divisively  for  such
evil  men  as  are  deceivers  and  impostors,  and  these  we  see  experimentally  grow  worse
and  worse.  They  have  no  foundation  to  rest  on ;  they  know  no  stay  when  once  they
have  passed  the  bounds  of  the  word,  no  more  than  a  violent  stream  doth  when  it
hath  broke  over  those  bounds  and  bonds  which  before  kept  it  in.  Error  knows  no
end ;  when  once  men  fort^ake  the  way  of  truth  they  wander  in  infinitum.  As  it  is  in
logic,  grant  one  absurdity  and  I  will  infer  a  thousand,  and  as  sin  begets  sin,
blood  toucheth  blood,  and  one  murder  begets  another  (Hos.  iv.  2).  So  error  is  very
fertile  and  prolific ;  it  speedily  brings  forth  a  great  increase.  One  error  is  a
bridge  to  another ;  ill  weeds  spring  apace  and  spread  far,  when  good  herbs  grow
thin  and  low.  A  little  of  this  leaven  will  quickly  sour  the  whole  lump  (Matt.  xvi.  6).
When  once  men  begin  to  tumble  down  the  hill  of  error  they  seldom  rest  till  they
come  to  the  bottom.  {T.  Hall,  B.D.)  Deceiving  others  and  being  deceived  in
turn: — They  cozen  others,  and  the  devil  cozens  them,  leading  them  into  far  greater
errors ;  and  so  they  shall  be  punished  on  a  double  account.  1.  Because  they  err
themselves  and  resist  the  truth.  2.  Because  they  have  drawn  others  into  error.
The  participle  of  the  present  tense  notes  their  assiduity  and  constancy ;  they  make
it  their  trade  to  deceive  others  :  they  are  still  deceiving  one  or  other  with  their
smooth,  flattering  language.  As  God  loves  to  employ  good  men  for  the  conversion
of  others  (not  that  He  needs  the  help  of  man,  but),  for  the  exercising  of  the  graces
of  His  servants,  and  for  the  greater  manifestation  of  His  own  glory,  so  the  devil,
who  is  God's  ape,  loves  to  deceive  men  by  men.  He  hath  his  agents  and  emissaries
everywhere.  As  good  men  delight  in  converting  others,  so  wicked  men  delight  in
perverting  others;  as  those  would  not  go  to  heaven  alone,  so  these  would  not  go  to
hell  alone :  and  therefore  they  labour  to  make  others  twofold  more  the  children
of  the  devil  than  themselves.  {Ibid.)  Satan  the  great  deceiver: — As  thieves
when  they  would  rob  a  man  draw  him  aside  out  of  the  highway  into  some
wood,  and  then  cut  his  throat,  so  this  grand  deceiver  and  his  agents  draw  men
aside  from  the  right  way  of  God's  worship  into  some  bypaths  of  error  to  their  ruin.
The  devil  he  is  the  cheater  of  cheaters,  and  deluder  of  deluders  ;  it  is  his  constant
trade,  as  the  participle  implies.  And  this  is  the  reason  why  many  false  teachers
may  die  with  boldness  and  courage  for  their  opinions,  viz.,  because  they  are  blinded
and  deluded  by  the  devil ;  they  think  themselves  martyrs,  when  they  are  grand
deceivers  and  grossly  deceived.  We  had  need,  therefore,  to  pray  for  the  Spirit  of
grace  and  illumination  that  we  may  see  the  methods,  depths,  and  devices  of  Satan
and  avoid  them.      (Ibid.)  Worse  and  worse: — Things   alter  for  the  worse

spontaneously,  if  they  be  not  altered  for  the  better  designedly.  (Bacon.)  Being
deceived : — A  man  may  tell  a  lie  till  he  believes  it  to  be  the  truth.  {J.  C.  Gray.)
Self-deception: — Mr.  Robert  Sutcliffe,  a  member  of  the  Society  of  Friends,
travelling  in  America  early  in  the  present  century,  had  a  tough  argument  with  a
man  engaged  in  the  slave  trade,  of  whom  he  says  :  "  At  length,  being  hard  pressed,
he  gave  up  the  point  in  a  good  deal  of  warmth,  with  this  remarkable  declaration  :
"  Why,  sir,  you  can't  suppose  that  the  Almighty  looks  so  narrowly  into  our  actions
as  you  do."  {Leisure  Hour.)  Changed  by  sin :— AWoweA  sin  always  masters  a
man  in  time.    The  man  may  loathe  his  master,  yet  he  obeys  him ;  he  may  fear  hia


278  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  lu.

master,  yet  still  he  does  his  hateful  bidding.  But  there  is  here  am  awful  warning
as  to  the  sure  change  of  the  very  being  of  a  man  under  the  once  invited  presence
and  the  permitted  occupation  of  the  forces  of  evil.  The  man  himself  changes —
imperceptibly  at  first  to  himself — others  see  it.  He  is  often  unaware  of  it  himself,
till  the  last  stages  are  reached.  It  must  be  so — there  must  be  a  change.  If  you
think  there  is  no  such  thing  as  standing  still  in  life — in  spiritual,  in  natural  life.
As  the  solid  tower  reels  and  sways  beneath  the  crashing  of  the  ringing  bells,  so  there
is  movement  even  in  the  most  solid,  calm-seeming  life.  (Canon  Wilber/orce.)
Development  of  evil : — Secular  history  tells  us  that  when  Tiberius  ^Luke  iii.  1)
became  emperor  of  Borne,  he  was  remarkable  for  his  kindness,  amiability,  and
moderation.  But  he  became  one  of  the  most  wicked  and  cruel  of  tyrants.  Nero,
too,  was  so  affable  and  kind  in  early  life,  that  he  was  quite  popular  at  the  beginning
of  his  reign  ;  but  he  afterwards  caused  his  mother,  his  wife,  bis  old  tutor  Seneca,
with  multitudes  of  Christians  and  others,  to  be  put  to  death,  many  of  them  in
excessively  cruel  ways ;  and  he  was  guilty  of  such  other  enormities,  that  his
people  at  length  conspired  against  him,  when,  to  escape  their  mahce,  he  killed
himself  in  the  thirty-first  year  of  his  age.  Robespierre,  "  the  tyrant,"  and  the
leading  spirit  during  "  the  reign  of  terror  "  in  Paris,  through  whom  thousands
of  both  his  friends  and  foes  were  slaughtered  or  subjected  to  the  greatest  cruelties,
was,  in  private  and  early  life,  amiable  and  kind.  He  once,  when  young,  resigned
his  situation  as  a  member  of  a  criminal  court,  because  he  had  such  an  objection
to  the  barbarity  of  capital  punishment,  which  he  characterised  as  "  base  assassi-
nation." The  devil  and  his  angels,  Cain,  Henry  Wainwright,  Ac,  show  to  what
evil  an  immortal  spirit  may  fall.  Wherefore  avoid  bad  company,  give  up  evil  or
doubtful  habits,  get  God's  restraining,  converting,  and  preserving  grace.  {H.  R.
Burton.)  Productivity  of  sin  : — Referring  to  the  terrible  productivity  of  sin,

Mr.  Varley  once  mentioned  that  when  in  Tasmania,  he  had  heard  of  a  snake
recently  killed  there  which  had  given  birth  to  thirty-seven  young  ones.  "But,"
said  he,  quoting  Joseph  Cook,  "  sin  is  an  eternal  mother."  Progressiveness  of  sin: —
A  gentleman  was  walking  with  a  friend  one  day  through  his  beautiful  grounds,
when  they  came  to  a  fine  large  tree  which  was  decayed  to  the  very  core.  *'  That
tree,"  said  the  proprietor,  "was  destroyed  by  a  single  worm.  A  short  time
since  it  was  as  vigorous  as  any  of  its  companions,  when  one  day  a  wood-
worm was  discovered  forcing  its  way  under  the  outer  bark.  A  naturalist  who
was  at  that  time  my  guest  remarked  on  seeing  it  that  if  left  alone  it  would
ultimately  kill  the  tree.  It  seemed  so  improbable,  that  the  worm  was  suffered
to  remain.  Gradually  it  bored  its  way  into  the  fibre  of  the  tree,  slowly  but
surely  doing  its  work.  The  following  summer  the  tree  shed  its  leaves  much
earlier  than  usual,  and  in  the  second  season  it  was  a  dead,  worthless  thing.
The  worm  which  seemed  so  very  insignificant  had  found  its  way  to  the  heart
of  the  once  noble  tree  and  destroyed  its  life."  How  forcibly  do  we  see  this
same  thing  illustrated  in  the  common  walks  of  every-day  life.  A  young  man  is
persuaded  by  his  companions  to  take  his  first  glass  of  wine.  It  seems  like  a
little  thing,  but  it  is  the  beginning  of  a  course  of  degradation  and  eternal  shame.
The  clerk  in  the  bank  appropriates  a  few  shillings  of  the  funds  entrusted  to  hi*
care.  One  step  leads  to  another,  until  at  last  he  is  arrested  and  cast  into  prison
as  a  defaulter.  A  boy  begins  to  practise  little  deceits  at  school  or  at  home
which,  unless  discovered  and  checked,  will  make  him  a  base  and  unprincipled
man.  Such  is  the  destructive  power  of  little  sins  when  the  continued  indulgence
in  them  is  practised.

Vers.  14, 15.  Continue  thou  In  the  things  which  thou  hast  learned.— Sem'c«mu*<6«
constant  and  faithful : — God's  servantsmust  continue  constant  in  the  truth  received.
They  must  not  play  fast  and  loose,  be  off  and  on  ;  but  they  must  be  still  the  same,
like  well-tuned  bells,  which  have  the  same  note  in  foul  weather  as  they  have  in
fair  (Job.  i.  21),  we  must  hold  fast  the  truth  (1  Thess.  v.  21),  abide  in  it  and  walk
in  it  (Rev.  iii.  3).  1.  This  constancy  is  a  note  of  sincerity,  then  are  we  Christ'i
disciples  indeed,  when  we  abide  in  the  truth  (John  viii.  32 ;  Job.  ii.  3),  when  no
storms  nor  tempests  can  remove  us  from  it,  but  we  stand  like  Mount  Sion,  which
never  moves,  and,  hke  seasoned  timber,  never  warps  nor  yields.  2.  All  the  premises
of  heaven  and  happiness  run  only  to  such  as  are  faithful  to  the  death  (Rev.  ii.  10),
endure  to  the  end  (Matt.  zxiv.  13),  and  continue  in  faith  (Rom.  ii.  7 ;  Matt.  x.  22  ;
Col.  i.  22,  23  ;  Heb.  iii.  6,  14).  3.  Lay  a  good  foundation,  dig  deep  ;  he  that  will
build  high,  must  lay  low.     Our  learning  doth  not  binder  but  further  the  work  of


«HA».  m.]  JI.  TIMOTHY.  279

the  Spirit  in  our  Bonis.  Timothy,  that  had  a  plentifal  measure  of  the  Spirit  (for  he
was  an  Evangelist),  yet  must  give  himself  to  reading  and  meditation  still.
As  Moses  was  faithful,  and  would  not  part  with  a  hoof  to  Pharaoh,  so  we  must  not
part  with  a  tittle  of  God's  truth  to  His  enemies ;  for  all  truths,  even  the  least,  are
precious ;  truth  is  like  gold,  which  is  glorious  in  the  ray  and  spangle,  as  well  as  in
the  wedge.  As  it  is  in  practicals,  he  that  makes  no  conscience  of  little  sins,  will
quickly  be  drawn  to  greater ;  so  it  is  true,  and  holds  in  doctrinals,  he  that  admits
of  a  Uttle  error,  will  soon  be  drawn  to  a  greater.  Though  every  truth  be  not  funda-
mental, yet  every  truth  is  a  guard  to  the  foundation,  the  outer  skin  of  an  apple  lies
remote  from  the  heart,  yet  if  you  pluck  that  off  the  heart  will  soon  be  rotten.  The
finger  is  not  a  vital  part,  but  a  gangrene  in  the  finger  will,  in  a  short  time,  reach
to  the  very  vitals  and  corrupt  the  blood  with  the  spirits.  Not  only  the  garment  of
truth,  but  the  fringes  thereof  are  useful,  and  must  be  preserved  (Num.  xv.  38-40).
We  experimentally  see  that  those  who  forsake  truth,  in  discipline,  quickly  fall  to
errors  in  doctrine.  We  shall  hardly  find  a  man  that  errs  in  the  one,  to  be  found  in
the  other.  As  therefore  we  must  count  no  sin  small,  so  we  must  esteem  no
error  small ;  for  the  least  truth  of  God's  kingdom  doth  in  its  place  uphold  the  whole
kingdom  of  His  truth.  4.  If  you  preserve  the  truth  it  will  preserve  you  in  the
hour  of  temptation,  as  Solomon  says  of  wisdom  (Prov.  iv.  8).  5.  It  is  a  great
honour  to  a  person  or  nation  to  be  the  conservators  and  preservers  of  the  truths
of  God.  It  is  not  only  our  duty,  but  our  glory.  There  are  many  spiritual  cheaters
abroad ;  the  greater  will  our  honour  be  in  maintaining  God's  truth  against
them  all.  Say  not  I  am  but  one,  and  a  weak  one  too,  but  remember  what  great
things  the  Lord  did  by  Athanasius  and  Luther.  (T.  Hall,  B.D.)  The  excellency
of  the  teacher  makes  the  doctrine  the  more  taking  : — This  we  see  even  in  human  and
moral  learning,  the  Platonic  doctrine  grew  famous  because  it  was  professed  by
Socrates,  and  the  Peripatetic  by  Aristotle.  The  scholars  of  Pythagoras  did  so
confide  in  the  dictates  of  their  master,  that  when  any  one  asked  them  a  reason  of
what  they  held,  they  would  give  no  other  answer  but "  Our  master  said  so."  Young
ministers  should  suspect  their  own  judgments  when  they  vary  from  a  holy,  aged
Calvin  Beza,  and  all  the  churches  of  God.  As  young  lawyers  and  physicians
observe  the  principles  and  practices  of  the  serious  and  grave  professors  of  their
way,  especially  when  grounded  on  maxims  and  rules  of  art,  so  should  young
divines.  It  ill  becomes  a  young  raw  physician  to  contradict  a  whole  college  of
physicians,  or  a  puny  lawyer  a  bench  of  judges,  or  a  young  divine  a  whole
assembly  of  divines.  (Ibid.)  Continuance  in  the  faith: — ^I.  The  things  in
WHICH  WB  ABB  TO  coNTiNUB.  1.  We  must  leam  those  things  in  which  we  are  to
continue.  2.  The  things  in  which  we  are  commanded  to  continue  are  the  things
of  which  we  have  been  assured.  II.  In  what  kespects  we  are  to  continub  in  them.
1.  We  must  continue  in  the  belief  of  them.  2.  We  must  continue  to  profess  that
truth  which  we  beUeve.  3.  We  must  continue  in  the  practical  improvement  of  the
truth.  What  is  the  chaff  to  the  wheat?  Such  is  every  other  doctrine  to  the
doctrine  of  the  Bible ;  and  its  energy  and  effects  are  proportioned  to  its  excellency,
when  it  is  received  witii  faith  and  love.  {G.  Lawson,  D.D.)  The  necessity  of
correct  belief: — CJomprehensively,  we  may  say  that  there  are  two  things  to  be
noticed  in  this  passage :  first,  that  the  proper  use  and  end  of  all  religious  know-
ledge is  the  promotion  of  good  conduct  and  character ;  and,  secondly,  that  there  is
a  definite  and  important  relation  between  certain  truths  and  certain  moral  results.
The  same  fruits  will  not  follow  as  well  from  one  set  of  principles  as  from  another.
Bight  belief  has  mush  to  do  with  right  conduct.  Believing  is  the  basis  of  all  instruc-
tion and  education.  Every  parent,  every  teacher,  every  moralist,  as  well  as  every
preacher  of  righteousness,  holds  that  human  life  and  conduct  will  largely  depend
upon  the  things  that  men  are  taught  to  believe.  There  has  sprung  up  a  popular
notion  that  it  makes  no  difference  what  a  man  believes  concerning  religion  if  only
he  be  sincere.  There  is  just  enough  truth  in  the  phrase,  hi  some  of  its  applications,
to  make  it  plausible,  and  to  give  it  currency.  And  so  it  has  come  to  be  a
proverb.  When  it  is  said,  "  It  matters  little  what  a  man's  creed  is  if  his  life  be
right,"  a  it  meant,  "  It  matters  Uttle  what  a  man's  headknowledge  is,  so  that  he  is
Bound  in  his  heart,"  and  by  sincerity  is  intended,  not  sincerityin  belief,  but  sincerity
in  life  or  godliness,  a  great  truth  is  expressed — a  truth  that  is  not  enough  recog-
nised. In  education  it  is  of  great  importance  what  sort  of  truth  you  employ,  for
some  kinds  of  teaching  are  a  great  deal  more  likely  to  produce  godliness  than
others.  But,  whatever  the  teaching  has  been,  if  the  man  is  a  good  man,  however
strange  it  may  appear  that  such  a  creed  should  have  such  a  disciple,  however  far


280  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip,  nu

he  may  be  from  the  average  results  which  ordinarily  follow  the  teaching  of  such
things  as  he  believes,  his  godliness  is  to  be  acknowledged  in  spite  of  the  beliefs.
There  are  thousands  that  are  not  half  as  good  as  they  ought  to  be,  considering  the
things  that  they  believe.  A  man's  creed  does  not  necessarily  make  him  good.  And
there  are  thousands  that  are  better  than  their  creeds.  But  generally  this  maxim
does  not  mean  sincerity  of  life  in  the  form  of  godliness  ;  it  means  that  it  does  not
matter  what  a  man  believes,  so  that  he  only  believes  it  sincerely.  The  first  question
then,  that  arises,  is  this :  "What  are  we  to  understand  by  a  man's  belief  ?  Do  we
understand  by  it  simply  those  things  of  which  he  has  an  intellectual  conception  ?
Do  thqf  amount  to  a  belief  ?  Truth  that  touches  a  man  not  merely  through  a  cold
perception,  but  through  some  warm  feeling — that  is  the  kind  of  truth  the  Scripture
teaches  to  constitute  belief.  It  may  be  intellectually  conceived ;  but  no  moral  truth
and  no  social  truth  is  ever  presented  so  as  to  be  believed,  vmless  it  be  presented  in
such  a  way  as  to  carry  sympathy  and  feeling  with  it — and  that  is  not  the  case  with
all  kinds  of  truth.  Physical  truths,  scientific  truths,  do  not  touch  the  feelings,  and
do  not  need  to.  Arithmetic  deals  with  truths  that  liave  no  relation  directly,
except  with  the  understanding.  They  never  come  with  desire,  sorrow,  pity,  or
emotion  of  any  sort.  But  all  truths  that  relate  to  dispositions  in  men,  to  moral
duties — they  never  stop  with  the  understanding,  but  touch  the  feehng  as  well.  A
man  cannot  be  said  to  believe  a  moral  truth  unless  he  believes  it  so  that  he  carries
some  emotion  with  it.  And,  in  this  respect,  it  makes  great  difference  what  a  man
believes.  Let  us,  then,  look  at  this  a  Httle  in  the  light  of  the  experience  of  men  in
this  world.  In  regard  to  the  truths  of  the  physical  economy  of  the  globe,  does  it
make  any  difference  what  a  man  believes  ?  Would  it  make  any  difference  to  a
macLinist  whether  he  thought  lead  was  as  good  for  tools  as  steel  ?  Would  it  make
any  difference  to  a  man  in  respect  to  the  industries  of  life  if  he  thought  that  a  triangle
was  as  good  as  a  circular  wheel  in  machinery  ?  In  respect  to  the  quality  of  sub-
stances, the  forms  of  substances,  the  combination  of  substances,  and  the  nature  of
motive  powers,  does  success  depend  upon  sincere  believing  or  on  right  believing  ?
Suppose  a  man  should  think  that  it  made  no  difference  what  he  believed,  and
should  say  to  himself,  "  I  wish  to  raise  corn,  but  I  have  not  the  seed  ;  so  I  will  take
some  ashes  and  plant  them  ;  and  I  believe  sincerely  that  they  are  as  good  as  corn,"
would  he  have  a  crop  of  corn  ?  What  would  his  sincerity  avail  ?  Take  one  thing
further.  There  are  affectional  and  social  truths.  Does  it  make  no  difference  what
a  man  believes  in  respect  to  these  ?  Is  there  no  difference  between  pride,  vanity,
and  selfishness  on  the  one  hand,  and  tenderness,  sympathy,  and  love  on  the
other?  As  it  is  with  the  lower  forms  of  moral  truth,  so  experience  teaches  us  it  is
with  the  higher  forms  of  moral  truth.  There  is  a  definite  and  heaven-appointed
connection  between  the  things  a  man  holds  to  be  true,  and  the  results  that  follow
in  that  man's  mind.  All  truths  are  not  alike  important,  and  all  truths  do  not  show
the  effects  of  being  believed  or  rejected  with  equal  rapidity.  There  are  many  truths
•which  bear  such  a  relation  to  our  every-day  life,  that  the  fruit  of  beheving  or
rejecting  appears  almost  at  once.  These  are  spring  truths,  that  come  up  and  bear
fruit  early  in  the  season.  There  are  other  truths  that  require  time  for  working  out
their  results.  They  are  summer  truths,  and  the  fruit  of  belief  or  disbelief  does  not
ripen  till  July  or  August.  Other  truths,  in  respect  to  showing  the  results  of  belief
or  disbelief,  are  like  late  autumnal  fruits,  that  require  the  whole  winter  to  develop
lh(  ir  proper  juices.  Thus  it  is  a  matter  of  great  importance  whether  a  man  believes
in  his  obligation  to  God  or  not ;  whether  he  believes  that  he  is  sinful  or  not ;
whether  he  believes  in  the  necessity  of  the  influence  of  the  Spirit  in  regeneration.
A  man's  belief  is  not  the  only  thing  that  works  upon  him.  There  is  a  great  mistake
in  saying  that  as  a  man  beheves  so  is  he,  if  you  mean  that  his  character  depends
upon  his  beUef  in  any  technical  theological  truth.  What  a  ma.n  is  depends  in  a
great  measure  upon  his  father  and  mother,  and  brothers  and  sisters,  and  friends ;
that  is,  it  depends  partly  on  the  things  that  he  believes,  and  partly  upon  the  influences
that  are  working  upon  him  in  the  family,  in  the  society,  and  in  the  party  to  which
he  belongs.  There  are  a  thousand  and  one  circumstances  that  have  much  to  do
with  what  a  man  is ;  and  his  character  is  not  formed  alone  by  his  technical  beliefs.
Let  us  apply  the  foregoing  reasonings  and  explanations  to  the  more  important
truths  which  we  are  appointed  to  preach.  We  preach,  then,  that  this  life  is  a  very
transient  scene  ;  that  we  are  strangers  and  pilgrims  here ;  that  we  are  started  here
tc  be  transplanted;  that  we  are  undergoing  a  process  of  education  in  this  life  with
reference  to  a  life  to  come.  We  are  taught  in  the  Word  of  God  that  all  men  are
gin-fitruck,  and  that  every  man  that  lives  needs  the  grace,  and  forbearance,  and  for-


CHAP,  m.]  II.  TIMOTHY.  281

giveness  of  God,  and  moral  renovation  at  the  hands  of  God.  If  a  man  believes
that  he  is  good  enough,  of  course  he  becomes  listless,  and  heedless,  and  inattentive.
If  another  man  by  his  side  believes  that  he  is  sinful,  and  needs  to  be  born  again,
with  what  a  constantly  quickened  and  watchful  conscience  must  he  needs  live  I
and  how,  with  all  his  moral  power,  must  he  perpetually  strive  to  live  a  godly  life  I
Does  it  make  no  difference  what  a  man  believes  in  respect  to  the  character  of  God,
the  nature  of  the  Divine  government  in  this  world,  its  claims  upon  us,  and  our
obligations  under  it  ?  What,  then,  is  the  application,  finally,  of  this  ?  It  is  just  this  :
that,  according  to  the  tenour  of  the  passage  from  which  our  text  is  taken,  it  makes
aU  the  difference  in  the  world  which  you  believe  in  respect  to  those  truths  that  are
connected  with  godhness — with  purity  of  thought,  purity  of  motive,  purity  of  dis-
position. You  must  beUeve  right  about  them.  If  there  are  any  truths  to  be  indif-
ferent about,  they  are  those  that  relate  to  your  worldly  good ;  and  if  there  are  any
truths  that  you  cannot  afford  to  be  indifferent  about,  they  are  those  that  relate  to
your  character,  to  your  immortality,  and  to  the  eternity  that  awaits  you.  Indeed,
your  character  and  destiny  depend  upon  your  beliefs  in  truth.  If,  then,  any  of  you
have  hitherto  been  reading  the  Word  of  God  as  a  book  of  curiosity,  I  beseech  you
remember  that  it  is  not  made  known  to  you  for  the  purpose  of  curiosity.  It  is
made  known  to  you  to  be  your  guide  from  sin,  from  sorrow,  from  earthly  trouble,
toward  immortality,  and  toward  glory.  Now  when  I  sit  in  my  house,  where  there
is  no  gale,  and  with  no  ship,  and  read  my  chart  out  of  curiosity,  I  read  it  as  yon
sometimes  read  your  Bible.  You  say,  "  Here  is  the  headland  of  depravity;  and
there  is  a  hghthouse — born  again ;  and  here  is  the  channel  of  duty."  And  yet
every  one  of  you  has  charge  of  a  ship — the  human  soul.  Evil  passions  are  fierce
winds  that  are  driving  it.  This  Bible  is  God's  chart  for  you  to  steer  by,  to  keep
you  from  the  bottom  of  the  sea,  and  to  show  you  where  the  harbour  is,  and  how  to
reach  it  without  ruiming  on  rocks  or  bars.  It  is  the  book  of  hfe  ;  it  is  the  book  of
everlasting  life  ;  so  take  heed  how  to  read  it.  In  reading  it,  see  that  you  have  the
truth,  and  not  the  mere  semblance  of  it.  You  cannot  live  without  it.  (H.  W.
Beecher.)  Value  of  personal  conviction  : — Without  this  subjective  conviction  of
the  heart,  it  would  not  have  been  possible  for  Timothy  to  hold  out  in  the  things  he
had  learned,  amid  so  many  persecutions.  {Van  Ooiterzee.)  Continue : — The  capital
word  in  this  injunction  is  doubtless  "  continue."  Timotny's  teachers  had  been  his
grandmother  Lois,  his  mother  Eunice,  and  the  apostle  Paul  himself.  From  his
childhood  he  had  been  taught  in  the  Scriptures,  and  now  the  apostle  urges  him  to
remain  steadfast  in  his  early  teaching.  But  was  such  an  exhortation  consistent
with  the  greater  light  that  would  come  to  the  young  learner  as  he  grew  older  and
increased  in  knowledge  ?  Might  he  not  have  occasion  to  change  his  beliefs,  to
revise  his  creed, *as  he  made  intellectual  advancement  ?  Let  us  see  if  he  was  right.
What  relation  should  subsist  between  "  the  things  learned "  and  the  increasing
light  of  greater  knowledge  ?  It  should  be  kept  in  mind  that,  notwithstanding  much
shifting  of  positions  in  human  thought,  the  essence  of  religion  remaius  unchanged  ;
it  is  fundamentally  the  same.  There  are  those  who  seem  to  think  that  greater
light  will  revolutionise  all  our  beliefs,  and  that  therefore  it  is  folly  to  cling  so
tenaciously  to  the  old  orthodox  positions  in  religion  or  anything  else.  Suppose  for
a  moment  that  this  were  true.  Then  there  could  be  no  certainty,  no  assurance.  We
should  not  dare  to  pin  our  faith  to  anything  in  religion  or  science  or  common
sense.  Even  those  mathematical  truths  that  have  been  so  confidently  held  as
axioms  would  stand  on  an  insecure  foundation,  for  who  knows  that  fuither  research
might  not  shatter  them,  and  raze  to  the  ground  the  proud  superstructure  ?  Besides,
these  progressive  thinkers  themselves,  who  advocate  certain  theories  with  so
much  gusto,  are  guilty  of  folly ;  for,  according  to  their  own  hypothesis,  new  light
may  change  their  beliefs,  and  prove  them  but  the  phantoms  of  a  day.  Do  you  see
where  this  theory,  that  all  our  knowledge  is  in  a  fluctuating  state,  subject  to  con-
stant change,  will  land  us  ?  In  the  harbour  of  nowhere  ?  Let  those  who  will  sail
for  that  port.  Many  of  us  prefer  a  definite  destination  after  the  voyage  of  life  is
over,  and  a  more  reliable  guiding  star  while  it  lasts.  But  let  us  look  around  us  for
analogies.  Are  there  not  many  things  that  abide  amid  all  changes  ?  The  zephyrs
still  blow  softly  on  the  blushing  cheek,  the  storm  still  howls,  the  stars  still  twinkle,
the  waves  still  roll  and  dash  upon  the  shore,  men  still  breathe  and  eat  and  sleep
and  love,  as  they  did  in  the  olden  times ;  that  is,  the  fundamental  things  continue.
And  the  hke  is  true  of  the  principles  of  Christianity ;  amid  all  fluctuations  "  the
foundation  of  God  staudeth  sure,"  and  we  still  have  "  hope  as  an  anchor  of  the
soul,  both  sure  and  steadfast.''    (Christian  Globe.)        Things  learnt  at  school:-^


28i  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  to.

1.  First  among  these  speoial  lessons  of  a  pnblio  school,  I  will  place  the  value  of
time.  I  know  not  how  to  express  my  sense  of  what  we  all  owe  to  what  I  may  call
a  life  of  compulsory  order.  Every  little  duty  of  the  day  has,  with  us,  its  place  and
its  time.  2.  I  will  mention  as  one  of  the  lessons  of  a  place  like  this,  the  forming  a
right  estimate  of  yourselves.  It  is  one  of  the  greatest  benefits  of  this  kind  of  educa-
tion, that  it  leaves  you  in  no  doubt  as  to  your  comparative  powers  and  attainments.
Be  not  presumptuous,  be  not  arrogant,  be  not  self-confident.  Take  a  just,  not  a
fanciful,  estimate  of  yourselves,  both  ways.  3.  A  third  important  lesson  learned
here  is,  the  necessity  and  the  power  of  adapting  yourselves  to  a  variety  of  persons
and  circumstances.  4.  A  fourth  lesson  here  learned  is  the  meaning  of  a  social  as
opposed  to  a  selfish  life.  5.  There  is  a  fifth  thing  taught  here,  as  it  can  scarcely
be  but  by  a  system  of  public  education,  and  that  is  the  great  lesson  of  the  conse-
qaences  of  actions.  6.  All  these  things  are  true,  and  capable  of  much  enforcement,
but  I  hasten  to  that  chief  lesson  of  all,  without  which  all  else  would  be  poor  indeed
— I  mean,  the  Divine  aspect  of  life ;  its  relation  to  God  Himself  through  Christ,  as
our  present  help,  our  one  hope  and  object,  the  very  stay  and  strength  and  life  of
our  life.  That  surely  is  the  meaning  of  aU  our  meetings  for  worship.  {Dean
Vaughan. )  Continue  in  the  things  learnt : — What  are  the  things  that  yon  have
learnt — what  are  the  lessons  that  I  would  write  upon  your  hearts  in  letters  that  the
fire  of  experience  shall  bring  to  the  light  ?  1.  The  dignity  of  work.  Try  to  realise
how  much  you  owe  to  the  labours  of  others  who  have  gone  before  you,  and  try  to
labour  for  others  in  your  turn.  Do  not  be  mere  triflers  and  spendthrifts.  Lay  one
stone,  if  it  be  one  only,  in  the  temple  of  human  progress.  Seek  to  learn  something
and  to  do  something  that  is  good.  2.  The  sovereignty  of  conscience.  The  age  in
which  we  live  is  democratic.  "Vox  populi  vox  Dei  "  is  its  watchword.  Let  me
warn  you  against  that  great  and  fruitful  error.  There  is  no  Divinity  in  numbers.
God  reveals  Himself  not  to  the  many,  but  to  the  few.  The  greatest  crime  ever
wrought  was  wrought  by  one  who  desired  to  do  the  people's  pleasure.  You  may
sympathise  with  the  people  as  much  as  you  Uke,  you  may  hold  it  right  that  the
will  of  the  people  should  be  done  ;  but  nothing  that  the  people  say  or  do  can  alter
by  one  hair's  breadth  the  law  of  right  and  wrong  for  you.  3.  The  duty  of  philan-
thropy. Every  generation  has  its  own  duties  and  responsibilities.  Nobody  can
tell  why  certain  questions  arise  at  a  particular  time  and  come  to  the  fore ;  it  is
God's  will.  And  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  distinguishing  duty  of  your  genera-
tion will  be  to  soften  and  hallow  the  lives  of  the  toiling  poor.  4.  How  shall  yon
do  this  ?  What  shall  be  your  motive  power  in  this  great  work  ?  It  shall  be  the
fourth — the  last — of  the  principles  which  I  have  impressed  upon  you,  and  which  I
leave  with  you  as  a  legacy  of  remembrance — the  paramount  value  of  religion.  •*  I
thank  God,"  said  Lord  Eussell  on  the  scaffold — "  I  thank  God  for  having  given  me
a  religious  education ;  for  even  when  I  forgot  it  most,  it  still  hung  about  me  and
gave  me  checks. "  May  it  be  so  with  you  1  May  religion  be  your  guide,  controlling,
inspiring,  leading  you  ever  to  a  higher  and  diviner  life  I  (J.  E.  C.  Welldon,  M.A.)
Pauls  charge  to  Timothy : — Yield  to  the  influence  of  authority  in  doctrine  and  life.
"But  continue  thou  in  the  things  which  thou  hast  heard  and  hast  been  assured  of,
knovring  of  whom  thou  hast  learned  them. "  This  advice  is  strangely  unUke  what
we  are  accustomed  to  hear.  Our  time  is  impatient  of  authority.  "  The  new
Timothy  "  is  exhorted  to  be  perfectly  unbiassed  in  the  formation  of  his  religious
opinions.  He  must  go  back  to  the  sources  of  things,  if  he  can ;  if  he  cannot,  he
must  improvise  opinions,  and  thereafter  be  his  own  authority.  Unverified  personal
impressions,  and  conclusions  hastily  reached,  are  better  than  the  testimony  of  the
wisest  and  most  faithful  witnesses  touching  the  doctrines  and  duties  and  experiences
of  Christ's  religion.  To  Paul  it  seemed  far  otherwise.  He  would  have  Timothy
strongly  biassed  in  favour  of  the  teaching  which  he  received  in  youth,  by  the
Christian  character  of  those  who  taught  him.  Grandmother  Lois  and  mother
Eunice  gave  the  testimony  of  experts.  They  knew  whereof  they  afl5rmed.  Reli-
gion was  not  to  them  a  matter  of  opinion  merely,  it  was  a  life.  Their  faith  was
••  unfeigned."  It  had  power  to  rule  their  lives.  Why  should  not  their  teachings
take  on  an  authoritative  quality  from  their  lives  ?  The  limits  of  authority  must  be
carefully  set.  Discriminations  must  be  made.  "  Profane  and  old  wives'  fables  "
must  be  avoided.  But  the  authoritative  teaching  of  a  holy  life  is  not  to  be  dis-
regarded because  unholy  lives  assume  to  be  authoritative.  Mental  freedom  is  to  be
coveted ;  but  the  freedom  which  assumes  that  each  age  must  begin  anew  the  study
of  the  "  ways  of  God  "  with  men  is  too  great.  (Monday  Club  Sermons.)  From
a  child  thou  hast  known  the  Holy  Scriptures. — The  Holy  Scriptures : — So  here


CHAP,  in.]  II.  TIMOTHY.  283

•what  a  large  encomium  and  high  commendation  the  Holy  Ghost  gives  of  the
Scriptures,  even  such  as  is  given  to  no  other  book  in  the  world  besides.  1.  He
commends  them  in  respect  of  one  special  property  and  adjunct,  viz.,  their  holi-
ness. The  holy  Scriptures.  2.  From  their  effects  :  they  are  able  to  make  us  wise
unto  salvation.  3.  From  their  authority,  utility,  perfection.  Now  the  Scriptures
are  called  holy  in  five  respects.  1.  In  respect  of  their  Author  and  principal  cause —
viz.,  the  most  holy  God.  2.  In  respect  of  the  penmen  and  instrumental  cause:
they  were  holy  men  of  God  (2  Pet.  i.  21).  3.  In  respect  of  their  matter :  they  treat
of  the  holy  things  of  God ;  they  teach  nothing  that  is  impure  or  profane.  They
teach  us  holiness  in  doctrine  and  practice.  4.  In  respect  of  their  end  and  effect —
viz.,  our  sanctification  (John  xvii.  17).  By  reading,  hearing,  and  meditating  on
God's  Word  the  Holy  Ghost  doth  sanctify  us  (Psalm  xix.  8,  9).  5.  By  way  of  dis-
tinction and  opposition ;  they  are  called  holy  to  distinguish  them  not  only  from
human  and  profane,  but  also  from  all  ecclesiastical  writings.  1.  This  must  teach.
us  to  bring  pure  minds  to  the  reading,  hearing,  and  handling  of  God's  holy  Word.^
2.  Take  heed  of  profaning  the  holy  Scriptures  by  playing  with  them,  or  making
jests  out  of  them.  8.  Love  the  Scriptures  for  their  purity ;  as  God  is  to  be  loved
for  His  purity,  so  is  His  Word.  Many  love  it  for  the  history,  or  for  novelty,  but  a
gracious  soul  loves  it  for  its  purity,  because  it  arms  him  against  sin,  directs  him
in  God's  ways,  enables  him  for  duty,  discovers  to  him  the  snares  of  sin  and  Satan  ^
and  80  makes  him  wiser  than  his  enemies.  The  Word  of  God  alone  is  able  to  make
us  wise  unto  salvation  (Psa.  xix.  7 ;  Luke  xvi.  28,  19 ;  John  v.  39,  and  xx.  31 ;
James  i.  22, 25).  No  other  knowledge  can  bring  us  to  salvation,  but  only  the  know-
ledge of  the  holy  Scripture.  The  Word  of  God  cannot  save  nor  profit  us  without
faith.  Such  is  our  blindness,  deadness,  dulness,  yea,  enmity  against  the  Word,
that  witiiout  faith  we  cannot  see,  conceive,  or  receive  it  (1  Cor.  ii.  14 ;  Kom.  i.  16 ;
Heb.  iv.  2 ;  John  iii.  19,  20).  If  a  man  offer  us  never  so  good  an  alms,  yet  unless
we  have  an  eye  to  see  it,  with  a  hand  and  heart  to  receive  it,  we  are  never  the
better  for  the  tender  of  it,  1.  Observe.  Parents  ought  to  instruct  their  children
betimes  in  the  Word  of  God.  It  is  good  seasoning  the  vessel  betimes  with  good-
ness. It  is  a  singular  mercy  to  have  good  parents,  and  specially  a  good  mother,
for  she  being  much  about  her  children  hath  many  opportunities  of  dropping  good
things  into  her  little  Lemuels,  as  Bathsheba  did  into  Solomon  (Proverbs  xxxi.  1).
The  mothers  of  the  kings  of  Israel  are  constantly  mentioned,  and  as  they  were
good  or  evil,  so  were  their  children.  But  at  what  age  would  you  have  parents
begin  to  teach  their  children  ?  So  soon  as  ever  they  begin  to  learn  wickedness,  we
should  teach  them  goodness ;  so  soon  as  ever  they  begin  to  curse  and  swear,  we
should  teach  them  to  bless  and  pray.  There  are  many  reasons  why  youth  should
be  seasoned  betimes  with  good  principles.  1.  In  respect  of  that  natural  rudeness
and  ignorance  which  cleaves  so  close  unto  them  (Eccles.  iii.  18 ;  Job.  xi.  12 ;  Jere-
miah iv.  22,  and  x.  14).  We  are  all  by  nature  like  wild  ass  colts,  unteachable,
nntractable.  2.  The  Lord  oft  blesses  this  seasoning  in  youth  with  good  success.
8.  It  is  usually  blessed  with  continuance  and  perseverance ;  such  as  are  good  young
are  oft  good  long ;  what  the  vessel  is  first  seasoned  withal  it  will  have  a  taste  of  it
a  long  time  after.  4.  This  is  an  excellent  means  to  propagate  goodness  to  posterity.
As  we  see  here,  Timothy's  grandmother  teacheth  his  mother,  and  his  mother
teacheth  him,  and  he  teacheth  the  Church  of  God,  &c.  So  if  you  teach  your
children,  they  will  teach  their  children,  and  thou  mayest  be  a  means  to  propagate
God's  truth  and  honour  from  one  generation  to  another.  So  that  you  may  com-
fort yourselves  when  you  come  to  die  that  yet  your  piety  shall  not  die,  but  shall
survive  in  your  posterity,  who  shall  stand  up  in  your  stead  to  profess  God's  name
and  truth  before  a  sinful  world.  5.  Such  well-bred  and  timely-taught  children  are
usually  great  comforts  and  ornaments  to  their  parents  (Proverbs  xxiii.  15, 16,  24,  25),
as  we  see  in  Abel,  Joseph,  Samuel,  Josiah  (2  Chron.  xxxiv.  3),  Obadiah  (1  Kings
xviii.  18,  12),  David,  Daniel,  Jeremy.  6.  Cliildren  are  the  seminary  and  nursery
of  the  Church  and  commonwealth;  now,  as  our  seminaries  and  seed-plots  are,  such
is  the  nation ;  as  the  parents,  house,  and  school  are,  such  are  towns  and  cities.
7.  Youth  is  most  teachable  and  tractable,  like  soft  wax  or  clay  fit  to  be  formed  and
framed  to  anything,  ready  to  take  any  impression.  Like  a  tender  twig  you  may
bend  it  which  way  you  please,  but  let  it  grow  to  be  a  tree,  and  you  may  sooner
break  it  than  bend  it.  We  should  therefore  take  this  fit  season  of  seasoning  youth
betimes  with  saving  truths,  and  killing  the  weeds  of  sin  which  begin  to  appear  in
their  lives.  No  creature  so  wild  but  it  may  be  tamed  if  taken  whilst  young.  We
pee  those  that  would  teach  or  tame  horses,  lions,  hawks,  dogs,  bears,  they  begin


284  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m.


with  them  betimes;  th«  iiorse  is  broken  whilst  a  oolt,  and  the  lion  tamed  whilst  it
is  a  whelp,  &c.  As  in  the  Ark  there  was  the  rod  and  manna,  so  in  every  well-
ordered  family  there  must  be  the  manna  of  instruction  and  the  rod  of  correction.
It  must  stir  up  young  persons  to  devote  the  flower  and  best  of  their  days  unto
God,  who  is  the  best  of  beings.  Show  me  any  that  can  show  better  title  to  thy
youth  than  God  can  do,  and  let  him  take  it.  He  gives  the  best  wages,  and  so
deserves  the  best  work ;  godhness  hath  the  promise  (Prov.  xxii.  4 ;  Matt.  vi.  33 ;
1  Tim.  iv.  8).  And  if  we  serve  Him  in  our  good  days.  He  will  help  us  in  our
evil  ones  ;  if  we  spend  our  youth  in  His  service,  He  will  support  us  and  supply  ua
in  our  old  age  (Isa.  xlvi.  3,  4).  If  it  were  in  our  power,  yet  we  may  in  no  wise
deal  80  disingenuously  with  our  God  as  to  give  the  devil  the  marrow  of  our  youth,
and  reserve  the  dry  bones  of  our  old  age  for  God.  It  is  no  wisdom  to  lay  the
greatest  load  on  the  weakest  horse.  Old  age  (though  in  itself  it  be  a  blessing)  yet
is  accompanied  with  many  troubles,  sicknesses,  and  diseases ;  they  are  the  dregs,
the  lees,  the  winter  of  our  days.  As  all  rivers  meet  in  the  sea,  so  all  diseases  meet
in  old  age — hence  it  is  called  the  evil  day  (Eccles.  xii.  3-5),  <&c.  Then  the  eyes  grow
dim,  the  ears  deaf,  the  hands  tremble,  and  the  legs  are  feeble,  and  the  memory  fails.
(T.  Hall,  B.D.)  Religion  in  youth : — 1.  It  is  more  easy ;  anything  taken  when
it  is  young  is  more  easily  wrought  upon.  A  twig  is  easily  bent ;  a  disease  taken
in  the  beginning  is  easily  cured,  when  everything  by  delay  grows  worse.  When
the  fingers  are  grown  stiff,  it  is  ill  learning  to  play  on  the  lute.  An  old  disease  is
hardly  cured.  The  longer  a  tree  grows,  the  harder  it  is  to  pull  up.  The  further
a  nail  is  driven,  the  harder  it  is  to  pull  it  out  again.  The  acting  of  sin  strengthens
the  habit,  and  when  sin  is  become  habitual,  connatural,  and  customary,  it  is  hardly
cured  (Jer.  xiii.  23 ;  Isa.  xxvi.  10).  2.  It  is  more  fruitful ;  we  shall  do  more  good,
and  receive  more  good ;  to  him  that  hath  shall  be  given.  We  shall  bring  forth
much  penitential  fruit,  which  will  bring  much  glory  to  God,  and  in  glorifying  Him
lieth  our  glory  (Job  xv.  8).  Suppose  a  man  should  never  repent  till  he  were  old
and  ready  to  die ;  though  such  a  man  may  be  saved,  yet  his  graces  are  not  so  con-
spicuous, nor  can  he  do  that  good,  nor  bring  that  glory  to  God  as  a  young  man
that  begins  betimes  to  serve  Him.  It  is  a  thrifty  course  to  be  an  early  convert ;  the
sooner  we  submit  to  the  Spirit's  conduct  the  better,  the  more  peace  and  liberty  we
shall  attain.  3.  It  is  more  beautiful  and  lovely.  Everything  is  beautiful  in  its
season  (Eccles.  iii.  11) ;  now  God's  usual  season  for  repentance  is  when  we  are
young.  4.  We  shall  resemble  the  servants  of  God ;  all  their  obedience  hath  been
prompt  and  speedy.  They  are  endued  with  the  wisdom  which  is  from  above,  which
is  easily  entreated  to  any  goodness.  6.  Consider  the  shortness  and  uncertainty  of
our  days.  It  is  a  notable  spur  to  speedy  repentance ;  for  as  presumption  of  long
life  doth  harden  men,  so  reahsing  of  death,  and  looking  on  it  as  present,  doth
quicken  and  awaken  men.  Now  our  hfe  in  Scripture  is  compared  to  a  span  that  ia
soon  measured  (Psa.  xxxix.  5) ;  to  a  tale  that  is  soon  told  (Psa.  xo.  9) ;  to  a  vapour
that  quickly  vanisheth  (James  iv.  14) ;  like  a  flower  that  soon  fades  (Isa.  xl.  6-8 ;
Job.  xiv.  2;  Psa.  cii.  11,  and  ciii.  15;  James  i.  10;  1  Pet.  i.  24);  like  a  post  or  a
weaver's  shuttle  that  fly  speedily  (Job.  vii.  6,  and  ix.  25).  6.  The  seasons  of  grace
are  short ;  time  itself  is  short ;  but  opportunity  is  much  shorter.  Every  day  in  the
year  is  not  a  fair  day,  and  every  day  in  the  week  is  not  a  market  day.  Grace  ia
not  every  day's  offer,  and  therefore  we  should  walk  in  the  light  whilst  we  have  the
light.  7.  In  this  we  may  learn  wisdom  from  the  men  of  the  world.  The  smith
strikes  whilst  his  iron  is  hot ;  the  husbandman  makes  hay  whilst  the  sun  shines.
The  mariner  observes  his  wind  and  tide,  the  lawyer  his  terms,  the  chapman  hia
fairs  and  markets,  and  the  gardener  his  seasons.  Yea,  shall  the  stork,  the  crane,
and  the  swallow  know  the  time  of  their  coming,  and  shall  we  not  know  the  day  of
our  visitation  ?  (Jer.  viii.  7).  Doth  the  bee  lose  no  fair  day,  and  doth  the  ant  in
summer  provide  for  winter  ?  (Prov.  vi.  8).  And  shall  not  we  in  the  summer  of
youth  provide  for  the  winter  of  old  age  ?  8.  Neglecting  the  day  of  our  visitation
Increaseth  wrath,  and  provokes  the  Lord  to  cut  off  young  persons  in  the  flower  of
their  days.  If  a  man  should  every  day  be  adding  sticks  to  the  fire,  and  oil  to
the  flame,  it  must  needs  make  the  fire  very  terrible  at  last.  {Ibid.)  The
Christian  education  of  the  young  : — 1.  "  Fbom  a  CHOiO  tuod  hast  known  the  holy
Scriptures."  That  must  have  been  a  privilege  of  no  slight  importance  in  the
estimation  of  Paul,  which  he  considered  worthy  of  peculiar  mention,  at  such  a
time,  and  in  his  dying  charge  to  his  most  beloved  friend  and  companion.  And
when  Timothy  himself  traced  back  the  course  of  his  life  to  his  earlier  years — when
the  memory  of  those  youthful  days  rose  upon  his  melting  mind,  as  be  perused  the


CHAP,  m.]  11.  TIMOTHY.  385

apostle's  touching  allusion,  he  too  would  most  readily  acknowledge  the  gracious
hand  of  providence  in  having  thus  blessed  bim  with  the  inestimable  advantages  of
an  early  religious  education.  Men,  who  deem  themselves  philosophers,  may  sneer
at  the  knowledge  of  a  child,  and  the  piety  of  a  child,  thinking  it  impossible  that
childhood  can  intelligently  either  know  or  love  God.  How  soon  can  it  comprehend
the  meaning  of  a  father's  authoritative  and  commanding  frown,  or  the  checking
and  controlling,  yet  affectionate  smile  of  a  mother  I  And,  by  the  very  simple
process  of  combining  these  perceptions,  and  comparing  in  order  to  elevate  them,
how  soon  it  may  be  taught  to  form  some  idea  of  a  Being  whose  authoritative  laws
are  similar,  though  vastly  superior,  to  those  of  a  father,  and  yet  whose  surpassing
love,  infinitely  transcending  that  of  a  mother,  shall  endure  when  hers  may  have
waxed  cold,  or  waned  utterly  away,  or  been  bid  behind  the  darkness  of  the  tomb !
II.  Consider  what  is  the  advantage  of  being  trained  to  know  the  holt  Scriptures,
This  Paul  declares  to  be,  that  they  are  able  to  make  us  wise  unto  salvation.  It
might  be  shown,  bad  we  at  present  scope  for  the  investigation,  that  the  wisdom  of
the  world  is  wholly  ineffectual  for  accomplishing  the  moral  regeneration  of  man  ;
nay,  effectual  only,  or  at  least  chiefly,  in  cultivating  and  enlarging  his  capacity  of
evil.  It  is  the  knowledge  of  the  holy  Scriptures,  and  that  alone,  which  can  make
men  wise  unto  salvation.  Eesults  so  strikingly  different  must  proceed  from  origi-
nating principles  not  less  diametrically  opposed.  Let  us,  therefore,  briefly  examine
some  of  the  leading  principles  of  the  wisdom  of  the  world,  marking  the  contrast
between  them  and  those  of  the  Scriptures.  Now,  the  main  intention  of  the  world's
wisdom  is,  to  fit  men  for  living  on  this  earth ;  that  of  the  Scriptures,  to  prepare
them  for  heaven.  Plans  constructed  upon  such  very  different  principles,  and  for
such  very  different  ends,  begin  to  diverge  at  their  very  commencement.  The  world
trains  children  to  a  similarity  with  itself — with  its  pride,  its  luxury,  its  self-indulg-
ence, its  vanity,  and  its  self-approbation  ;  the  Scripture  principle  is,  "  the  nurture
and  admonition  of  the  Lord,"  self-denial,  humility,  acknowledgment  of  sin,  and
dependence  upon  God  alone  for  help.  The  world  inculcates  the  love  of  gain,  as  a
ruling  object;  the  Bible  declares  that  "the  love  of  money  is  the  root  of  all  evih"
The  world  is  loud  in  its  praises  of  these  who  acquire  advancement  and  distinction
in  life ;  Christianity  teaches  us  to  be  content  with  such  things  as  we  have,  threatens
the  fall  of  the  mighty  and  the  proud,  and  pronounces  a  blessing  upon  the  meek,
the  lowly,  and  the  humble.  The  world  allows,  nay,  inculcates,  selfishness ;  Chris-
tianity bids  us  seek  not  our  own  welfare  only,  but  also  that  of  others.  The  world
approves  a  bold,  contentious  spirit,  as  one  likely  to  force  it  jostling  way  through  all
opposition  ;  Scripture  says,  "  The  servant  of  the  Lord  must  not  strive."  The  world
allows  dissimulation,  selfish  delusion,  petty  fraud,  and  all  the  thousand  knaveries
of  common  life  and  business ;  Christianity  requires  that  the  whole  life  and
conduct  should  be  characterised  by  the  very  transparency  of  truth,  as  ever  in  the
presence  of  the  God  of  truth  and  holiness.  III.  We  come  now  to  offer  some
REMARKS  ON  THE  PRINCIPLE  OF  THIS  SAVING  WISDOM — that  by  which  it  is  accomplished,
viz.,  "Through  faith  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus."  {W.  M.  Hetherington,  M.A.)
Knowledge  of  Bible  in  youth  : — David  Livingstone  gained  a  New  Testament  in  the
Sabbath  school  when  nine  years  old  by  repeating  the  119th  Psalm  on  two  successive
evenings  with  only  five  errors.  {W.  G.  Blaikie.)  John  Wesley's  estimate  of  the
Bible : — I  am  a  creature  of  a  day,  passing  through  life  as  an  arrow  through  the  air.
I  am  a  spirit,  coming  from  God,  and  returning  to  God :  just  hovering  over  the  great
gulf ;  a  few  moments  hence,  I  am  no  more  seen ;  I  drop  into  an  unchangeable  eter-
nity 1  I  want  to  know  one  thing — the  way  to  heaven ;  how  to  land  safe  on  that
happy  shore.  God  Himself  has  condescended  to  teach  the  way.  He  hath  written
it  down  in  a  book.  Oh,  give  me  that  book  I  At  any  price,  give  me  the  book  of
God  I  I  have  it :  here  is  knowledge  enough  for  me.  Let  me  be  a  man  of  one  book.
Here,  then,  I  am,  far  from  the  busy  ways  of  men.  I  sit  down  alone ;  only  God  is
here.  In  His  presence  I  open,  I  read  His  book  ;  for  this  end — to  find  the  way  to
heaven.  The  Bible  and  the  family  : — One  evening  a  man,  who  resided  in  South-
wark,  attended  a  missionary's  meeting  for  the  special  purpose  of  lauding  Paine  and
Voltaire  as  writers  whose  moral  sentiments  surpassed  in  beauty  anything  of  the
kind  found  in  the  Bible.  What  this  objector  to  the  gospel  had  to  say  was  listened
to  with  deference,  and  then  he  was  asked  if  ever  he  had  read  the  volume  he  con-
temned. Yes,  he  had  read  the  Bible  in  common  with  other  books.  "  Have  you
a  family  T  "  asked  the  missionary  who  was  presiding  over  the  little  assembly.  Yes,
the  speaker  possessed  a  wife  and  little  ones.  Which,  then,  would  he  recommend  to
them — the  life-companion  who  was  dear  to  him  and  the  children  whom  he  loved —


see  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m.

Infidelity  or  Christianity  ?  The  company  may  have  looked  curiously  to  eee  what
shape  the  infidel's  answer  would  assume,  but  they  could  little  have  suspected  what
its  import  would  be.  What  was  their  astonishment  when  the  champion  of  unbelief
of  a  few  minutes  before  burst  into  tears,  and  then  cried,  "  I  never  heard  that  kind
of  argument  before.  I  would  rather  give  them  the  Bible  than  any  infidel  book."
(G.  H.  Pike.)  The  Bible  and  the  light  of  God: — Lord  Byron  and  Mr.  Hobhouse
explored  together  a  cavern  in  Greece.  They  lost  themselves  in  its  abysses,  and
the  guide  confessed  in  alarm  that  he  knew  not  how  to  recover  the  outlet.  They
roved  in  a  state  of  despair  from  cave  to  celL  They  climbed  up  narrow  apertures,
but  found  no  way  of  escape.  Their  last  torch  was  consuming ;  they  were  totally
ignorant  of  their  whereabouts,  and  all  around  was  darkness.  By  chance  they
discerned  through  the  gloom  what  proved  to  be  a  ray  of  light  gleaming  towards
them.  They  hastened  to  follow  it  and  arrived  at  the  mouth  of  the  cave.  Would
that  all  the  torches  which  are  blinding  men  to  the  light  of  God  would  burn  out,
and  that  speedily  1  Blessed  be  darkness  and  despair  if  through  them  men  discern
the  beams  which  shine  from  heaven  and  reveal  salvation.  (H.  Batchelor.)  Edu-
cation of  the  young : — A  lady  was  once  talking  with  an  archbishop  upon  the  subject
of  juvenile  education,  and,  after  some  time,  the  lady  said,  •'  Well,  my  lord  arch-
bishop, as  for  myself,  I  have  made  up  my  mind  never  to  put  my  child  under
religious  instruction  until  he  has  arrived  at  years  of  discretion."  He  replied,  "If
you  neglect  your  child  all  that  time,  the  devil  will  not."  Early  and  lasting  im-
pressions : — in  our  great  museums  you  see  stone  slabs  with  the  marks  of  rain  that
fell  hundreds  of  years  before  Adam  lived,  and  the  footprint  of  some  wild  bird  that
passed  across  the  beach  in  those  olden  times.  The  passing  shower  and  the  light
foot  left  their  prints  on  the  soft  sediment ;  then  ages  went  on,  and  it  has  hardened
into  stone ;  and  there  they  remain,  and  will  remain  for  evermore.  That  is  like  a
man's  spirit ;  in  the  chil^sh  days  so  soft,  so  susceptible  to  all  impressions,  so
joyous  to  receive  new  ideas,  treasuring  them  all  up,  gathering  them  all  into  itself,
retaining  them  all  for  ever.  {A.  Maclaren,D.D.)  Which  are  able  to  make  thee  wise
unto  salvation. — The  Scriptures  and  Christ : — Christ  is  the  central  theme  of  the
Bible's  prophecies.  The  hope  of  Christ  echoes  through  its  Psalms.  Every  page
gains  new  meaning  when  brought  into  relation  with  Christ.  In  the  great  light-
houses along  our  coast  reflectors  of  immense  power  are  placed  around  the  lamps.
They  are  composed  sometimes  of  as  many  as  a  thousand  pieces  of  highly  polished
crystal.  Each  of  these  sends  out  its  own  image  of  the  central  light.  AU  combine
to  form  the  refulgent  beam  that  shines  a  score  of  miles  across  the  sea.  So  from
each  separate  part  of  the  Bible  Christ  is  in  some  way  reflected,  and  when  we  recog-
nise Him  throughout,  it  is  all  bright  with  interest  and  truth.  The  saving  uie  of
the  Bible : — There  are  many  people  to  whom  the  Bible  does  not  amount  to  much.
If  they  merely  look  at  the  outside  beauty,  why,  it  vnU  no  more  lead  them  to  Christ
than  the  Koran  of  Mahomet,  or  Washington's  farewell  address,  or  the  Shaster  of
the  Hindoos.  It  is  the  inward  light  of  God's  Word  you  must  get  or  die.  I  came
np  to  the  Church  of  the  Madeleine,  in  Paris,  and  looked  at  the  doors,  which  were
the  most  wonderfully  constructed  I  ever  saw,  and  I  could  have  stayed  there  for  a
whole  week ;  but  I  had  only  a  little  time,  so  having  glanced  at  the  wonderful
carving  on  the  doors,  I  passed  in,  and  looked  at  the  radiant  altars  and  the  sculp-
tured dome.  Alas,  that  so  many  stop  at  the  outside  door  of  God's  holy  Word,
looking  at  the  rhetorical  beauties,  instead  of  going  in  and  looking  at  the  altars  of
sacrifice,  and  the  dome  of  God's  mercy  and  salvation  that  hovers  over  every  penitent
and  believing  soul.  Oh,  my  friends,  if  you  merely  want  to  study  the  laws  of  lan-
guage, do  not  go  to  the  Bible.  It  was  not  made  for  that.  Take  "  Howe's  Elements
of  Criticism" — it  will  be  better  than  the  Bible  for  that.  If  you  want  to  study
metaphysics,  better  than  the  Bible  will  be  the  writings  of  William  Hamilton.  But
if  you  want  to  know  how  to  have  sin  pardoned,  and  at  last  to  gain  the  blessedness
of  heaven,  search  the  Scriptures,  "for  in  them  ye  have  eternal  life."  {T.  De  Witt
Talmage,  D.D.)  Wise  unto  salvation  through  faith : — The  addition  is  remarkable.
St.  Paul's  experience  had  taught  him  that  without  that  faith  the  study  of  the  sacred
writings  might  lead  only  to  endless  questioningp  and  logomachies.  Targums  and
the  Talmud  remain  as  if  to  show  how  profitless  such  a  study  might  become.  {E.
JI.  Plnmptre,  D.D.)  The  faith-torch : — Faith  in  Christ  is,  as  it  were,  a  torch,  by
the  light  of  which  we  can  first  read  aright  and  understand  the  dim  colonnades  and
mysterious  inscriptions  in  the  ancient  venerable  temple  of  the  Old  Covenant.  (Van
Oosterzee.)  Wise  unto  salvation : — I.  That  the  Scriptdbes  are  able  to  make  wise
BWTo  salvation.     The  Scriptures  do,  indeed,  contain  the  truth  that  makes  wise  to


CHAV.  ra.]  II.  TIMOTHY,  287

salvation,  but  it  is  "  by  faith  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus."  It  is  when  the  Scriptures
are  believed,  when  they  are  received  in  the  love  of  them,  that  man  becomes  a
partaker  of  a  blessing.  Here  it  may  be  said,  what  strange  language ! — believe  the
Scriptures ! — why,  we  always  believed  them  I  Those  who  utter  such  observations
may  imagine  they  believe,  but  they  never  believed  ' '  faith  worketh  by  love  " —
"  faith  purifies  the  heart " — "  faith  overcomes  the  world  " — faith  is  not  a  fancy —
faith  is  not  something  floating  through  the  mind  of  man,  but  it  is  of  the  operation
of  God.  If,  then,  a  man  is  careless  about  his  soul,  he  does  not  believe ;  if  he  thinks
more  highly  of  the  testimony  of  the  world  than  he  does  of  the  testimony  of  bis  God,  he
does  not  believe ;  if  he  depends  on  his  own  poor  doings,  and  makes  them  the  ground
of  his  hope,  he  does  not  believe ;  "for  other  foundation  can  no  man  lay  than  that
which  is  laid,  Christ  Jesus."  If  a  man  neglects  the  various  relative  duties  of  life,
and  spends  his  time  and  money  in  satisfying  in  any  way  the  lusts  and  desires  of  his
flesh,  that  man,  whatever  he  may  be,  or  whatever  he  may  say,  does  not  believe.  II.
That  Timotht  was  instbucted  in  these  Scbiptukes  fbom  his  youth.  Here  we
have  a  direct  answer  given  to  those  who  would  withhold  from  the  young  the  book
of  God.  No  man  of  sense,  or  common  understanding,  or  ordinary  feeling,  would
withhold  a  medicine  from  his  sick  child,  in  consequence  of  that  child  being  unable
to  ascertain  the  nature  of  the  medicine,  or  calculate  the  effect  of  its  operation.  (P.
Roe,   M.A.)  The  blessedness  of  children  Scripturally   taught: — I.  What  the

Holy  Sobiptuees  can  do.  "  Make  thee  wise  unto  salvation."  Exceedingly  high
praise :  can  be  affiimed  of  no  other  book.  Were  the  Bible  a  book  to  teach  men  the
art  of  becoming  rich,  many  would  read  it  who  now  refuse  ;  all  "  that  will  be  rich  "
would  then  study  their  Bibles  as  diligently  as  their  ledgers.  If  it  taught  men  to  be
philosophers,  another  class  would  read  it  more  than  they  commonly  do.  If  it  were
a  mere  road  book,  many  would  consult  it  who  now  do  not  as  they  pursue  the  road
of  life.  But  the  Bible  proposes  to  make  men  rich  towards  God,  wise  unto  salvation,
pilgrims  on  the  way  to  heaven.  It  teaches  the  best  means  of  attaining  the  best  end ;
and  that  is  true  wisdom.  II.  How  the  Holy  Scriptobes  pboduce  such  gbeat
EFFECTS.  "  Through  faith  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus."  The  Scriptures  do  not  work
as  a  kind  of  charm.  It  is  not  by  having  the  Bible  in  the  house,  nor  in  the  school,
nor  in  the  church ;  but  it  is  by  having  the  Bible  in  the  heart,  its  contents
heard,  read,  marked,  learned,  and  inwardly  digested — that  they  make  us  "wise
unto  salvation  through  faith  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus."  The  infidel  can  read
them  and  scoff ;  the  poet  can  read  them  and  only  admire  their  sublimity ;  the
historical  student  can  consult  them  only  as  ancient  records ;  the  formalist  can
read  them  just  to  get  through  a  certain  stated  portion  ;  yea,  wicked  persons  have
read  them  for  bad  purposes — to  copy  the  sins  which  the  Scriptures  hold  up
to  abhorrence.  Of  all  such  it  may  be  said  that  the  Word  preached  or  read
"  did  not  profit  them,  not  being  mixed  with  faith  in  them  that  heard  it."  The
Word  profits  when  we  hear  as  Lydia  heard,  "  whose  heart  the  Lord  opened,  that
she  attended  unto  the  things  which  were  spoken  of  Paul."  Therefore  the  study
of  the  Scripture  should  always  be  connected  with  prayer  for  Divine  grace.    III.  The

ADVANTAGE  OF  KNOWING  THE  HoLY    SCKIPTUEES,  IF  POSSIBLE,  EVEN  FROM  EABLY  YOUTH.

' '  From  a  child  "  ;  there  is  the  time  when  Scriptural  instruction  should  begin.  The
word  here  rendered  "  child,"  denotes  childhood  in  its  infantile  stage.  To  early  edu-
cation, blessed  of  God  in  His  own  time  and  way,  the  Church  has  owed  some  of  her
greatest  ornaments.  Augustiu,  who  made  a  noble  stand  for  the  gospel  in  the  fifth
century,  always  attributed  his  conversion  to  the  prayers,  the  tears,  and  the  instruc-
tions of  his  mother,  Monica.  God,  in  fact,  appears  to  have  remarkably  honoured
Christian  mothers,  whether  they  stood  singly,  or  were  supported  in  their  endeavours
to  imbue  their  children's  minds  with  Holy  Scripture.  Dr.  Doddridge,  one  of  the
most  eminently  pious  men  among  the  Nonconformists  in  this  country,  used  to  relate
that  his  mother  taught  him  the  histories  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament  before  he
could  read,  by  the  aid  of  some  Dutch  tiles  in  the  chimney  of  the  room  where  they
usually  sat ;  and  her  religious  instructions  were  the  means  of  making  good  impres-
sions upon  his  mind  that  were  never  obliterated.  (J.  Hamhleton,  M.A.)  First  duty
of  parents: — 1.  Paul  found  Timothy,  in  their  earliest  acquaintance,  a  person  who,
though  young  in  years,  was  fitted  to  enter  the  world  iu  situations  of  great  trust  and
confidence.  2.  Paul  had  to  think  of  Timothy,  whilst  employed  in  the  onerous  duties
of  his  vocation,  as  one  whose  bodily  constitution  was  sickly,  and  hence  as  one  who
was  liable  to  severe  illness  or  early  death.  3.  Paul  had  to  experience  the  contem-
plation of  being  shortly  separated  from  Timothy,  having  before  his  own  eyes  the
certain  prospect  of  maityrdom.     Yet,  in  all  his  reflections,  arising  from  the  varioui


288  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m.

circumstances  attending  his  connection  with  this  beloved  disciple,  one  suflScient
consolation  filled  St.  Paul's  affectionate  heart.  He  knew  that  Timothy,  even  from  his
childhood,  had  known  the  Holy  Scriptures  ;  and  this  knowledge  reUeved  him  from
all  apprehension  and  anxious  pain  about  his  beloved  friend.  He  could  confidently
trust  him  in  the  world  ;  he  could  bear  to  lose  him  out  of  it ;  and  he  could  with
comfort  leave  him  in  it,  when  his  own  expected  death  arrived.  And  you  who  have
children  of  your  own,  or  are  in  any  way  entrusted  with  the  guardianship  of  the
young,  will  find  that  those  three  cases  which  I  have  cited  concerning  Paul  and
Timothy,  may  minutely  represent  your  connection  with  the  rising  members  of  the
human  family.  1.  In  tbe  first  place,  many  a  parent's  heart  is  often  anxiously  bur-
dened with  a  conviction  that  soon  the  world  must  be  opened  to  a  son  or  a  daughter ;
that  the  veil  of  domestic  virtue  and  innocence,  which  has  hitherto  screened  these
children's  eyes  from  a  sight  of  the  vanity  and  wickedness  which  exist  in  the  highway
of  life,  must  be  rent  asunder ;  and  that  the  allurements  of  pleasure,  the  fascinations
of  sin,  the  temptations  of  gain,  the  suggestions  of  ambition,  will  all  assail  their
inexperienced  feelings,  with  a  force  to  which  their  own  natural  inclinations  will  only
lend  congenial  aid  ;  and  this  will  be  so,  even  with  those  who  have  been  most  care-
fully and  religiously  trained.  How,  then,  are  parents  to  defend  their  offspring,  and
how  are  the  young  to  be  secured  from  the  corrupting  influence  of  the  ordeal  through
which,  in  entering  the  world,  these  inexperienced  ones  must  necessarily  pass  ?  Shall
they  be  supplied  with  money,  to  save  them  from  the  thirst  of  gain,  when  it  will  give
them  the  means  also  of  indulging  in  sinful  pleasure  ?  Shall  they  be  highly  edu-
cated, and  taught  all  that  the  accumulated  learning  of  the  philosopher  has  dis-
covered, when  this  may  fill  the  head  without  cleansing  one  affection  of  a  naturally
depraved  heart  ?  Shall  they  be  shut  out  from  the  world,  when  the  devil  has  already
taken  possession  of  them  in  those  bosom  lusts  and  appetites  which  human  flesh  and
spirit  universally  inherit  along  with  breath  ?  All  these  resources,  and  all  which  are
like  unto  them,  are  useless,  vain,  and  idle  ;  and  the  only  effectual  fortification  against
the  seductions  of  this  world,  which  it  is  the  duty  of  all  men  to  enter  and  purify  by
a  good  example,  is  that  Divine  kno.vledge  acquired  in  childhood,  which  Timothy,
when  a  child,  had  been  taught  by  a  holy  mother.  Armed  with  this  instruction,  the
parent  may  trust  his  child  to  the  duties  of  life  ;  and  youth  may  boldly  go  into  the
world,  to  bless  and  be  blessed  by  contact  with  its  evil  influences,  to  which  he  will
neither  conform  nor  yield.  2.  It  is  the  sad  lot  of  many  parents  to  see,  in  the  early
life  of  those  for  whom  a  mother's  pangs  have  been  borne,  the  blighting  shadow  of
infirmity,  or  the  ravages  of  violent  disease,  appear,  with  ominous  warning  that  sick-
ness and  death  are  no  respecters  of  age.  Even  in  the  contemplation  of  a  sickly  or
a  dying  child,  there  is  a  consolatory  reaction  from  the  grief  which  the  spectacle  pre-
sents, if  father  and  mother  can  then  conscientiously  feel  that,  even  from  a  child,
their  dear  one  had  known  the  Holy  Scriptures,  whatever  else  they  might  have
omitted  in  their  instructions ;  and  that  whether  renewed  health  come,  or  death  carry
off  their  treasure,  they  have  thus  made  their  young  one  wise  unto  salvation,  through
faith  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus.  3.  Parents  constantly  have  the  prospect  before  them
of  separation,  by  their  own  deaths,  from  those  who,  naturally,  owe  their  lives  to
them.  It  were  well,  therefore,  that  they  should  make  provision  for  this  day  of  con-
sternation and  account.  To  leave  riches  without  righteousness  is  the  poorest  of  all
inheritances;  and  poverty,  though  accompanied  by  patience  and  decency,  will  be  no
excuse  for  the  want  of  that  holiness  which  springeth  only  of  faith.  Happy  only,
therefore,  can  be  the  death  of  that  parent,  be  he  rich  or  poor,  high  or  low,  who  can
Bay,  with  his  last  breath,  to  each  of  his  offspring,  "  From  a  child  thou  hast  knovm
the  Holy  Scriptures."  {A.  Gatty,  M.A.)  Wisdovi  unto  salvation  : — (To  children.)
I  am  going  to  say  something  to  you  to-day  about  Timothy,  and  something  about  the
knowledge  which,  St.  Paul  says,  Timothy  had  from  childhood.  "  That  the  soul  be
without  knowledge,  it  is  not  good."  All  knowledge  is  good,  but  the  knowledge  of
the  Holy  Scriptures  is  the  best ;  for  the  Holy  Scriptures  are  able  to  do  for  us  what
all  other  things  are  not  able  to  do — to  make  us  "  wise  unto  sulvation."  How  is  it
that  man  manages  the  wind,  the  water,  the  steam,  the  lightning,  though  once  he
was  a  little  babe,  knowing  nothing  and  able  to  do  nothing?  Just  because  he  gets
knowledge  and  wisdom ;  by  knowledge  and  by  wisdom  he  can  do  all  these  things.
If  you  get  knowledge,  and  by  knowledge  wisdom,  you  may  become  like  angels;  but
if  you  get  knowledge  and  do  not  use  it  rightly,  if  you  do  not  fear  God  and  serve
Him,  if  you  lie,  and  steal,  do  you  think  you  will  be  like  angels  ?  Oh  !  there  are  a
great  many  children  brought  up  to  be  wise  in  this  world,  but  the  greater  number
are  allowed  to  be  fooHsh.     God  says,  "  Wisdom  is  the  principal  thing,  therefore  get


OBAP.  HI.]  II.  TIMOTHY.


wisdom,"  get  it  at  any  price,  and  do  not  part  with  it  for  anything.  Eemember,  wisdom
is  of  two  kinds — wisdom  for  this  world,  and  wisdom  for  the  world  to  come.     We
have  a  short  life  here,  but  we  will  have  a  long  eternity  there.    We  have  a  very  nice
world  here,  but  there  is  a  beautiful  world  there.     Timothy  had  wisdom  for  this
world,  and  wisdom  for  the  other  world,  too.     Children,  the  way  to  be  wise  with  the
wisdom  that  is  from  God  is  to  know  the  Scripture  ;  the  other  wisdom  will  teach  you
abont  this  world  :  how  to  get  food  for  the  body,  which  comes  out  of  the  ground  ;
clothes  for  the  body,  they  come  out  of  the  ground ;  a  house  for  the  body,  and  that
comes  out  of  the  ground ;  how  to  get  money,  and  it  comes  out  of  the  ground.  Look
up  ;  your  treasure  is  above,  not  in  the  ground.  The  wisdom  for  this  world  we  get  out
of  the  works  of  God  ;  the  wisdom  for  the  next  world  we  get  out  of  the  Word  of  God,
The  wisdom  from  the  Word  of  God  teaches  us  how  to  get  bread  for  the  soul — that  is
Jesus — raiment  for  the  soul,  shelter  for  the  soul.  All  these  we  have  in  Jesus  Christ ;
and  this  we  know,  and  Jesus  we  know,  by  the  Scriptures.  So,  then,  the  way  to  be  wise
unto  salvation  is  to  know  the  Scriptures.    In  order  to  understand  the  Scriptures  wa
must  have  a  new  heart,  and  when  we  have  a  new  heart  we  become  wise  unto  salvation.
The  Scriptures  make  us  "  wise  unto  salvation,"  because  they  tell  us  what  salvation  is,
and  where  salvation  is.     And  where  is  it,  children  ?    I  know  where  the  light  is — it
is  in  the  sun  ;  I  know  where  the  water  is — it  is  in  the  ocean  ;  I  know  where  nourish-
ment is — it  is  in  food.     But  salvation,  which  is  the  best  thing,  and  the  sweetest
thing,  is  not  in  the  sun  nor  in  the  ocean,  is  not  in  the  moon  nor  in  the  stars.
Where — where  is  it  ? — in  what  place  can  we  find  it  ?    There  is  nothing  so  good,
nothing  so  great,  nothing  so  lasting,  nothing  so  enriching  as  salvation.    Those  who
get  it  will  never  suffer,  never  sin,  never  sorrow,  never  die.     This  salvation  is  a  grand
thing  !  with  it,  you  will  be  rich  ;  without  it,  you  will  be  poor.     It  will  make  you
like  God  in  holiness  and  happiness.     Oh  !  salvation ! — where  is  it  ?    It  is  in  Jesus.
I  remember  reading  about  a  little  boy  who  went  to  sea.     One  night  a  great  storm
arose,  and  the  storm  lifted  up  the  waves  very  high,  and  the  wind  raged,  so  that  the
sails  were  torn  ;  the  masts  were  carried  away,  and  the  ship  was  tossed  about  like  a
cork  on  the  waters ;  and  then  a  great  wave  came  and  dashed  the  ship  upon  the
rocks,  and  every  one  on  board,  big  and  Uttle — all,  all — went  like  a  stone  to  the
bottom !     Two  or  three  days  after  the  body  of  a  boy  was  found  lying  on  the  shore.
He  was  in  a  sailor's  dress ;  and  when  they  searched  his  clothes  they  felt  something
hard  in  his  bosom.    It  was  a  Bible  !  with  the  name  of  the  Sunday-school  where  he
got  it,  and  the  name  of  the  teacher  who  gave  it  to  him  written  in  it ;  and  the  book
had  marks  of  being  much  read.     Children,  if  that  boy  loved  that  book,  and  read  it ;
if  he  knew  Jesus  and  loved  Him,  though  the  night  was  dark  and  the  sea  was  stormy,
he  had  hght  in  his  mind  and  peace  in  his  heart ;  and  he  has  now  a  life  that  will
never  end,  and  a  treasure  that  will  never  be  spent.     Though  his  body  was  dashed
on  the  wild  shore,  his  spirit  will  be  with  God  in  heaven  for  ever.     Millions  of  such
children  are  waiting  in  heaven  for  the  morning  of  the  resurrection,  when  they  will
get  their  bodies  out.  of  their  little  graves,  and  Jesus  will  change  them,  and  make
them  like  His  own  glorious  body,  and  they  shall  live  and  reign  with  Him  for  ever
and  ever.     Would  it  not  be  a  sad  thing  if  any  of  you  who  are  now  hearing  about
Jesus  should  be  lost!     His  blood  can  wash  you;  EQs  Spirit  can  sanctify  you.    Go
to  Him — trust  in  Him — or  you  will  perish.     (J.  Gregg,  D.D.)        The  sirfficiency  of
Holy  Scripture : — I.  The  glorious  purpose  which  God  intended  Holt  Scripture
TO  ACCOMPLISH.      To  "  make  them  wise."     The  very  statement  of  such  an  object  is
fitted  to  commend  the  book  that  is  to  accomplish  it  to  our  appreciation  and  our  love.
What  is  there,  that  can  be  compared  with  wisdom  ?     It  is  the  greatest  acquisition
that  immortal  man  can  make.     But  to  be  made  wise  "  unto  salvation  "  must  be  the
supreme  end  and  aim  of  all  wisdom,  worthy  of  the  name.     For  if  man  be  pregnant
with  immortality,  to  have  meetness  for  heaven  must  be  the  chief  end  of  man  during
the  days  of  his  pilgrimage  here  below.     Salvation  "through  Christ  Jesus."     The
end  so  glorious,  how  sure  and  simple  the  way  !     "Faith  which  is  in  Chiist  Jesus."
II.  The   sufficiency  of  Holy  Scripture  to  accomplish   this  glorious   object.
"  Inspiration  of  God  "  :  have  you  weighed  the  expression  ?     ^Vhat  thanks  we  owe
to  our  gracious  Father,  that  He  has  not  left  us  an  imperfect,  mutilated,  shifting,
and  uncertain  standard,  but  has  given  us  a  standard  that  in  itself  remains  complete
and  unchangeable  as  His  own  eternal  throne  !     IH.  The  fitness  of  Holy  Scrip-
ture to  accomplish  that  purpose  even  in  one  of  the  little  lambs  of  the  flock
OF  Christ.     The  Word  of  God  is  of  all  the  books  that  the  world  contains  the  most
suited  to  a  child's  mind  and  a  child's  heart.     "  I  thank  Thee,  0  Father,  Lord  of
heaven  and  earth,  that  Thou  hast  hid  these  things  from  the  wise  and  prudent,  and

19


290  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m.

hast  revealed  them  onto  babes ;  even  so  Father,  for  so  it  seemed  good  in  Thy  sight."
{H.  Stowell,  M.A.)  The  gift  of  the  Scriptures,  and  how  it  should  be  improved: —
I.  What  you  owe  to  the  Scriptubes  in  a  way  of  privilege.  Is  truth  valuable  ? —
they  are  called  "  the  Word  of  truth."  Is  righteousness  valuable  ? — they  are  called
«'  the  Word  of  righteousness.''  Is  grace  valuable  ? — they  are  called  "  the  Word  of  His
grace."  Is  hfe  valuable? — tbey  are  called  "the  Word  of  life."  Is  salvation  valu-
able ? — they  are  called  '•  the  Word  of  this  salvation."  1.  Let  us  view  these  Scriptures
as  inspired.  They  claim  no  less  a  pre-eminence  for  themselves.  And  how  delightful
is  it,  in  a  world  of  uncertainties,  conjectures,  and  errors,  to  find  something  concern-
ing which  we  may  say.  Well,  this  is  truth,  upon  which  we  may  rely  secure.  ' '  Heaven
and  earth  shall  pass  away,  but  My  words  shall  not  pass  away."  2.  Let  us  view
these  Scriptures  as  preserved.  3.  Let  us  view  these  Scriptures  as  translated.  The
first  translation  of  the  Scriptures  was  the  Septuagint,  executed  by  a  number  of
learned  men  at  Alexandria,  who  translated  the  Scriptures  of  the  Old  Testament  into
Greek.  This  was  peculiarly  overruled  by  the  providence  of  God.  Alexander,  by
his  victories  and  dominion,  was  the  means  of  spreading  the  knowledge  of  the  Greek
language,  and  thus  the  Scriptures  could  be  easily  read ;  and  thus  an  expectation
was  commonly  entertained  of  a  future  Messiah  and  Benefactor.  The  New  Testa-
ment was,  also,  soon  translated  into  several  languages ;  but  it  was  a  long  time
before  the  Bible  was  translated  into  our  own  language.  When  Elizabeth  came  to  the
throne,  by  an  act  of  grace  she  opened  the  prisons,  and  a  number  of  the  citizens
addressed  her,  thanking  her  for  her  generosity ;  but  ventured  piously  and  ingeniously
to  say,  "  May  it  please  your  Majesty,  there  are  four  very  excellent  and  worthy  men
who  have  been  denied  to  walk  abroad  in  the  English  tongue — Matthew,  Mark,  Luke,
and  John " ;  and  from  that  time  they  have  been  allowed  to  walk  at  liberty,  and  to
speak  to  you  in  your  own  tongue,  in  public  and  private,  of  the  wonderful  works  of
God.  4.  Let  us  view  these  Scriptures  as  printed.  A  certain  writer  says,  when
London  Bridge  was  first  built,  a  copy  of  the  Scriptures  would  cost  nearly  as  much
as  one  of  the  arches  ;  and  the  whole  of  a  labourer's  work  through  hfe  would  not
have  been  sufficient  to  have  furnished  him  with  a  copy  1  How  is  it  now?  Now,
you  see,  by  means  of  this  invention,  they  may  be  multiplied  to  any  degree ;  and
every  family,  yea,  every  individual,  may  be  in  possession  of  a  Bible,  either  by  dona-
tion or  by  easy  purchase.  5.  Let  us  view  the  Scriptures  as  expounded.  Now  we  owe
much  to  many  of  those  who  have  thus  written.  6.  Let  us  view  the  Scriptures  as
preached.  Nothing  in  the  communication  of  knowledge  has  ever  yet  been  found
like  a  living  address  from  man  to  man.  Nothing  can  produce  so  much  impression
and  effect.  7.  Let  us  view  the  Scriptures  as  experienced.  There  are  many  who
have  the  Scriptures  without  them,  but  not  in  them.  There  are  many  who  have  the
Scriptures  in  their  own  country,  in  their  churches,  in  their  houses,  in  their  hands,
and  some  of  them  even  in  their  mouths,  but  not  in  their  hearts.  But  there  are
others  to  whom  they  are  as  a  "  well  of  water,  springing  up  into  everlasting  life."  II.
What  you  owe  to  the  Sobiptobes  in  a  way  of  duty.  1.  Surely  you  owe  nothing
less  than  to  peruse  them,  and  to  value  them,  as  David  did.  He  said,  "  I  rejoice  at
Thy  Word  as  those  who  find  great  spoU."  "  I  esteem  the  words  of  Thy  mouth,"
says  Job,  "  more  than  my  necessary  food."  And,  says  David,  "  The  law  of  Thy
mouth  is  better  unto  me  than  thousands  of  gold  and  silver."  And  what  said  the
celebrated  Robert  Boyle? — "  I  would  prefer  a  single  twig  of  the  tree  of  life  to  all
the  riches  of  the  world."  But  let  it  be  remembered  that  the  Scriptures  will  not
profit  unless  they  are  "mixed  with  faith  in  them  that  hear  them."  2.  What  less
can  this  duty  be  than  to  understand  them.  3.  Surely  this  duty  cannot  be  less  than
the  practising  of  what  the  Scriptures  teach.  "  If  ye  know  these  things,  happy  are
ye  if  ye  do  them  "  :  and  even  "  faith,  without  works,  is  dead,  being  alone."  We
read  of  "  obeying  the  truth,"  and  of  "  walking  in  the  truth."  4.  Surely  this  duty
cannot  include  less  than  your  distributing  them.  The  Scriptures  were  designed  for
all.  The  Scriptures  are  not  given  you  as  a  blessing  only  to  enjoy,  but  as  a  taleut,
also,  to  employ.  (W.  Jay.)  The  SundaT/ -school  and  the  Scriptures  : — I.  The
work  of  God's  grace  in  Timothy  commenced  with  early  instruction — "From  a
child  thou  hast  known  the  Holy  Scriptures."  1.  Note  the  time  for  instruction.
The  expression,  "  from  a  child,"  might  be  better  understood  if  we  read  it,  "  from  a
very  child  ";  or,  as  the  Revised  Version  has  it,  "  from  a  babe."  Babes  receive  im-
pressions  long  before  we  are  aware  of  the  fact.  A  special  vantage-ground  is  lost
when  even  babyhood  is  left  uncultured.  The  Holy  Scripture  may  be  learned  by
children  as  soon  as  they  are  capable  of  understanding  anything.  It  is  a  very  re-
markable fact,  which  I  have  heard  asserted  by  many  teachers,  that  children  will


CHAP,  m.]  11.  TIMOTHY.  291

learn  to  read  out  of  the  Bible  better  than  from  any  other  book.  I  scarcely  know
why :  it  may,  perhaps,  be  on  account  of  the  simplicity  of  the  language ;  but  I
believe  it  is  so.  A  Biblical  fact  will  often  be  grasped  when  an  incident  of  common
history  is  forgotten.  There  is  an  adaptation  in  the  Bible  for  human  beings  of  all
ages,  and  therefore  it  has  a  fitness  for  children.  Give  us  the  first  seven  years  of  a
child,  with  God's  grace,  and  we  may  defy  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil  to  ruin
that  immortal  soul,  2.  It  is  well  to  note  the  admirable  selection  of  instructors.
We  are  not  at  a  loss  to  tell  who  instructed  youthful  Timothy.  "  When  I  call  to
remembrance  the  unfeigned  faith  that  is  in  thee,  which  dwelt  first  in  thy  grand-
mother Lois,  and  thy  mother  Eunice  ;  and  I  am  persuaded  that  in  thee  also."
Nowadays,  since  the  world  has  in  it,  alas  1  so  few  of  Christian  mothers  and  grand-
mothers, the  Church  has  thought  it  wise  to  supplement  the  instruction  of  home  by
teaching  held  under  her  fostering  wing.  I  regard  this  as  a  very  blessed  institution.
3.  Note  the  subject  of  the  instruction.  "  From  a  child  thou  hast  known  the  Holy
Scriptures  " :  he  was  lead  to  treat  the  book  of  God  with  great  reverence.  I  lay
stress  upon  that  word  *'  Holy  Scriptures."  One  of  the  first  objects  of  the  Sabbath-
school  should  be  to  teach  the  children  great  reverence  for  these  holy  writings,  these
inspired  Scriptures.  The  Jews  esteemed  the  Old  Testament  beyond  all  price ;  and
though  unfortunately  many  of  them  fell  into  a  superstitious  reverence  for  the  letter
and  lost  the  spirit  of  it,  yet  were  they  much  to  be  commended  for  their  profound
regard  to  the  holy  oracles.  Especially  is  this  feeling  of  reverence  needed  nowadays.
Observe  that  Timothy  was  taught,  not  only  to  reverence  holy  things  in  general,  but
especially  to  know  the  Scriptures.  Suppose  we  get  the  children  together  on  Sabbath
days,  and  then  amuse  them  and  make  the  hours  to  pass  away  pleasantly ;  or  instruct
them,  as  we  do  in  the  week-days,  in  the  elements  of  a  moral  education,  what  have  we
done  ?  We  have  done  nothing  worthy  of  the  day,  or  of  the  Church  of  God.  4.  Once  more
upon  this  point :  it  appears  that  young  Timothy  was  so  taught  as  a  child  that  the
teaching  was  effectual.  "  Thou  hast  known  the  Holy  Scriptures,"  says  Paul.  H.  That
this  work  was  qdickenkd  by  a  saving  faith.  The  Scriptures  do  not  save,  but  they
are  able  to  make  a  man  wise  unto  salvation.  ChUdren  may  know  the  Scriptures,
and  yet  not  be  children  of  God.  1.  Faith  in  Jesus  Christ  is  that  grace  which  brings
immediate  salvation.  Many  children  are  called  of  God  so  early  that  they  cannot
precisely  tell  when  they  were  converted.  You  could  not  have  told  this  morning,  by
observation,  the  moment  when  the  sun  rose,  but  it  did  rise ;  and  there  was  a  time
when  it  was  below  the  horizon,  and  another  time  when  it  had  risen  above  it.  The
moment,  whether  we  see  it  or  not,  in  which  a  child  is  really  saved,  is  when  he
believes  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  2.  Notice,  that  by  this  faith  in  Christ  Jesus  we
continue  and  advance  in  salvation.  The  moment  we  beUeve  in  Christ  we  are  saved ;
but  we  are  not  at  once  as  wise  as  we  may  be,  and  hope  to  be.  3.  Observe,  that  the
text  gives  us  a  plain  intimation  that  by  faith  knowledge  is  turned  into  wisdom.
Exceedingly  practical  is  the  difference  between  knowledge  and  wisdom.  See  it  in
the  text.  "  Knowledge  is  power,"  but  wisdom  is  the  application  of  that  power  to
practical  ends.  Knowledge  may  be  bullion,  but  wisdom  is  the  minted  gold,  fit  for
circulation  among  men.  4.  Learn  yet  again,  that  faith  finds  her  wisdom  in  the  use
of  knowledge  conferred  by  the  Scriptures.  Faith  never  finds  her  wisdom  in  the
thoughts  of  men,  nor  in  pretended  revelations ;  but  she  resorts  to  the  inspired
writings  for  her  guidance.  This  is  the  well  from  which  she  drinks,  the  manna
on  which  she  feeds.  Faith  takes  the  Lord  Jesus  to  be  her  wisdom.  The
knowledge  of  Christ  is  to  her  the  most  excellent  of  the  sciences.  IH.  That
Bound  instruction  in  Holy  Scripture,  when  quickened  by  a  Uving  faith,  cbeates  a
SOLID  chaeacter.  The  man  who  from  a  child  has  known  the  Holy  Scriptures,
when  he  obtains  faith  in  Christ  will  be  grounded  and  settled  upon  the  abiding
principles  of  the  unchanging  Word  of  God.  IV.  As  this  early  teaching  creates  a
fine  solid  character,  so  will  it  pkoduce  great  usefulness.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)
True  Wisdom  : — The  apostle  here  refers  to  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures ;  showing
that  there  was  no  want  of  conformity,  but  the  reverse,  between  those  Scriptures  and
the  doctrines  he  had  preached.  What  advantage  had  the  Jew?  Chiefly  that  to
him  belonged  the  oracles  of  God.  It  was  a  great  privilege  which  Timothy  in  his
childhood  had — that  he  could  read,  and  did  read,  the  holy  writings  :  a  great  privi-
lege, in  like  manner,  it  is,  that  the  entire  Bible,  the  canon  in  its  complete  state,
with  the  superaddition  of  the  New  Testament,  is  given  "  to  us  and  to  our  children,
and  to  all  that  are  afar  off,  and  to  as  many  as  the  Lord  our  God  shall  call."  I.
The  holy  wkitinos.  Will  you  mark  the  force  and  emphasis  of  the  word  ?  It  ia
not  the  print ;  it  is  the  "  writings."    The  Scriptures  then  were  not  produced  by


292  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ol

types  and  blocks,  by  the  modern  mode  of  producing  copies ;  each  copy  was  written
by  the  hand  of  man.  But  it  is  very  delightful  to  reflect  that  the  exact  transcript,
the  pure  and  spotless  copy  of  the  things  written  down  by  the  hand  of  Moses  and
David,  and  Isaiah,  and  John,  and  St.  Paul  have  come  down  in  their  clearness  and
certainty  to  us.  We  know  what  the  vnritings  are  to  which  St.  Paul  specifically  and
in  this  chapter  exclusively  refers.  The  Book  of  Genesis— the  details  of  the  fall,
and  the  deluge,  and  the  call  of  Abraham ;  Exodus — the  emancipation  from  Egypt
and  the  Decalogue ;  Leviticus — the  laws  and  ordinances  of  the  Levitical  Church  ;
Numbers — their  movements  and  acts  ;  Deuteronomy — a  reiteration,  or  going  over
again ;  Joshua — the  pictures  of  the  conquest ;  Judges — the  early  difficulties  and
confusions ;  Samuel— the  development  of  the  regal  character,  the  examples  and
achievements  of  Saul  and  David  ;  and  so  on,  through  the  historical  books,  to  the
Psalms  and  the  prophets.  In  relation  to  all  these  we  are  certain  that  we  have  the
exact  copies,  because  the  Jews  preserved  them  with  an  unsurpassed  care  and  vigil-
ance, with  an  interest  and  a  concern  which  amounted  even  to  superstition.  In
addition  to  these,  as  I  have  said,  we  have  as  the  holy  writings  the  four  Gospels,
the  facts  of  our  Lord's  life  and  death  and  resurrection — the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,
the  early  triumph  of  the  faith — the  Epistles,  opening  doctrine,  enforcing  precepts,
explaining  ordinances — and  to  put  the  crown  and  diadem  upon  the  head,  as  it
were,  of  tbe  entire  person,  the  whole  body  of  revelation,  that  great  and  marvellous
book  called  the  Revelation.  Wonderful  writings  I  An  amazing  richness  and
extent  and  vastness  and  variety  and  plenitude  of  truth  and  fact,  of  history  and
prophecy,  of  doctrine,  of  knowledge  and  of  wisdom,  opened  and  poured  forth  from
these  gushing  fountains.  But  ''holy  writings."  Mark  that  word:  "holy,"  as
emanating  directly  from  God,  as  being  the  fruit  and  product  of  immediate  and
miraculous  inspiration.  And  we  have  the  strong  affirmation,  "  All  Scripture  is
given  by  inspiration  of  God,  and  is  profitable  for  doctrine,  for  reproof,  for  correc-
tion, for  instruction  in  righteousness,  that  the  man  of  God  may  be  perfect,
throughly  furnished  unto  all  good  works."  And  in  this  sense,  of  an  immediate
dictation  from  Heaven,  a  Divine  breathing  from  above,  the  afflatus  of  the  Holy
Ghost,  the  writers  being  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost — in  this  sense,  as  a  communication
from  the  infinite  and  uncreated  Mind,  as  a  product  of  the  wisdom  and  intelligence
of  Heaven,  I  take  the  book  to  be  "  the  holy  writings,"  to  have  a  style  of  its  own,
an  authorship  of  its  own,  a  permanence  of  its  own.  A  holy  book,  as  the  product
and  emanation  of  the  thrice  holy  God,  and  as  having  in  all  the  parts  and  branches
of  it  a  holy  tendency.  It  is  a  revelation  of  God  ;  and  God  here  makes  Himself
manifest  as  holy,  in  connection  with  the  exhortation,  "  Be  ye  holy,  for  I  am  holy."
In  every  part  of  it  we  see  sin  punished — virtue,  obedience  fostered  ;  above  all,  in
the  great  manifestation  of  Christ — in  His  sacrifice,  sufferings,  and  death,  that  God
"  might  be  just  and  the  justifier  of  him  that  believeth  in  Jesus,"  we  behold  ineffable
justice ;  and  in  the  example  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  which  we  are  required  to  follow,
putting  our  foot  into  His  footprints,  there  is  the  same  demand.  It  is  a  book  mar-
vellously adapted  to  the  wants  of  a  fallen  and  guilty  world — preserving  from  pre-
sumption, on  the  one  hand,  and  from  despondency,  on  the  other — that  we  sin  not ;
but  if  we  are  overtaken  by  transgression,  there  is  the  sacrifice  and  the  propitiation.
And  as  actually  producing  holiness — as  being  the  cause  of  this  beautiful  product,
the  root  (if  I  may  so  say)  of  this  sweet  and  lovely  and  Divine  flower ;  for  the  "  law
of  the  Lord  is  perfect,  converting  tbe  soul ;  the  commandment  of  the  Lord  is  pure,
enlightening  the  eyes."  Men  are  good  in  proportion  as  they  direct  themselves  to
the  study  of  the  Scripture,  and  as  they  walk  according  to  its  rules.  "  I  cannot  tell,"
Jonathan  Edwards  saj  s,  "  how  it  comes  to  pass,  but  so  it  is,  that  the  more  I  read
the  Scriptures,  and  the  more  I  familiarise  myself  with  the  Divine  contents  of  the
heavenly  book,  the  more  pure,  the  more  peaceful,  the  more  benevolent,  and  the
more  happy  I  find  myself."  Why,  it  is  cause  and  effect.  If  you  put  yourself  in
contact  with  the  cause,  the  effect  will  be  sure  to  follow  ;  and  you  may  know  that
the  men  who  are  wise  in  the  Scriptures,  and  who  love  the  Scriptures,  are  in  the
same  proportion  and  degree  holy  men.  The  Scriptures  help  them  in  their  walk
with  God,  in  the  maintenance  and  preservation  of  their  piety,  in  its  noblest,
•weetest,  most  elevated  and  pure  aspirations  and  desires.  The  Bible,  the  Holy
Bible,  is  the  source  and  fountain  of  the  light  and  life  and  power  of  the  Church,
n.  The  Holy  Scriptures  are  "able  to  make  ub  wise  unto  salvation."  "  Are  able."
There  is  a  power,  then,  affirmed  respecting  them.  They  are  true,  genuine.  If  put
to  the  proof  they  will  demonstrate  their  capacity.  They  are  "  able,"  as  supplying
the  information  by  the  light  of  which  we  may  be  saved.     It  is  said  in  the  Old  Tea-


CHAP,   nt]  //.  TIMOTHY  293

tament — "  As  the  rain  cometh  down,  and  the  snow  from  heaven,  and  returneth  not
thither,  but  watereth  the  earth,  and  maketh  it  bring  forth  and  bud,  that  it  may
give  seed  to  the  sower,  and  bread  to  the  eater :  so  shall  My  Word  be."    It  is  said
in  the  New  Testament,  "  My  Word  is  quick  aud  powerful,  sharper  than  a  two-edged
sword."    It  is  "able,"  as  it  brings  the  likeness  of  Christ  into  me,  and  is  accom-
panied by  the  enlightenment,  influence,  and  grace  of  the  Spirit ;  for  the  Spirit  who
dictated  and  indited  these  heavenly  communications  abides  in  the  Church,  and
difiuses  His  unction  and  grace  upon  the  understandings  and  hearts  of  men,  where-
by, in  His  light  seeing  light,  they  discern  the  meaning  of  the  expressions  and  tha
principles,  and  are  able  to  appropriate,  apply,  and  bring  them  home.     "  Wise."
Be  upon  your  guard  if  any  man  is  going  to  make  you  wise.     The  first  thing  the
devil  did  was  to  persuade  Eve  that  he  could  make  her  wise.     Somebody  arises  with
a  new  doctrine  and  a  new  interpretation — something  which  is  to  enlighten  the  eyes  :
be  upon  your  guard,  to  say  the  least.    Yet  be  "wise  "  in  respect  to  the  truth  which
is  in  Jesus  ;  "wise  "  in  respect  to  what  is  good — simple  in  respect  to  what  is  evil ;
in  malice  children — in  understanding  men.     The  Bible  will  make  men  "wise."
Even  the  uneducated,  what  is  called  by  Isaiah  "  the  wayfaring  man,  though  a  fool,"
shall  not  err  in  the  rudiments  and  elements,  in  the  great  salutary,  refreshing,  and
saving  principles.     But  if  you  want  to  be  wise  up  to  the  full  measure — to  know  the
exact  meaning  of  every  book,  the  time  of  its  being  written,  the  purpose  for  which
it  was  written,  the  literature  associated  with  every  book  of  the  whole  Bible,  why,  it
is  a  vast  range  of  knowledge,  and  it  is  marvellous  how  every  kind  and  variety  of
knowledge  can  be  made  to  bear  upon  the  elucidation  of  the  inspired  books,  so  that
they  come  out  manifested  and  revealed  in  their  own  light  and  lustre,  amid  the  un-
bounded and  universal  intelligence  of  men.    But  "  wise  unto  salvation."    If  you
know  the  holy  writings,  and  are  acquainted  with  the  book,  you  can  answer  for
yourselves  the  marvellous  questions — ' '  How  am  I  to  be  saved  ?     How  is  sin  to  be
forgiven,  transgression  blotted  out  ?    How  am  I  to  regain  the  ancient  position,  and
to  be  dealt  with  as  though  I  had  never  sinned  ?  "    The  holy  writings  furnish  you
with  the  answer.     By  being  sprinkled  from  an  evil  conscience  by  the  blood  of  the
Immanuel,  cleansed  from  all  sin  by  the  blood  of  the  Son  of  God.    Faith  in  Him
brings  home  the  light  upon  this  subject.     I  can  know  nothing  of  all  this,  except  by
the  holy  writings.     And  this  is  the  chief  wisdom.     You  may  be  wise  in  the  world
to  get  money  ;  you  may  be  wise  in  philosophy  and  science,  and  deep  in  literature  ;
you  may  be  wise  in  frivolities  and  gaieties  and  fashions  and  adornments.     What
will  jour  wisdom  amount  to  ?    What  is  it  in  comparison  with  wisdom  unto  salva-
tion ?    III.  It  is  "  BT  FAITH  IN  Christ  Jesus."    We  are  not  directed  by  the  apostle
to  exalt  the  holy  writings  against  Christ,  or  Christ  against  the  holy  writings,  as  if
there  were  any  competition  between  the  two.    It  is  Christ  as  revealed  in  the  holy
writings.    Yet  it  is  not  that  we  are  "  wise  unto  salvation "  by  faith  in  the  holy
writings,  but  by  faith  in  Christ  Jesus,  the  living  Christ.     The  holy  writings  tell  me
that  the  anointed  Saviour,  the  Son  of  God,  has  done  the  work,  completed  the  great
and  wonderful  achievement  which  the  Bible  ascribes  to  Him  ;  and  my  soul  by  faith
cordially  accepts  the  testimony  and  reposes  upon  the  truth.     IV.  Timothy  when  a
child  knew  this.    Ah !  his  mother  taught  him,  and  his  grandmother — his  mother
Eunice  and  his  grandmother  Lois.     Oh,  sweet  child  !  oh,  beautiful  teachers  I    How
they  taught  him  !  and  how  he  listened  1     For  when  Paul  says,  "  From  a  child  thou
hast  known  the  Holy  Scriptures,"  he  means  not  merely  the  speculative  and  theo-
retical doctrines,  but  the  experimental  and  practical  had  taken  possession  of  his
heart  and  enlightened  his  mind.     Mothers  I  hear  this.    Early  education,  which  is
the  most  permanent  in  its  effects,  and  the  most  influential  upon  character,  depends
mainly  and  chiefly  upon  the  mother.    Search  into  the  Scriptures,  then,  and  let  it
be  said  of  you  that  you  know  them  ;  that  you  have  a  measure  of  understanding,
and  that  you  take  means  perpetually  for  its  improvement  and  advance.     And  those
who  teach  the  children  of  others  voluntarily  are  greatly  to  be  commended.     It  is  a
service  acceptable  and  well-pleasing  to  God.     (James  Stratten.)         Upon  reading
the  Scriptures: — I.  The  obligations  we  ake  under  to  apply  ourselves  to  thb

KNOWLEDGE  OP  THE  HoLY  SCRIPTDRES.  II.  ThE  GREAT  ADVANTAGE  THAT  WILL  ATTEND
THIS  STUDY.  III.  The  PARTICULAR  HAPPINESS  OF  AN  EARLY  EDUCATION  IN  THIS  KNOW-
LEDGE. IV.  Some  rules  for  direction  in  this  duty.  1.  We  must  read  the  Scrip-
tures frequently,  because  from  hence  we  shall  receive  the  greatest  assistances  in
understanding  them.  2.  We  must  read  them  with  attention.  Without  this,
indeed,  barely  to  run  over  the  words  of  Scripture  in  a  negligent,  cursory  manner,
is  a  profane  disregard  to  the  Almighty  Author,  whose  name  they  bear.    3.  We


294  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xo.

must  read  them  with  reverence.  (1)  By  reverence  I  understand  that  humility  of
mind  which  is  due  from  us  to  our  great  Creator,  that  submission  and  subjection  of
our  hearts  and  understandings  to  His  Divine  will,  which  disposes  us  readily  to
comply  with  whatsoever  He  proposes  to  us,  whether  it  concerns  our  faith  or  prac-
tice. (2)  But  besides  this  reverence  to  God  the  author,  there  is  a  farther  instance
of  our  humility  to  be  shown,  in  not  being  too  hasty  or  peremptory  of  ourselves  to
determine  the  meaning  and  sense  of  the  Holy  Scriptures.  4.  We  must  read  them
without  prejudice.  A  fault  we  shall  never  avoid  unless  we  observe  the  former  rule,
and  approach  those  sacred  oracles  with  reverence  and  humility,  with  an  open  heart,
and  a  teachable  disposition.  (J.  Rogers,  D.D.)  Through  faith  which  is  In
Christ  Jesus. — Faith  in  Christ  the  key  to  the  Bible : — Faith  in  Christ  is  the  key
which  will  unlock  and  give  access  to  the  treasures  of  saving  wisdom  which  are  laid
up  in  the  Old  Testament.  The  Bible  is  an  organised  whole,  and  Christ  and  the
Cross  of  Christ  are  wrought  into  the  structure  of  it,  although  they  do  not  always
meet  the  eye.  He  who  by  faith  sees  •'  Christ  and  Him  crucified  "  in  the  Scriptures
is  in  immediate  possession  of  the  ground-plan  of  the  holy  volume.  He  will  observe
how  the  original  promise  respecting  "  the  seed  of  the  woman  "  was  a  germ  of  hope
planted  in  the  earth,  which,  by  constant  accretions  from  new  prophecies  and  new
types,  had  expanded  itself  into  full  blossom  when  the  Virgin-born  appeared  to
fulfil  it.  He  will  observe  how,  as  the  ages  rolled  away,  the  light  of  revelation  grew
brighter,  and  how  the  prophets,  in  the  greater  spirituality  of  their  religious  pre-
cepts, and  the  greater  explicitness  of  their  predictions,  were  many  steps  in  advance
of  the  law.  He  will  observe  how,  from  the  sacrifice  of  Abel  downwards,  every
victim  which  fell  at  the  altar  of  Jehovah  prefigured  the  great  sacrifice  of  the  death
of  Christ.  And  in  reciting  the  Psalms  he  will  feel  that  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  which
was  in  those  sweet  psalmists  of  Israel,  testified  darkly  beforehand  of  the  sufferings
of  Christ  and  the  glory  which  should  follow.  Thus  the  whole  of  Scripture  is
welded  together  in  the  counsel  and  design  of  God  ;  and  we  know  that,  as  regards
man,  that  counsel  and  design  is  all  bound  up  in  one  word — "  Christ."  He  was
"  the  Lamb  slain  "  in  the  counsels  of  eternity  "  from  the  foundation  of  the  world";
;.nd  accordingly  in  every  chant  of  God's  holy  prophets,  which  have  been  since  the
world  began ,  there  has  always  been  an  undersong  of  Him,  an  undersong  which
may  be  caught  by  every  spiritual  ear.  {Dean  Goulburn.)  The  Bible  in  early
youth : — From  the  time  that,  at  my  mother's  feet,  or  on  my  father's  knee,  I  first
learned  to  lisp  verses  from  the  sacred  writings,  they  have  been  my  daily  study  and
vigilant  contemplation.  If  there  be  anything  in  my  style  or  thoughts  to  be  com-
mended, the  credit  is  due  to  my  kind  parents  in  instilling  into  my  mind  an  early
love  of  the  Scriptures.    {Daniel  Webster.)

Vers.  16,  17.  All  Scripture  is  ^ven  by  inspiration  of  God. — Inspiration  of
Scripture : — The  word  Inspiration  itself  is  evidently  a  figure.  It  may  be  illus-
trated by  another  word.  "  Inspiration  "  is  a  breathing  into  :  "  influence  "  is  a
flowing  into :  neither  word  is  self-explanatory ;  the  former,  like  the  latter,  may
clearly  admit  of  degrees  and  modifications.  The  word  Inspiration  occurs  twice  in
the  English  Version  of  the  Bible.  "  But  there  is  a  spirit  [Trvtu^a]  m  man  :  and  the
inspiration  {nvorj)  of  the  Almighty  giveth  them  understanding  "  (Job  xxxii.  8).
*'  All  Scripture  is  given  by  inspiration  of  God  [Otorrvivaroc],  and  is  profitable  for
doctrine,"  &c.  (ver.  16).  In  the  one  passage  instruction  is  the  chief  thought,
in  the  other  edification.  The  word  occurs  twice  also  in  the  Prayer-book.  "  Grant
to  us  Thy  humble  servants  that  by  Thy  holy  inspiration  we  may  think  those  things
that  be  good,"  &c.  (Collect  for  the  fifth  Sunday  after  Easter).  "  Cleanse  the
thouf^hts  of  our  hearts  by  the  inspiration  of  Thy  Holy  Spirit,  that  we  may  perfectly
love  Thee,"  &c.  (Collect  in  the  Communion  service).  In  both  these  sanctification
is  the  end  in  view.  Definition  is  still  wanting.  In  several  passages  of  the  Epistles
(as,  for  example,  Rom.  xv.  4,  and  2  Peter  i.  20,  21)  strong  terms  are  employed  to
describe  the  objects  and  uses  of  Old  Testament  Scripture  as  a  whole,  and  its  source
in  the  agency  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Nothing  can  be  more  inclusive  than  St.  Paul's
otra  ■>Tpoeypa<pTi,  nothing  more  emphatic  than  St.  Peter's  IXaXriffav  avo  Qtov
di'9p(jjnot.  Yet  definition  is  still  wanting  alike  of  the  word  and  of  the  thing.
Theories  of  Inspiration  have  been  many,  but  it  is  not  in  conjecture  or  in  reasoning
that  our  idea  of  it  should  be  sought.  The  only  true  view  of  Inspiration  will  be  that
which  is  the  net  result  of  a  lifelong  study  of  Scripture  itself,  with  all  freedom  in
registering  its  phenomena,  and  all  candour  in  pondering  the  question,  "  What
Baith  it  concerning  itself  ? "    It  is  easy  to  see  (and  the  Church  of  the  present  day


CHAP,  ni.]  II.  TIMOTHY.  295

is  honest  in  avowing  it)  that  the  real  truth  must  lie  somewhere  between  two
extremes — the  extreme  of  verbal  inspiration  on  the  one  side,  and  the  extreme  of  a
merely  human  composition  on  the  other.    I.  Against  the  idea  oy  a  verbal  inspi-

BAXION  OF  SCBIFTCBE  WE  ABE  WARNED   BY  MANY  CONSIDERATIONS.      AmOUgSt   theSO  WO

may  place — 1.  Its  utter  unlikeness  to  all  God's  dealings  in  nature  and  grace.
••  Where  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  there  is  freedom  " — freedom,  not  bondage  ;  free-
dom, not  rigidity.  2.  The  language  of  the  New  Testament  as  to  the  dofference
between  "letter"  and  "spirit,"  between  ypafina  and  Trvev fia — the  deadness  of  the
one,  the  power  of  the  other.  As  soon  as  Inspiration  itself  is  tied  to  the  clause  and
the  sentence,  to  the  precise  shape  and  form  of  the  utterance,  and  the  black  and  white
page  of  the  written  or  printed  book,  it  too  is  turned  from  the  nvor)  into  the
■vEipoypaipov,  and  has  lost  the  very  fopa  of  the  Spirit  which  made  it  a  Trpo^tfTtia  (2
Pet.  1.  21).  3.  Such  passages,  for  example,  as  the  opening  verses  of  St.  Luke  s
Gospel,  which  speak  only  of  diligent  research  and  a  thoughtful  judgment  as  his
guides  in  composing ;  or  St.  Paul's  expressions  in  the  seventh  chapter  of  his  First
Epistle  to  the  Corinthians,  as  to  his  speaking  not  always  with  authority,  but  some-
times in  the  tone  of  suggestion  and  advice ;  or  again,  St.  Peter's  remarks  upon  the
Epistles  of  St.  Paul,  which  in  the  same  breath  he  describes,  by  clear  implication,
as  "  scriptures,"  and  yet  characterises  with  a  freedom  which  would  be  irreverent
and  almost  impertinent  if  each  line  of  those  "  scriptures  "  had  been  verbally  in-
spired. 4.  The  observation  of  differences  of  style  and  method  between  one  Scrip-
ture writer  and  another ;  the  employment,  for  example,  by  one  of  irony  and  sarcasm,
by  another  of  no  weapons  but  those  of  simple  persuasion.  6.  The  fearful  import-
ance attached  to  each  reading  and  each  rendering  of  each  verse  and  clause  of  Scrip-
ture, if  one  was,  and  another  was  not ;  the  very  word  dictated  or  the  very  thought
breathed  from  heaven.  6.  Also  the  utter  grotesqueness  of  such  an  idea  as  the
revelation  of  science,  whether  astronomy,  geology,  or  ethnology — which  yet  there
would  have  been  if,  where  such  objects  are  involved,  the  phrases  and  the  sentences
had  been  literally  and  verbally  inspired  of  God ;  implying  an  anticipation,  perhaps
by  many  centuries,  of  discoveries  for  which  God  had  made  provision  in  His  other
gift  of  reason,  and  which  it  would  have  been  contrary  to  all  His  dealings  thus  to
forestall.  "Man's  extremity  is  God's  opportunity";  that  which  He  had  given
faculties  for  finding  out  in  time.  He  would  not  interpose,  before  the  time  came,  to
precipitate.  7.  The  terrible  risk  to  mankind  of  pinning  down  the  faith  to  state-
ments utterly  indifferent  to  spiritual  profiting,  which  yet,  if  philosophically  accu-
rate, must  for  whole  ages  bear  the  appearance  of  error.  And  who  shall  guarantee
the  Bible,  even  if  accurately  written  up  to  the  science  of  the  nineteenth  century,
from  being  condemned  by  the  science  of  the  twentieth?  II.  If  such  are  the  con-
fusions and  contradictions  of  the  one  extreme,  the  other  extreme  is  tet  more
PERILOUS.  The  practical  elimination  (now  so  common)  of  the  Divine  element  in
Scripture  is  fatal  in  every  sense  to  its  inspiration.  1.  It  reduces  Scripture  to  the
level  (at  best)  of  works  of  human  genius ;  and,  when  this  is  done,  makes  the  ques-
tion, for  each  book,  a  comparative  one,  in  which  some  books  would  be  exposed  to
a  disparaging  judgment.  2.  It  sends  as  back  to  human  reasoning,  which  is  on
many  topics  (such,  for  example,  as  immortahty,  forgiveness,  and  spiritual  grace)
human  guessing,  for  all  our  information  on  things  of  gravest  concern.  3.  It  con-
tradicts (1)  express  declarations  of  the  New  Testament  Scriptures  as  to  the  Divine
authority  of  the  Old,  as  well  as  (2)  express  assertion  of  Divine  illumination,  pro-
mised and  experienced,  in  the  New  Testament  writers  themselves.  4.  It  does
violence  to  the  continuous  doctrine  of  the  Church  of  all  ages,  which  has  from  the
▼ery  first  been  express  and  peremptory  in  its  view  of  the  Divinity  of  the  Scripture.
6.  It  leaves  us  practically  destitute,  even  of  a  revelation.  Because,  though  there
might  be  a  revelation  without  an  inspiration  (that  is,  a  gospel  of  Christ,  brought
into  the  world  by  Him,  and  by  Him  communicated  to  Hjb  apostles,  and  by  them
to  after  ages,  without  a  separate  inspiration  of  the  writers  of  its  records),  yet,  as  a
matter  of  fact,  it  is  by  Scripture  that  we  test  our  revelation,  and  that  which  shakes
the  authority  of  Scripture  shakes  the  certainty  of  the  revelation  which  Scripture
enshrines.  HI.  Between  these  two  extremes  lies  somewhere  the  vert  truth
ITSELF  ABOUT  INSPIRATION.  It  would  be  arbitrary  to  define  it  so  precisely  as  to
unchristianise  those  who  cannot  see  with  us.  That  there  is  both  a  human  and
also  a  Divine  element  in  the  Bible  is  quite  certain.  Some  things  we  may  say  with
confidence.  1.  Inspiration  left  the  writer  free  to  use  his  own  phraseology,  even  his
mode  of  illustrating  and  arguing.  2.  It  did  not  level  the  characteristic  features  of
different  minds.    No  one  could  imagine  the  Epistle  to  the  Galatians  written  by  Stt


296  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m.

John,  or  the  Epistle  of  St.  James  written  by  St  Paul.  3.  It  did  not  supersede  the
necessity  of  diligence  in  investigating  facts,  nor  the  possibility  of  discrepancies  in
recording  them ;  though  it  is  more  than  probable  that  most  or  all  of  these  would
be  reconciled  if  we  knew  all.  4.  While  it  left  the  man  free  in  the  exercise  of  all
that  was  distinctive  in  his  nature,  education,  and  habits  of  thought,  it  communi-
cated nevertheless  an  elevation  of  tone,  an  earnestness  of  purpose,  a  force  and  fire
of  holy  influence,  quite  apart  and  different  from  that  observable  in  common  men.
5.  It  communicated  knowledge  to  the  man  of  tilings  otherwise  indiscoverable,  and
also  to  the  writer  of  things  which  it  was  the  will  of  God  to  say  by  him  to  the  hearer
or  reader.     IV.  While  we  refrain  from  definition,  it  is  odk  duty  as  Christians  to

FOBM  A  HIGH  CONCEPTION  OF  THE  THING   ITSELF  FOB  WHICH   INSPIRATION  IS   THE   NAME.

1.  Let  US  think  what  would  have  become  of  the  irapn(pT]Kt]  itself,  under  whichever
or  whatever  dispensation,  if  it  had  been  left  to  depend  upon  oral  transmission.  2.
Let  us  give  weight  to  the  passages  (some  of  them  quoted  above)  which  assert  In-
spiration in  the  strongest  possible  terms.  3.  Most  of  all,  let  us  live  so  much  in  the
study  of  Scripture,  as  to  acquire  that  reverent  and  devout  conception  of  it  which  is
ever  deepest  and  strongest  in  those  who  best  know  it.  A  Christian  man  able  to
treat  the  Bible  slightingly  would  be  a  contradiction  in  terms.  (Dean  VaugJian.)
Inspiration : — The  word  which  is  here  rendered  "  inspired  of  God  "  is  common
enough  in  heathen  writers,  but  this  is  the  only  place  in  which  it  occurs  in
Holy  Scripture.  As  the  word  was  common  in  heathen  writers,  so  is  the  idea.
"  Best,"  says  an  ancient  Greek  poet,  "  is  the  word  of  inspired  wisdom."  Another
Greek  writer  speaks  of  "  dreams  inspired  of  God."  The  Roman  orator  Cicero  says,
"  No  man  was  ever  great  without  a  certain  Divine  inspiration."  This  last  example
reminds  as  that  in  the  Bible  alto  inspiration  is  in  the  first  instance  the  attribute  of
men,  not  of  books.  The  prophet  in  the  Old  Testament  is  also  called  the  man  of
the  Spirit.  Men  from  God,  the  Second  Epistle  of  Peter  tells  us,  spake  as  they  were
moved  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  There  is  a  spirit  in  man,  we  read  in  Job,  and  the
inspiration  of  the  Almighty  giveth  them  understanding.  The  Divine  breath,  for
that  is  the  idea  contained  in  the  words  "  inspired  of  God,"  is  first  in  a  human  soul ;
it  is  only  through  the  soul  that  it  can  be  communicated  to  any  word  or  work.
Scripture  can  only  be  a  body  of  inspired  writings  because  it  is  the  work  of  a  body
of  inspired  men.  Now  let  us  approach  the  subject  from  this  side,  and  I  think  it
will  lead  us  to  some  serviceable  truths.  All  men  are  not  equally  capable  of  inspi-
ration— some  have  a  much  greater  fitness  than  others  for  receiving  the  Spirit  of
God.  If  we  wish  to  see  the  perfect  type  of  inspiration — inspiration  not  limited  or
hampered  by  any  unfitness  in  its  instrument — we  must  find  one  in  whom  there  is
no  sin,  but  an  entire  and  perfect  sympathy  with  the  mind  and  will  of  God.  One
such  there  is  in  Scripture,  and  one  only — the  man  Christ  Jesus.  No  one  ever  had
the  Spirit  without  measure  except  Him ;  in  other  words,  no  one  ever  walked  the
earth  besides  who  was  in  the  true  and  full  sense  inspired  of  God.  The  Divine
breath  was  in  Him,  and  Him  only,  the  life  of  every  thought  and  word.  Hence  the
words  of  Christ  have  a  soUtary  and  supreme  value.  He  says  so  Himself :  "  The
words  that  I  speak  unto  you,  they  are  spmt  and  they  aie  hfe."  The  difiiculties
which  are  felt  at  the  present  time  in  connection  with  inspiration  should  all  be
brought  under  review  in  this  light.  Every  scripture,  the  text  tells  us,  at  least  by
implication,  has  a  Divine  breath  in  it ;  there  is  a  Divine  purpose  which  it  has  once
served,  and  which,  at  a  certain  stage  of  human  progress,  it  may  profitably  serve
still ;  but  not  e\ery  scripture  is  equally  inspired ;  not  every  scripture  has  the  final
and  permanent  validity  of  the  words  of  Christ;  and  as  long  as  these  last  find  their
way  to  our  hearts  and  work  the  will  of  Christ  in  us,  we  need  not  disquiet  ourselves
because  we  cannot  define  the  inspiration  of  Esther,  for  instance,  or  of  Second
Chronicles.  When  we  take  the  words  of  Christ  as  the  perfect  type  of  inspired
words,  and  the  record  of  them  as  the  perfect  type  of  inspired  Scripture,  we  see  what
the  essential  contents  and  purpose  of  inspiration  must  be.  Christ's  words  are  not
monotonous ;  they  are  inexhaustible  in  their  fulne.-s ;  but  in  them  all  there  is  the
undertone :  One  thing  is  needful.  Christ  is  always  saying  the  same  things,  and
about  the  same  things.  The  natuie  of  God,  the  will  of  God,  the  true  life  and
destiny  of  man — these  and  all  that  gathers  round  these  are  His  theme.  He  aims
at  making  men  wise,  but  it  is  wise  unto  salvation.  He  never  taught  a  school  of
history  or  of  science,  or  even  of  speculative  theology.  It  was  His  meat  to  do  the
will  of  Him  that  sent  Him,  to  declare  that  will,  to  win  others  to  do  it  likewise.  We
eannot  come  nearer  than  the  study  of  His  words  brings  us  to  a  true  idea  of  inspira-
tion ;  and  if  what  I  have  said  is  true  at  all,  it  follows  that  inspiration  has  to  da


CHAP,  ui.]  II,  TIMOTHY.  297

only  with  the  will  of  God.     The  man  of  the  Spirit  is  not  necessarily  an  infallible
observer,  an  infallible  scientist,  an  infallible  historian ;  in  matters  unconnected
with  his  inspiration  he  may  share  the  ignorance  or  the  prejudices  of  his  uninspired
contemporaries;  but  he  is,  in  the  measure  of  his  inspiration,  an  infallible  interpre-
ter of  the  will  of  God.     Could  anything  be  more  true  than  that  the  words  of  Christ
are  profitable  for  doctrine,  or  to  put  it  in  commoner  words,  useful  for  teaching  ?
The  truth  about  God  and  man  and  all  spiritual  realities  is  revealed  in  them,  and
brought  home  to  the  mind  and  heart.     They  have  filled  and  fertilised  the  intellect
of  Christendom  for  centuries.    Are  they  not  useful  also  for  reproof,  or  more  exactly,
for  conviction  ?    Are  there  any  words  in  the  world  that  can  quicken  a  dead  con-
science and  make  it  sting,  like  His  ?    How  many  of  us  have  been  revealed  to  our-
selves as  we  listened  to  Him,  and  been  compelled  to  cry  like  the  woman  of  Samaria
— "  Come,  see  a  man  that  told  me  all  things  that  ever  I  did  "  ?    Are  they  not  pro-
fitable also  for  correction,  for  the  putting  right  of  what  is  wrong,  and  for  discipline
in  righteousness  ?    But,  some  one  may  say,  though  all  this  is  plain  enough  iu
regard  to  Christ's  words,  it  is  very  difiicult  to  apply  it  to  everything  in  the  Bible —
for  instance,  to  the  historical  books  ;  yet  the  text  speaks  of  every  scripture.    That
is  true,  and  no  doubt  by  every  scripture  the  apostle  has  the  Old  Testament  in  view;
there  was  no  other  scripture  to  speak  of  when  he  wrote.     But  I  think  a  little
patience  and  attention  will  show  that  this  general  and  practical  definition  of  inspi-
ration is  applicable  to  the  whole  of  the  Bible  ;  and  if  the  Bible,  from  first  to  last,
has  this  inspiring  and  educative  power  for  practical  spiritual  purposes,  we  must  not
deny  its  inspiration  on  other  and  alien  grounds.    Let  us  take  examples  from  the
historical  books  to  make  clear  what  I  mean.     There  are  parts  of  the  Old  Testament
that  belong  to  the  clear  daylight  of  history — for  example,  the  story  of  the  last  years
of  David.     That  story  is  told  in  2  Sam.,  from  chap.  xi.  onward.     I  hardly  need  to
recall  it  even  by  mentioning  the  names  of  Bathsheba,  Uriah,  Amnon,  Tamar,  Ab-
salom, Ahithophel,  Joab,  Shimei.   No  one  knows  who  wrote  it,  but  it  is  not  possible
to  doubt  that  it  rests  on  the  authority  of  some  one  in  immediate  contact  with  the
facts.     Now  consider  how  it  might  have  been  written.     A  newspaper  reporter  often
has  to  deal  with  the  same  materials,  and  the  chances  are  a  thousand  to  one  that  in
his  hands  they  minister  to  the  defilement  and  degradation  of  the  community.     A
secular  historian  would  probably  handle  them  Ughtly,  as  the  inevitable  disorders  of
an  oriental  despotism — the  natural  result  of  such  a  situation  as  David  occupied.  In
neither  case  would  there  be  room  to  speak  of  inspiration.    But  as  it  stands  in  the
Bible,  that  terrible  record  of  crime  and  its  consequences,  is  in  the  full  sense  of  the
word  inspired.    It  is  not  written  by  a  sensational  reporter,  or  a  pragmatical  his-
torian, but  by  a  man  of  the  Spirit.    We  see  lust  and  blood  in  it,  not  with  the  sen-
sual eye  which  feels  the  fascination  of  moral  horrors,  but  with  the  holy  eye  of  God.
No  man  ever  read  it  but  was  awed,  shocked,  disciphned  in  righteousness  by  pity  and
fear.     It  is  in  that  sense  that  the  story  is  inspired.     The  facts  were  not  inspired  ;
they  were  the  common  property  of  men  with  and  without  the  Spirit.     There  could
not  be  a  more  signal  illustration  of  the  power  of  inspiration  than  that  a  narrative  like
this — all  of  foulest  crime  aompact — should  have  virtue  in  it,  when  told  by  an  inspired
man,  to  quicken  the  conscience,  and  educate  the  man  of  God.     Take  one  example
more,  in  some  ways  the  most  difficult  of  aU,  the  first  eleven  chapters  of  Genesis.
According  to  the  usual  chronology  these  cover  a  space  of  something  like  two  thousand
years.   They  do  not  contain  many  incidents — Creation,  the  Fall,  the  Flood,  the  origin
and  dispersion  of  the  nations,  are  the  chief.     Now  nobody  lived  through  all  that
period,  and  at  the  very  earliest  these  narratives  were  not  written  as  we  have  them  for
centuries  after  it  expked.  To  what  extent  they  embody  traditions  ;  how  nearly  or  how
lemotely,  in  any  given  case,  tradition  may  be  related  to  things  as  they  actually  hap-
pened ;  whether  a  primitive  revelation  survives  in  them  here  or  there — all  these  are
questions  on  which  men  have  been  very  positive,  but  on  which  simple  regard  for
truth  precludes  positiveness.    And  what  I  want  to  insist  upon  here,  is  that  the  in-
spiration of  these  chapters,  like  that  of  the  rest  of  the  Bible,  is  not  affected  by  any
decision  to  which  we-may  come  on  these  points.    Inspiration  has  to  do  with  the
spirit  of  the  writer,  not  with  his  materials.    The  inspiration  of  Luke  did  not  pro-
vide him  with  facts  about  the  life  of  Jesus ;  he  had  to  learn  them  from  eye-
witnesses and  catechists  ;  he  had  to  scrutinise  and  compare  documents  Uke  another
historian.   Neither  did  inspiration,  as  I  beheve,  supply  the  vnriter  of  Genesis  with  hia
materials.     What  is  inspired  in  his  story  is  what  speaks  to  the  spirit,  what  serves
to  convict,  to  correct,  to  discipline  in  righteousness ;  and  judged  by  this  standard,
there  is  nothing  iu  the  Bible  better  entitled  to  claim  inspiration  than  the  story,  e.g..


£98  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha?.  ni<

of  the  Fall.  Compare  such  a  narrative  with  the  use  made  of  similar  materials  by  a
pagan  writer — a  comparison  that  can  fortunately  be  made — and  we  see  how  wonder-
fully the  author  must  have  been  filled  and  uplifted  by  a  Spirit  above  his  own.  It  is
because  bis  writing  has  this  spiritual  quality,  this  permanent  power  to  reveal  to  ua
both  God  and  our  own  heart,  that  it  answers  to  the  description  given  by  Paul  of
every  inspired  Scripture.  There  is  only  one  proof,  in  the  long  run,  that  the  Spirit
of  God  is  in  the  Bible ;  and  that  is,  that  it  exerts  its  power  through  the  Bible.
The  perfection  of  Scripture  is  perfection  for  its  purpose,  and  that  purpose  is
the  transformation  of  character.  (<7a«.  Dennfy,  B.D.)  The  inspiration  and
utility  of  the  Scriptures  : — I.  The  inspibation  or  the  Sckiptubes.  1.  What  is  in-
spiration? It  is  not  revelation,  but  the  infallible  record  of  an  infallible  revelation.
2.  The  extent  of  inspiration.  How  far  were  these  men  guided  by  the  Holy  Ghost
in  the  composition  of  the  Scriptures  ?  To  every  line  and  word.  Yet  was  not  the
self-control  or  intelligent  consciousness  of  the  writer  destroyed.  Each  writer  re«
tains  his  own  style  (see  1  Cor.  ii.  13 ;  xii.  6).  3.  The  object  of  inspiration.  To
give  certainty  to  that  written  under  its  guidance,  i.  The  proofs  of  inspiration.
Internal  evidence.  Arguments  drawn  from  the  history  of  these  books,  from  their
contents.  Christ's  appeal  to  the  Old  Testament  as  of  Divine  origin.  The  claim  of
both  writers  of  Old  and  New  Testaments.  II.  Thb  ttilitt  of  the  Scriptures.
•'  PfioriTABLE  FOH,"  <&c.  1.  As  au  unvarying  standard  of  doctrine.  Not  a  theolo-
gical statement,  but  the  germ  of  all  true  doctrine.  From  it  all  doctrine  must  be
derived,  and  to  it  all  doctrine  must  be  referred.  2.  Useful  in  the  confutation  of  all
religious  error.  "  Profitable  for  reproof."  3.  Useful  as  an  infallible  standard  of  right
and  wrong.  We  cannot  trust  a  pope,  a  church.  4.  Useful  for  instruction  in  righteous-
ness. By  following  its  teachings  we  are  brought  into  fuUer  measures  of  perfection.
Our  sanctification  is  by  the  Word.  "  Sanctify  them  through  Thy  truth ;  Thy
Word  is  truth."  {James  Hunter.)  Inspired  Scriptures,  and  their  Divine
purpose : — I.  The  nature  or  the  writings  here  spoken  of.  II.  The  object
FOB  which  the  Scriptures  were  written.  This  object  is  twofold;  first,  what
the  Bible  would  make  man  ;  and  next,  how  it  would  accomplish  its  purpose.  1.
What  the  Scriptures  would  make  man.  "  That  the  man  of  God  may  be  perfect,
thoroughly  furnished  unto  all  good  works."  It  does  this  by  first  making  him  a
•'  man  of  God."  Religion  is  not  an  abstraction — it  is  a  Divine  life,  and  a  life  which
in  man  makes  him  a  man  of  God.  2.  The  standard  after  which  he  ever  aims  is
perfection  1  3.  But  we  have  not  only  the  standard  announced,  we  have  also  the
style  of  the  spiritual  education  determined — "  that  the  man  of  God  may  be  perfect,
thoroughly  furnished."  III.  How  the  Scriptubes  propose  making  "  men  of  God,
THROUGHLY  FURNISHED,  UNTO  ALL  GOOD  WORKS."  *'  All  Scripturc  is  glveu  by  inspira-
tion of  God,  and  is  profitable."  1.  "  For  doctrine  " ;  that  is,  for  conveying  those
truths  and  that  learning  needful  to  salvation.  2.  Becoming  "profitable  for
reproof."  This  word  " reproof ,"  means  "conviction."  3.  It  becomes  " profitable
for  correction."  This  is  equally  necessary  in  a  volume  suitable  to  save  men.
4.  Lastly — by  "  instruction  of  righteousness."  The  unlearning  of  man's  love  to
sin,  the  undoing  of  his  evil  habits — this  is  correction.  But  after  all  this  is  but  the
negative  part  of  Christian  character.  It  is  the  a'-egnation  of  evil.  Christianity
inculcates  positive  good.  IV.  The  work  which  Holt  Scbiptdbe  is  yet  destined
TO  do.  1.  By  the  Bible  the  Church  of  God  mnst  be  purified.  2.  By  the  Bible,  as  an
hastrument,  the  Jews  must  be  converted.  3.  By  the  Bible  the  great  apostasy  must
be  destroyed.  4.  By  the  Bible,  instrumentally,  the  heathen  must  be  converted.
(A.  M.  Brown,  LL.D.)  The  Bible  superhuman: — I  shall  content  myself  with
stating  some  plain  facts  about  the  Bible,  which  can  neither  be  denied  nor  explained
away.    And  the  ground  I  shall  take  up  is  this — I.  That  these  facts  ought  to

AATISFT  EVERT  REASONABLE  INQDIRER  THAT  THE  BiBLE  IS  OF  QOD,  AND  NOT  OF  MAN.      1.

It  is  a  fact  that  there  is  a  superhuman  fulness  and  richness  in  the  contents  of  the
Bible.  It  throws  more  liglit  on  a  vast  number  of  most  important  subjects  than  all
the  other  books  in  the  world  put  together.  It  boldly  handles  matters  which  are
beyond  the  reach  of  man  when  left  to  himself.  2.  It  is  another  fact  that  there  is  a
superhuman  wisdom,  sublimity,  and  majesty  in  the  style  of  the  Bible.  Strange
and  unlikely  as  it  was,  the  writers  of  Scripture  have  produced  a  book  which
even  at  this  day  is  utterly  unrivalled.  With  all  our  boasted  attainments  in
science  and  art  and  learning  we  can  produce  nothing  that  can  be  compared
with  the  Bible.  To  talk  of  comparing  the  Bible  with  other  "sacred  books"
BO  called,  such  as  the  Koran,  the  Shasters,  or  the  book  of  Mormon,  is  positively
absurd.     You   might  as  well  compare  the  sun  with  a  rushlight— or  Skiddaw


CEAP.  nx.]  II.  TIMOTHY.


with  a  mole-hill— or  Saint  Paul's  with  an  Irish  hovel— or  the  Portland  vase  with
»  garden  pot — or  the  Koh-i-noor  diamond  with  a  bit  of  glass.  God  seems  to  have
allowed  the  existence  of  these  pretended  revelations  in  order  to  prove  the  im-
measurable superiority  of  His  own  Word.  3.  It  is  another  fact,  that  there  is  a
superhuman  accuracy  in  the  facts  and  statements  of  the  Bible,  which  is  above  man.
Here  is  a  book  which  has  been  finished  and  before  the  world  for  nearly  1800  years.
These  1800  years  have  been  the  busiest  and  most  changeful  period  the  world  has
ever  seen.  During  this  period  the  greatest  discoveries  have  been  made  in  science,
the  greatest  alterations  in  the  ways  and  customs  of  society,  the  greatest  improve-
ments in  the  habits  and  usages  of  life.  But  aU  this  time  men  have  never  discovered
a  really  weak  point  or  a  defect  in  the  Bible.  Over  and  over  again  the  enemies  of
the  Bible  have  fancied  they  have  detected  defects.  Again  and  again  they  have
proved  to  be  mistaken.  The  march  of  intellect  never  overtakes  it.  The  wisdom
of  wise  men  never  gets  beyond  it.  The  science  of  philosophers  never  proves  it
wrong.  The  discoveries  of  travellers  never  convict  it  of  mistakes.  Are  the  ruins
of  Nineveh  and  Egypt  ransacked  and  explored  ?  Nothing  is  found  that  overturns
one  jot  or  tittle  of  the  Bible's  historical  statements.  4.  It  is  anotuer  fact  that  there
is  in  the  Bible  a  superhuman  suitableness  to  the  spiritual  wants  of  all  mankind.
It  feeds  the  mind  of  the  labourer  in  his  cottage,  and  it  satisfies  the  gigantic
intellects  of  Newton,  Chalmers,  Brewster,  and  Faraday.  It  is  the  only  book,  more-
over, which  seems  always  fresh  and  evergreen  and  new.  I  place  these  four  facts
about  the  Bible  before  you,  and  I  ask  you  to  consider  them  well.  Take  them  all
four  together,  treat  them  fairly,  and  look  at  them  honestly.  Upon  any  other
principle  than  that  of  Divine  inspiration,  those  four  facts  appear  to  me  inexplicable
and  unaccountable.  Not  only  were  its  writers  isolated  and  cut  off  in  a  peculiar
manner  from  other  nations,  but  they  belonged  to  a  people  who  have  never  produced
any  other  book  of  note  except  the  Bible !  There  is  not  the  slightest  proof  that,
unassisted  and  left  to  themselves,  they  were  capable  of  writing  anything  remarkable,
like  the  Greeks  and  Bomans.  Yet  these  men  have  given  the  world  a  volume  which
for  depth,  sublimity,  accuracy,  and  suitableness  to  the  wants  of  man,  is  perfectly
nnrivaUed.  How  can  this  be  explained  ?  To  my  mind  there  is  only  one  answer.
The  writers  of  the  Bible  were  Divinely  helped  and  qualified  for  the  work  which
they  did.  II.  Let  us  now  consider  the  privileges  which  the  possession  of  an
INSPIRED  BOOK  CONFERS  UPON  uB.  1.  It  is  a  privilege  to  possess  the  only  book  which
gives  a  reasonable  account  of  the  beginning  and  end  of  the  globe  on  which  we  live.
2.  It  is  a  privilege  to  possess  the  only  book  which  gives  a  true  and  faithful  account
of  man.  3.  It  is  a  privilege  to  possess  the  only  book  which  gives  us  true  views  of
Ood.  4.  It  is  a  privilege  to  possess  the  only  book  which  gives  a  clear  account  of
the  full,  perfect,  and  complete  provision  which  God  has  made  for  the  salvation  of
fallen  man.  5.  Finally,  it  is  a  privilege  to  possess  the  only  book  which  explains
the  state  of  things  that  we  see  in  the  world  around  us.  III.  Let  us  now  consider
THE  DUTIES  WHICH  THE  POSSESSION  OF  God's  ORACLES  entaiIjS  UPON  US.  1.  First  and
foremost,  let  ua  honour  the  Bible  by  making  it  the  supreme  rule  of  faith,  the
standard  measure  of  truth  and  error,  of  right  and  wrong  in  our  churches.  2.  In
the  next  place,  if  we  believe  the  Bible  to  be  "  the  oracles  of  God,"  let  us  show  the
reality  of  our  belief  by  endeavouring  to  spread  it  throughout  the  world.  {Bp.
Ryle.)  Inspiration  of  the  Holy  Scriptures : — I.  In  confirmation  of  this  doctrine,
WE  would  ask  attention  to  the  following  considerations  and  arguments.  1.
We  would  offer  a  short,  clear,  and  strong  argument,  from  Mr,  Wesley.  ••  The  Bible,"
*ay8  he,  *•  must  be  the  invention  either  of  good  men  or  angels,  bad  men  or  devils,
•r  ol  God."  (1)  It  could  not  be  the  invention  of  good  men  or  angels;  for  they
neither  could  nor  would  make  a  book,  and  tell  lies  all  the  time  they  were  writing
h,  saying,  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord,"  when  it  was  their  own  invention.  (2)  It  could
not  be  the  invention  of  bad  men  or  devils  ;  for  they  would  not  make  a  book  which
eommande  all  dutv,  forbids  all  sin,  and  condemns  their  souls  to  hell  to  all  eternity.
(3)  Therefore  w«  ist  draw  this  conclusion,  that  the  Bible  must  have  been  given
by  Divine  inspiit*  .on — that  it  is  the  work  of  God.  2.  Our  second  argument  is
derived  from  prophecy.  The  ability  to  foretell  future  events,  especially  hundreds
of  years  beforehand,  belongs  to  God  alone.  8.  The  declarations  of  the  Scriptures
themselves  plainly  prove  this  doctrine.  But  will  not  this  be  proving  inspiration
by  inspiration  ?  It  would  be  so,  indeed,  did  we  assume  the  Bible  in  this  argument
to  be  inspired.  But  now  we  take  it  only  as  a  book  of  truth,  declaring  true  doctrines
and  true  history ;  as  such  we  receive  it,  and  by  itself  prove  its  inspiration.  II.  Wb
PASS  lo  OONBIDBB  BOMB  OBJBOTIOMS.     1,  The  first,  and  one  which  is  frequently  in


800  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ra.

the  mouths  of  infidels,  is  that  there  are  contradictions  in  the  Scriptures,  and  there-
fore they  cannot  be  inspired.  2.  A.nother  class  of  objections  against  the  plenary
inspiration  of  the  Scriptures  is  founded  on  the  imperfect  state  of  the  text,  its
■variations  in  the  reading  and  punctuations.  3.  Another  objection  which  has  been
urged  against  plenary  or  verbal  inspiration  is  founded  on  the  individuality  of
the  sacred  writers.  The  following  is  our  answer : — God  speaks  to  man  after  the
manner  of  men ;  and  hence  He  uses  human  language,  and,  of  course,  human
language  with  its  imperfections.  Inferences :  1.  If  the  Holy  Scriptures  are
Divinely  inspired,  human  reason  ought  to  be  held  in  abeyance  to  their  teachings.
^.  If  Divinely  inspired,  they  must  teach  us  truth  without  any  admixture  of  error.
3.  We  also  infer  that,  if  Divinely  inspired,  they  contain  a  sufficiency  of  truth  for
our  salvation.  (Stephen  M.  Vail,  M.A.)  The  Word  of  God  commended  to  the  man
of  God  in  the  perilous  times  of  the  last  days : — 1.  The  subject  of  this  text  is  our  own
precious  Bible.  2.  And,  assuredly,  of  the  very  deepest  interest  must  such  a  subject
be  to  the  sort  of  person  to  whom  in  the  text  the  Spirit,  by  Paul,  addresses  Himself,
on  the  Divine  inspiration,  and  authority,  and  profitableness  of  the  Bible.  For  it  is
to  "  the  man  of  God  "  the  apostle  here  speaks  in  commendation  of  the  Word  of
God.  It  is  to  one  he  writes  who  (vers.  14,  15)  had  "  learned"  and  "  been  assured  "
of  "the  things"  revealed  in  "the  Holy  Scriptures,"  which  "from  a  child  he  had
known  " — who  had  experimentally  proved  them  to  be  "  able  to  make  him  wise  unto
salvation,  through  faith  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus."  To  that  sort  of  person  no
theme  could  be  more  attractive  of  the  deepest  interest,  than  the  incalculable
preciousness  of  the  Holy  Bible  (Psa.  xix.  7-11).  One  thing  only  could  enhance
such  a  man's  estimate  of  their  infinite  value,  and  that  one  thing  was  the  character
of  *'  the  times  "  in  which,  as  peculiarly  threatening  of  dangerous  assaults  on  the
Christian  faith,  the  apostle  commended  the  profitableness  of  the  Scriptures  and
exhorted  the  man  of  God  to  continue  to  confide  in  the  profitableness  of  "all
Scripture"  as  "  given  by  inspiration  of  God."  3.  And  yet,  though  thus  employed
as  the  means  of  enforcing  his  exhortation  to  Timothy  to  "  continue  in  the  things
which  he  had  learned,"  the  "  perilous  "  controversies  of  "  the  times  "  are  not  suffered
by  any  insinuation  on  the  part  of  the  apostle  to  disturb  the  certainty  in  which  his
young  disciple  had  "  been  assured  "  of  "  the  things  which  he  had  learned."  4.  Are
we  "  men  of  God,"  "  taught  of  God"  to  know  Him,  and  with  profoundest  reverence
to  acknowledge  His  authority  Bpeaking  in  His  own  Word  ?  Then  we  are  of  those
who  spiritually  pee.  To  our  renewed  hearts,  as  to  open  healthy  eyes,  the  hght  of
Holy  Scripture  has  come  and  entered  in,  carrying  with  it  its  own  evidence  of  its
Divine  authority,  and  with  a  power  that  is  irresistible.  I.  Whence  have  we  the
Bible  ?  It  is  *'  of  God  " — its  authority  is  Divine.  When  God  speaks  the  highest
exercise  of  man's  reason  surely  is,  in  silent  submission,  to  believe  and  obey,  simply
because  it  is  the  Word  of  GoJ  that  is  spoken.  It  is  the  exercise  of  a  prerogative
the  noblest  birthright  of  man,  to  believe  God's  truth.  In  that  submission  of  human
reason  to  the  authority  of  Divine  truth,  man  escapes  into  freedom  !  The  truth  as
nothing  else  can  do,  emancipates  the  mind  from  the  debasing  slavery  to  the
opinions  of  men.  It  puts  man  as  to  unseen  things  in  immediate  and  direct  com-
munication alone  with  God.  No  creature  is  allowed  to  intervene  as  the  Lord  of
the  conscience,  when,  for  the  authority  of  God  speaking  in  it,  the  word  in  Holy
Scripture  is  believed.  God  is  then  by  His  Word  and  Spirit  in  actual  contact  with
your  soul,  for  your  enjoying  the  most  ennobling  fellowship  with  Himself,  in  the
light  of  truth,  and  in  the  perfect  freedom  of  a  willing  obedience  of  the  truth.  IT.
In  what  manner  is  it  given  us  by  God  ? — "  It  is  given  by  inspiration  of  God  !  "
The  text  here,  you  observe,  does  not  point  to  such  a  mode  of  communication  with
man  as  was  used  in  the  Garden  of  Eden,  when,  in  the  cool  of  the  day,  the  voice  of
God  was  heard  by  Adam  talking  with  him.  Nor  yet  does  the  text  here  refer  to  such
a  mode  of  writing  down  what  the  voice  of  God  had  uttered  in  man's  hearing,  as  was
once  and  again  practised,  when,  on  two  tables  of  stone,  the  ten  words  of  the  Holy
Moral  Law  were  engraven  by  the  immediate  finger  of  God.  The  text  does  plainly
testify  to  the  Word  of  God  being  written,  but  observe,  to  that  result  being  attained
by  what  is  called  "  inspiration."  It  is  God-breathed.  That,  what  is  written  in  the
Bible  is  the  Word  of  God,  results  from  the  inspiration  by  God  of  men  employed  by
Him  to  VTrite  it.  The  Word  in  Holy  Scripture  results  from  that  miraculous
operation  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  whereby  He  did  so  communicate  Himself  to  the
writers  of  these  Scriptures  for  the  revelation  of  His  will  to  man,  as  to  secure  the
infallible  truth  and  Divine  authority  of  what  is  written  in  the  Bible.  Of  the
manner  91  that  miraculous  operation  of  the  Spirit  of  God  we  know  nothing.    III.


CHAP,  m.]  11.  TIMOTHY,  801

To  WHAT  EXTENT  IS  THE  BiBLE  INSPIBED  ? — "  All  Scripture  IS  given  by  inspiration  of
God."  It  is  thus  that  the  Divine  Anthor  of  the  book  Himself  declares  to  what
extent  it  is  inspired.  In  whatever  manner  the  Divine  influence  that  "  gave  the
Word  "  worked — by  whatever  means,  by  means  of  however  many  varied  manu-
scripts, as  by  many  different  compilers — the  result  we  have  in  this  Bible  is
throughout  Divinely  inspired.  IV.  With  what  design  has  it  been  given  bt
INSPIRATION  OF  GoD  ?  It  was  givcn  to  be  profitable,  in  order  ♦'  that  the  man  of  God
may  be  thoroughly  furnished  unto  all  good  works,"  and  for  that  end  profitable  in
a  way  manifold  and  many-sided.  1.  The  Bible  is  "profitable  for  doctrine."  By
its  revelation  of  truth  as  an  objective  reality,  it  really  gives  man  truth  to  love.  It
thus  stands  in  the  boldest  contrast  to  the  utterly  unsatisfying  vanity  of  modern
rationalism,  which  gives  you  nothing  but  the  question  whether  there  be  revealed
truth  at  all.  2.  The  Bible  is  "profitable,  too,  for  reproof."  By  its  deep  and  searching
spirituality  the  Bible  deals  with  man's  state  as  a  sinner  before  God.  It  reveals  the
truth  as  to  man  lost.  It  reaches  the  deepest  needs  of  his  condition.  It  thus
utterly  dispels  all  the  delusive  fancies  of  modern  rationalism,  whereby  man  is
tempted  to  think  well  of  himself ;  and  so  to  count  that  a  gain  to  him  which,  if  ever
he  be  saved,  he  must  be  content  to  count  as  loss  for  Christ.  3.  The  Bible  is
profitable,  besides,  "  for  correction"  of  every  such  groundless  hope  in  man.  By
the  revelation  of  grace  to  us  as  fallen,  and  of  deliverance  from  the  guilt  and  power
of  our  sin  by  the  death  and  resurrection  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  the  Bible  gives  a  Divine
contradiction  to  every  rationalistic  theory  of  human  progress,  by  which  redemption
is  attempted  to  be  explained  without  the  cross  and  the  sacrifice  of  the  Eedeemer.
4.  The  Bible  is  profitable,  finally,  for  instruction  (or  discipline)  in  the  life  and  walk
of  righteousness.  In  direct  opposition  to  the  wUd  ravings  of  modern  rationahsm
about  "  emancipation  from  the  external  law  of  revealed  truth  " — for  the  solemn
rebuke  of  that  delusive  licence  which  is  sought  in  following  the  light  within  us,
rather  than  the  Word  of  God  without  us — the  Bible  plainly  asserts  that,  "  under
the  law  to  Christ,"  this  is  the  love  of  the  new  life  in  Christ,  that  we  keep  His
commandments — a  life  of  obedience  of  "  the  law  of  liberty  " — even  as  Christ  Him-
self "  kept  His  Father's  commandments  and  abode  in  His  love."  (R.  H.  Muir.)
On  the  Scriptures : — I.  Human  ability  has  been  inadequate  to  the  production  op

ANTTHINO   WHICH   WOULD  JUSTIFY  US   IN  ATTRIBUTING    TO    IT   THE   PRODUCTION   OP   THE

Scriptures.  II.  God  having  graciously  resolved  to  recover  the  human  race  from
the  state  into  which  they  had  fallen,  and  to  this  end  having  spoke  in  times  long
past  to  the  fathers  by  the  prophets,  and  in  the  latter  days  to  the  world,  by  His  Son,

IT  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that,  for  THE  BENEFIT  OF  THE  GENERATIONS  TO  COME  FOB

EVER,  He  would  cause  a  record  to  be  made  of  the  communications  of  His  will.
III.  The  connection  and  agreement  of  the  several  parts  of  the  sacred  volume,
intimate  strongly  its  Divine  inspiration.    IV.  Tradition  has  accompanied  the

HOLY  volume  in  ALL  AGES  AND  PLACES  OF  ITS  BEING,  TESTIFYING  ITS  CLAIM  TO  BE
CONSIDERED  AS  THE  WoRD    OF    GOD.       V.    ThB    PROVIDENTIAL    CARE    OF    GoD    OVER   THE

Holy  Scriptures  may  well  lead  us  to  believe  that  they  are  His  offspring.
VI.  The  completeness  of  the  sacred  writings,  whereby  I  mean  their  sufficiency

AND    perfection    AS   A    BULB    OF   FAITH  AND    CONDUCT  ;    THEIR    ADEQUATENESS    TO    OUR

necessities  in  THIS  PRESENT  STATE.  1.  This  we  may  clearly  deduce  from  what  has
already  been  established.  Being  "given  by  inspiration  of  God,"  the  Scriptures
must  be  perfect  for  the  purpose  whereunto  He  sends  them ;  and  if  they  are  finished,
SO  that  no  further  addition  to  them  is  to  be  expected,  they  must  be  perfect  in  all
generations  for  ever,  for  the  use  of  the  children  of  men.  2.  And  this,  if  we  now
advert  to  the  sacred  writings,  will  be  found  to  be  really  the  case.  Upon  every
subject  of  a  religious  or  moral  nature,  concerning  which  mankind  have  been
inquisitive,  we  may  here  find  ample  information.  And  concerning  the  conduct
which  is  proper,  in  every  situation  in  which  mankind  may  be  placed,  we  may  here
find  explicit  instruction.  3.  But,  it  may  be  objected,  if  the  Scriptures  are  thus
complete,  whence  is  it  that  so  many  to  whom  they  are  sent,  are  brought  by  them
neither  to  right  faith  nor  to  right  practice  ?  4.  And  this  brings  me  to  observe  in
illustration  of  the  completeness  of  the  sacred  volume,  that  if  any  who  have  access
to  it  are  deficient  in  knowledge  or  virtue,  the  cause  of  the  deficiency  is  altogether  in
themselves.  The  Law  of  the  Lord  is  perfect ;  and  His  Spirit  is  ready  to  render  His
Word  efficacious  to  every  attentive  and  humble  mind.  But  we  must  approach  it
with  docility.  It  is  owing  to  men's  lusts  and  passions,  to  the  pride  of  their
minds,  to  the  perverseness  of  their  hearts,  to  the  carnality  and  viciousnesp
of  their  lives,  that  they  do  not  all  perceive  the  excellence  and  perfection  ol  tb«


302  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  m.

Word  of  Ood,  and  find  it  a  Bavoar  of  life   unto  life  to  their  Bonis.      VII.

Wb    find     OtTBSELVEfl     IN     POSSESSION     GW    k    VOLUICS,    WONDERFULLY     ADAPTED    TO

THE  NECESSITIES  OF  ouB  NATDBE,  and  "  glvon  by  inspiration  of  God."  It  becomes
us  to  inquire,  what  is  the  object  for  which  it  is  given  ?  1.  And  let  me  observe
that  it  is  for  no  purpose  of  benefit  to  the  Almighty  that  the  volume  of  His  Word  is
given  to  our  world.  Neither  our  faith  nor  our  obedience  can  profit  the  Most  High.
2.  I  must  also  premise  that  whether  any  other  beings  than  ourselves  are  interested
in  them,  and  whether  their  contents  wiU  be  of  utility  to  us  in  the  other  world,  are
questions  which  need  not  be  discussed  as  essential  to  the  inquiry  we  are  about  to
consider.  It  is  enough,  in  order  to  raise  our  estimation  of  them,  to  be  assured
that  into  the  mysteries  revealed  to  as  the  angels  desire  to  look,  and  that  by  the
dispensations  of  God  to  the  Church  on  earth  His  manifold  wisdom  is  made  known
to  higher  orders  of  beings.  From  the  nature  of  things  we  may  also  be  certain  that
those  general  principles  of  duty  and  virtue  which  have  not  respect  to  mutable  stations
and  relations  are  the  principles  by  which  the  conduct  of  perfect  beings  is  regulated
in  all  worlds.  3.  But  what  I  am  now  principally  concerned  to  consider  is  the  end
or  uses  of  the  aacred  volume  to  men,  to  whom  it  is  given,  in  the  present  world.
And  this  is  nothing  less  than  our  recovery  from  the  state  of  ignorance,  sinfulness,
and  misery  into  which  we  are  fallen,  and  our  exaltation  to  the  hope  of  eternal
life.  That  I  may  more  distinctly  set  before  you  the  gracious  design  of  the  Almighty
in  giving  us  the  volume  of  His  Word,  allow  me  more  particularly  to  observe  that  it
is  the  efficacious  means  of  all  those  changes  and  graces  by  which  the  Christian
character  is  formed  and  perfected.  We  are  told,  you  know,  that  we  must  be  born
again  in  order  to  the  knowledge  and  enjoyment  of  the  kingdom  of  God.  It  is
through  the  instrumentality  of  the  Scriptures  that  this  regeneration  is  accomplished.
They  are  the  seed  of  this  new  birth.  Again :  it  is  necessary  that  we  should  be
sanctified  and  made  holy  in  heart  and  life  before  we  can  enter  into  the  kingdom  of
heaven.  And  the  Holy  Scriptures  are  the  means  by  which  the  Spirit  of  God
accomplishes  this  important  part  of  oar  salvation.  Further :  it  is  required  of  as
to  grow  in  grace ;  and  we  have  need  to  be  constantly  nourished  in  all  goodness,  if
we  would  not  relapse  into  our  vile  state,  but  advance  to  perfection  in  knowledge
and  virtue.  The  sacred  writings  are  the  granary  from  which  this  daily  sustenance
of  our  souls  is  to  be  obtained.  They  reveal  the  truths,  they  contain  the  virtues,
they  give  efficacy  to  the  ordinances,  by  which  we  are  nourished  into  eternal  life.
Finally :  it  is  necessary  to  our  comfort,  and  to  the  full  accomplishment  of  our
deliverance  from  the  miseries  of  our  natural  state,  that  we  should  have  joy  and
peace  in  believing.  And  the  reservoir  of  all  spiritual  joy  is  the  Word  of  God — the
gospel  of  our  salvation.  VUI.  From  these  truths  there  are  several  inferences
of  a  very  serious  nature  and  great  practical  importance  to  which  I  must  now  ask
your  attentive  consideration.  1.  And  from  the  views  we  have  taken  of  the  sacred
volume  we  may  perceive  its  claim  to  oar  highest  estimation.  2.  But  if  we  value
the  Scriptures  we  shall  also  study  them.  The  consequences  of  not  reading  the
Holy  Scriptures  are  of  a  more  serious  nature  and  greater  in  extent  than  yoa  may
suppose.  It  is  to  this,  I  apprehend,  that  we  are  to  attribute,  in  a  great  measure,
the  total  ignorance  of  religion  in  some  and  the  decay  of  it  in  others.  It  is  in  this
that  we  are  to  look  for  the  cause  of  the  instability  of  Christians.  Here  we  may
find  the  reason  why  error  prevails.  Here  we  may  discover  the  source  of  fanaticism
and  of  superstition.  To  this  it  is  owing  that  the  best  seem  unconscious  of  the
degree  of  holiness  to  which  they  are  called  ;  and  that  all  rest  easy  under  imperfec-
tions of  knowledge  and  deficiencies  of  virtue  which  a  thorough  acquaintance  with
the  Scriptures  would  both  reprove  and  correct.  3.  In  the  course  of  our  observa-
tions  upon  the  Holy  Scriptures,  we  have  shown  that  Ood  hath  a  merciful  purpose
in  conferring  them  upon  us,  even  to  recover  us  from  our  ignorance,  sinfulness,  and
misery,  and  exalt  us  to  the  hope  of  everlasting  life.  It  behoves  us,  therefore,  to
inquire  how  far  His  desire  and  gracious  intention  have  been  accomplished  in  os  t
And  this  inquiry  you  will  most  safely  answer,  not  by  adverting  to  your  occasional
feelings  and  transient  fervours,  but  by  looking  to  your  principles  and  your  lives.
Are  you  brought  to  a  clear  knowledge  of  the  only  true  God,  and  of  Jesus  Christ
whom  He  hath  sent  ?  Are  those  traits  of  excellence  which  are  distinctly  exemplified
in  the  lives  of  the  Scripture  worthies,  and  which  are  all  combined  and  perfected  in
the  example  of  our  blessed  Lord,  imitated  by  you  in  the  several  conditions  and
relations  in  which  the  Most  High  hath  placed  you  ?  If,  at  the  day  of  judgment,  we
shall  be  found,  notwithstanding  our  advantages,  to  have  remained  unchanged  and
unrenewed,  the  very  heathens  will  rise  up  in  judgment  and  condemn  us.     4.  On


CHAT.  TO.]  11.  TIMOTHY.  803

this  Eolemn  acconnt  I  cannot  forbear  adding  what  is  powerfully  enforced  by  our
subject,  the  importance  of  bringing  to  the  oracles  of  truth,  whenever  we  recur  to
them,  becoming  dispositions  and  conduct.  Endeavour,  if  possible,  to  make  it  the
standard  by  which  you  would  regulate  all  your  thoughts  and  actions.  5.  The
character  of  the  sacred  writings,  and  your  privilege  in  possessing  them,  impose  on
you  an  obligation  to  extend  the  knowledge  of  them  as  far  as  you  are  able,  and
especially  to  make  them  the  source  from  which  you  furnish  your  children  with  the
principles  and  rules  of  life.  {Bp.  Dehon.)  The  true  teachings  of  the  Bible : —
"  Every  Scripture  inspired  of  God,"  is  the  declaration,  "  is  profitable."  Profitable
for  what?  Well,  "  for  teaching,  for  reproof,  for  correction."  It  is  a  good  teaching-
book.  It  is  a  good  book  out  of  which  to  get  instruction,  provided  you  seek  the  right
sort  of  instruction — instruction  in  righteousness.  What  is  righteousness  ?  Eight
living.  In  the  Old  Testament  and  the  New  the  ideal  pattern  is  that  of  a  man  living
right  in  himself,  in  his  social  and  civic  relations,  in  his  whole  orb  of  self.  A  man
must  have  some  ideal  pattern  before  him,  and  he  must  live  according  to  it.  The
Bible  is  said  to  be  inspired — that  part  of  it  which  is  inspired.  ••  Every  Scripture
inspired  of  God  is  also  profitable  for  teaching,  for  reproof,  for  correction,  for
instruction  in  righteousness."  For  what  purpose?  Why,  "that  the  man  of  God
may  be  complete,  furnished  completely  unto  every  good  work."  There  are  two
radical  views  of  the  function  of  sacred  Scripture.  First,  it  is  held  that  it  is  a  book
proceeding  directly  from  the  mind  of  God,  in  the  same  sense  in  which  Milton's
poems  proceeded  from  his  mind,  or  in  which  Newton's  discoveries  proceeded  from
his  mind,  or  in  which  any  legislation  proceeds  from  the  minds  of  the  legislators,
and  that  it  contains  a  substantial  revelation  of  God's  moral  government,  both  in
this  life  and  in  the  other  world.  In  part,  it  is  such  a  book ;  but  that  is  not  the
genius  of  the  Bible.  Such  is  not  the  grand  end  of  this  book.  The  second  view  is
the  Scriptural  theory.  It  is  contained  in  the  text.  The  Bible  is  a  book  that  under-
takes  to  teach  men  how  to  live  so  that  they  shall  live  hereafter ;  and  in  regard  to
that  aim  and  design  of  the  Bible  there  is  no  divergence  of  opinion.  All  Scripture,
then,  is  not  inspired.  Why  should  we  suppose  that  the  genealogies,  and  the  land
laws,  or  the  laws  of  property,  among  the  Jews,  needed  to  be  either  inspired  or
revealed  ?  Was  it  to  supersede  the  natural  operation  of  human  reason  that  the
Bible  was  given  ?  If  the  division  of  property  sprang  up  in  the  Hebrew  common-
\iealth,  and  if  there  were  many  minute  economies,  all  of  which  were  of  a  nature
such  as  that  they  could  be  born  out  of  the  human  mind,  and  it  was  perfectly  within
the  power  of  the  human  mind  to  write  them  down,  what  inspiration  was  needed  for
that  purpose  ?  No  inspiration  is  necessary  to  record  things  that  common  human
intelligence  cannot  miss,  and  cannot  very  well  fail  of  recording.  Proverbs  and
national  songs,  manners  and  customs,  of  the  Hebrew  commonwealth — all  lay
within  the  natural  function  of  human  reason ;  and  when  it  is  said,  *'  AU  Scripture
that  is  inspired,"  doubtless  it  was  with  the  conception  that  many  of  these  things
were  natural  and  not  supernatural.  The  existence  of  God ;  a  belief  in  the  moral
order  of  the  universe,  or  supervising  Divine  Providence ;  conscience,  or  the  know-
ledge of  what  is  right  and  what  is  wrong,  and  sensibility  to  that  which  is  right  as
well  as  reaction  from  that  which  is  wrong ;  the  nature  of  things  that  are  right  and
the  nature  of  things  that  are  wrong ;  sanctions  for  virtue,  and  sanctions  also,  penal,
for  vice,  selfishness,  wickedness,  cruelty — all  these  things  are  constitutional,  if  I
may  say  so,  in  the  Bible.  Here,  then,  is  the  life  that  you  must  not  live,  and  here
is  the  life  that  you  must  Uve.  Was  there  ever  a  man  that  wanted  to  take  anything
away  from  that  ?  The  whole  Bible  is  an  attempt  to  correct  a  man,  and  take  him
away  from  this  under-passionate  life  of  which  we  have  been  hearing  the  registra-
tion, and  to  persuade  him  to  come  out  of  it  into  the  higher  and  spiritual  life.  The
genius  of  the  Bible  is  to  lift  men  to  righteousness,  and  to  show  the  things  to  be
avoided,  and  the  things  to  be  taken  on.  It  is  a  book  of  instruction  in  righteous-
ness, that  the  man  of  God  may  be  thoroughly  furnished  to  every  good  work  ;  and
here  are  the  work  and  the  qualities.  Now,  I  should  like  to  know  if  there  is  any
infidel  in  this  world  on  that  subject,  or  can  be.  A  great  many  do  not  believe  that
God  can  exist  in  three  persons ;  but  is  there  anybody  that  ever  doubted  that  love
was  beautiful,  was  true,  was  desirable  ?  A  great  many  men  have  had  theories  of
the  Atonement  of  Jesus  Christ ;  there  are  some  fifteen  or  twenty  different  theories
or  modifications  on  that  subject ;  but  did  men  ever  have  any  difference  of  opinion
as  to  love,  joy,  peace,  long-suffering,  kindness,  goodness,  faithfulness,  meekness,  or
any  of  these  other  qualities  ?  About  them  there  is  absolute  unity.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)
The  Divine  authority  and  perfection  of  the  Scriptures : — L  That  the  Scbiptubbs


1^


304  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m.

ABE  oiTEN  BY  INSPIRATION  OF  GoD.  1.  In  Older  to  judge  whether  persons  are
inspired,  we  must  carefully  inquire  into  their  moral  character  ;  into  their  doctrine
or  message ;  and  into  the  credentials  or  proofs  of  their  mission.  2.  The  other
external  proof  of  an  inspired  person  is  the  fulfilment  of  prophecy.  II.  The  per-
fection OB  SUFFICIENCY  OF  THE  SCRIPTURES.  1.  They  are  profitable  for  doctrine
to  acquaint  us  with  our  lost  and  miserable  condition  by  the  entrance  of  sin  into
the  world,  and  the  train  of  fatal  consequences  that  attended  it ;  with  our  recovery
by  Christ ;  the  covenants  of  redemption  and  grace  ;  the  offices  of  Father,  Son,  and
Spirit  in  the  work  of  our  redemption,  and  with  all  those  other  mysteries  which  were
kept  secret  since  the  world  began,  but  are  now  made  manifest  by  the  Holy  Scriptures
for  the  obedience  of  faith  (Rom.  xvi.  26).  2.  For  reproof,  or  the  discovery  of  our
pernicious  errors  in  doctrine  and  practice.  3.  The  Scriptures  are  profitable  for
correction  of  vice  and  wickedness.  "  Wherewithal,"  says  the  Psalmist,  "  should  a
young  man  cleanse  his  way  but  by  taking  heed  thereto  according  to  the  Word  of
God  ?  "  There  we  have  a  collection  of  all  Christian  graces  and  duties,  with  their
opposite  vices.  The  fruits  of  the  spirit  and  of  the  flesh  are  distinguished  with  the
greatest  propriety ;  and  the  most  engaging  motives  to  the  practice  of  the  one,  and
awful  threatenings  against  the  other,  are  represented  with  the  greatest  strength
and  advantage.  4.  For  instruction  in  righteousness.  That  is,  either  in  the
righteousness  of  God,  which  is  by  faith  of  Jesus  Christ  unto  all  and  upon  all  that
believe,  or  in  the  practice  of  moral  righteousness,  the  nature  and  excellency  of
which  is  better  explained  and  illustrated  in  the  sermons  of  our  blessed  Saviour
than  in  all  the  writings  of  the  ancient  philosophers.  III.  The  clearness  and
PERSPICUITY  OF  THE  SCRIPTURES.  1.  They  wcic  Written  in  the  vulgar  language,  and
therefore  designed  for  the  use  of  the  common  people.  2.  Our  Saviour,  in  His
sermons  to  the  people,  appeals  to  the  Scriptures,  and  exhorts  His  countrymen,  the
Jews,  to  search  them.  The  Bereans  are  commended  for  this  practice  (Actsxvii.  11),
and  Timothy  appears  to  have  been  acquainted  with  them  from  his  childhood.  If,
then,  it  be  proper  to  teach  our  children  the  Scriptures,  and  if  it  be  the  duty  of
grown  persons  to  search  them,  it  must  follow  that  they  are  sufficiently  clear  in  all
points  necessary  to  salvation.  Lessons :  1.  Hence  we  may  learn  that  the  religion
of  a  Christian  should  be  his  Bible,  because  it  contains  the  whole  revealed  will  of
God,  and  is  a  perfect  rule  of  faith  and  practice.  2.  Let  us  be  thankful  that  we  have
the  Scriptures  in  the  vulgar  language.  3.  Let  Christians  of  all  ranks  and  capacities
revive  this  neglected  duty  of  reading  the  Scriptures  in  their  families  and  closets :
it  is  both  a  delightful  and  useful  employment.  4.  When  we  read  the  Scriptures,
let  us  consider  them,  not  as  the  words  of  men,  but  as  in  deed  and  truth  the  Word
of  God.  5.  In  judging  of  controversies  among  Christians,  let  us  not  be  carried
away  by  the  authority  of  great  names  or  the  numbers  of  them  that  are  on  one  side,
but  keep  close  to  the  Scriptures.  6.  When  we  read  the  Scriptures,  let  us  pray  for
the  instructions  and  teachings  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  whose  office  it  is  (o  remove  the
prejudices  and  enlighten  the  understandings  of  those  who  are  truly  sincere.  {Daniel
Neal.)  Tlie  inspiration  of  the  Scriptures  : — I.  The  nature  of  the  inspiration.
Inspiration  means  that  which  is  breathed  into  the  human  mind  of  God.  In  the
same  way  as  Christ  breathed  upon  the  apostles,  and  said,  "  Eeceive  ye  the  Holy
Ghost,"  so  inspired  men  receive  that  influence  and  power  which  enlightens,  and
purifies,  and  sustains  their  judgment  and  their  capacity  whilst  they  are  writing  it.
Exactly  in  the  same  way  as  a  musician,  out  of  an  instrument,  by  the  touch  of  his
fingers,  will  evoke  such  sounds,  such  harmonies,  as  his  own  skill,  his  own  will,  or
his  own  pleasure  may  design,  the  writers  of  the  Holy  Scriptures  are  the  instruments
out  of  which  the  Holy  Ghost  evokes  the  melodies  of  truth — the  harmonies  of
heavenly  and  Divine  doctrine — that  which  makes  us  happy  in  time,  and  prepares
us  for  the  happiness  of  eternity.  There  is  a  slight  distinction  to  be  made  between
inspiration  and  dictation.  Dictation  addresses  itself  to  the  ear,  and  goes  through
the  ear  into  the  understanding  and  the  heart ;  inspiration  is  more  that  which  is
within  a  man — it  is  a  power  dwelling  in  the  interior  of  his  soul,  and  influencing  hia
thoughts  and  expressions  accordingly.  1.  There  is  inspiration  in  matters  historical
— that  which  relates  to  the  histories  and  biographies  contained  in  the  Bible.  2.
We  come  to  the  inspiration  which  is  doctrinal,  or  which  has  to  do  with  abstract
truth,  such  truth  as  the  human  faculties  could  never  elicit,  invent,  or  evolve ;  such
truth  as,  if  known  at  all  by  man,  must  be  made  known  by  God.  3.  I  advert  to  that
inspiration  which  I  denominate  legislative — that  which  is  associated  with  the
giving  of  law  and  the  enunciation  of  commandments.  4.  There  is  the  inspiration
which  is  devotional.    5.  I  shall  mention  but  one  other  form :  that  is,  the  form  of


CHAP,  m.]  n.  TIMOTHY,  805

prophecy — the  inspiration  which  relates  to  the  prophetic  Word.  I  take  this  to  be
the  fullest,  most  perfect,  and  unmingled  of  all  the  inspirations,  because  to  man  in
no  case  is  there  vouchsafed  any  foresight.     II.  Some  op  the  leading  evidences,

THE     MORE     8TBIKING     PBOOFS,    THAT    THE    BiBLE   DOES   COME   FROM   THAT   SACRED  AND

CELESTiAii  SOURCE  TO  WHICH  WE  ASCRIBE  IT.  1.  First  it  claims  to  be  80 ;  i  Isays  of
itself  that  it  is  so.  Moses  did  as  the  Lord  commanded  him.  Again  and  again  we
read,  "  the  Lord  spake  unto  Moses  "  ;  and  every  prophet  came  with  this  annuncia-
tion, "  Thus  saith  the  Lord."  We  find  Paul  saying,  "  I  command ;  yet  not  I,  but
the  Lord";  "The  Spirit  speaketh  expressly";  '*Ye  have  received  the  Word  of
God."  2.  There  is  another  evidence  which  arises  from  the  nature  of  its  contents —
from  the  original,  exalted,  enlightened,  amazing  principles,  which  it  contains.  I
hold  it  as  an  axiom  that  God  only  can  reveal  God — that  God  is  never  known  but
by  His  own  teaching  and  by  His  own  inspiration.  Here  is  God  revealed.  3.  There
is  also  an  argument  arising  from  the  self-evidencing  power  of  truth.  Light  is  self-
evidencing.  When  a  child  sees  light,  it  does  not  want  any  logical  argument  to  say
that  it  is  light.  When  mind  flashes,  when  intellect  sparkles,  when  genius  corus-
cates, you  say,  this  is  mind ;  you  want  no  other  evidence — the  thing  demonstrates
itself.  So  does  the  truth  in  the  book  of  God.  Eead  out  the  doctrine,  make  known
the  precept,  let  us  see  the  history  ;  why,  it  is  of  God  ;  it  carries  its  own  evidence.
4.  Then  there  is  the  harmony  of  aU  its  parts.  5.  I  must  add  the  evidence  of  its
holiness.  The  Bible,  received  in  the  heart  and  mind,  makes  a  man  pure,  gentle,
and  Christlike ;  received  into  a  family,  it  makes  a  scene  of  peace  and  unity ;
received  into  a  nation,  it  purifies  and  elevates ;  and  the  world,  did  it  receive  the
Bible  and  act  upon  its  principles,  would  be  paradisaical ;  almost  all  the  miseries  of
it  would  be  gone  at  a  stroke ;  whatever  is  peaceful  and  felicitous  for  the  glory  of
God  and  for  the  happiness  of  man  would  multiply,  prosper,  and  abound.  6.  There
is  one  other  argument,  that  arising  from  prophecy,  in  connection  with  the  total
want  of  human  foresight,  and  the  vastness  and  extent  of  this  proof:  "  We  have  a
more  sure  word  of  prophecy,  whereunto  we  do  well  to  take  heed,  as  to  a  light  shining
in  a  dark  place."  III.  The  use  and  purpose:  "That  the  man  of  God  maybe
perfect,  throughly  furnished  unto  all  good  works."  You  note  the  expression,
"  man  of  God."  I  take  it  to  be  a  very  noble  and  magnificent  thing  to  be  a  man  ;  I
glorify  God  every  day  of  my  life  that  I  am  a  man ;  I  mean,  that  I  have  the  capacities,
the  mind,  the  thinking  powers,  the  will  of  a  man.  Then  it  is  said,  "  man  of  God."
There  are  the  faculties  consecrated,  the  grace  and  light,  the  emanation  and  power
of  Deity  beaming  upon  the  man,  making  him  a  *'  man  of  God."  (James  Straiten.)
The  inspiration  of  Scripture : — We  can  form  no  more  distinct  conception  of  what
inspiration  is  in  itself  than  that  implied  in  the  word — the  breathing  of  God  upon,
or  into,  the  minds  of  His  servants.  He  imparted  to  them  an  extraordinary  degree
of  influence,  whereby  they  were  instructed  what  and  how  to  speak  and  write.  This
special  Divine  influence  distinguishes  them  from  all  other  teachers,  and  their
writings  from  all  other  books.  The  manner  of  inspiration  is  beyond  our  knowledge;
indeed,  the  working  and  influence  of  the  Divine  Being  anywhere  are  to  us  a  pro-
found mystery.  Motion,  life,  and  growth,  the  fruitfulness  of  the  earth,  and  the
order  and  harmony  of  all  things  must  be  traced  to  Him ;  but  how  they  are  produced
we  know  not.  In  Him  we  live  and  move  and  have  our  being ;  He  besets  us  behind
and  before,  and  lays  His  hand  upon  us;  but  His  manner  of  doing  this  is  too
wonderful  for  us  to  understand.  We  are  bound  to  recognise  His  influence  in  the
mental  power,  wisdom,  and  goodness  of  men ;  but  how  He  comes  into  contact  with
the  mind  it  is  impossible  to  explain.  So  also  of  the  prophets  and  apostles.  They
were  inspired  of  God ;  He  breathed  into  their  minds,  and  endued  them  with  a
supernatural  power  of  seeing  and  teaching  spiritual  truth — this  we  know ;  but
beyond  this  point  we  cannot  pass.  Observe  a  threefold  effect  of  inspiration — the
revelation  of  truth,  intensity  of  feeling,  and  abiding  power  in  the  words.  I.  First,
the  inspired  man  was  a  "seer";  the  veil  was  turned  aside,  and  he  was  per-
mitted TO  LOOK  INTO  THE  SANCTUABY  OF  TBUTH.  Think  of  the  Hebrew  prophets
to  whose  writings  the  text  refers.  The  unity,  personality,  and  spirituality  of  God
were  revealed  to  them.  They  beheld  His  glory  as  others  did  not,  and  therefore
spoke  of  it  in  subhme  and  incomparable  language.  The  teaching  of  the  Bible
shoold  be  judged  of  by  this :  Do  the  prophets  and  apostles  reveal  spiritual  truths
in  a  clearer  light  than  the  ancient  philosophers  did  ?  To  this  a  thoughtful  man
can  only  return  one  answer — they  do.  Kead,  for  instance,  the  Meditations  of
Marcus  Aurelius,  and  then  turn  to  the  Epistles  of  St.  Paul,  and  I  think  you  will
be  obliged  to  acknowledge  that  moral  and  spiritual  truth  shines  in  the  verses  of  th«

20


806  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  nu

apostle  with  a  brilliancy  and  strength  not  to  be  found  in  the  words,  wise  and  beauti-
ful though  they  are,  of  the  imperial  Stoic.  Seeing,  then,  that  the  prophets  and
apostles  speak  with  such  deep  spiritual  insight,  the  question  is,  How  this  came  to
pass  7  They  were  not  philosophers,  scholars,  and  orators,  as  the  great  and  learned
men  of  Qrcece  and  Borne  were.  The  true  explanation  is,  "  holy  men  of  God  spoke
as  they  were  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost."  11.  Theie  mental  illuuination  was
ACCOMPANIED  BT  DEEP  AND  INTENSE  TEEUNO.  Their  Spirits  Were  "moved" — they
felt  the  burden  of  "the  word  of  the  Lord" — the  truth  was  in  their  heart  "as  a
boming  fire."  Therefore  speech  became  a  necessity,  for  by  speaking  they  lightened
the  burden  that  oppressed  them  and  gave  out  the  fire  that  burned  in  their  bosoms.
When  they  had  messages  of  peace  and  good  tidings  to  deliver,  their  "  doctrine
dropped  as  the  rain,  their  speech  distilled  as  the  dew,  and  as  the  small  rain  upon
the  tender  herb."  But  when  the  sins  of  the  nation  and  the  judgments  of  heaven
were  their  themes,  they  cried  aloud,  and  their  language  was  as  terrible  as  a  mid-
night alarm.  To  speak  as  the  prophets  spoke  we  also  must  be  enlightened  and
"  moved  "  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  IH.  The  ABicrao  power  in  the  wobds.  They  are
instinct  with  the  love,  the  pity,  the  sympathy,  and  the  power  of  the  Divine  mind,
"  They  are  spirit,  and  they  are  life."  The  ancient  sacred  fire  that  descended  from
heaven  continues  to  burn  on  the  altar  of  the  Bible.  (T.  Jones.)  The  Bible  : — I
speak  of  the  Bible  first  as  the  obeat  teacher  of  mankind,  because  it  must
ever  continue  to  be  of  the  supremest  importance  to  the  race  of  mankind.  It  con-
tains the  record  of  God's  special  revelations  to  one  chosen  people,  and  of  that  final
all-incluBive  revelation,  wherein  He  has  spoken  and  is  speaking  to  us  by  His  Son.
The  Bible  is  not  by  any  means  God's  only  revelation.  It  always  has  been  an  evil
when  it  has  been  so  considered.  It  contains,  however,  some  of  the  clearest  and
direotest  lessons  which  God  has  ever  spoken  to  man  through  the  mind  and  utter-
ance of  his  brother  man.  Take  but  one  illustration  of  its  unique  supremacy.  After
all  these  thousands  of  years  of  the  world's  existence,  after  all  splendours  of  litera-
ture in  all  the  nations  and  in  all  ages,  there  is  no  book  in  the  whole  world  which
can  supersede  the  Bible  as  an  instrument  for  the  education  of  the  young.  After  all
these  millenniums  it  remains  the  most  uniquely  glorious  book  which  the  world  has
ever  known.  "Its  light,"  says  Cardinal  Newman,  "is  like  the  beauty  of  heaven  in
all  its  clearness,  its  vastness  like  the  bosom  of  the  sea,  its  variety  like  the  scenes  of
nature."  Perhaps  testimony  from  a  rehgious  teacher  might  be  regarded  as  purely
official.  Let  me,  then,  quote  the  testimony  of  an  eminent  living  man  of  science ;
the  testimony  of  a  man  like  Professor  Huxley  on  this  subject  will,  at  least,  not  be
suspected.  "  I  have  been  seriously  perplexed  to  know,"  he  says,  "how  the  religious
feeling  which  is  the  essential  basis  of  conduct  can  be  kept  up  without  the  use  of  the
Bible.  The  pagan  moralists  lacked  fire,  and  life,  and  colour,  and  even  the  noble
Stoic,  Marcus  Aurelius,  is  too  high  and  refined  for  an  ordinary  child.  For  three
centuries  this  book  has  been  woven  into  the  life  of  all  that  is  best  and  noblest  in
English  history.  It  forbids  the  veriest  hind  who  never  left  his  village  to  be  ignorant
of  the  existence  of  other  countries  and  other  civilisations,  and  of  the  great  past
stretching  back  to  the  furthest  Umit  of  the  oldest  nations  of  the  world.  By  the
study  of  what  other  book  could  children  be  so  much  humanised  or  made  to  feel
that  each  figure  in  that  vast  historical  procession  fills,  Uke  themselves,  but  a
momentary  inter-space  between  two  eternities,  and  earns  the  blessings  or  the  curses
of  this  and  of  all  time,  according  to  his  efforts  to  do  good  and  to  hate  evil,  even  as
they  also  are  earning  their  payment  for  their  daily  work  ?  "  Unhappily,  however,
the  Bible  in  age  after  age  has  been  liable  to  such  boundless  misinterpretation,  that
it  is  not  possible  or  honourable  to  speak  of  it  as  the  most  blessed  among  the
teachers  of  mankind,  without  admitting,  as  St.  Peter  did  eighteen  hundred  years
ago,  that  it  may  very  easily  be  wrested  to  our  own  destruction.  Century  after
century  men,  misled  by  their  religious  teachers,  have  failed  altogether  to  see  what
the  Bible  is ;  they  have  made  a  fetish  of  it,  and  under  the  plea  of  its  sacredness
have  taken  advantage  of  its  many-sidedness  to  get  rid  of  its  most  central  and
essential  teaching ;  they  have  made  it  like  the  faineant  monarchs  who  have  been
surrounded  with  splendid  state  and  almost  Divine  reverence,  while  care  was  taken
that  their  real  voice  should  never  be  heard,  and  their  real  wishes  never  known.
Men  have  used  the  Bible  to  find  an  excuse  for  hating  and  cursing  and  burning  one
another,  they  have  torn  it  into  shreds  and  turned  each  shred  of  it  into  a  fluttering
ignoble  ray  of  some  party  pennon  ;  they  have  dislocated  its  phrases  and  built  false
theologies  on  the  perversions  of  its  texts.  .  .  .  But  having  eliminated  these  errors,
we  may  dwell  without  stint  on  the  priceless  value  of  Scripture  as  a  whole-— of  Scrip-


OBA».  m.]  n,  TIMOTHY.  807

tore  in  its  best  and  final  teaching  to  the  heart  of  man.  The  Talmud  and  the  Eoran,
and  even  the  writings  of  the  Indian  and  the  Buddhist,  have  stolen  its  precious  gems.
It  has  exercised  the  toil  of  men  like  Origen  and  Jerome,  and  fired  the  eloquence  of
Chrysostom  and  Augustine.  It  dictates  the  supreme  and  immortal  songs  of  Dante
and  of  Milton.  It  has  inspired  the  pictures  of  Fra  Angelico  and  Baphael,  the  music
of  Handel  and  Mozart.  There  is  scarcely  any  noble  part  of  knowledge  worthy  of
the  mind  of  man,  but  from  Scripture  it  may  have  some  direction  and  light.  The
hundred  best  books,  the  hundred  best  pictures,  the  hundred  best  pieces  of  music,
are  ten  times  over  involved  in  it.  The  sun  never  sets  upon  its  gleaming  page.  *'  What
a  book,"  exclaimed  the  sceptical  poet  Heine,  after  a  day  spent  in  the  unwonted  task
of  reading  it.  "  Vast  and  wide  as  the  world,  rooted  in  the  abysses  of  creation  and
towering  up  beyond  the  blue  secrets  of  heaven ;  sunrise  and  sunset,  promise  and
fulfilment,  birth  and  death,  the  whole  drama  of  humanity,  are  all  in  this  book."
•*  In  this  book,"  said  Ewald,  the  foremost  of  modern  critics,  when  Dean  Stanley
visited  him,  and  the  New  Testament,  which  was  lying  on  the  table,  fell  accidentally
to  the  ground — "in  this  book,"  he  said,  as  he  stooped  to  pick  it  up,  "is  all  the
wisdom  of  the  world."      II.    Test  it  onck  more  by  the  iMMEAStiEABLB  comfobt

AND   BLESSING   WHICH   IT,   AND    WHICH    IT    ALONE,    HAS   BROUGHT    AND   EVER   CAN   BRING

TO  DYING  MEN.  MilUons  have  loved  it  passionately  who  have  cared  nothing  for  any
other  literature,  and  it  alone  has  been  sufficient  to  lead  them  through  life  as  with
an  archangel's  hand.  "  Into  Thy  hands  I  commend  my  spirit " ;  in  age  after  age
Polycarp,  Augustine,  John  Huss,  Jerome  of  Prague,  St.  Bernard,  Luther,  Melanc-
thon,  Columbus,  Francis  Xavier,  and  I  know  not  how  many  thousands  more,  have
died  with  these  words  upon  their  lips.  "  That  book,  sir,"  said  Andrew  Jackson,
President  of  the  United  States,  pointing  to  the  family  Bible  upon  the  table,  as  he
lay  upon  his  death-bed,  *'  that  book,  sir,  is  the  rock  on  which  our  RepubUc  rests."
"  I  have  only  one  book  now,"  said  the  poet  CoUins,  "  but  that  is  the  best."  "  Bring
me  the  book,  sir,"  said  Sir  Walter  Scott  to  Lockhart  on  his  deathbed.  «'  What
book  ?  "  asked  Lockhart.  "  The  book,  the  Bible,"  said  Sir  Walter,  "  there  is  only
one."  Every  shallow  and  ignorant  freethinker  thinks  he  can  demolish  the  Bible;
he  might  as  well  try  to  demolish  the  Himalayas.  The  greatest  men  have  esteemed
it  most.  Infidels  babble  about  the  contradictions  between  Scripture  and  science.
I  have  quoted  the  testimony  of  one  of  the  most  eminent  living  men  of  science  ;  let
me  quot«  one  of  the  most  illustrious  dead.  Once,  when  the  famous  Faraday  waa
lying  ill,  his  physician.  Dr.  Latham,  found  him  in  tears  with  his  arm  resting  upon
a  table  on  which  lay  the  open  book.  "  I  fear  you  are  worse,"  said  Dr.  Latham.
*'  It  is  not  that,"  said  Faraday,  with  a  sob ;  "  but  why  will  people  go  astray  when
they  have  this  blessed  book  to  guide  them  ?  "  Its  words  speak  to  the  ear  and  to
the  heart  as  no  other  music  will,  even  after  wild  and  sinful  lives.  "  Though  I  walk
through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death  I  will  fear  no  evil,  for  Thou  art  with
me,  Thy  rod  and  Thy  staff  comfort  me."  Those  words  were  written  by  hig
physician  to  Daniel  Webster  on  his  death-bed,  and  the  great  man,  the  despised,
broken  idol  of  a  great  nation,  who  had  cast  the  destiny  of  all  his  life  on  one  throw
of  ambition  and  had  lost  the  cast — the  great  man  faltered  out,  "  That  is  what  I
want — Thy  rod,  Thy  rod,  Thy  staff.  Thy  staff,"  and  they  were  the  last  words  ha

said.  III.  I  WOULD  then  urge  you  all  to  a  constant  and  REVERENT,  BUT  AT  THE
8AMB   TIME   A  WISE  AND  SPIRITUAL,    STUDY  OF  THIS  BOOK.       "If  WO  be  ignoraut,"  Said

the  translators  of  1611,  •'  the  Scriptures  will  instruct  us  ;  if  out  of  the  way,  they
will  bring  us  home ;  if  out  of  order,  they  will  reform  us  ;  if  in  heaviness,  comfort
VLB;  if  dull,  quicken  us;  if  cold,  inflame  us."  Tolle  lege,  Tolle  lege;  take  them
and  read,  take  them  and  read.  Only  beware  how  you  read.  Bead  as  a  scoffer
read  as  a  pharisee,  and  it  will  be  useless.  Bead  rightly,  and  then  the
Bible  will  be  a  light  unto  your  feet,  and  a  lamp  unto  your  path.  Bead
teachably,  read  devotionably.  The  saving  knowledge  of  Scripture  is  a  science,
not  of  the  intellect,  but  of  the  heart.  Bead,  above  all,  as  Christ  taught
us  to  read,  not  to  entangle  yourselves  in  the  controversial  or  the  dubious,
but  go  to  the  very  heart  of  the  central  significance.  {Archdeacon  Farrar.)
The  Holy  Scriptures  : — L  The  Bible  is  the  most  ancient  book  in  the  world,  and
YET  it  is  not  antiquated,  but  always  fresh  and  fragrant,  as  the  beauty  of  the
morning,  and  the  breath  of  spring.  Like  the  angel  of  the  resurrection,  the  spirit  of
the  Bible  is  clothed  and  crowned  with  immortal  youth,  and  rejoices  in  the  possession
of  un decaying  strength.  II.  The  Bible  is  the  most  expansive  book  in  the  world.
It  was  the  saying  of  Malebranche,  the  great  philosopher,  that  if  he  had  all  truth,  he
would  let  forth  only  a  ray  at  a  time,  lest  it  should  blind  the  world.    And  this  seemi


808  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  m.

to  be  the  principle  which  underlies  the  whole  revelation  in  the  Word  of  God.  The
truth  is  unveiled  to  men  according  as  they  are  able  to  bear  it.  III.  The  Bible  is
THE  MOST  INSPIRING  BOOK  IN  THE  woELD.  We  may  hold  Certain  mechanical  views
of  inspiration,  but  the  question  for  each  one  of  us  is  to  ask,  Does  the  Bible  really
inspire  us?  The  Bible  is  inspired  because  it  is  inspiring,  and  if  it  fails  of  this
effect,  then  the  mere  theoretical  knowledge  of  the  inspiration  will  be  of  little  value.
And  yet  if  we  derive  no  inspiration  from  Scripture,  we  must  not  therefore  lay  the
blame  upon  the  Bible,  and  conclude  that  it  has  failed  to  stand  the  test.  There  are
certain  qualities  of  mind  and  heart  which  we  must  bring  to  the  interpretation  of  all
things.  Nature  herself  will  not  inspire  U8  if  we  have  no  eye  to  see  her  beauty,
•r  heart  to  understand  her  charm.  It  is  the  poet  who  sees  in  nature  a  glow  and
glory  which  may  be  hidden  from  others,  because  he  is  possessed  with  a  certain
sympathy.  So  it  is  in  regard  to  the  Bible.  We  must  bring  to  its  study  an  innocent
eye  and  a  pure  heart,  a  longing  desire  for  truth,  and  a  purpose  to  obey  it ;  and  then
we  shall  feel  inspired  by  the  revelations  which  it  makes  known  to  us,  IV.  The
Bible  is  the  only  perfect  book  in  the  world.  Perfection  is  the  sign  and  signa-
ture of  all  God's  works.  If  you  put  under  the  microscope  a  bee's  sting  and  an
ordinary  sewing  needle,  you  will  at  once  see  the  difference  between  man's  handi-
work and  God's.  They  are  both  very  like  each  other  when  examined  by  the  naked
•ye ;  but  when  brought  beneath  the  lens  we  perceive  the  mighty  difference.  The
needle  is  rough  and  rugged,  full  of  bulges  and  bends,  like  the  undressed  bough  of
a  tree,  whereas  the  sting  of  the  bee  retains  its  arrowy  point  and  perfection  under
the  closest  scrutiny.  And  so  it  is  with  all  God's  works  in  contrast  vrith  man's.
The  Bible  is  the  only  perfect  book,  because  it  is  the  work  of  God.  The  law  of  the
Lord  is  perfect,  says  the  Psalmist,  the  sun  rules  in  the  heavens,  and  divides  the
day  from  the  night.  And  so  with  the  Word  of  God.  The  light  which  shines
through  it  rules  the  mind  and  will  and  heart  of  man,  and  divides  the  darkness  from
the  light.  But  the  Word  of  God  is  not  only  perfect,  but  it  is  designed  to  make  man
perfect — that  the  man  of  God  may  be  perfect— fully  furnished  unto  every  good
work.  (J.  Coats  Shanks.)  The  incidental  advantages  of  study  of  the  Bible  : —
It  is  common  to  urge  upon  men  a  study  of  the  Bible  as  a  matter  of  duty — a  part  of
the  "  thou  shalt  "  of  God  ;  and  also  as  a  matter  of  worship — the  other  part  of  prayer
and  praise.  While  it  is  fortunate  that  we  have  a  book  which  can  lay  the  claim  of
duty  upon  us,  and  still  more  fortunate  that  we  have  a  book  worthy  to  be  incorpo-
rated into  our  worship,  there  are  other  aspects  in  which  the  Bible  offers  itself,
which  might  be  called  its  advantages.  Set  aside  now  the  fact  that  it  is  a  religious
book,  and  all  religious  considerations,  and  regard  it  simply  as  a  book  to  be  studied,
and  there  is  no  book  the  study  of  which  brings  so  many  advantages  as  the  Bible,
because  there  is  no  other  one  book  that  embraces  so  many  departments  of  truth
and  knowledge  or  treats  them  in  so  wise  a  way.  I.  Look  at  it  as  a  book  of  bistort.
The  Bible  begins  with  the  creation  out  of  chaos,  and  ends  with  humanity  lifted
into  the  heavens,  and  the  whole  mighty  sweep  is  history.  But  the  great  advantage
at  studying  history  through  the  Bible  is  that  we  thus  follow  the  main  current  of
human  progress  in  all  the  ages;  we  are  tracing  an  idea,  a  principle,  a  force,  and
that  the  greatest  the  world  has  ever  felt.  II.  Look  at  it  as  a  book  of  political
science,  a  study  of  the  Hebrew  Commonwealth  is  valuable  because  it  shows  how
close  and  real  is  the  relation  of  the  nation  to  God,  and  how  vital  is  righteousness
and  fidelity  to  God.  We  have  in  the  Bible  the  finest  illustration  of  patriotism  to  be
found  in  all  history.  There  was  no  individualism,  there  was  no  communism,  but
a  happy  balance  between  man  as  an  individual  and  as  a  member  of  the  race,  such
as  we  find  in  nature.  We  are  individuals  ;  we  are  also  members  of  the  race,  and
both  exist  in  God.  A  true  nation  is  a  true  expression  of  this  threefold  fact.  ^  No-
where is  it  so  clearly  set  forth  as  in  the  Hebrew  Commonwealth.  Its  institutions^
also,  are  well  worth  studying.  The  details  of  life  are  treated  sacredly.  A  Divine
emphasis  is  laid  upon  trivial  matters  of  well-being.  Filth  and  contagious  diseases
are  an  abomination  in  the  sight  of  God.  Health  is  well  pleasing  to  God.  Family,
property,  personal  rights,  sex  are  guarded  by  Divine  sanctions.  III.  Look  at  it  as
A  BOOK  OF  biography.  "  The  proper  study  of  mankind  is  man."  The  Bible  is  per-
manently a  book  of  biographies.  It  is  a  book  of  religious  history,  but  the  history
is  always  turning  on  a  man.  It  is  a  book  of  religion,  but  the  religion  is  that  of  real
life,  and  of  separate  men.  When  men  of  great  natures  move  through  great  scenes,
and  do  great  deeds,  or  when  they  unfold  qualities  and  traits  that  aie  fine  and  rare
and  strong,  then  we  have  the  materials  for  biography.  By  such  a  standard  the
Bible  is  most  rich  in  this  material  for  study.      IV.  Look  at  it  as  a  book  of  litkba.


«HAP.  in.]  IL  TIMOTHY.  809

TUBE.  Dr.  Johnson  once  read  the  Book  of  Bath  to  a  company  of  literary  infidela.
"  What  a  charming  idyl ! "  they  said.  "  Where  did  you  find  it  ?  "  There  are  four
fields  of  literature  in  which  the  Bible  rises  higher  than  all  other  books — ethics,
religious  poetry,  religious  vision,  and  the  drama  in  its  high  sense  as  a  discussion  of
human  life.  The  Proverbs  and  Book  of  Ecclesiastes  are  the  wisest,  aptest,  most
varied,  and  best  expressed  maxims  of  practical  life  ever  made,  and  outweigh  in
value  all  others  taken  together.  The  Psalms,  considered  simply  as  expressions  of
religious  feeling,  find  no  rival.  They  touch  every  mood,  sink  to  all  depths,  rise  to
all  heights ;  they  are  as  free  and  natural  as  the  winds,  and  cover  human  nature  as
it  weeps  and  struggles  and  hopes  and  rejoices.  The  prophetic  utterances  are  not
only  unique,  but  are  fuller  of  passion,  sublimer  in  expression,  bolder  in  imagery,
loftier  in  conception,  than  anything  to  be  found  in  profane  literature.  And  they
have  this  unique  quality  :  they  are  the  products  of  an  actual  experience,  and  not
mere  creations  of  the  imagination.  They  have  also  this  transcendent  value — one
that  should  make  them  dear  to  every  thoughtful  man  :  they  are  expressions  of
patriotism,  and  contain  the  philosophy  of  national  life  as  existing  in  God.  V.  Look
at  it  as  a  book  full  op  undeveloped  foeces  and  truths.  I  mean  the  opposite  of
the  common  assertion  that  it  is  an  exhausted  book.  I  mean  it  in  a  sense  that  ex-
cludes it  from  being  classed  with  other  books  called  sacred.  I  admit  that  there  are
a  few  books  which  seem  to  hold  within  themselves  truths  capable  of  infinite  ex-
pansion, and  to  touch  truths  not  yet  realised.  Such  are  some  of  the  great  philoso-
phies and  poems  and  essays ;  but,  after  studying  them  awhile,  the  sense  of  finitenesa
begins  to  gather  about  them ;  we  come  to  limitations,  to  boundaries ;  there  is
a  solid  firmament  above,  and  the  truths  run  round  the  world  and  not  into  endless
heavens  ;  we  detect  faults  ;  we  feel  the  weakness  of  a  human  personality  ;  we  say,
"  Thou  hast  seen  far,  but  not  the  end,  nor  the  whole."  It  is  not  so  when  we  read
the  Bible.  One  reason  why  some  men  reject  it  or  pass  it  by  is  that  it  so  quickly
carries  them  beyond  their  depth  and  outruns  their  conception.  And  one  reason
why  other  men  delight  in  it,  and  write  booksjupon  books  about  it,  is  that  it  brings
the  infinite  and  the  mysterious  within  reach,  enkindling  their  imaginations  and
stirring  their  spirits  by  the  outlooks  thus  gained.  I  spoke  of  the  Bible  as  a  book
of  undeveloped  spiritual  forces.  I  mean  that  we  find  in  it  those  facts  and  laws  and
truths  which  are  working  out  the  destiny  of  man.  They  are  spread  out  in  a  life ;
they  are  uttered  in  words.  The  parables  of  Christ — if  we  but  knew  it — contain  the
history  of  the  world  and  of  mankind  for  aU  eternity.  The  Sermon  on  the  Mount
states  the  laws  by  which  human  society  progresses,  and  will  reach  its  goal  of  per-
fection. The  acts  of  Christ's  life  illustrate  or  reveal  how  this  material  world  is
immersed  in  the  real  world  of  the  spirit,  where  the  miraculous  becomes  natural.
The  whole  life  of  Christ  is  simply  a  true  life — perfectly  obedient  to  God,  whoUy
sacrificed  for  man,  duty  itself,  love  itself,  lost  and  so  found.  Divine  and  human,
and  claiming  a  oneness  for  humanity  with  itself  in  God.  I  anticipate  the  day
when  the  Bible  will  stand  higher  in  the  estimate  of  men  than  ever  before.  It  will
not  be  blindly  worshipped  as  in  the  past,  but  it  will  be  more  intelligently  read.  It
is  not  a  book  of  the  past,  but  of  the  future.  As  we  move  up  toward  it  we  shall  find
that  it  reflects  the  world  on  its  pages,  and  that  it  contains  the  true  order  of  human
life.  Meanwhile,  it  is  not  amiss  for  us  to  study  the  Decalogue  for  social  guidance ;
the  Beautitudes  for  guides  in  daily  life  ;  and  Christ,  in  all  the  light  and  mystery  of
His  being  and  character,  as  the  Way,  the  Truth,  and  the  Life — the  way  through  this
tangled  world,  the  truth  in  this  world  of  perplexity,  the  life  in  this  world  where  all
things  else  perish  and  pass  away.  {T.  T.  Miinger,  D.D.)  What  is  the  Bible  .» —
The  first  thing  I  want  to  say  to  you  is  this :  You  are  not  to  look  in  the  Bible  for
a  complete  and  comprehensive  presentation  of  Divine  truth.  You  are  not  to  look  in
it  for  a  revelation  or  disclosure  of  science  of  any  kind,  physical  or  metaphysical,
natural  or  supernatural.  It  is  not  at  all  a  scientific  treatise.  It  does  not  aim  or
purport  so  to  be.  Nor  are  you  to  regard  the  Bible  as  an  infallible  book  of  equal
value  and  equal  authority  in  all  its  utterances  and  all  its  parts  ;  as  a  book  '•  without
any  intermixture  of  error."  An  infallible  book  would  require,  first  of  all,  that  the
writers  should  be  inf aUibly  informed  as  to  the  truth ;  in  the  second  place,  that  they
should  be  able  to  utter  it  infaUibly;  in  the  third  place,  that  they  should  have
a  language  for  the  communication  of  their  ideas  which  was  an  infallible  vehicle  of
thought ;  in  the  fourth  place,  that,  if  they  died,  the  manuscripts  in  which  their
thoughts  were  contained  should  be  infalhbly  preserved,  without  any  intermixture
of  error,  through  the  ages  after  their  death  ;  fifthly,  that,  if  the  language  in  which
they  wrote  were  changed,  the  translators  should  be  themselves  capable  of  giving  an


910  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m.


infallible  translation ;  eixthly,  that,  if  the  book  were  to  be  infallibly  applied  to  the
actual  conditions  of  life,  men  who  interpreted  and  applied  these  principles  should
be  infallible  interpreters.     And,  finally,  it  would  require  that  the  men  who  received
should  be  able  infallibly  to  apprehend  what  was  given.    The  treasure  of  truth  in  the
Bible  ifl  not  a  minted  treasure  with  the  stamp  of  the  Divine  image  upon  it.     It  is
like  the  gold  hid  in  the  bosom  of  the  mountain.    It  must  be  mined,  dug  out  with
the  alloy  with  which  it  is  intermixed,  washed,  burned  in  the  furnace,  and  the  stamp
must  be  put  upon  it  before  it  is  ready  for  currency.    But  as  soon  as  this  is  done,
the  process  begins  over  again.     The  Bible  yields  its  treasure  only  to  him  who  digs
for  it  as  for  a  hid  treasure  ;  the  promise  of  the  Bible  is  only  to  him  who  seeks  and
knocks.    No  age  can  do  this  seeking,  this  knocking,  for  another.    The  structure
and  the  history  of  the  Bible  alike  demonstrate  that  what  God  has  given  us  here  ia
not  a  substitute  for  thought,  but  an  incentive  to  thinking.     Lessing  said,  "  If  God
were  to  offer  me  in  one  hand  Truth  and  in  the  other  Search  for  Truth,  I  would  accept
Search  for  Truth."  "What  God  gives  us  in  the  Bible  is  Search  for  Truth.  What,  then,
ifl  the  Bible  ?    It  is  a  selection  of  Uterature  evolved  out  of  eighteen  centuries  of
human  life,  comprising  all  various  literary  forms,  written  by  men  of  all  various
types  and  temperaments,  without  concord,  without  mutual  understanding,  without
knowing  that  they  were  m^^dng  a  book  that  was  to  last  for  all  time.     It  is  a  collec-
tion of  the  most  spiritual  utterances,  of  the  most  spiritual  men,  of  the  most
spiritual  race,  of  past  time.    You  are  to  come  to  it  as  such  a  collection.    It  is  as
such  that  you  are  to  study  and  take  advantage  of  it — as  such  a  record  of  spiritual
experiences.     L  In  the  first  place,  then,  in  view  of  this  generic  statement,  I  urge
«n  you  to  have  your  Bible — not  merely  a  Bible,  but  todb  Bible.     Mr,  Shearman
has  a  copy  of  the  Bible  which  Mr.  Beecher  carried  for  something  like  forty  years—
perhaps  more — with  his  marking  scattered  through  it.     It  is  more  than  a  Bible — it
IB  Mr.  Beecher's  Bible ;  and  the  pencil-marks  in  it  tell  the  story  of  his  own  spiritual
experience,  while  they  emphasize  the  spiritual  experiences  of  the  ages  that  are  past.
So,  have  your  own  Bible,  into  which  your  life  shall  be  woven,  around  which  your
spiritual  associations  shall  cluster,  and  which  shall  become  sacred  to  you,  not  so
much  for  the  voice  that  spake  to  Abraham,  to  Moses,  to  David,  to  Isaiah,  or  Paul,
so  many  centuries  ago,  but  for  the  voice    that    has    spoken  to    you — through
Abraham,  Moses,  David,  Isaiah,  or  Paul— in  your  own  life-experience.    II.  Usk
TOTJB  Bible.    The  Bible  that  is  to  lay  hold  on  you  is  a  Bible  that  you  must  lay
hold  upon.    Familiarise  yourself  with  the  Bible,     It  is  a  coy  acquaintance.    It
does  not  let  every  one  into  its  heart,  or  disclose  to  the  chance  acquaintance  the
secret  of  its  power.     You  must  love  it.    If  you  are  to  love  it  you  must  acquaint
yourself  with  it.    You  must  take  it  with  you  into  your  experience.    You  must
make  it  the  man  of  your  counsel  in  your  perplexity  ;  you  must  go  to  it  for  comfort
in  your  sorrow ;  you  must  find  in  it  inspiration  when  the  deadening  process  of  life
has  brought  you  earthward ;  you  must  seek  in  it  those  experiences  for  which  your
own  heart  and  soul  hunger.     III.  You  must,  in  your  use  of  the  Bible  look  behind
THE  BOOK  TO  THE  TBDTH  WHICH  IS  IN  THE  BOOK,  and  whioh  really  constitutes  the
book.     Studying  Biblical  criticism  is  not  studying  the  Bible.    Behind  all  form  and
structure  is  the  truth  which  makes  the  Bible.     What  is  the  Bible  ?    This  thing  that
I  hold  in  my  hand  ?  Not  at  all.   Were  it  in  Greek,  it  would  still  be  the  Bible.  Not  the
book— the  truths  that  lie  behind  the  book,  they  make  the  Bible.  Such  truths  as  these :
the  man  is  immortal— not  that  he  is  going  to  Uve  a  thousand  or  a  hundred  thousand
years  after  death,  but  that  he  has  in  him  a  spirit  that  death  cannot  and  does  not  touch ;
that  he  is  under  other  laws  than  those  that  are  physical,  that  he  is  under  the  great
moral  laws  of  right  and  wrong ;  that  there  is  a  God  who  knows,  thinks,  feels,  loves ;
and  that  there  is  a  helping  hand  reached  down  out  of  heaven  to  lay  hold  of  and  to
give  help  to  every  struggling  man  seeking,  working,  praying,  wrestling  toward  a
nobler  manhood ;  an  immortal  spirit,  a  personal  God,  a  forgiveness  of  sins — that  is
the  Bible.     Go  to  the  Bible,  not  for  an  infallible  philosophy  of  human  life,  but  for
nnveilings  and  disclosures  of  infinite,  helpful,  inspiring  truth.     IV.  But  behind  this
truth  there  is  something  further  to  be  sought.     Fob  lite  is  more  than  tbdth,  and
BXPEBiENCE  IS  MOBE  THAN  PHiLOsoPHT.     The  Bible  is  the  most  human  of  books.    It
is  the  record  of  human  life,  and  of  the  noblest  and  divinest  experiences  in  human
life.     It  is  because  it  is  a  human  book  that  it  appeals  to  humanity.    It  is  because  it
is  a  human  book  that  humanity  finds  light  and  life  and  power  in  it.     Writers  of
the  Bible  are  not  like  lead  pipes  that  take  water  from  a  distance  and  bring  it  a  long
way  and  deposit  it  for  you,  without  the  trouble  of  your  drawing.    Writers  of  the
Bible  are  like  the  mountain-side,  saturated  with  water  which  pours  from  its  side  in


CMAt.  in.]  II.  TIMOTHY.  811

■prioga  when  we  ask  to  drink  The  Bible  writers  were  saturated  with  Divine
trath ;  then  out  of  that  saturation  the  truth  sprang  forth  into  utterance.  In  the
Bible  yoo  oome  into  association  and  fellowship  with  men  who  are  living  in  the
spiritual  realm ;  you  oome  in  contact  with  men  who  are  struggling,  not  for  art,  not
for  wealth,  not  for  culture,  not  for  refinement,  but  for  walking  with  God.  They
blunder;  liiey  do  not  know  ;  they  have  dim  visions,  oftentimes,  of  God — they  see
Him  as  that  blind  man  saw  the  trees  as  men  walking.  Their  notion  is  intermingled
with  the  notion  of  their  time ;  but  in  it  all,  throughout  it  all,  inspiring  it  all,  is  that
hunger  and  thirst  after  righteousness  that  shall  be  filled.  To  come  into  the  Bible
is  to  oome,  not  into  words  graven  on  stone,  however  true,  but  into  living  ex*
periences  of  love,  of  faith,  or  hope,  wrought  in  imperfect  lives,  but  glorifying  them
by  the  glory  of  an  indwelling  God.  V.  And  behind  the  truth  and  behind  the  ex-
perience you  are  to  look  for  something  still  more  than  either — too  abe  to  look  fob
God  himself.  Back  of  all  Bible  truth  is  the  human  experience  of  the  Divine.
Back  of  all  human  experience  of  the  Divine  is  the  God  that  inspires,  irradiates,
and  creates  it.  Do  I  value  the  locket  less  because  I  know  it  is  a  human  handiwork  t
It  is  not  the  locket  I  care  for.  It  is  the  picture  of  the  beloved  that  is  in  the  locket.
It  is  not  the  frame  and  form  and  structure  of  the  book,  but  it  is  the  God  who  dwells
in  the  book  that  makes  it  dear  to  me.  Eaulbach's  famous  cartoon  of  the  Beforma-
tion  presents  Luther  holding  aloft  an  open  Bible,  while  grouped  around  and  before
him  are  the  inventors,  the  discoverers,  the  thinkers,  the  writers  of  genius,  that  were
nurtured  in  the  cradle  of  the  Reformation.  It  is  a  true  picture.  Where  that  open
Bible  has  not  gone,  there  to-day  is  darkness  illimitable.  Where  that
Bible  has  gone,  partly  opened  and  partly  closed,  there  is  a  dawning
of  the  day.  And  where  it  is  an  open  Bible  with  a  free  page  and  a  well-
read  one,  there  is  the  illumination  of  civilisation.  {Lyman  Abbott,  D.D.)
What  use  do  we  make  of  the  Scriptures  f — All  our  practical  knowledge  of  God  is
comprised  in  the  Bible.  The  Bible  then  ought  to  be  to  us  that  which  the  chart  and
the  compass  are  to  the  mariner  on  a  stormy  ocean ;  we  have  absolutely  no  other  guide,
no  other  directory  to  our  course.  In  what  light,  then,  do  we  practically  regard  the
Bible  ?  Is  it  enough  to  possess  the  Scriptures,  to  have  been  instructed  out  of  the
Scriptures  in  infancy,  to  hear  them  read  in  public  worship,  to  have  a  general  appro-
bation of  their  contents  ?  Would  it  be  satisfactory  to  the  mariner  merely  to  possess  a
compass  on  board  his  vessel ;  to  have  received  information  as  to  its  use  in  iriancy,  to
admire  its  utility,  or  to  discourse  sometimes  publicly  of  its  merits ;  meanwhile  he
is  driving  on,  it  may  be,  to  rocks,  to  shoals,  to  sands,  or  quite  away  from  his
course  ?  But  how  many  an  individual  lives  in  this  precise  manner,  as  to  his  use  of
the  Scriptures !  Day  passes  after  day,  week  after  week,  month  after  month,  year
after  year,  and  God  marks  not  his  anxious  eye  pondering  over  this  chart  of  life.
Politics,  science,  poetry,  history,  it  may  be  lighter  productions — these  can  arrest
his  attention  and  interest  his  mind ;  but  the  Bible  which  notifies  the  waymarks  to
eternity — this  excites  no  interest.  And  yet  such  a  person  perhaps  expects  God's
favour — expects  to  reach  the  harbour  of  endless  peace,  and  never  even  dreams  of
the  probabUity  of  intervening  shipwreck !  Mournful  and  inconsistent  expectations !
Many,  however,  are  to  be  found  who  are  by  no  means  chargeable  with  this  entire
neglect  of  the  Scriptures.  Some  have,  from  infancy,  acquired  regular  habits
of  reading  the  Bible,  and  peruse,  as  a  daily  or  at  least  as  a  weekly  task,  their
allotted  chapters.  But  they  do  this  oftentimes  without  anxiety,  and  without
progress  in  religious  knowledge.  The  fact  of  reading  is  to  them  more  important
than  the  contents  which  they  read.  They  manifest  no  submission  of  the  heart  to
God's  teaching — no  godly  diligence  to  lay  up  in  the  soul  His  statutes  and  promises.
Eternity  fastens  not  upon  their  thoughts — the  wonders  of  redeeming  love  attract
not  their  affections.  They  read  with  coldness,  and  languor,  and  unconcern.  There
is  no  scrutiny  as  to  the  effect  of  their  knowledge — as  to  the  conformity  of  their
views,  and  sentiments,  and  habits,  with  the  decisions  and  intentions  of  God !  The
heart  makes  no  progress  in  its  voyage — it  is  no  nearer  to  God — no  nearer  to  the  dia-

gositions  of  Heaven  than  it  was  many  years  ago.  Think  again  of  the  mariner —
is  eye  glances  daily  upon  his  compass — or  once  a  week  he  fixes  his  look  upon  the
needle ;  but  he  uses  not  the  helm — he  brings  not  the  vessel  into  the  prescribed
course  I  As  well  then  might  the  compass  be  cast  into  the  depths  of  the  sea  t  Now,
it  is  evident  that  this  is  not  the  use  of  the  Scriptures  which  God  demands — this  is
not  to  possess  any  anxiety  as  to  the  knowledge  of  God's  will.  Those  who  thna
neglect,  or  thus  imperfectly  respect  the  Scriptures,  are  not  among  those  who  "  work
ont  their  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling."    (Christian  World  Pulpit.)        Sctlp-


312  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in.

ture  manifold  yet  one : — The  Bible  is,  to  ase  the  language  of  Prof.  Westcott, "  a  book
manifold  by  the  variety  of  times  and  circumstances  in  which  its  several  parts  had
their  rise,  one  by  the  inspiring  presence  of  the  same  spiritual  life."  It  may  be  com-
pared to  a  cathedral  whose  parts  have  been  built  at  different  successive  ages :  the
traces  of  these  ages  are  easily  seen  in  the  architectural  style,  but  all  are  knit
togetl.  er  in  one  holy  temple  of  God.  Closer  investigation  of  this  cathedral  shows
that  the  historical  range  of  its  growth  is  greater  and  wider  than  was  at  first  sup-
posed. The  stones  which  have  been  built  in,  it  seems,  were  drawn  from  widely-
scattered  quarries ;  here  are  marbles  which  must  have  been  imported  from  distant
lands ;  here  are  great  blocks  of  stone  which  must  have  been  conveyed  from  unthought-
of  hills ;  here  are  richly-carved  capitals  which  show  some  foreign  skill :  but  all  these
have  found  their  fitting  place.  Each  stone,  each  ornament,  drops  into  the  spot
prepared  for  it ;  arch,  pillar,  buttress,  muUion  and  pinnacle,  whatever  their  greater
or  their  lesser  antiquity,  are  lending  support  or  beauty,  and  fulfilhng  their  functions
as  parts  of  one  vast  sanctuary,  whose  puipose  is  not  lost  or  altered  because  anti-
quarians have  made  its  stories  doubly  interesting  and  doubly  dear  by  enlarging  the
bounds  of  its  history  and  adding  new  elements  to  the  story  of  its  growtJbi.  {Bp.
W.  B.  Carpenter.)  Profitable  for  doctrine,  &c. — The  uses  of  the  Scriptures: — The
Scriptures  give  Divine,  and  therefore  infallible,  direction  "for  doctrine" — the
didactic  teaching  of  the  truth  concerning  God;  ''for  reproof" — the  refutation  by
proof  of  error  concerning  God ;  "  for  correction  " — the  setting  right  or  rectifying  the
wrong  principles  of  practical  ethics;  "for  instruction  in  righteousness" — the
positive  nurture  of  the  soul  in  experimental  knowledge  of  the  way  in  which  a  sinner
may  be  accounted  righteous  before  God.  And  this,  it  will  be  perceived  on  a  little
reflection,  is  a  marvellously  logical  classification  of  their  uses ;  and  it  is  exhaustive,
as  covering  all  the  possible  wants  that  man  can  desire  to  have  met  by  a  revelation.
As  a  being  endowed  with  reason,  and  capable  of  believing  only  what  he  conceives  to
be  truth,  his  religion  must  embrace  a  "  doctrine  "  of  God  and  his  relations  to  God.
As  a  creature  Uable  to  be  deceived,  by  error  and  unbelief  concerning  God  and  his
relations  to  God,  his  religion  must  have  a  guide  to  warn  against  and  expose  the  wilea
of  error,  that  are  ever  tampering  with  his  "  evil  heart  of  unbelief."  As  a  being
whose  passions  are  ever  blinding  his  conscience  in  reference  to  duty  toward  God  and
man,  his  religion  must  supply  him  with  a  rule  of  right,  by  which  to  correct  his
crooked  judgments  and  amend  his  crooked  ways.  As  a  being  capable  of  a  birth  to
a  new  and  everlasting  life,  his  religion  must  supply  him  with  a  nurture  under  the
new  law  of  righteousness  which  the  faith  that  is  unto  salvation  teaches  him.  So
that  it  may  be  affirmed  with  truth,  that  no  want  of  the  human  soul  can  be  conceived,
which  is  not  provided  for  under  one  or  other  of  these  four  heads.  (S.  Robinson,  D.D. )
The  profitableness  of  Scripture : — The  Scriptures  are  "  profitable  for  reproof,"  The
word  here  means  conviction.  The  teaching  has  reference  to  the  ignorance  of  men,  the
conviction  refers  to  their  errors  and  prejudices.  The  mental  state  presupposed  here
may  be  thus  expressed :  First,  there  is  ignorance ;  secondly,  error,  wrong  thoughts
and  beliefs;  thirdly,  prejudice  in  favour  of  the  errors  that  are  present,  and  against
the  truth  that  is  absent.  The  declaration  of  the  apostle  is  that  the  Word  of  God
has  power  to  convince  those  who  are  in  this  state ;  that  it  will  destroy  their  errors
and  remove  their  prejudice.  One  great  reason  why  there  is  so  much  prejudice  in  many
minds  with  regard  to  religion  is,  that  they  do  not  study  the  sacred  Scriptures.  They
read  all  sorts  of  books  concerning  the  Bible,  but  the  Divine  book  itself  is  neglected.
They  prefer  the  water  that  is  brought  to  them  through  pipes  and  curious  contriv-
ances of  men  to  the  fountain  of  living  water,  pure,  clear  as  crystal,  which  springs
np  from  the  primeval  rocks  close  to  their  own  door.  They  gaze  upon  the  cold  and
tpiritless  engraving  rather  than  examine  the  grand  original  picture.  The  honest
aud  earnest  study  of  the  Bible  would  produce  a  mighty  revolution  in  the  minds  and
hearts  of  thousands,  both  Christians  and  others.  Akin  to  this  there  is  another
thought  that  follows.  The  Scriptures  are  profitable  for  correction.  Some  read  to
criticise.  They  cannot  admire  the  great  opening  poem  of  the  Book  of  Genesis,  in
which  the  inspired  muse  sings  the  creative  power  of  the  Almighty  in  notes  *'  har-
monious with  the  morning  stars,"  because  it  does  not  speak  with  scientific  preci-
sion. It  is  quite  right  to  point  out  whatever  inaccuracies  may  be  discovered  in  the
history  of  the  deliverance  from  Egypt  and  the  sojourn  in  the  Wilderness,  but  one
cannot  help  remarking  that  that  is  a  peculiar  state  of  mind  in  which  a  man  can  read
through  the  wonderful  story  without  being  once  struck  with  its  spirit,  its  grandeur,
and  its  awfniness.  Others  turn  the  sacred  pages  to  find  supports  for  the  systems
they  have  formed.    This  is  the  same  as  if  a  man  constructed  a  theory  of  nature,


OHA».  m.]  II.  TIMOTHY.  813

and  afterwards  went  in  search  of  the  facts  whereby  its  truth  must  be  proved.
Others,  again,  read  for  comfort.  They  have  been  disappointed  by  the  world  in
which  they  placed  too  much  trust ;  or  death  has  broken  in  upon  their  charmed
circle  and  filied  their  hearts  with  sorrow ;  or  their  health  is  failing,  and  there  are
indications  that  the  end  is  not  distant ;  or  their  sin  has  been  a  burden  from  which
they  seek  rest.  Well,  let  them  read  for  comfort,  for  the  Bible  is  the  book  for  sor-
rowful people.  Its  deep  expressions  of  Divine  love,  sympathy,  and  tenderness  have
in  them  a  power  to  heal  the  broken  heart.  But  we  should  also  know  that  the
Scriptures  are  given  for  our  •'  correction."  He  is  the  wise  reader  of  God's  Word
who  tries  his  opinions,  beliefs,  principles,  life,  and  character  by  the  Divine  standard,
and  is  willing  to  have  them  corrected.  This  brings  us  to  the  high  purpose  for
which  the  Scriptures  were  given  to  us,  namely,  to  impart  "  instruction  in  righteous-
ness,  that  the  man  of  God  may  be  perfect " — right  in  every  respect,  in  thought,  feeling,
character,  and  therefore  right  in  state  and  condition — ^right  in  himself,  right  in  his
relations  to  his  fellows,  and  right  before  God.  The  aim  of  the  husbandman  in  the
plants  he  cultivates  is  to  have  fruit ;  but  Nature  is  as  careful  of  the  blossoms  and
the  foliage  as  of  the  fruit,  for  her  purpose  is  a  perfect  tree.  Men  cultivate  parts  of
their  nature.  Some  educate  and  develop  tbeir  physical  nature,  and  not  much  else.
Others  pay  attention  to  the  sensuous  soul — they  love  music,  art,  eloquence,  and  light
literature.  There  are  persons  who  are  mere  thinkers ;  the  cultivation  of  the  intel-
lectual powers  is  the  one  important  thing  in  their  estimation.  Some  spend  their
lives  in  small  activities — things  that  are  good  in  themselves,  but  which  become
harmful  when  done  to  the  neglect  of  more  important  duties.  There  is  good  in
all  of  these;  but  none  of  them  aim  high  enough.  The  Divine  purpose  is  not
physical  perfection,  nor  intellectual  strength,  nor  refinement  of  taste,  not  even
morality  and  devotion,  but  the  full  development  of  the  whole  nature, "  that  the  man
of  God  may  be  perfect."  (T.  Jones.)  The  proper  way  to  test  the  Bible : — You  see
a  recipe  for  making  bread.  What  is  the  way  to  test  that  recipe,  but  to  put  the
materials  together  according  to  its  direction  ?  If  the  bread  is  good,  the  recipe  is
good,  is  it  not  ?  If  it  is  good,  I  do  not  care  where  it  came  from — I  do  not  care  if
King  Pharaoh  wrote  it ;  and  if  it  is  not  good,  I  would  not  care  any  more  for  it  if  it
came  from  the  angel  Gabriel.  It  is  the  thing  that  proves  the  thing.  The  effect
proves  what  is  the  nature  of  the  cause.  And  if  there  are  prescriptions  in  God's
Word  to  heal  pride,  and  selfishness,  and  all  forms  of  sin  and  diseases,  and  on  trial
the  prescriptions  are  found  to  do  what  they  profess  to  be  able  to  do,  the  effect  jus-
tifies the  cause.  Now,  the  Bible  does  not  profess  to  be  a  book  of  theories  or  philo-
sophies. It  professes  to  be  "profitable  for  doctrine,  for  reproof" — it  is  the  best
book  in  this  world  for  all  sorts  of  reproof  addressed  to  the  weaknesses  and  wants
of  human  hfe — "  for  instruction  in  righteousness :  that  the  man  of  God  may  be
perfect,  throughly  furnished  unto  aU  good  works."  Where  a  man  wants  to  be  a
good  man,  where  a  man  wants  to  be  thoroughly  furnished,  and  he  goes  to  the  Bible,
he  will  have  the  best  evidence  that  any  man  can  have  that  it  is  a  Divine  book ;  for
it  will  furnish  him  with  those  things  which  his  experience  shows  him  he  needs.
Here  is  a  roll  of  charts  of  a  difficult  harbour.  They  were  drawn,  it  may  be,  by
Robert  Small.  They  are  handed  by  him  to  Admiral  Dupont.  The  Admiral,  the
moment  he  sees  them,  laughs  right  out,  and  says,  "  Do  you  call  this  a  chart?  "  It
was  made  with  a  burnt  stick.  Eobert  Small,  you  know,  was  a  slave ;  and  he  had  to
get  his  knowledge  as  other  slaves  get  theirs.  He  was  a  pilot  in  Charleston  harbour,
however,  and  he  knows  where  the  shallow  places  are,  where  the  deep  places  are,
where  the  obstructions  are,  and  where  it  is  clear  sailing ;  and  he  makes  a  rough
sketch  of  the  whole  vicinity,  and  puts  it  into  Admiral  Dupont's  hand;  and  the
Admiral  says,  "  Do  you  suppose  I  am  going  to  steer  my  ships  by  a  chart  that  a
nigger  made?  "  Or  he  says,  "  When  did  you  make  this?  On  what  kind  of  a  table
did  you  make  it?  What  did  you  use  to  make  it  with ?  "  Does  he  say  this  ?  Under
Buch  circumstances  what  would  Admiral  Dupont  do,  who  is  a  sensible  man,  and
who  has  so  much  sense  that  he  knows  how  to  employ  negroes,  and  take  the  advan-
tage of  their  aid?  He  would  say  to  those  under  him,  "  Take  a  cutter,  man  it,  and
go  out,  and  sound,  and  see  if  the  chart  is  correct " ;  and  they  would  find  the  shoals
and  channels  to  be  just  as  they  were  represented  to  be ;  and  after  they  had  put  the
chart  to  proof,  and  found  it  to  correspond  to  the  fact,  they  would  report  to  him,  and
he  would  say,  "  That  is  a  good  chart,  if  a  black  man  did  make  it.  It  is  true,  and
that  is  the  reason  why  it  is  good."  Now,  the  Bible  is  a  chart.  It  teaches  men  how
to  steer  where  that  sandbank  of  temptation  is ;  where  that  rock  of  danger  is  ;  where
that  whirling  vortex  of  passion  is.    The  Bible  is  a  chart  of  salvation ;  and  if  a  man


814  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oiu».  m.

only  knows  his  conrse  by  this,  he  will  go  through  life,  with  all  its  storms,  and  come
safely  into  the  port  of  heaven.  The  way  to  test  the  Bible  is  not  to  criticise  it,  and
compare  its  rude  marking  with  the  more  modem  ways  of  making  charts :  the  way  to
test  the  Bible  is  to  put  your  sounding  lines  into  the  channel,  and  try  it,  and  see  if  it
is  not  true.  But  that  is  the  test  men  do  not  employ.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  Scripture
teache$  a  religion  of  grandeur  and  joy : — I  do  not  wonder  that  the  men  nowadays
who  do  not  believe  the  Bible  are  so  very  sad,  when  they  are  in  earnest.  A  writer
in  one  of  our  Beviews  tells  that  he  was  studying  the  poems  of  Matthew  Arnold,  who
believes  not  in  a  living  God,  but  in  a  something  or  other,  which  somehow  or  other,
at  some  time  or  other  makes  for  righteousness.  The  sad  and  hopeless  spirit  of  the
poet  passed  for  the  time  into  the  reviewer,  and  he  felt  most  mii^erable.  He  went
out  for  a  walk.  It  was  a  bleak  wintry  day,  and  he  was  then  at  Brodick  in  Arran.
The  hills  were  in  a  winding-sheet  of  snow,  above  which  arcse  a  ghastly  array  of
clouds.  The  sky  was  of  a  leaden  hue,  and  the  sea  was  making  its  melancholy  moan
amid  the  jagged,  dripping  rocks.  The  gloom  without  joined  the  gloom  within,  and
made  him  very  wretched.  He  came  upon  some  boys  shouting  merrily  at  play.  ♦*  Are
you  at  the  school?"  he  asked.  "Yes,"  was  the  reply.  "And  what  are  you  learn-
ing?  "  "  I  learn,"  said  one,  "  what  is  the  chief  end  of  man."  "  And  what  is  it?  "
the  reviewer  asked.  The  boy  replied,  "  Man's  chief  end  is  to  glorify  God  and  to
enjoy  Him  for  ever."  He  at  once  felt  that  the  boy  was  taught  a  religion  of  grandeur
and  joy,  while  the  poet's  was  a  religion  of  darkness  and  despair.  {J.  Wells,
M.A.)  All  Scripture  profitable: — In  the  plainest  text  there  is  a  world  of
holiness  and  spirituality:  and  if  we,  in  prayer  and  dependence  upon  God,  sit
down  and  study  it,  we  shall  behold  much  more  than  appears  to  us.  It  may  be,
at  once  reading  or  looking,  we  see  little  or  nothing;  as  Elijah's  servant  went
once  and  saw  nothing,  therefore  he  was  commanded  to  look  seven  times.
"  What  now?  "  says  the  prophet.  "  I  see  a  oloud  rising  like  a  man's  hand,"  and
by  and  by  the  whole  surface  of  heaven  was  covered  with  clouds  (1  Kings  xviii.
44).  (J.  Caryl.)  Scripture  to  be  used  in  daily  life : — A  good  husband  having
received  a  bag  of  money,  locketh  it  up  safe,  that  none  may  rob  him  of  it,  and
as  occasion  is  he  fetcheth  it  down  and  layeth  it  out,  some  of  it  for  food,  some  for
clothes,  some  for  rent,  some  for  servants'  wages,  some  for  this  thing,  and  some  for
that,  as  his  necessities  require ;  so,  friend,  do  thou  lay  up  the  precious  treasure  of
the  Word  safe  in  the  cabinet  of  thine  heart,  and  bring  it  out  as  occasion  calls  for  it,
in  thy  daily  life.  (G.  Swinnock.)  Adaptation  of  the  Bible: — The  eyes  of  a
good  portrait  follow  the  spectator  wherever  he  stands,  to  look  him  exactly  in  the  face ;
and  BO,  whoever  a  man  may  be,  and  whatever  his  case,  the  Bible  confronts  him  with
its  warning  if  he  be  doing  iU,  its  warranty  if  he  be  doing  well,  and  its  wisdom  under
any,  and  for  all,  circumstances.  Apology  for  the  Bible : — King  George  III.  on
first  hearing  of  Bishop  Watson's  "Apology  for  the  Bible,"  said,  "Apology  for
the  Bible  I  I  did  not  know  that  the  Bible  wanted  any  apology."  The  pulpit  and
the  reading-desk : — John  Wesley  said  to  one  of  his  followers,  who  urged  upon  him
the  deficiencies  of  some  of  the  clergy,  as  a  cause  of  separation,  "  If  you  have
nothing  but  chaff  from  the  pulpit,  you  are  abundantly  fed  with  the  finest  of  the
wheat  bom  the  desk. "  Scripture  its  own  evidence : — It  has  been  for  thirty  years  the
deep  conviction  of  my  soul  that  no  book  can  be  written  on  behalf  of  the  Bible  like
the  Bible  itself.  Man's  defences  are  man's  word  .  .  .  the  Bible  is  God's  Word,  and
by  it  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  first  spoke  it,  still  speaks  to  the  soul  that  closeth  itself
not  against  it.  (JS.  B.  Pusey,  D.D.)  Revelation  and  conscience : — If  we  admit
the  agreement  of  revelation  with  conscience  to  be  an  evidence  of  Divinity  in  the
Bible,  do  we  thereby  make  conscience  the  criterion  of  what  is  Divine  in  it  ?  Some
say  BO  and  make  this  the  door  to  Bationalism.  But  it  is  surely  possible
to  make  conscience  a  witness,  without  exalting  it  into  Si  judge.  {J,  Ker,  D.D.)  Ths
Bible  penetrative : — In  the  Bible  there  is  more  that  finds  me  than  I  have  expe-
rienced in  all  other  books  put  together  ;  the  words  of  the  Bible  find  me  at
greater  depths  of  my  being;  and  whatever  finds  me  brings  with  it  an  irresistible
evidence  of  its  having  proceeded  from  the  Holy  Spirit.  {S.  T.  Coleridge.)
Scripture  profitable : — A  threefold  account.  1.  For  their  dignity  and  authority.
2,  For  their  utility.  3.  For  their  perfection.  (1)  They  are  profitable  for  doctrine
and  instruction :  they  teach  men  what  to  know  and  believe,  they  instruct  ufl  in  all
truth  necessary  to  salvation,  viz.,  concerning  God,  man,  Christ,  law,  gospel,  heaven,
hell.  He  first  begins  with  doctrine,  which  in  order  must  go  before  all  the  rest ;  for
it  is  in  vain  to  reprove  or  exhort  unless  we  first  teach  a  man  and  inform  him  of  hi?
doty.    (2)  For  reproof  of  error  and  confutation  of  false  doctrine.    We  need  not  run


CHAP,  m.]  II.  TIMOTHY.  815

to  general  councils  or  send  for  ancient  fathers  to  determine  controversies  or  confute
errors ;  we  have  the  Holy  Scriptures  that  enable  the  man  of  God,  and  furnish  him
richly  for  that  purpose.  (3)  For  correction  of  sin  and  evil  manners,  which  is  done
by  admonition  and  reproof  denouncing  God's  judgments  against  them,  that  those
which  go  astray  may  be  brought  into  the  way  by  repentance.  (4)  The  Scripture
teacheth  us  how  to  lead  a  holy  and  righteous  life  according  to  the  will  of  God,  and
BO  is  profitable  for  instruction  in  righteousness  and  good  worts,  it  being  the  most
perfect  rule  of  righteousness.  (5)  The  Scripture  allures  us  to  piety  by  the  sweet
promises  of  the  gospel,  and  so  is  profitable  for  consolation  (Eom.  xv.  4).  This  God
hath  ordained  as  a  lamp  for  our  feet,  that  we  miscarry  not  amidst  those  many
by-paths  that  are  in  the  world.  Let  us,  then,  make  use  of  it  in  the  course  of  our
lives.  If  a  carpenter  have  a  rule  or  line,  if  he  tie  it  to  his  back  and  never  use  it,
his  work  must  needs  be  crooked;  so  if  we  have  Bibles  and  never  read  them,  nor
meditate  on  them  to  practise  them,  our  lives  must  needs  be  irregular.  They  are,
then,  to  be  reproved  who  set  up  false  rules  to  walk  by,  as — 1.  Antiquity.  2.  Custom.
3.  Fathers.  4.  The  Church.  5.  Keason.  6.  Universality.  7.  Enthusiams.  (T^
Hall,  B.D.)  Profiting  in  Scripture  to  appear  : — Let  us  imitate  the  sheep,  which
boast  not  how  much  they  have  eaten,  but  show  it  actually  by  their  fat,  fleece,  ami
young.  (Ibid.)  How  to  profit  by  Scripture: — Observe,  such  as  meddle  with
God's  Word  must  profit  by  it.  We  abuse  the  Word  when  we  read  or  hear  it  only
for  speculation,  novelty,  and  curiosity,  but  not  for  practice,  that  we  may  know,
love,  and  fear  God,  and  so  be  happy  for  ever.  God  gave  them  for  this  end,  that  we
might  profit  by  them.  Those  ministers,  then,  are  to  be  blamed  that  play  with
Scripture  and  feed  their  people  with  the  chaff  of  airy  notions,  frivolous  questions,
idle  distinctions,  and  fooUsh  controversies,  seeking  their  own  ends  and  praise,  and
not  the  benefit  of  God's  people.  Let  such  remember  that  the  Scripture  was  given
to  profit  us,  but  not  play  withal.  (Ibid.)  Perfection  of  Scripture  should  win
regard: — This  perfection  of  the  Scripture  should  stir  up  our  love  to  it.  As
imperfect  things  are  sUghted  by  us,  so  complete  and  perfect  things  are  highly
esteemed  by  all  the  sons  of  wisdom.  No  book  to  be  compared  to  this  for  perfection,
and  therefore  no  book  should  be  so  loved,  read,  studied,  and  prized  by  us.  Here's
nothing  vain  or  superfluous,  but  all  things  full  of  life  and  spirit;  whatever  good  the
soul  can  desire,  'tis  here  to  be  had.  Here  is  food  for  the  hungry,  water  for  the
thirsty,  wine  for  the  wearied,  bread  for  the  weak,  raiment  for  the  naked,  gold  for
the  poor,  eye-salve  for  the  blind,  and  physic  for  the  sick.  If  thy  heart  be  dead,  this
will  quicken  tbee ;  if  hard,  this  will  soften  it ;  if  dull,  revive  it.  In  all  our  tempta-
tions, this  is  a  David's  harp  that  helpeth  to  still  them  (Acts  xv.  81).  We  should
therefore  with  joy  draw  water  out  of  these  wells  of  salvation  (Isa.  xii.  3).  We  see
how  worldlings  deUght  to  view  their  bills  and  bonds,  their  leases  and  indentures,
by  which  they  hold  their  lands  and  livings ;  and  shall  not  we  delight  to  study
the  Scripture,  which  assureth  us  of  never-fading  riches  ?  (Ibid.)  Plainness
of  Scripture: — A  lady  of  suspected  chastity,  and  who  was  tinctured  with  in.
fidel  principles,  conversing  with  a  minister  of  the  gospel,  objected  to  the
Scriptures  on  account  of  their  obscurity  and  the  great  diflSculty  of  understanding
them.  The  minister  wisely  and  smartly  replied,  "  Why,  madam,  what  can
be  easier  to  understand  than  the  Seventh  Commandment — *  Thou  shalt  not
commit  adultery' ?  "  (C.  Buck.)  The  Bible  a  guide : — The  Bible  is  not  a  puzzle
to  wise  heads,  but  a  lamp  for  the  wayfaring  man.  (Daniel  Moore.)  The  Bible  a
guide :—  No ;  I  say,  destroy  the  Bible,  and  still  everything  remains  the  same — •
except  that  you  have  lost  your  guide.  If  a  party  of  voyagers  who  are  passing
through  a  dangerous  channel  were  to  say,  "  Away  with  the  chart  I  it  is  such
a  worry  to  be  always  looking  at  it ;  and  it  expects  one  to  be  so  very  careful,  too ;
away  with  it;  it's  a  nuisance  I"  you  might  easily  get  rid  of  your  chart,  but  the
rocks  and  shoals  and  sunken  reefs  and  all  the  perils  of  the  channel  would  remain
there  just  the  same.  Suppose  a  community  were  to  say,  •'  Banish  your  doctors.
Let's  have  no  medical  books  here,  no  treatises  on  disease.  *  Throw  physic  to  the
dogs.  We'll  none  of  it  1 ' "  They  could  do  that,  of  course,  if  they  liked.  But  the
laws  and  conlitions  of  health  and  disease,  of  life  and  death,  would  remain  precisely
where  they  were  before.  And  it  is  conceivable  that  men  might  get  rid  of  the  Bible.
Practically,  many  do  get  rid  of  the  Bible  ;  but  what  do  they  gain  ?  Only  the  loss
of  a  guide.  The  facts  of  the  universe,  the  facts  about  man  and  about  God,  the  facta
about  the  mutual  relation  of  the  one  to  the  other,  remain  precisely  the  same.  (G.
Calthrop,  M.A.)  Restraining  power  of  the  Bible  : — The  Kev.  Charles  Vince,  of
Birmingham,  told  the  following  incident  at  a  meeting  of  the  Bible  Society  in  1863 : —


316  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi.

•'  The  Hill-top  Auxiliary  in  the  '  Black  Country '  determined  to  send  round  two  or
three  Christian  men  every  Saturday  evening,  with  packages  of  Bibles,  to  visit  the
public-houses  and  persuade  the  miners  and  puddlers  of  the  district,  while  they  had
their  money,  to  spend  some  part  of  it  in  buying  the  Word  of  God.  While  they  were
carrying  out  this  plan  a  miner  said, '  Wouldn't  it  be  a  good  thing  for  us  to  have  a
copy  to  read  down  in  the  pit  at  dinner-time  ?  '  The  proposition  met  with  general
approval,  and  they  agreed  to  buy  a  copy  for  this  purpose.  Of  the  first  copy  handed
to  them  the  landlord  said  the  print  was  too  small  to  read  down  in  the  pit,  and
offered  to  give  a  shilling  towards  the  cost  of  a  better  type.  This  was  bought,  and
one  of  the  men  said  with  great  simplicity,  '  If  we  have  the  Bible  at  dinner-time,
we  mustn't  have  any  swearing.'  This,  too,  was  carried,  and  a  fine  imposed  upon
the  man  that  should  break  the  rule.  Is  there  any  other  book  in  the  world  that  you
could  carry  into  the  company  of  men  and  make  them  say,  •  If  we  open  this,  and
begin  to  look  at  it,  we  must  begin  to  put  away  some  of  our  sins '  ?  "  {Family
Treasury.)  The  Bible  instructive  : — A  Hindoo  paper,  published  in  Bengal,  speaks
as  follows  of  the  excellence  of  the  Bible : — "  It  is  the  best  and  most  excellent  of  all
English  books,  and  there  is  not  its  like  in  the  English  language.  As  every  joint  of
the  sugar-cane,  from  the  root  to  the  top,  is  full  of  sweetness,  so  every  page  of  the
Bible  is  fraught  with  the  most  precious  instruction.  A  portion  of  this  book  would
yield  to  you  more  of  sound  morality  than  a  thousand  other  treatises  on  the  same
BObject.  In  short,  if  anybody  studies  the  English  language  with  a  view  to  gaining
wisdom,  there  is  not  another  book  which  is  more  worthy  of  being  read  than  the
Bible."  (Sword  and  Trowel.)  Faraday's  testimony  to  the  value  of  Scripture: —
One  of  the  best  and  greatest  Fellows  of  the  Eoyal  Society  in  the  present  century
was  ill,  and  sitting  in  his  room,  when  one  of  the  best  of  my  profession  that  ever
lived  in  this  country,  Dr.  Latham,  went  in  to  him  and  found  this  great  man  in
tears,  sitting  by  his  fireside.  Latham  told  me  this  story  himself.  He  said,  •'  My
good  friend,  I  fear  you  feel  more  ill  to-day  ;  what  is  it  ?  "  "  No,"  he  said,  "  not
that ;  I  was  thinking  what  a  sorrow  it  is  that  the  world  will  go  astray  when  it  has
this  blessed  book  to  guide  it."  This  man  was  Faraday,  and  I  need  not  say  that  the
book  on  his  table  was  the  Bible.  (Sir  H.  W.  Acland,  M.D.)  The  poor  widow's
treasure : — "  Did  ye  ask  me  if  I  had  a  Bible  ?  "  said  a  poor  old  widow  in  London ;
••  Did  ye  ask  me  if  I  had  a  Bible  ?  Thank  God  I  have  a  Bible.  What  should  I  do
without  my  Bible  ?  It  was  the  guide  of  my  youth,  and  it  is  the  staff  of  my  age  ;  it
wounded  me,  and  it  healed  me  ;  it  condemned  me,  and  it  acquitted  me ;  it  showed
me  I  was  a  sinner,  and  it  led  me  to  the  Saviour;  it  has  given  me  comfort
through  Ufe,  and  I  trust  it  will  give  me  hope  in  death."  The  principles  of
Scripture  to  be  applied : — Professor  Newman  complained,  some  years  ago,  against
our  Bible,  because  it  does  not  tell  every  father  to  what  business  or  profession  he
should  put  his  sons.  For  such  infinite  particulars  and  detailed  advices  we  should
require,  not  a  portable  manual,  but  a  British  Museum.  Far  wiser  and  truer  is  the
principle  enunciated  by  the  orator  Burke,  when  he  says,  "Beading,  and  much
reading,  is  good.  But  the  power  of  diversifying  the  matter  infinitely  in  your  own
mind,  and  of  applying  it  to  every  occasion  that  arises,  is  far  better ;  so  don't
suppress  the  living  force."  {J.  Clifford,  D.D.)  The  Bible  a  lighthouse : — A  light-
house  looks  like  a  tall  pillar  rising  out  of  the  sea,  or  built  upon  some  high  bluff.
The  top  is  a  large  lantern,  where  a  bright  light  is  kept  burning  all  night,  which  ia
seen  far  out  at  sea;  and  it  says  to  all  ships  and  sailors  sailing  by,  "  Take  care  1
take  care  !  "  One  is  built  on  a  ledge  of  rocks  ;  its  warning  light  says,  "  Give  wide
berth  to  these  sunken  rocks."  Another  says,  "  Steer  clear  of  this  dangerous  reef."
Another,"  Keep  clear  of  this  dangerous  headland.  If  you  come  here,  you  are  lost."
There  are  a  great  many  Ughthouses  on  the  coast :  how  does  a  sailor  know  which  ia
which  ?  He  sees  a  light  gleaming  through  the  darkness  and  the  storm  ;  but  where
is  it?  He  has  a  chart  in  the  ship,  and  that  tells.  A  chart  is  a  map  of  the  coast,
with  all  its  rocks  and  sandbanks  and  lighthouses  put  down,  and  everything  that  a
eailor  ought  to  know  in  order  to  steer  his  ship  safely  across  the  ocean.  If  he
faithfully  consults  it,  and  keeps  a  good  look  out,  he  is  likely  to  ride  out  the  storm
and  come  safely  into  port.  That  the  man  of  God  may  be  perfect. — Character : —
The  superiority  of  man  is  everywhere  manifested  on  earth.  True  greatness  ia
measured  by  character.     I.  To  perfect  the  chakacteb  of  man  is  the  aim  of

OhBISTIAN  truth.  II.  In  developed  character  is  to  be  found  the  great  MORAIi
RICHES  OF  THE  WORLD.  III.  In  IT  WE  HAVE  A  STRIKINO  PROOF  OF  MAN'S  IMMORTALITT.
IV.  It  supplies  a  test  by  which  to  measure  the  value  of  the  SERVICES  OF  THE
BANGTUART,  THE  VALUE    OF    THE    BiBLE,  OF    ALL   THINGS — ITS    ABILITY  TO  DEVELOP  TRUR

MANHOOD.    Have  we  grown  in  Christian  character  ?    Have  the  Church  servioeB


CHAP.rv.]  II.  TIMOTHY.  817

proven  barren  or  fruitful  to  us  ?  (R.  S.  Starrs,  D.B.)  The  Bible  the  book  for  the
man  of  God : — Jerome  was  versed  in  the  polite  literature  of  his  day  and  in  the
works  of  classic  writers.  He  tells  us  that  in  a  dream  he  once  thought  himself
arraigned  before  the  judgment  seat  of  Christ,  where  he  was  asked  the  nature  of  his
profession.  He  answered,  "  I  am  a  Christian."  "  Thou  art  not  I "  said  the  Judge ;
"  thou  art  a  Ciceronian,  for  the  works  of  that  author  possess  thy  heart."  The
Judge  then  gave  order  that  he  should  be  scourged  by  angels.  Although  it  was  only
a  dream,  his  chastisement  never  was  forgotten ;  it  changed  the  direction  of  his
thoughts.  "  From  that  time,"  he  says,  "  I  gave  myself  to  the  reading  of  Divine
things  with  greater  diligence  and  attention  than  I  had  ever  read  the  other  authors."
To  give  undue  attention  to  secular  reading,  to  the  neglect  of  sacred  literature,  is  a
temptation  peculiar  to  the  cultivated  believer,  and  it  is  a  real  temptation ;  for  one
may  be  as  sordid  in  the  acquisition  of  knowledge  as  in  the  pursuit  of  wealth.
The  man  of  God's  equipment : — I.  The  man  of  God  is  instbuctkd — 1.  Concerning
God.  2.  Concerning  man.  3.  Concerning  duty.  4.  Concerning  responsibility.
II.  The  mak  of  God  is  disciplined.  1.  Joy  in  prosperity.  2.  Hope  in  adversity.
3.  A  cheerful  submission  to  the  will  of  God  at  all  times.  III.  The  man  of  (3od  is
INSPIRED.  1.  The  mind  is  illumined.  2.  The  affections  are  sanctified.  8.  The
whole  life  is  made  the  reflex  of  revelation.  {Weekly  Pulpit.)  Development  of
character: — An  English  barrister  who  was  accustomed  to  train  students  for  the
practice  of  law,  and  who  was  not  himself  a  religious  man,  was  once  asked  why  he
put  students,  from  the  very  first,  to  the  study  and  analysis  of  the  most  difficult  parts
of  the  Sacred  Scriptures?  "Because,"  said  he,  "there  is  nothing  else  like  it,  in
any  language,  for  the  development  of  mind  and  character."  The  Bible  the
text-book  of  character : — Professor  Matthew  Arnold  represents  modern  literature,
and  is  often  regarded  as  one  of  the  severest  critics  of  the  current  Christianity ;  yet
he  says,  "  As  well  imagine  a  man  with  a  sense  for  sculpture  not  cultivating  it  by  the
help  of  the  remains  of  Greek  art,  or  a  man  with  a  sense  for  poetry  not  cultivating
it  by  the  help  of  Homer  and  Shakespeare,  as  a  man  with  a  sense  for  conduct  not
cultivating  it  by  the  help  of  the  Bible."  Professor  Huxley  represents  modem
science,  and  is  the  bete  noire  of  controversial  theologians ;  yet  he  says,  "  I  have
been  perplexed  to  know  by  what  practical  measures  the  religious  feeling,  which  is
the  essential  basis  of  conduct,  was  to  be  kept  up  .  .  .  without  the  use  of  the  Bible."


CHAPTER  IV.

Vebs.  1,  2.  I  charge  thee.— An  earnest  charge : — Cold  preaching  makes  bold
sinners,  when  powerful  preaching  awes  the  conscience.  Matters  of  greatest  impor-
tance must  be  pressed  with  greatest  vehemence.  God  putteth  not  forth  great
power  but  for  great  purpose  (Eph.  i.  18,  19).  (T.  Hall,  B.D.)  Charged  before
God : — The  master's  and  the  commander's  eye  make  the  servant  and  the  soldier
active  (Matt.  vi.  6  ;  Acts  x.  4).  (Ibid.)  Earnestness  in  preaching : — It  is  weak-
ness to  be  hot  in  a  cold  matter,  but  worse  to  be  cold  in  a  hot  matter.  (J,  Trapp.)
The  judgment: — Dr.  John  Brown,  speaking  of  a  minister's  leaving  his  people  for
another  pastorate,  says  that  he  mentally  exclaims,  ••  There  they  go  !  When  next
they  meet  it  will  be  at  the  judgment  I  "  [H.  0.  Mackey.)  Ministers  at  the  judg-
ment:— Adalbert,  who  lived  in  the  tenth  century,  was  appointed  Archbishop  of
Prague.  This  preferment  seemed  to  give  him  so  little  satisfaction  that  he  was  never
seen  to  smile  afterwards  ;  and  on  being  asked  the  reason,  he  replied :  ••  It  is  an  easy
thing  to  wear  a  mitre  and  a  cross,  but  an  awful  thing  to  give  an  account  of  a  bishop-
ric before  the  Judge  of  quick  and  dead."  (W.  H.  Baxendale.)  An  ordination
charge : — I.  Where  faithful  ministers  stand — •'  Before  God  and  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ."  1.  Before  God.  (1)  As  a  sinner  saved  by  grace.  Once  far  off,  but  brought
nigh  by  the  blood  of  Christ.  (2)  As  a  servant.  In  prayer,  how  sweet  to  kneel  at
His  footstool,  no  veil,  no  cloud  between  the  soul  and  God.  In  preaching,  how  sweet
to  say,  like  Elijah,  when  he  stood  before  Ahab,  "  I  stand  before  the  Lord  God  of
Israel."  2.  Before  Jesus  Christ.  (1)  The  faithful  minister  has  a  present  sight
of  Christ  as  his  righteousness.    He,  like  Isaiah,  saw  "  His  glory  and  spake  of


318  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOR.  [chap.  it.

Him."  (2)  The  faithful  minister  should  feel  the  presence  of  a  living  Saviour  (Jer.
i.  8;  Acts  xviii.  10).  (3)  Within  sight  of  judgment.  II.  The  grand  BusiNEsa  op
THE  TiXTBTXTL  MTNisTEB.  1.  Preach  the  Word.  (1)  Not  other  matters.  (2)  The
most  essential  parts  especially.  (3)  More  in  the  manner  of  God's  Word.  2.
Reprove,  rebuke,  exhort.  Most  ministers  are  accustomed  to  set  Christ  before  the
people.  They  lay  down  the  gospel  clearly  and  beautifully,  but  they  do  not  urge
men  to  enter  in.  Now  God  says,  exhort ;  not  only  point  to  the  open  door,  but  com-
pel them  to  come  in.  III.  The  manneb.  1.  With  long-suffering.  There  is  no
grace  more  needed  in  the  Christian  ministry  than  this.  This  is  the  heart  of  God
the  Father  towards  sinners — "  He  is  long-suffering  to  usward,  not  willing  that  any
should  perish."  2.  With  doctrine — the  clear  and  simple  statement  of  the  truth
preceding  the  warm  and  pathetic  exhortation.  3.  With  urgency.  If  a  neighbour's
house  were  on  fire,  would  we  not  cry  aloud  and  use  every  exertion  ?  If  a  friend  were
drowning,  would  we  be  ashamed  to  strain  every  nerve  to  save  him  ?  4.  At  all  times.
Satan  is  busy  at  all  times — he  does  not  stand  upon  ceremony — he  does  not  keep
himself  to  Sabbath-days  or  canonical  hours.  Death  is  busy.  Men  are  dying  while
we  are  sleeping.  The  Spirit  of  God  is  busy.  Blessed  be  God,  He  hath  cast  our  lot
in  times  when  there  is  the  moving  of  the  Great  Spirit  among  the  dry  bones.  Shall
ministers  then  be  idle,  or  stand  upon  ceremony  ?  {R.  M.  McCheyne.)  Urgency
of  the  ministerial  office  : — In  a  visit  which  I  once  made,  when  a  young  clergyman,
to  the  churches  of  Belgium,  so  remarkable  for  the  grandeur  and  elaborate  carving
of  their  pulpits,  my  attention  was  especially  attracted  by  one  well  suited  to  enforce
a  solenm  lesson  on  every  one  who  might  occupy  it.  There  arose  from  the  back  of
it  a  gigantic  figure  of  death,  stretching  its  gaunt  skeleton  form  over  the  head  of  the
preacher,  and  holding  in  one  hand  a  scythe,  and  with  the  other  presenting  a  scroll
on  which  was  inscribed  "  Hasten  thou  to  gather  in  thy  harvest,  for  I  must  soon  reap
mine."  Yes  I  it  is  the  brevity  of  the  opportunity  and  the  inestimable  interests  at
stake  which  render  the  ministerial  ofiBce  of  such  urgency  that  no  season  may  be
missed,  no  effort  spared,  in  order  that  it  may  accomplish  its  work.  {Bp.  Baring.)
Preaching  in  the  sight  of  God : — Bishop  Latimer  having  one  day  preached  before
King  Henry  VIH.  a  sermon  which  displeased  his  majesty,  he  was  ordered  to  preach
again  on  the  next  Sabbath,  and  to  make  an  apology  for  the  offence  he  had  given.
After  reading  his  text,  the  bishop  thus  begun  his  sermon:  "Hugh  Latimer,  dost
thon  know  before  whom  thou  art  this  day  to  speak  ?  To  the  high  and  mighty
monarch,  the  king's  most  excellent  majesty,  who  can  take  away  thy  life  if  thoa
offendest ;  therefore,  take  heed  that  thou  speakest  not  a  word  that  may  displease.
But  then  consider  well,  Hugh,  dost  thou  not  know  from  whence  thou  comest — upon
whose  message  thou  art  sent  ?  Even  by  the  great  and  mighty  God  I  who  is  all-
present  !  and  who  beholdeth  all  thy  ways  !  and  who  is  able  to  cast  thy  soul  into  hell  I
Therefore,  take  care  that  thou  deliverest  thy  message  faithfully."  He  then  pro-
ceeded with  the  same  sermon  he  had  preached  the  preceding  Sabbath,  but  with  con-
siderably more  energy.  The  sermon  ended,  the  Court  were  full  of  expectation  to
know  what  would  be  the  fate  of  this  honest  and  plain-dealing  bishop.  After  dinner
the  king  called  for  Latimer,  and,  with  a  stern  countenance,  asked  him  how  he  dared
to  be  so  bold  as  to  preach  in  such  a  manner.  He,  falling  on  his  knees,  replied,  his
duty  to  his  God  and  his  prince  had  enforced  him  thereto,  and  that  he  had  merely
discharged  his  duty  and  his  conscience  in  what  he  had  spoken.  Upon  which  the
king,  rising  from  his  seat,  and  taking  the  good  man  by  the  hand,  embraced  him,  say-
ing, "  Blessed  be  God  I  have  so  honest  a  servant ! "  At  His  appearing. — The  second
advent:— I.  The  manneb.  1.  In  mystery.  2.  In  glory.  3.  With  universality.
II.  The  purpose.  1.  To  reveal  the  true  judgment  of  righteousness.  2.  To  proclaim
open  verdict  on  probationers.  8.  To  ensure  an  effectual  separation  of  character.
in.  The  REsm-TS.  1.  The  vindication  of  righteousness.  2.  The  triimiph  of  love.
{U.  R.  Thomas.)  Preach  the  Word.— The  ministry  of  the  Word: — Preaching  ia
God's  great  ordinance  nuw,  as  it  has  been  in  the  past.  Its  source  and  substance  is
the  Word.  The  truth  you  are  to  preach  is  a  Divine  revelation,  a  written  system  of
truth.  Tour  teaching  is  not  the  tradition  of  men  on  the  one  hand,  or  their  myste-
rious speculations  on  the  other,  but  the  revealed  Word  of  the  living  God.  You  are
not  the  inspirer  or  discoverer  of  truth,  you  are  only  its  interpreter.  It  is  no  light
matter  to  represent  with  freshness  and  force  the  truth  when  reached.  Much  work
goes  to  that,  not  to  elaborate  but  to  simplify.  The  test  of  clear  thinking  is  clear
expression.  Let  the  teaching  of  Christ  be  your  pattern — words  clear  and  simple  aa
the  light  of  heaven — thoughts  deep  as  eternity.  Have  faith  therefore  in  hard  work.
But  labour  is  not  enough.    The  mere  interpreter  can  see  but  a  little  way  into


CHAP.  IV.]  II.  TIMOTHY.  819

religious  truth.    The  heart  sees  best.    The  rays  of  truth,  that  shine  down  into  the
closet,  are  the  brightest  and  the  best.     Have  faith  in  prayer  as  well  as  in  toil.    But
while  preaching  the  Word  in  its  fulness,  preach  it  also  in  its  unity — that  is,  preach
Christ.     A  Bible  without  Christ,  a  pulpit  without  Christ,  would  be  a  world  without
God.  Give  Christ  the  place  in  preaching  that  He  holds  in  the  Word  :  Christ's  death
— the  sinner's  only  hope ;  Christ's  life — the  believer's  only  pattern ;  the  righteous-
ness of  Christ — the  ground  of  pardon  ;  the  grace  of  Christ — the  riches  of  believers  ;
the  love  of  Christ — the  power  of  new  obedience.    It  is  only  from  the  height  of  the
Cross  that  we  can  get  a  full  view  of  the  Word.    Not  that  you  are  always  to  be
preaching  on  the  central  doctrine  of  the  Cross,  just  as  you  are  not  always  looking
right  up  to  the  sun  ;  but  as  you  view  all  things  on  earth  in  the  light  that  streams
from  the  sun,  so  should  you  see  all  truth  in  the  light  that  streams  from  the  Cross.
That  is  no  narrow  theme,  or  soon  exhausted.  Christ  can  enter  into  everything,  into
all  doctrine,  all  duties,  all  experience.    Christian  doctrine  is  just  Christ's  portrait,
drawn  at  full  length.     Christian  moraUty  is  just  Christ's  portrait,  embodied  in  the
life.    Christian  experience  is  Christ  realised  in  the  heart.    Christian  usefulness  ia
Christ's  glory,  carried  out  into  all  the  details  of  life.    And,  last  of  all,  preach  the
Word,  for  it  is  the  "  power  of  God  unto  salvation  to  every  one  that  believeth."
Preach  it  for  salvation ;  not  only  for  instruction,  that  you  may  save  yourself  and
them  that  hear  you.    All  its  truths  are  revealed  for  this  end.    (j.  Riddcll.)    Preach
the  Word: — I.    We  must  preach  the  Word  with  reference  to  the  Divinity  of  its
Author.    II.  We  must  preach  the  Word  with  reference  to  the  wonders  of  His  love  I
III.  We  must  preach  the  Word  with  reference  to  the  efficacy  of  His  atoning  sacri-
fice.   IV.  We  must  preach  the  Word  with  reference  to  the  sanctifying  influences  of
His  Spirit.    V.  We  must  preach  the  Word  faithfully  and  fully,  in  its  precepts,  as
well  as  its  doctrines.     VI.  We  must  preach  the  Word  in  its  catholic  and  evangelical
spirit.     Vn.  We  must  preach  the  Word  as  the  grand  means  of  promoting  the
Saviour's  glory ;  and  of  accelerating  the  approach  of  the  millennial  day.  (J.  Parsons.)
Conditions  of  success  in  working  for  Christ : — 1.  A  sound  conversion  is  essential  to
successful  effort.     2.  An  intimate  association  with  Christ  is  an  element  of  great
success.    Let  a  minister  go  out  into  the  fields  with  Jesus  to  glean,  and  he  shall
come  back  at  even,  "  bearing  his  sheaves  with  him."    Let  him  go  out  helped  by
genius,  by  culture,  by  learning,  by  wealth,  by  position,  leaving  Christ  behind,  and
his  words  are  as  sounding  brass  and  a  tinkling  cymbal.     3.  Christians  must  orga-
nise for  victory.     A  sleepless  vigilance  and  a  tireless  activity  are  as  essential  to
success  in  the  Church  as  in  business.    A  progressive  man  holds  fast  to  what  has
been  attained,  and  reaches  forth  to  possibilities  laid  bare  to  his  eye.     4.  A  high
ideal  of  a  Christian's  position  and  work  must  be  kept  in  view.     5.  The  great  fight
is  the  preaching  of  the  Word.     The  men  of  power  and  weight  are  men  of  the  Book  ;
such  represent  God.     6.  Practise  the  Word.     {J.  D.  Fulton,  D.D.)        Preaching
the  Word: — To  rightly  "  preach  the  Word  "  there  is  demanded  a  far-reaching  pre-
paration.    Not  for  a  work  like  that  of  the  old  alchemists  and  astrologers  whose
locks  and  beards  grew  grey  as  they  bent  over  their  crucibles  or  gazed  at  the  stars,
in  the  vain  hope  of  solving  mysteries.     We  have  little  to  do  with  mysteries.    It  is
for  the  simplicity  of  the  gospel  we  search,  and  that  leads  us  to  heights  and  depths.
We  are  to  so  think  and  pray  and  live  that  we  may  show  to  men  plain  paths  for
their  feet.   This  makes  the  minister  a  student,  but  none  the  less  a  man.   It  is  manly
to  follow  the  lead  of  heavenly  lights  over  rough  ways  and  into  clouds.     The  richest
ores  and  gems  of  Nature  are  guarded  by  her  fortresses  ;  so  is  it  with  truth,  and  no
man  but  the  sluggard  complains  that  a  full  soul,  like  a  full  purse,  comes  through
toil  and  trial.  Newton  was  once  asked,  "  How  do  you  make  your  great  discoveries  ?  "
His  reply  was :  '*  I  keep  the  subject  constantly  before  me,  and  wait  till  the  first
dawnings  open  slowly,  by  Uttle  and  httle,  into  a  full,  clear  light."    This  is  the  key
to  God's  storehouse.    The  minister,  who  would  be  an  approved  workman,  must
mingle  with  those  for  whom  he  labours.    Surrounding  circumstances,  bent  of  mind,
temperament,  culture,  experiences  of  life,  have  given  to  each  one  of  his  people  a
standpoint  for  discerning  truth.     Now,  the  minister  of  Christ  is  sent  to  be  the  sug-
gester  of  truth.     How  shall  he  be  able  to  so  hold  it  up  that  every  one  may  get  a
grasp  upon  it,  unless  he  understands  the  principles  and  something  of  the  methods
upon  which  the  various  activities  of  life  are  carried  forward  ?   To  gain  such  a  power
as  this  and  have  it  all  sanctified,  so  that  he  shall  neither  materialise  nor  idealise,
but  rather  stamp  everything  with  God's  own  seal  and  illumine  everything  with  God's
own  light,  is  a  work  before  which  the  stoutest  may  tremble.    "  Who  is  sufficient
unto  these  things?"    (E,  R.  Ingersoll,  D.D.)        Preach  the  Word,  not  sceptical


320  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cnip.  w.

objections : — The  habit  of  perpetually  mentioning  the  theories  of  unbelievers  when
preaching  the  gospel,  gives  a  man  the  appearance  of  great  learning,  but  it  also
proves  his  want  of  common  sense.  In  order  to  show  the  value  of  wholosr>me  food
it  is  not  needful  to  proffer  your  guest  a  dose  of  poison,  nor  would  he  think  the  better
of  your  hospitality  if  you  did  so.  Certain  sermons  are  more  calculated  to  weaken
faith  than  to  render  men  believers  ;  tbey  resemble  the  process  through  which  a  poor
unhappy  dog  is  frequently  passed  at  the  Grotto  del  Cane  at  Naples.  He  is  thrown
into  the  gae  which  reaches  up  to  the  spectators'  knees,  not  with  the  view  of  killing
him,  but  merely  as  an  exhibition.  Lifted  out  of  his  vapoury  bath,  he  is  thrown
into  a  pool  of  water,  and  revives  in  time  for  another  operation.  Such  a  dog  is  not
likely  to  be  a  very  efficient  watch-dog  or  pursuer  of  game ;  and  when  hearers  Sun-
day after  Sunday  are  plunged  into  a  bath  of  sceptical  thought,  they  may  survive  the
experiment,  but  they  will  never  become  spiritually  strong  or  practically  u.'ieful.  It
is  never  worth  while  to  make  rents  in  a  garment  for  the  sake  of  mending  them,  nor
to  create  doubts  in  order  to  show  how  cleverly  we  can  quiet  them.  Should  a  man
set  fire  to  his  house  because  he  has  a  patent  extincteur  which  would  put  it  out  in  no
time  he  would  stand  a  chance  of  one  day  creating  a  conflagration  which  all  the
patents  under  heaven  could  not  e.sily  extinguish.  Thousands  of  uubelievers
have  been  born  into  the  family  of  scepticism  by  professed  preachers  of  the
gospel,  who  supposed  that  they  were  helping  them  to  faith :  the  fire  fed  upon
the  heaps  of  leaves  which  the  foolish  well-intentioned  speaker  cast  upon  it  in
the  hope  of  smothering  it.  Young  men  in  many  instances  have  obtained  their
first  notions  of  infidelity  from  their  ministers  ;  they  have  sucked  in  the
poison,  but  refused  the  antidote.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Be  instant  In  season,  out
of  Beason. — Never  out  of  seanon: — Not  that  the  Word  is  ever  out  of  season  in
itself,  for  it  is  the  bread  of  life  ;  all  other  meats  have  their  times  and  seasons,  but
bread  is  the  staff  of  nature,  and  is  never  out  of  season.  There  is  no  season  un-
seasonable for  so  seasonable,  for  so  necessary  a  duty  in  the  opinion  of  a  natural
man,  and  in  the  eye  of  carnal  reason  it  seems  sometimes  to  be  out  of  season,  as
when  it  is  preached  on  the  week-day,  when  pastor  and  people  have  profits  and
pleasures  and  worldly  employments  to  draw  them  off.  Now  a  sermon  seems  like
snow  in  harvest  to  such  earthly  souls,  it  is  out  of  season  with  them,  yet  even  these
seasons  which  the  world  judgeth  unseasonable  must  a  minister  redeem  for  preach-
ing. (Ibid.)  Not  strawberry -preachers: — We  must  not  be  strawberry -preachers
(as  Bishop  Latimer  calleth  them),  which  come  but  once  a  year  and  are  quickly  gone
again,  (ibid.)  Constant  preaching : — You  cannot  give  God's  children  too  much
of  their  Father's  bread.  (Old  Puritan.)  In  season,  out  of  season : — Who  has  not
reproached  himself  for  suffering  opportunities  of  usefulness  to  pass  unimproved —
seasons  when  "  a  word  fitly  spoken  "  might  have  turned  a  sinner  from  the  error  of
his  way  to  the  wisdom  of  the  just?  Why  are  we  so  reluctant  to  fill  this  department
of  usefulness ?  Who  can  tell  the  power  of  a  word?  Is  it  not  often  more  effectual
than  a  sermon?  I  once  spent  an  afternoon  in  a  family  where  a  young  woman  had
been  employed  for  the  day.  I  ought  to  have  learned  her  spiritual  state,  but  did
not.    At  the  tea-table  she  remarked  that  she  had  done  her  work.     I  replied,  "  If

J'our  work  is  done  for  time,  you  must  work  for  eternity, "  She  sat  a  moment  speech-
ess  ;  then,  bursting  into  tears,  she  hastened  from  the  room.  Surprised  and  startled
at  such  an  effect  from  a  word,  I  sought  to  learn  from  her  the  cause  of  this  sudden
distress.  Her  heart  was  overladen  with  the  burden  of  sin.  She  had  struggled  to
conceal  her  sorrow  from  the  family.  The  cup  was  full.  One  drop  made  it  run  over,
and  led  to  a  discovery  of  her  deep  conviction.  This  season  of  usefulness  would  have
been  lost  by  a  few  moments'  delay,  and  that  anguish  of  spirit  have  been  to  me  un-
known. (American  Messenger.)  The  seasonable  word  not  to  be  delayed: — Dr.
Chalmers  once  lodged  in  the  house  of  a  nobleman  near  Peebles.  He  was  the  life
and  Boul  of  the  discourse  in  the  circle  of  friends  at  the  nobleman's  fireside.  The
Bubject  was  pauperism — its  causes  and  cure.  Among  the  gentlemen  present  there
was  a  venerable  old  Highland  chieftain,  who  kept  his  eyes  fastened  on  Dr.  C,  and
Ustened  with  intense  interest  to  his  communications.  The  conversation  was  kept
up  to  a  late  hour.  When  the  company  broke  up  they  were  shown  upstairs  to  their
apartments.  There  was  a  lobby  of  a  considerable  length,  and  the  doors  of  the  bed-
chambers opened  on  the  right  and  left.  The  apartment  of  Dr.  C.  was  directly  oppo-
site to  that  of  the  old  chieftain,  who  had  already  retired.  As  the  doctor  waa
undressing  himself,  he  heard  an  unusual  noise  in  the  chieftain's  room.  The  noise
was  succeeded  by  a  heavy  groan  1  He  hastened  into  the  apartment,  which  wan  in  a
few  minutes  filled  with  the  company,  who  all  rushed  into  the  relief  of  the  old  man.


CHAP.  IV.]  II.  TIMOTHY.  321

It  was  a  melancholy  sight  which  met  their  eyes.  The  venerable  white-headed  chief
had  fallen  in  the  arms  of  his  attendant.  It  was  evidently  an  apoplexy.  He  breathed
for  a  few  moments  and  expired  1  Dr.  C.  stood  in  silence,  with  both  hands  stretched
out,  and  bending  over  the  deceased.  He  was  the  very  picture  of  distress.
He  was  the  first  to  break  silence.  "  Never  in  my  life,"  said  he  in  a  tremulous
voice,  "  did  I  see,  or  did  I  feel,  before  this  moment,  the  meaning  of  that  text,  V""
'  Preach  the  Word ;  be  instant  in  season,  out  of  season,'  &c.  Had  I  known
that  my  venerable  old  friend  was  within  a  few  minutes'  reach  of  eternity,  I
would  not  have  dwelt  on  that  subject  which  formed  the  topic  of  this  evening's
conversation.  I  would  have  addressed  myself  earnestly  to  him.  I  would  have
preached  unto  him  and  unto  you  Christ  Jesus,  and  Him  crucified.  I  would  have
urged  him  and  you,  with  all  the  earnestness  befitting  the  subject,  to  prepare  for
eternity.  You  would  have  thought  it,  you  would  have  pronounced  it,  out  of  season.
But  ah  1  it  would  have  been  in  season— both  as  it  respected  him,  and  as  it  respects
you."  A  word  in  season : — A  poor  blacksmith,  bending  with  age  and  weakness,
was  passing  through  a  country  village;  he  stopped  at  a  good  woman's  cottage,  and
rested  himself  on  the  railing  before  the  door.  The  pious  dame  came  out,  and  the
weary  traveller  remarked  that  his  time  here  would  be  short ;  he  was  often  ailing ;
he  added,  "  Ah,  Nanny !  I  sha'n't  be  long  for  this  world,  I  reckon  1 "  She  thought
of  his  words,  and  replied,  "Well,  John,  then  I  hope  you'll  prepare  for  your
journey  1  "  The  blacksmith  passed  on,  and  his  call  was  soon  forgotten  by  Nanny  ;
but  that  simple  sentence  was  impressed  on  his  memory  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  never
to  be  erased.  He  pondered  it  while  walking  home,  and  soon  consumption  laid  him
on  a  bed  of  pain.  Again  and  again  did  he  think  about  "  the  journey,"  and  about
being  "prepared  "  for  it.  He  began  to  pray,  and  all  around  him  were  continually
hearing  the  old  woman's  advice.  No  pious  friends  were  near  to  converse  with  him,
but  it  is  confidently  believed  that  the  aged  sinner  was  led  to  look  to  the  Saviour
through  the  simple  incident  related  above.  Almost  his  last  breath  was  spent  in
thanking  God  that  the  good  old  woman  ever  warned  him  "  Be  instant  in  season,
out  of  season  "  :  sow  beside  all  waters,  that  thou  mayest  reap  a  glorious  harvest
at  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  Man.  {Christian  Miscellany.)  Using  an  oppor-
tunity : — My  good  and  kind  friend,  Dr.  Sale,  the  late  vicar  of  Sheffield,  once  gave
me  an  affecting  account  of  a  conversation  he  had  in  a  railway  carriage  with  one  of
his  parishioners,  a  manufacturer,  who  was  returning  from  Epsom  the  day  after  the
Derby,  with  considerable  winnings.  The  faithful  vicar  struck  home,  and  soon  dis-
covered that  the  man,  with  all  his  seeming  elation,  was  consciously  guilty ;  and
showed  it,  not  only  by  the  changes  of  his  countenance,  but  by  his  desperate  attempts
to  "  change  the  subject."  It  was  in  vain,  however,  that  he  strove  to  get  out  of  the
Christian  preacher's  power.  The  vicar  pressed  the  charge  of  guilt,  till  the  sweat
started  to  the  gambler's  brow,  and  he  cried,  "  For  God's  sake,  say  no  more  I  I  know
it  is  wrong.  I  dare  not  reflect  upon  it  1 "  Yet  the  vicar  did  not  shrink  from  hia
duty ;  but  still  urged  his  reproof,  till  he  thought  he  had  reason  to  beheve  that  the
man  would  give  up  his  sin.  (Thos.  Cooper.)  Making  an  opportunity : — The
Mogul  is  a  dirty  little  beer-shop,  entirely  supported  by  low  and  depraved  persons.
The  tap-room  was  built  in  the  yard  beside  a  skittle  ground,  and  was  approached
through  a  long  passage.  Upon  entering  it  one  evening  the  city  missionary,  John
M.  Weylland,  found  a  crowd  of  at  least  forty  juvenile  thieves,  vagrants,  and  bullies.
As  the  noise  was  great,  the  only  hope  of  doing  good  was  an  effort  to  enter  into  con-
versation with  one  or  two  individuals.  This,  however,  was  prevented,  as  many  of
them  knew  the  visitor,  and  hit  upon  a  device  to  get  rid  of  him.  A  song  was  started
by  one  of  the  men,  and  the  chorus  was  taken  up  by  the  full  company,  who  repeated
with  deafening  effect  the  words,  "  He's  a  jolly  good  fellow."  As  the  song  proceeded
the  repetition  became  so  boisterous  that  the  visitor  divined  their  intention  to  sing
him  out.  He  at  once  saw  the  difficulty  of  his  position,  as,  if  they  had  succeeded,
the  same  practice  would  have  been  adopted  in  other  tap-rooms  to  the  hindrance  of
his  usefulness.  He,  therefore,  instead  of  leaving,  took  a  seat  in  their  midst  in  a
most  unconcerned  manner.  The  chorus  was  kept  up  until  many  of  the  vocalists
had  bawled  themselves  hoarse  ;  and  as  the  yelling  became  feeble  the  visitor  sprang
to  his  feet,  and  said  vehemently,  "  And  they  were  good  fellows,  but  the  magistrates
commanded  to  beat  them.  And  when  they  had  laid  many  stripes  upon  them,  they
cast  them  into  prison,  charging  the  jailer  to  keep  them  safely ;  who,  having  received
such  a  charge,  thrust  them  into  the  inner  prison,  and  made  their  feet  fast  in  the
stocks."  These  words  changed  the  current  of  feeling.  Nearly  all  in  the  room  had
been  in  prison,  and  those  who  had  not  had  a  deep  sympathy  with  such.    "  Who

21


823  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n.

were  they  ?  "  "  Where  was  it?  "  and  "  What  a  shame  1 "  were  the  general  exclama-
tions. After  a  pause,  which  produced  absolute  silence,  the  speaker  continued :
•'And  at  midnight  they  sang  praises  unto  God."  And  then,  opening  his  Bible,  he,
in  a  solemn,  earnest  tone,  read  the  narrative  of  the  imprisonment  of  Paul  and  Silas.
When  he  came  to  the  words,  "  He  set  meat  before  them,  and  rejoiced,  believing  in
God  with  all  his  house,"  the  reader  closed  the  Book,  and  in  a  few  telling  sentences
explained  the  nature  of  saving  faith  in  Christ,  and  the  result  of  that  faith — being
made  "new  creatures."  After  this  visit  the  work  was  easy  in  that  tap-room,
and  in  the  family  of  the  landlord.  Seasonable  fishing : — The  minister  is  a
fisherman,  and  the  fisherman  must  fit  himself  to  his  employment.  If  soma
fish  will  bite  only  by  day,  he  must  fish  by  day ;  if  others  will  bite  only  by  moon-
light, he  must  fish  for  them  by  moonlight.  {R.  Cecil.)  Unlikely  opportunity
used : — A  gentleman  one  day  observed  a  man  in  the  dress  of  a  clown  surrounded  by
&  crowd  of  some  two  hundred  persons,  who  were  amused  at  his  foolish  antics  and
pitiful  jokes.  After  looking  on  for  some  moments  with  feelings  of  compassion
towards  the  poor  creature  who  befooled  himself  to  make  a  living,  he  drew  a  tract
from  a  parcel  which  he  carried,  and,  pressing  through  the  crowd,  offered  it  to  the
clown.  The  latter  took  it,  and  at  once  began  to  read  it  aloud  in  mockery,  for  the
further  entertainment  of  the  bystanders.  It  was  short,  and  he  read  it  through
to  the  last  words,  which  were :  "  Thou  fool,  this  night  thy  soul  shall  be  required
of  thee."  Overcome  with  sudden  and  evident  emotion,  he  left  the  crowd  and
hastened  away.  The  giver  of  the  tract  followed  him,  and  tried  to  converse  with
bim  ;  but  all  the  response  he  could  get  for  some  time  was,  "  I'm  lost  1  I'm  lost  1 "
However,  the  gospel  was  lovingly  explained  to  him,  and  it  entered  into  his  heart.
He  became  an  earnest  believer,  and  was  soon  among  the  regular  labourers  for  Christ
in  the  East  End  of  London,  in  1874.  (<7.  F.  B.  Tinling,  B.A.)  Reprove. — Need
of  reproof : — He  that  minds  his  patient's  health  will  not  toy  or  trifle  or  play  with
his  mortal  diseases ;  the  flesh  must  feel  the  plaster,  or  it  will  never  eat  up  the  cor-
ruption in  it.  Shouldest  thou  apply  a  healing  plaster  to  skin  the  wound  aloft,
when  there  is  need  of  a  corrosive  to  take  away  the  dead  flesh,  thou  wouldest  be
false  and  unfaithful  to  thy  friend.  Eeproof,  like  salt,  must  have  in  it  both  sharp-
ness and  savouriness.  Admonition  without  serious  application  is  like  an  arrow  with
too  many  feathers,  which,  though  we  level  at  the  mark,  is  taken  by  the  wind  and
carried  quite  away  from  it.  Some  men  shoot  their  reprebensiona,  like  pellets
through  a  trunk,  with  no  more  strength  than  will  kill  a  sparrow.  Those  make
sinners  believe  that  sin  is  no  such  dreadful  evil,  and  the  wrath  of  God  no  such
frightful  end.  He  that  would  hit  the  mark  and  recover  the  sinner,  must  draw  his
arrow  of  reproof  home.  Reproof  must  be  powerful ;  the  hammer  of  the  Word
breaks  not  the  heart,  if  it  be  lightly  laid  on.  It  must  also  be  so  particular,  that  the
offender  may  think  himself  concerned.  Some  in  reproof  will  seem  to  aim  at  the
sinner,  but  so  order  it  that  their  arrows  shall  be  sure  to  miss  him  ;  as  Domitian,
when  a  boy  held  for  a  mark  afar  off  his  hand  spread,  with  the  fingers  severed  he
shot  his  arrows  so  that  all  hit  the  empty  spaces  between  his  fingers.  Be  the  reproof
never  so  gracious,  the  plaster  so  good,  it  will  be  ineffectual  if  not  applied  to  the
patient.  (G.  Swinnoch.)  Ministers  must  be  faithful: — God  never  made  ministers
as  false  glasses  to  make  bad  faces  look  fair ;  such  make  themselves  guilty  of  other
men's  sins.  (T.  Watson.)  No  harpoons  onboard : — A  sailor  just  off  a  whaling  expe-
dition asked  where  he  would  hear  good  preaching.  On  his  return  from  church  his
friend  said  to  him,  "  You  do  not  seem  to  have  liked  the  sermon  ?  "  "  Not  much  ;
it  was  like  a  ship  leaving  for  the  whale  fishing — everything  ship-shape,  anchors,
cordage,  sails  all  right — but  there  were  no  harpoons  on  board."  Effectual
reproof: — The  Rev.  Dr.  John  H.  Vincent  once  reproved  a  swearer  so  powerfully
and  yet  so  tenderly  that  he  not  only  subdued  him,  but  melted  him  in  tears.  It
was  in  a  railway  station  ;  the  room  was  full  of  passengers  waiting  for  a  late  train.
A  man  in  the  room  was  shocking  everybody  with  his  impiety,  especially  in  profaning
the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus.    Suddenly  Dr.  Vincent  began  to  sing—

*'  Jesus,  lover  of  my  soul.
Let  me  to  Thy  bosom  fly."

—The  song  ceased ;  perfect  silence  followed.  The  swearer  was  reproved.  After  a
time  he  came  to  Dr.  Vincent  and  said,  "  Could  I  see  you  for  a  moment  outside  ?  "
They  went  out  together.  "How  came  you,"  said  he,  "to  sing  that  hymn  just
now?"    The  Doctor  replied:  "I  heard  you  swearing  and  profaning  the  name  ot


CHAP.  IT.]  11.  TIMOTHY.  823


the  Lord  JeBUS,  and  I  thought  I  would  let  you  know  there  was  somebody  there  who
loved  that  name."    "  That's  very  strange,"  said  the  man.    *'  My  sister,  when  she
was  dying,  sang  that  very  hymn,  and  she  made  me  promise  to  meet  her  in  heaven.
Could  you  pray  for  me  ?  "   Down  they  knelt  together,  and  the  Doctor  prayed  for  the
penitent  man,  and  asked  that  he  might  have  grace  and  strength  to  keep  the  vow  he
bad  made  to  his  dying  sister.    The  train  came ;  they  were  separated,  to  meet  no
more,  in  aU  piobability,  till  they  meet  in  eternity.    Disciple  of  Jesus,  witness  for
your  Master.    Bear  His  reproach.    Confess  His  name  before  men.        Personal
rebuke  beat : — Men  need  to  be  reminded  of  their  own  sins  much  more  than  they
do  of  Adam's  sin.    The  soldier  has  a  deeper  sense  of  danger  when  the  rifle  ball
rings  close  by  his  ears,  than  by  the  general  roar  of  the  battle  ;  and  so  a  sinner  will
have  a  much  deeper  sense  of  God's  displeasure,  when  his  own  sin  is  brought  home
to  him,  than  by  listening  to  general  remarks  on  the  sinfulness  of  the  race.     (M.
Miller.)        Silent  reproof: — One  day,  as  Dr.  Cutler  was  returning  home,  a  poor
woman,  whose  husband  had  been  very  intemperate,  called  after  him,  and  holding
up  a  pair  of  chickens,  begged  him  to  accept  them.     "  I  told  her,"  said  he,  '*  she
could  not  afford  to  give  away  such  a  fine  pair  of  chickens."  "  Mr.  Cutler,"  said  she,
with  a  sad  expression,  "  you  will  hurt  my  feelings  if  you  do  not  take  them.     I  have
fatted  and  picked  them  on  purpose  for  you.     It  is  the  only  return  I  am  able  to  offer
for  the  very  great  service  you  have  lately  done  me  and  my  little  children,"    "I  am
not  aware,"  said  Mr.  Cutler,  "  of  having  done  you  any  service  of  late."     "  Sir,"
said  the  poor  woman,  '•  you  have  reformed  my  husband."    "There  must  be  soma
mistake,"  said  Mr.  Cutler.     "  I  knew  your  husband  was  intemperate ;  but  I  have
never  said  a  word  to  him  on  the  subject."     "  I  know  you  never  have,"  said  she ;
"  if  you  had,  his  pride  is  such  that  it  might  have  made  matters  worse.    It  has
happened,  o(jdly  enough,  that  often,  when  you  have  stepped  in  to  say  a  few  kind
words  to  us,  he  has  been  taking  his  dram,  or  taking  down  his  jug  or  putting  it  back
again.    About  two  months  ago,  just  after  you  went  out,  he  went  to  the  door,  and  to
my  astonishment  poured  nearly  a  pint  of  rum  out  of  his  jug  on  to  the  ground,  and
said,  '  Debby,  rinse  out  that  jug  with  hot  water.    I've  done.    I  can't  stand  that
man's  looks  any  longer  I     If  Mr.  Cutler  would  look  savage,  I  shouldn't  mind  it ;  but
he  looks  so  sad,  and  so  benevolent  all  the  while,  when  he  sees  me  taking  a  dram,  that
I  know  what  he  means  just  as  well  as  if  he  preached  it  in  a  sermon ;  and  I  take  it
very  kindly  of  him  that  he  didn't  give  me  a  long  talk.'  "    {Memoir  of  Dr.  Cutler.)
Fruitful  rebukes : — The  Eev.  John  Spurgeon  was  going  to  preach  at  his  chapel  in
Tollesbury,  Essex.    It  was  the  Sabbath  morning,  and  as  he  passed  a  cottage  garden
he  B3W  a  man  digging  potatoes.  He  stopped  and  said,  "Am  I  mistaken,  or  are  you  ?
I  have  come  nine  miles   to    preach  to-day,  thinking  it  was  the   Sabbath-day.
As  I  see  you  are  at  work,  I  suppose  I  must  be  wrong,  and  had  better  go  home."  The
man  coloured,  and  driving  his  spade  into  the  ground,  he  said,  "  No,  sir,  you  are  not
wrong,  but  I  am  :  and  I  will  have  no  more  of  it.    I  will  be  roimd  this  afternoon  to
hear  you  preach.    Nobody  has  ever  spoken  to  me  before,  and  you've  only  done  your
duty."    He  was  at  the  chapel,  and  his  wife  with  him.    His  wife  became  a  member
of  the  church,  and  he  remained  a  regular  attendant  upon  the  means  of  grace.     (C.
H.  Spurgeon.)        Benefit  of  reproof : — There  was  one  particular  instance,  in  which
a  degree  of  severity  on  my  part  was  attended  with  the  happiest  effects.    Two  young
men,  now  blessed  servants  of  the  Most  High  God,  came  into  my  church  in  a  most
disorderly  way  ;  and  as  usual  I  fixed  my  eyes  upon  them  with  sternness,  indicative
of  my  displeasure.    One  of  them  was  abashed ;  but  the  other,  the  only  one  that
ever  waa  daring  enough  to  withstand  my  eye,  looked  at  me  again  with  undaunted,
not  to  say  with  impious  confidence,  refusing  to  be  ashamed.    I  sent  for  him  the
next  morning,  and  represented  to  him  the  extreme  impiety  of  his  conduct,  contrast-
ing it  with  that  of  those  less  hardened  ;  and  warning  him  who  it  was  that  he  thus
daringly  defied  ;  ♦'  He  that  despiseth  you  despiseth  Me  ;  and  he  that  despiseth  Me,
despifceth  Him  that  sent  Me  "  ;  and  I  enjoined  him  never  to  come  into  that  church
again,  unless  he  came  in  a  very  different  spirit.    To  my  surprise,  I  saw  him  there
again  the  following  Sunday,  but  with  a  more  modest  countenance ;  and  from  that
time  he  continued  to  come,  till  it  pleased  God  to  open  his  eyes,  and  to  lead  him  into
the  full  knowledge  of  the  gospel  of  Christ ;  and  in  a  year  or  two  afterwards  he  be-
came a  preacher  of  that  faith  which  he  once  had  despised.      (P.   B.   Power.)
Exhort.     Zealous  exhortation: — The  following  incident  is  known  only  to  a  few,  !^ut
is  deserving  of  a  wider  publicity.     "  I  shall  always  remember  Mr.  Moody,"  said  a
gentleman,  "for  he  was  the  means  of  leading  me  to  Christ.    I  was  in  a  railway
train  one  day,  when  a  stout,  cheery -looking  stranger  came  in,  and  sat  down  in  the


824  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  it.

seat  beside  me.  We  were  passing  through  a  beautiful  country,  to  which  he  called
my  attention,  saying,  "  Did  you  ever  think  what  a  good  Heavenly  Father  we  have,
to  give  us  such  a  pleasant  world  to  live  in  ?  "  I  made  some  indifferent  answer,  upon
which  he  earnestly  inquired,  "  Are  you  a  Christian?  "  I  answered,  "  No."  "  Then,"
eaid  he,  "you  ought  to  be  one  at  once.  I  am  to  get  off  at  the  next  station,  but  if  you
will  kneel  down,  right  here,  I  will  pray  to  the  Lord  to  make  you  a  Christian."
Scarcely  knowing  what  I  did,  I  knelt  down  beside  him  there,  in  the  car,  filled  with
passengers,  and  he  prayed  for  me  with  all  his  heart.  Just  then  the  train  drew  up
fit  the  station,  and  he  had  only  time  to  get  off  before  it  started  again.  Suddc  nly
coming  to  myself  out  of  what  seemed  more  like  a  dream  than  a  reality,  I  rushed  out
on  to  the  car  platform,  and  shouted  after  him,  "  Tell  me  who  you  are."  He  replied,
••  My  name  is  Moody."  I  never  could  shake  off  the  conviction  which  then  took  hold
Dpon  me,  until  the  prayer  of  that  strange  man  was  answered,  and  I  had  become  a
Christian.    (A  Faithful  Pastor.)

Vers.  3,  4.  They  will  not  endure  sound  doctrine. — Inclination  the  enemy  of

truth : — The  reason  is  here  assigned  for  this  faithful  ministry :  one  that  has

Blways  been  in  force,  since  human  nature  has  always  been  the  same.    Men's  own

inclinations  will  become  the  guide  of  their  conduct  concerning  truth  and  duty.

Because  sound  or  salutary  teaching  about  their  own  errors  and  sins  is  abasing  to

their  pride  and  crucifying  to  their  selfish  passions,  it  will  not  be  endured.    Yet

their  minds  crave  stimulus,  and  even  their  moral  natures  demand  some  opiate.

Hence  they  will  resort  to  various  so-called  teachers,  in  order  to  obtain  fancies  that

please  and  rules  of  life  that  suit  their  native  tastes.    And  the  effect  of  this  will  be

that  they  turn  themselves  away  from  truth  to  falsehood,  and  are  at  last  given

up  of  God  to  the  fixed  delusion  of  believing  a  lie,  to  their  own  perdition.     The

picture  is  sad  indeed,  and  common  as  sad,  in  this  as  in  every  century  and  land.

None  believe  so  wildly,  and  none  are  so  hopelessly  hardened,  as  those  who  finally

reject  the  saving  truth  of  God.     {J.  G.  Butler,  D.D.)        Smooth  things  preferred  .—

Edward  Irving  found  no  favour  as  a  preacher  in  the  commencement  of  his  ministry.

After  various  disappointments.  Dr.  Chalmers  heard  and  appreciated  him,  and

invited  him  to  be  his  assistant  in  Glasgow.    Irving,  in  astonishment  and  doubt,

replied :  •'  I  will  preach  to  them  if  you  think  fit,  but  if  they  bear  with  my  preaching

they  will  be  the  first  people  who  have  borne  with  it. "    Dislike  to  the  truth : — Aristotle

writeth  that  vultures  are  killed  with  oil  of  roses.      Sweet  smells  enrage  tigers.

Swine  cannot  live  in  some  parts  of  Arabia,  saith  Pliny,  by  reason  of  the  pleasant

Bcent  of  aromatical  trees  there  growing  in  every  wood.    (J.    Trapp.)        Sound

doctriru  forsaken: — 1.  The  grounds  of  their  apostasy — viz.,  their  hatred  of  the

truth ;    they  will  not  endure  sound  doctrine ;   they  will  reject  it    and   cast   it

behind  their  backs ;   they  hate  and  abhor  it.     They  look  upon  it  as  a  grievous

burden,  as  Israel  did   upon  the   doctrine  and    visions    of    the    prophets    (Jer.

xiii.  34,  36).     It  is  not  so  much  they  cannot,  but  they  will  net  endure  sound

doctrine ;    they  love  their  lusts  above  the  law,  and  therefore  they  hate  him

that   reproves  in  the  gates.     Errors  they  can  tolerate,  and  superstition   they

can   tolerate,  but  the  truth  they  cannot  bear.      2.   A  second  ground  of   their

apostasy  is  their  delight  in  false  teachers ;  they  so  dote  on  them,  that  one  or  two

will  not  content  them,  they  must  have  heaps  of  them.     They  love  their  lusts,  and

therefore  they  seek  out  for  such  teachers  as  may  not  disquiet  them.   They  witt  ingly

and  willingly  suffer  themselves  to  be  deluded  by  them.    The  word  signifies — (1)  An

earnest  desire  of    getting    such  teachers.     (2)  It   notes    an  indiscreet   and  con-

insed  gathering  together  of  such  a  multitude  of  teachers  without  wit  or  reason,

without  any  respect  either  to  their  life  or  learning,  head  nor  tail.     The  disciples

ereate  their  doctors,  the  lusts  of  their  followers  are  their  call.     3.  A  third  cause  of

their  apostasy  is  that  innate  malice   and  inbred  concupiscence  which   is  in  the

hearts  of  men.  But  the  word  in  the  original  is  "lusts,"  which  implies,  not  a  simple

desire  or  sudden  motion,  but  a  vehement,  ardent,  earnest  desire  and  pursuit  of

a  thing.    4.  They  have  itching  ears ;  this  is  another  reason  why  they  seek  out  for

false  teachers ;  they  love  not  such  as  deal  plainly  and  faithfully  with  them,  they

must  have  such  as  please  their  humours,  tickle  their  fancies  with  novelties  and

curiosities,  but  they  must  in  no  wise  touch  their  vices.    5.    Here  is  the  issue  and

eonaequences  of  their  contempt  of  the  truth — viz.,  the  loss  of  truth,  and  following

fables.     This  is  the  devil's  method.     First  he  stops  the  ear  against  sound  doctrine,

and  then  he  opens  it  to  error.     Like  a  cruel  thief,  he  draws  the  soul  out  of  the

right  road  into  some  wood,  by-lane  or  corner,  and  there  binds,  robs,  and  rifles  it.


CHAP.  IV.]  17.  TIMOTHY.  325

1.  God  not  only  knoweth  what  men  do  at  present,  and  what  they  have  done,  but
what  they  will  do  in  time  to  come.  He  tells  Timothy  here  what  will  be  done  many
years  after  he  is  dead  and  gone.  2.  The  more  perfidious  the  world  is,  and  the
more  false  teachers  abound,  the  more  careful  must  Christ's  ministers  be  to  oppose
them  by  preaching  sound  doctrine.  The  badness  of  the  times  approaching  must
make  us  to  redeem  the  present  season.  The  sun  will  not  always  shine ;  tempests
will  arise,  and  the  night  will  come  when  no  man  can  work.  Those  that  reverence
Moses  to-day,  to-morrow  are  murmuring  against  him  (Exod.  xiv.  ult.,  and  xv.  14).
3.  Saving  doctrine  is  sound  doctrine.  4.  Unsound  persons  cannot  endure  sound  doc-
trine. It  is  salt  which  searcheth  men's  sores  and  puts  them  to  pain.  It  is  light  which
these  sore  eyes  cannot  endure,  nor  these  thieves  abide.  They  do  evil,  and  therefore
they  hate  the  light  (John  iii.  20).  They  do  not  only  fear,  but  hate  the  light.  They
cannot  endure  to  have  the  law  preached,  their  consciences  searched,  nor  their  sins
discovered.  But  as  for  sound  men,  they  love  sound  doctrine ;  they  desire  it  (Psa.
xliii.  3).  They  come  to  it  (John  iii.  21),  and  bless  God  for  it  (1  Sam.  xxv.  32,  33).
6.  In  the  last  days  there  will  be  many  false  teachers.  There  will  not  be  one
or  two,  but  there  will  be  heaps  of  them,  the  world  will  swarm  with  them.  Men  will
have  variety  of  lusts,  and  those  call  for  variety  of  teachers  to  uphold  them.  Good
men,  and  especially  good  ministers,  are  rare,  they  are  one  of  a  thousand  (Job  xxxiii.
23),  but  wicked  ones  abound ;  there  is  much  dross,  but  little  gold ;  much  chaff,
but  Httle  wheat ;  many  weeds,  few  good  flowers.  If  the  devU  have  any  work  to  do,
he  wants  no  agents  to  effect  it.  If  men  once  set  open  their  doors,  they  shall  not  want
deceivers.  When  men  slight  truth  they  shall  have  teachers  which  shall  be  God's
executioners  to  bind  them  and  blind  them,  and  lead  them  into  error.  6.  Observe,
as  all  other  parts  of  man,  so  amongst  the  rest  the  ear  hath  its  diseases.  Salt  is
fitter  for  such  than  oil :  though  it  be  more  searching,  yet  it  is  more  sovereign.
This  itching  disease  was  never  so  common  as  in  our  days.  There  is  a  sinful
spiritual  itch  upon  the  soul  which  is  sevenfold — viz. ,  an  itch  of — (1)  Novelty.  (2)
Curiosity.  (3)  Singularity.  (4)  Popularity.  (5)  Flattery.  (6)  Disputing.  (7)
Quarrelling.  (T.  Hall,  B.D.)  Application  in  preaching  objected  to  : — A  farmer
went  to  hear  John  Wesley  preach.  The  farmer  was  not  a  converted  man ;  he  cared
little  about  religion  ;  on  the  other  hand,  he  was  not  what  we  call  a  bad  man.  His
attention  was  soon  excited  and  riveted.  John  said  he  should  take  up  three  topica
of  thought — he  was  speaking  greatly  about  money.  His  first  head  was,  •'  Get  all
you  can."  The  farmer  nudged  a  neighbour  and  said,  "  This  is  strange  preaching.
I  never  heard  the  like  of  this  before.  This  is  very  good.  Ton  man  has  got  things
in  him  ;  it  is  admirable  preaching."  John  discoursed  of  "  Industry,"  "Activity,"
"Living  to  purpose,"  and  reached  his  second  division,  which  was,  "Save  all  yoa
can."  The  farmer  became  more  excited.  "  Was  there  ever  anything  like  this  ?  "
he  said.  Wesley  denounced  thriftlessness  and  waste,  and  he  satirised  the  wilful
wickedness  which  lavishes  in  luxury ;  and  the  farmer  rubbed  his  hands,  and  he  thought,
"  All  this  have  I  been  from  my  youth  up  " ;  and  what  with  getting,  and  what  with
hoarding,  it  seemed  to  him  that  "  salvation  had  come  to  his  house."  But  Wesley
advanced  to  his  third  head,  which  was,  "  Give  all  you  can."  "  Ay  dear,  ay  dear,"
sadd  the  farmer;  "  he  has  gone  and  spoilt  it  all."  There  was  now  no  further  point  of
contact,  no  interest  in  the  farmer's  mind.  (Preacher's  Lantern.)  Itching  ears. —
Curious  hearers  : — Some  come  to  the  Word  preached,  not  so  much  to  get  grace,  as  to
enrich  themselves  with  notions — "  Itching  ears  "  (ver.  3).  Austin  confesseth  that
before  his  conversion  he  went  to  hear  St.  Ambrose,  rather  for  his  eloquence  than
for  the  spirituality  of  the  matter.  "  Thou  art  unto  them  as  a  very  lovely  song  of
one  that  hath  a  pleasant  voice,  and  can  play  well  on  an  instrument."  Many  come
to  the  Word  only  to  feast  their  ears ;  they  like  the  melody  of  the  voice,  the  mel-
lifluous sweetness  of  the  expression,  the  newness  of  the  notion  (Acts  xvii.  21).
This  is  to  love  the  garnishing  of  the  dish  more  than  the  food  ;  this  is  to  desire  to
be  pleased  rather  than  edified.  Like  a  woman  that  paints  her  face,  but  neglects
her  health,  so  they  paint  and  adorn  themselves  with  curious  speculations,  but
neglect  their  souls'  health.  This  hearing  doth  neither  sanctify  the  heart,  nor  the
Sabbath,  (T.  Watson. )  Shall  be  turned  unto  fables. — Truth  hidden  when  neglected :
— From  these  words  we  learn  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  religious  truth,  and
therefore  such  a  thing  as  religious  error.  We  learn  that  religious  truth  is  one,
and  therefore  that  all  views  of  religion  but  one  are  wrong.  And  we  learn,  moreover,
that  so  it  was  to  be  that  professed  Christians,  forgetting  this,  should  turn  away
their  ears  from  the  one  truth,  and  be  turned,  not  to  one,  but  to  many  fables.  This
is  a  most  solemn  thought,  and  a  perplexing  one.    However,  there  is  another  which,


826  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv.

though  it  ought  not  to  be  perplexing,  is  perplexing  still,  and  perhaps  has  greater
need  to  be  considered  and  explained — I  mean  that  men  of  learning  and  ability  are
so  often  wrong  in  religious  matters  also.  Now,  if  we  consult  St.  Paul's  Epistles  to
the  Corinthians,  we  shall  find  the  same  state  of  things  existing  even  in  the  first
age  of  Christianity.  Even  tbe  apostle  speaks  of  those  who  were  blind,
or  to  whom  his  Gospel  was  hid;  and  he  elsewhere  describes  them,  not  as  the
uneducated  and  dull  of  understanding,  but  as  the  wise  of  this  world,  the  scribe  and
the  disputer.  Does  not  our  Saviour  Himself  say  the  same  thing,  when  He  thanks
His  Father,  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth,  that  He  hath  hid  these  things  from  the  wise
and  prudent,  and  revealed  them  unto  babes?  Now  it  should  not  surprise  us
when  men  of  acute  and  powerful  understandings  more  or  less  reject  the  gospel,  for
this  reason :  that  the  Christian  revelation  addresses  itself  to  our  hearts,  to  our  lore
of  truth  and  goodness,  our  fear  of  sinning,  and  our  desire  to  gain  God's  favour ;
and  quickness,  sagacity,  depth  of  thought,  strength  of  mind,  power  of  comprehen-
sion, perception  of  the  beautiful,  power  of  language,  and  the  like,  though  they  are
excellent  gifts,  are  clearly  quite  of  a  different  kind  from  these  spiritual  excellences
— a  man  may  have  the  one  without  having  the  other.  This  should  be  kept  in
mind  when  Christians  are  alarmed,  as  they  sometimes  are,  on  hearing  instances
of  infidelity  or  heresy  among  those  who  read,  reflect,  and  inquire;  whereas,
however  we  may  mourn  over  such  instances,  we  have  no  reason  to  be  surprised
at  them.  It  is  quite  enough  for  Christians  to  be  able  to  show,  as  they  well  can,
that  belief  in  revealed  religion  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  highest  gifts  and
acquirements  of  mind,  that  men  even  of  the  strongest  and  highest  intellect  have
been  Christians ;  but  they  have  as  little  reason  to  be  perplexed  at  finding  other
men  of  ability  not  true  believers,  as  at  finding  that  certain  rich  men  are  not  true
believers,  or  certain  poor  men,  or  some  in  every  rank  and  circumstance  of  life.  A
belief  in  Christianity  has  hardly  more  connection  with  what  is  called  talent,
than  it  has  with  riches,  station,  power,  or  bodily  strength.  Now  let  me  explain
what  I  mean  by  a  further  remark.  Is  it  not  plain  that  earnestness  is  necessary  for
gaining  religious  truth  ?  On  the  other  hand,  is  it  not  a  natural  effect  of  ability
to  save  us  trouble,  and  even  to  tempt  us  to  dispense  with  it,  and  to  lead  us  to  be
Indolent?  Do  not  we  see  this  even  in  the  case  of  children— the  more  clever  are
the  more  idle,  because  they  rely  on  their  own  quickness  and  power  of  apprehension  ?
Is  indolence  the  way  to  gain  knowledge  from  God  ?  Though  there  is  no  art
or  business  of  this  world  which  is  learned  without  time  and  exertion,  yet  it  is
commonly  conceived  that  the  knowledge  of  God  and  our  duty  will  come  as  il
by  accident  or  by  a  natural  process.  Men  go  by  their  feelings  and  likings ;  they
take  up  what  is  popular,or  what  comes  first  to  hand.  They  think  it  much  if  they
now  and  then  have  serious  thoughts,  if  they  now  and  then  open  the  Bible ;  and
their  minds  recur  with  satisfaction  to  such  seasons,  as  if  they  had  done  some  very
great  thing,  never  remembering  that  to  seek  and  gain  religious  truth  is  a  long  and
systematic  work.  And  others  think  that  education  will  do  everything  for  them,  and
that  if  they  learn  to  read,  and  use  religious  words,  they  understand  religion  itself.
And  others,  again,  go  so  far  as  to  maintain  that  exertion  is  not  necessary  for
discovering  the  truth.  They  say  that  religious  truth  is  simple  and  easily  acquired ;
that  Scripture,  being  intended  for  all,  is  at  once  open  to  all,  and  that  if  it  had
difficulties,  that  very  circumstance  would  be  an  objection  to  it.  And  others,  again,
maintain  that  there  are  difficulties  in  religion,  and  that  this  shows  that  it  is  an
indifferent  matter  whether  they  seek  or  not  as  to  those  matters  which  are  difficult.
In  these  and  other  ways  do  men  deceive  themselves  into  a  carelessness  about
religious  truth.  And  is  not  all  this  varied  negligence  sufficient  to  account  for  the
varieties  of  religious  opinion  which  we  see  all  around  us?  How  are  the  sheep
of  Christ's  flock  scattered  abroad  in  the  waste  world !  What  religious  opinion
can  be  named  which  some  men  or  other  have  not  at  some  time  held  ?  All  are
equally  confident  in  the  truth  of  their  own  doctrines,  though  the  many  must
be  mistaken.  In  this  confusion  let  us  look  to  ourselves,  each  to  himself.  There
must  be  a  right  and  a  wrong,  and  no  matter  whether  others  agiee  with  us  or  not,
it  is  to  us  a  solemn  practical  concern  not  to  turn  away  our  ears  from  tbe  truth.
Let  not  the  diversity  of  opinion  in  the  world  dismay  you,  or  deter  you  from  seeking
all  your  life  long  true  wisdom.  It  is  not  a  search  for  this  day  or  that,  but  as  you
should  ever  grow  in  grace,  so  should  you  ever  grow  also  in  the  knowledge  of  onr
Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  (^* Plain  Sermons  by  Contributors  to  •  Tracttfor  the
Time$."')


CHAP.  IV.]  II.  TIMOTHY,  827

Yer.  5.  But  watch  thou  In  all  things. — 1.  Bat  watch  thon.    The  apostasy  and
looseness  of  the  times  we  live  in  must  make  as  the  more  watchful.    Their  falla
must  be  our  fears ;  their  levity  must  quicken  us  to  constancy,  and  their  negligence
must  quicken  our  diligence  in  keeping  the  watch  of  the  Lord.    2.  Good  men  desire
the  Church's  good  after  their  departure.    Paul  is  dying,  yet  he  commands  Timothy
to  improve  his  talents  for  the  Church's  good  when  himself  was  dead.     Moses,
before  he  dies,  prays  the  Lord  to  set  up  a  fit  ruler  instead  (Num.  xxviii.  16,  17).
Wicked  men  care  not  what  becomes  of  the  world,  when  they  are  dead  and  gone
let  heaven  and  earth  come  together,  and  all  be  in  confusion,  they  care  not.    But
good  men  have  public  spirits.    3.  As  all  persons,  so  ministers  especially  must
watch.    The  devil  hath  a  special  spite  at  them  ;  he  commands  his  agents,  as  the
king  of  Aram  did  his  followers,  to  fight  neither  with  small  nor  great,  but  against
the  king  of  Israel;  so  he  bends  all  his  strength  against  the  miuisleis  of  Israel.
(1)  The  better  the  man,  the  more  watchful  must  he  be.    The  pirate  sets  on  the
laden  ship,  and  the  thief  upon  the  wealthiest  traveller.    But  we  must  watch  as
pastors  too,  and  discover  wolves  that  would  destroy  the  fiock.    (2)  We  must  watch
at  all  times,    (a)  In  prosperity,  as  pigeons  when  they  fare  best  fear  most.     (&)
Watch  in  adversity,  the  devil  is  busy  then  in  laying  snares,  as  the  fowler  doth  for
birds  in  frosty  weather.     (3)  In  all  places,  in  public  and  private,  at  home  and
abroad ;  the  world  is  fuU  of  snares.     (4)  Watch  in  all  things,  so  runs  the  text.
(5)  Watch  against  all  sins.     We  carry  about  us  a  proneness  to  all  sin.     (6)  Watch
over  all  thy  senses ;  stop  thine  ears ;  make  a  covenant  with  thine  eyes  (Job.  xxxi.  1).
Set  a  watch  before  thy  mouth.     The  whole  soul  is  out  of  order,  and  therefore  wa
must  set  a  guard  upon  all  its  faculties.    4.  Ministers  especially  must  be  hardy  men.
We  are  called  soldiers,  shepherds,  watchmen,  husbandmen,  all  which  must  endure
summer's  heat  and  winter's  frost.     (1)  We  must  endure  hardship  in  our  prepa-
ratory studies ;  we  must  give  up  ourselves  to  reading,  study  and  prayer.     (2)  Ha
must  endure  hardship  in  the  actual  performance  of  his  duty.     (3)  Most  properly
and  genuinely  this    hardship  in  the  text  consists  in   a  patient   undergoing  of
those  injuries  and  oppositions  which  we  must  expect  from  an  ungrateful  world.
(4)  The  Lord  Himself  sometimes  is  pleased  to  exercise  us,  and  to  inure  us  to
hardship,  that  we  may  be  the  fitter  for  His  service.     But  let  us,  like  good
soldiers  of  Christ,  endure  hardship — (a)  Patiently,     (b)  Courageously,     (c)  Con-
stantly.    6.  The  ministry  is  a  work.     The  sweat  of  the  brow  is  nothing  to  that
of  the  brain;  besides  the  dangers  we  are  liable  to  for  our  work's  sake.     6.  Do
the  work  or  service  of  an  evangelist.    Observe,  ministers  are  servants,  and  their
office  is  service.     7.  Of  an  evangelist.    Observe,  ministers  must  preach  the  gospel.
We  must  publish  the  glad  tidings  of  a  Saviour  (what  in  us  lieth  to  all  the  world) ;
this  is  to  do  the  work  of  an  evangelist,  viz.,  soundly  and  sincerely  to  publish  the
gospel.     8.  Make  full  proof  of  thy  ministry.     Ministers  must  fully  and  faithfully
discharge  all  the  duties  of  their  calling.   (T.  Hall,  B.D. )      Christian  watchfulness  : —
None  are  so  likely  to  maintain  watchful  guard  over  their  hearts  and  lives  as  those  who
know  the  comfort  of  living  in  near  communion  with  God.    They  feel  their  privilege
and  will  fear  losing  it.    They  will  dread  falling  from  their  high  estate,  and  marring
their  own  comfort  by  bringing  clouds  between  themselves  and  Christ.    He  that  goes
on  a  journey  with  a  little  money  about  him  takes  little  thought  of  danger,  and
cares  little  how  late  he  travels.     He,  on  the  contrary,  that  carries  gold  and  jewels,
will  be  a  cautious  traveller:  he  will  look  well  to  his  roads,  his  horses,  and  his
company,  and  run  no  risks.    The  fixed  stars  are  those  that  tremble  most.    The
man  that  most  fully  enjoys  the  light  of  God's  countenance,  will  be  a  man
tremblingly  afiaid  of  losing  its  blessed  consolations,  and  jealously  fearful  of  doing
anything  to  grieve  the  Holy  Ghost.    {Bishop  Ryle.)        Endure  afflictions. — En-
durance of  hardship : — Some  dyes  cannot  bear  the  weather,  but  alter   colour
presently ;  but  there  are  others  that,  having  something  that  gives  a  deeper  tincture,
will  hold.    The  graces  of  a  true  Christian  hold  out  in  all  sorts  of  weathers,  in
winter  and  summer,  prosperity  and  adversity,  when  superficial  counterfeit  holiness
will  give  out.    (it.  Sibbes.)      Ministerial  hardship : — I  board  with  a  poor  Scotsman  ;
his  wife  can  talk  scarcely  any  English.     My  diet  consists  mostly  of  hasty-pudding,
boiled  com,  and  bread  baked  in  ashes,  and  sometimes  a  little  meat  and  butter.     My
lodging  is  a  little  heap  of  straw,  laid  upon  some  boards,  a  little  way  from  the
ground ;  for  it  is  a  long  room,  without  any  floor,  that  I  lodge  in.     My  work  is
exceedingly  hard  and  difficult.     I  travel  on  foot  a  mile  and  a  half  in  the  worst  of
roads  almost  daily  and  back  again ;  for  I  live  so  far  from  my  Indians.     I  have  not
seen  an  Enghsh  person  this  month.    These  and  many  other  uncomfortable  cir-


828  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  it

camstances  attend  me ;  and  yet  my  spiritual  conflicts  and  distresses  so  far  exceed
all  these  that  I  scarce  think  of  them,  but  feel  as  if  I  were  entertained  in  the
most  sumptuous  manner.  The  Lord  grant  that  I  may  learn  to  endure  hardness  aa
a  good  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ  1  {David  Br ainerd.)  Do  the  work  of  an  evangelist. —
The  work  of  an  evangelist : — We  fancy  we  still  see  Dr.  Wardlaw  standing  in  the
pulpit  and  beseeching  the  newly-ordained  pastor  to  approve  himself  in  all  things
as  the  faithful  servant  of  God.  Some  of  his  sentences  still  linger  in  our  recol-
lection— "Oh,  my  brother!"  he  said,  "never  forget  that  the  greatest  triumph
which  can  be  accomplished  on  earth  is  the  conversion  of  a  soul ;  and  a  minister'a
labours  are  never  so  highly  honoured  as  when  men  are  born  of  God  through  his
instrumentality.  It  may  be  of  importance  to  polish  the  jewel  after  it  has  been
found,  but  the  chief  thing  is  to  dig  it  out  of  the  mine.  It  may  be,  and  it  is,
important  to  dress  up  the  stone  for  the  front  of  the  building,  but  he  does  the
greatest  work  who  excavates  it  from  the  quarry  in  which  it  lay  imbedded." '
{Evangelical  Repository.)  An  earnest  evangelist : — While  waiting  on  one  occasion
in  a  gentleman's  parlour,  Vassar  opened  conversation  with  his  wife,  a  very  fashion-
able and  proud-looking  lady,  who  was  sitting  in  the  room.  With  great  concern  he
began  at  once  to  urge  the  necessity  of  the  new  birth  and  immediate  acceptance  of
Christ  upon  her.  She  was  thunderstruck,  and  protested  that  she  did  not  believe  in
any  of  those  things.  Then  followed  a  most  fervent  appeal,  texts  of  Scripture,
warning  against  rejecting  Christ,  the  certainty  of  a  wrath  to  come  for  any  found  in
impenitence,  till  my  friend  said  he  was  fairly  alarmed  at  the  boldness  of  the  assault.
Suddenly  the  gentleman  came  in  for  whom  he  was  waiting,  and  called  him  out.
When  the  gentleman  returned  to  his  wife,  she  said,  "  There  has  been  an  old  man
here  talking  with  me  about  religion."  "  Why  did  you  not  shut  him  up  ?  "  he  asked
giTiffly.  "  He  is  one  of  those  parsons  that  you  cannot  shut  up,"  was  her  reply.
"  If  I  had  been  here,"  he  said,  "  I  would  have  told  him  very  quickly  to  go  about
his  business."  "  If  you  had  seen  him,  you  would  have  thought  he  was  about  his
business,"  was  her  answer.  {Memoir  of  Uncle  John  Vassar.)  Make  full  proof
of  thy  ministry. — Fulfil  thy  ministry: — This  word  "ministry"  does  not  refer
exclusively  to  what  we  are  accustomed  to  call  the  Christian  ministry,  meaning  the
teaching  and  pastoral  office  in  the  Church.  That  is  but  one  of  ten  thousand  forms
of  ministration  or  service,  which  may  be  rendered  to  our  fellows  at  the  call  of  God.
To  minister  to  any  one,  is  to  help  or  serve  him  ;  and  so  every  course  of  action  by
which  we  can  help  and  serve  others  is  a  ministry,  and  every  such  service  is  truly  a
Christian  work.  And  as  we  cannot  all  render  the  same  service,  but  can  each  render
particular  kinds  of  service  to  particular  people — relatives,  friends  or  neighbours —
that  particular  description  of  service  which  each  of  us  can  render  is  our  "  ministry."
It  is  a  ministry,  the  object  of  whose  functions  lies  without  us,  in  contrast  to
activities  which  centre  in  self  as  their  object.  And  it  is  "  thy  ministry,"  because
it  is  that  particular  form  of  helpful  activity  which  it  is  open  to  each,  separately,  to
prosecute.  Paul's  was  different  from  Timothy's,  and  neither  has  belonged  to
anybody  since ;  nor  will  your  ministry,  or  mine,  ever  be  allotted  to  anybody  else  ;
for  no  one  will  be  situated  as  we  are,  or  have  exactly  our  opportunities.  But,  in
some  respects,  our  ministry  is  like  Timothy's  and  Paul's.  It  is  directed  to  the  same
objects  :  the  spread  of  Christ's  truth  and  Christ's  Church.  And  we  are  summoned
to  it  by  the  same  Divine  Lord,  to  whom  also  we  shall  render  an  account  of  its
discharge.  All  the  high,  sublime  elements,  then,  which  belonged  to  their  ministry
or  service  in  life,  belong  to  ours,  though  ours  may  take  less  striking  outward  forms,
and  be  rendered  with  no  eye  but  God's  to  watch  our  performance  of  it.  The
sublime  considerations,  moving  to  fidelity  in  it,  which  Paul  urged  on  Timothy,
bear,  then,  on  us.  "  I  charge  thee  before  God,  make  full  proof  of  " — thoroughly
fulfil — "thy  ministry."  {T.  M.  Herbert,  M.A.)  The  appeal  of  the  elder  to  the
younger  generation : — In  the  charge  of  the  aged  Paul  to  the  young  disciple  Timothy,
there  peems  to  be  an  appeal  which,  though  unexpressed,  is  perpetually  addressed
from  the  elder  generation  to  the  younger.  What  the  one  old  man  said  to  the  single
young  one,  all  Christ's  servants,  whose  work  is  nearly  done,  seem  to  say  to  all
those  whose  work  is  just  beginning.  "  Fulfil  thy  ministry,  for  I  am  now  ready  to
be  offered."  Choose  what  time  in  the  world's  history  you  like,  you  will  always  find
those  two  classes  well  represented ;  for  it  is  always  true  that  "  one  generation
passeth  away,  and  another  cometh."  And  while  the  old  are  always  passing
to  their  rest,  and  the  young  rising  to  do  their  parts,  the  great  aims  for  which
Christian  men  strive  and  pray,  and  the  great  institution  of  the  Church,  through
which  they  further  them,  lives  on  ;  and  it  is,  or  should  be,  the  concern  of  each


CHAP.  IT.]  II.  TIMOTHY.  829

generation  to  hand  it  down  invigorated  and  enlarged,  to  their  successors.  But  if
that  is  to  be  done,  these  successors  must  be  ready  to  take  up  these  toils  and  aims ;
to  adapt  them  to  the  needs  of  the  coming  time,  and  engage  in  them  with  a  spirit
at  least  as  devoted  as  that  which  their  fathers  showed.  So  they  seem  to  hear
from  their  father,  "Fulfil  thy  ministry,  for  I  am  now  ready  to  be  offered."  Now  if
we  take  our  own  time,  and  apply  to  it  these  considerations,  which  hold  good  of
every  time,  what  shall  we  say  ?  Now,  as  ever,  there  is  a  passing  and  a  rising
generation.  And  the  great  Church  and  kingdom  of  Christ,  which  has  been  in  the
hands  of  the  fathers,  will  soon  be  in  the  Lands  of  the  children.  That  glorious
institution  will  live,  though  the  hands  which  now  sustain  it  decay.  But  young
hands  must  receive  it  from  the  failing  hold  of  the  elders,  and  by  their  efforts
it  must  be  upheld.  Are  they  ready  to  take  it  ?  Are  they  prepared  to  "  fulfil  their
ministry,"  because  their  predecessors  will  soon  leave  the  task  in  their  hands?
(Ibid,)  Fulfilling    one'$    ministry : —Sever&l    ancient    rulers    did    not    find

management  of  their  dominions  sufficiently  burdensome,  and  so  one  of  them
became  a  fiddler,  another  a  poet,  and  another  an  orator.  The  world  never  had  a
worse  fiddler  than  Nero,  nor  a  more  wearisome  poet  than  Dionysius,  nor  a  more
blundering  orator  than  Caligula  ;  and  we  might  fearlessly  assert  also  that  the  world
never  had  worse  princes  than  these  three.  Such  instances  are  exceedingly  in-
structive, and  remind  us  of  the  sculptor's  advice  to  the  cobbler  to  stick  to  his  last.
Each  tub  had  better  stand  on  its  own  bottom  ;  for  when  tubs  take  to  rolling  about
they  spill  all  that  they  contain,  be  it  either  wine  or  water.     (C  H.  Spurgeon.)

Vers.  6-8.  I  am  now  ready  to  be  offered. — The  law  of  sacrifice : — The  interest  of
the  Second  Epistle  to  Timothy  is  altogether  exceptional.  It  is  the  interest  of  a
heart-moving  tragedy ;  and  yet  the  tragic  gloom  which  rolls  above  its  heavens
is  relieved,  is  almost  illumined  with  golden  glory  by  a  strain  and  temper  of
pathetic  tenderness.  It  is,  as  far  as  we  are  concerned,  the  last  earthly  utterance
of  an  altogether  remarkable  man ;  the  last  will  and  testament,  so  to  speak,  of
one  in  whose  character  commanding  ability,  simple  and  unswerving  purpose,
unflagging  energy,  unselfish  enthusiasm,  and  warm  and  wide  and  sunny  sympathy
were  combined  in  a  degree  unrivalled  in  the  history  of  our  race.  And  then,
too,  St.  Paul,  as  he  writes,  may  indeed  be  "the  aged,"  but  age  can  scarcely
slacken  power  in  such  a  soul,  and  here,  consequently,  he  wins  the  unforbidden
homage  we  pay  spontaneously  to  one  who,  in  the  fullest  vigour  and  energy  of  life,
looks  straight  and  calmly  into  the  eyes  of  death.  The  text  is,  I  suppose,  one  of
the  best-known  verses  in  the  Bible,  an  utterance  of  profound  humility  and  lofty
courage  and  unvarying  truth;  it  is  to  us  altogether  interesting — interesting,  doubtless,
because  it  reveals  the  character  of  such  a  one  as  Paul ;  but  more,  a  word  of  world-
wide import,  for  at  such  moments  great  men  are  themselves  revelations.  Paul  was
alone  in  a  sense  in  which  he  had  never  been  before.  The  dear  Churches — that  is,
the  dear  souls,  loved  with  such  strength  and  joy  as  was  in  him  to  love  with — were
far  away  ;  their  faces  he  would  never  gaze  upon  again ;  the  old  places  were  gone ;
no  more  would  he  see  the  Holy  City  so  rich  in  memories,  no  more  the  long  blue
line  of  the  Abarim  bounding  the  land  of  the  chosen  race,  no  more  the  jagged  hills
of  his  native  Tarsus,  no  more  the  dancing  waters  of  the  blue  iEgean,  no  more  the
Acroceraunian  crests,  only  lately  marking  the  path  of  his  pilgrimage  from  Corinth
to  Rome.  Nature  had  closed  her  doors  to  the  wanderer ;  from  his  prison  on  the
Esquiline,  or  from  the  cave  near  the  Capitol,  or  wherever  it  was  that,  in  their  last
da}  8,  his  eyes  closed  and  opened  to  the  light  of  the  Eoman  summer,  those  eyes  were
straining  beyond  even  objects  of  human  affection  to  the  unimagined  wonders  of
another  world ;  he  was  looking  forward.  At  such  a  time  it  is  that  great  natures
fall  back  upon  the  principles  which  have  governed  life ;  and  to  us  their  utterances
then,  are  supremely  interesting,  for  such  principles  are  the  exhibition,  in  fact,  of
universal  law.  St.  Paul,  in  his  words  illustrated  by  his  life,  is  indeed  proclaiming
a  fundamental  law  of  the  Church  of  his  Master,  "The  Reign  of  Lawl"  Need
I  remind  you  that  of  that  realm  we  are  all  the  subjects  ?  It  is  fundamental,  it
explains,  as  it  has  guided,  the  Church's  influence  ;  it  teaches,  as  it  has  trained,
souls  to  tread  the  only  way  of  lasting  usefulness.  It  applies  to  all.  It  is  not  the
heritage  of  the  peerless  apostle,  but  also  the  rule  of  the  quiet  Christian  ;  obedience
to  it  decides  indeed  the  value  of  our  choice  in  crises  of  destiny,  but  it  also  ennobles
the  "  trivial  round"  of  daily  life.  Here,  indeed,  it  is  thrown  out  in  vivid  colour
from  a  dark  background  of  death ;  here,  indeed,  in  full  force,  it  is  borne  in  upon
the  mind,  because  it  comes  as  no  abstract  statement,  but  the  life-rule  written  in  the


330  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it.

heart's  blood  of  a  living  and  a  dying  man.  In  him  it  found  a  wonderful  complete*
ness:  it  is  the  fundamental  law  of  the  Church  of  Jesus — the  Law  of  Sacrifice.
And  now,  I  ask,  "  How  for  Paul  was  the  grave  transfigured?  "  and  the  answer  is,
"  By  the  same  power  by  which  life  was  governed,  by  the  law  of  sacrifice."  What,
then,  is  sacrifice?  By  sacrifice,  speaking  morally  and  spiritually,  as  now,  I  mean
this  :  The  willing  surrender  of  legitimate  desire  in  submission  to  a  sovereign,  an
authoritative  claim;  and  the  interest  of  the  text  lies  in  tliis,  not  only  that  it
expresses  the  rich  result  of  that  law  operating  in  its  completeness  in  a  human  soul,
but  also,  it  limits  the  stages  of  trial  by  which  such  completeness  was  achieved.
What,  let  us  ask,  were  some  at  least  of  those  stages?  1.  First,  then,  he  had
wakened  up  to  the  reality  and  requirements  of  the  spiritual  life.  Man  is  a  creature
of  two  worlds,  but  of  one  sphere  of  being ;  standing  he  is  within  the  boundary  of
time,  but  one  foot  is  planted  across  the  frontier  of  eternity.  Little  we  see  of  man's
real  working,  just  here  and  there  a  hint  is  given  by  the  definite  act  which  meets
the  senses,  excites  our  blame  or  sets  the  chorus  of  praise  re-echoing  through  the
halls  of  history,  but  day  by  day  and  hour  by  hour  man's  spirit,  shrouded,  veiled
from  his  fellow  man,  is  at  work  in  the  spirit  sphere.  Now  to  waken  up  to  this,
and  to  the  consequent  requirements  of  duty  in  this  interior  life,  is  to  be  brought
under  the  law  of  sacrifice,  because  it  is  at  once  to  be  under  the  necessity  of  war,
•'  The  Prince  of  the  power  of  the  air,  the  spirit  that  now  worketh  in  the  children
of  disobedience,"  is  no  mere  tendency  to  wrong,  but  a  personal  spirit,  with  a
personal  power.  And  surely  it  has  been  the  experience  not  only  of  the  saints — the
giant  explorers  in  the  regions  of  spiritual  life — but  the  experience  of  earnest,
commonplace  children  of  God,  that  besides  their  struggle  with  their  own  corruption,
they  have  been  conscious  of  sudden  assaults,  of  well-timed  suggestions  of  sin,
alarming,  astounding,  distinctly  to  them  distinguishable  from  any  picture  of
imagination ;  painfully,  evidently  separated  from  themselves,  and  clearly  coming
•with  the  force  and  horror  of  the  agency  of  a  personal  tempter.  The  action  of
the  hierarchy  of  evil  was  indeed  perhaps  more  evident  to  the  Christians  when
St.  Paul  taught  and  lived  than  to  ourselves.  The  entire  imperial  system  of  Eome
might  well  appear  to  him  an  organisation  of  evil ;  and  indeed,  so  awfully  had  the
creature  forsaken  his  Creator — read  the  first  chapter  of  the  Eoman  Epistle  and
say  was  it  not  so  ? — ^that  that  splendid  fabric  sprung  from  the  genius  of  Pagan
civilisation  had  become  little  else  than  a  series  of  well-worked  agencies  of  sin.  It
is  true  that  the  life  of  the  second  Adam  permeating  the  race  of  the  Redeemed
has  made  of  modem  civilisation  a  very  different  story.  But  tell  me,  is  there
not  enough  in  modem  life  to  witness  to  the  presence  of  the  same  tremendous
power  ?  Can  you  open  your  newspaper  any  morning  without  being  impressed  by
the  fact  that  the  world  is  trying  to  get  rid  of  the  incubus  of  the  thought  of  God  ?
without  being  conscious  of  tones  of  thought  and  views  of  life  nowise  condemned  by
society  at  large,  which  would,  to  say  the  least,  have  shocked  apostles?  Is  there  not
an  air  of  unruffled  indifference,  or  a  tone  of  quiet  patronage  assumed  towards  moral
evil  which  give  the  lie  to  the  brave,  the  necessary  hostility  taught  as  in  the
Catechism  when  we  were  children  ?  Does  not  this  subtle  tolerance  of  sin  flow
through  society,  invade  the  Church,  deprave  the  mind?  Hence  men  lose  all
lense  of  the  severe  requirements  of  a  righteous  God,  because  they  have  first  lost
all  sense  of  His  character  of  severe  essential  holiness ;  hence,  young  men,  you
are  the  victims  (are  you  not?)  in  business  life  of  habits  of  language,  alliance
with,  almost  toleration  of,  which  you  feel  to  be  inconsistent  with  any  nobility
of  mind,  not  to  say  any  sincerity  of  Christian  character.  Ah  I  how  are  you  to
escape?  Certainly  not  without  struggle.  Eoused  to  the  facts,  roused  to  the  re-
quirements of  spiritual  life,  you  find  yourself  in  battle ;  self  must  be  denied,  duty
must  be  done,  strength  must  be  sought  (faithfulness  is  needed  in  sacraments  and
prayer — faithfulness,  too,  in  using  strength  when  given).  You  must  submit,  and
heartily,  to  the  law  of  sacrifice.  Spiritual  activity  on  the  side  of  right  and  truth
and  purity  and  duty — this  is  a  stage  towards  a  complete  achievement.  Paul  had
learned  it ;  whether  his  description  is  drawn  from  the  racecourse  or  the  battle  it
matters  not ;  he  had  learned  at  any  rate  the  necessity  of  struggle.  "I  have  fought
a  good  fight."  2.  It  is  well,  is  it  not,  to  awaken  to  the  mystery,  to  recognise
the  reality,  of  the  spiritual  world  ?  But  there  is  surely  a  farther  stage  for  the  way-
farer in  this  path  of  sacrifice.  What  shall  be  the  standard  to  measure  and  direct
the  struggle  of  life?  To  an  earnest  Christian  what  God  forbids  is  bad— unutterably,
inexcusably  bad.  Right  is  right  and  wrong  wrong,  without  palliation  or  possibility
of  compromise.    To  do  good  is  not  merely  wiser  than  to  do  ill;  it  is  the  place,


CHAP.  IT.]  II.  TIMOTHY,  831

calling,  need  of  the  oreatore  ;  wilful  sin,  Belf-chosen  evil,  is  the  damnable,  roinoas,
and  sorrowful  thing,  which  may  call  for  a  tribute  of  sadness  and  pity,  but  admits
of  no  defence.  Need  I  say  it  ?  this  necessary  revelation  of  God's  will  is  furnished
by  the  moral  law.  Conscience  speaks  first.  I  do  not  now  pause  to  define  its  office
or  assign  its  place,  or  dwell  upon  the  limits  of  its  dominion ;  only  let  me  remark  in
parenthesis — Obey  your  conscience,  respect  its  warnings,  listen  for  its  whispers,
submit  unhesitatingly  to  its  commands ;  you  will  be  all  the  wiser,  better  men.  Here
Paul  had  first  read  and  obeyed  the  will  of  God,  and  because  he  had  long  been
trained  in  that  sincere  and  accurate  submission,  he  was  ready,  when  the  face  of
Jesus  was  fashed  upon  him  from  the  flaming  heaven,  above  the  peaks  of  the  Hauran,
at  once  to  recognise,  and  unconditionally  to  obey.  The  prophets,  the  psalmists,
the  teachers  of  Israel  had  for  him  enlarged  upon  and  enforced  the  lessons  of  that
primal  instruction,  as  revelation  of  the  Christ,  and  the  New  as  well  as  Old  Testament
Scriptures  have  ever  since  done  for  us  all ;  but  for  him  and  for  each  since  his  time,
the  larger  laws  of  Divine  guidance  have  been  particularised  and  pointed  by  special

Erovidence  and  special  trials.  The  requirements  of  that  Will  are  often — at  least  to
uman  frailty — severe.  The  heart's  most  fierce  desires  are  not  most  easily
assuaged,  the  world's  most  prized  successes  are  not  most  surely  secured,  by  obedience
to  the  will  of  God.  No.  Splendid  indeed  the  results,  moral,  spiritual,  of  such
adherence  and  such  submission,  but  the  process  is  pain.  Honestly  and  earnestly  to
choose  that  standard  is  to  be  subject  to  the  law  of  sacrifice.  Paul  chose  it,  and,
like  him,  each  one  who  does,  fulfils,  though  it  be  in  pain,  an  allotted  mission.  "  I
have  finished,"  says  the  apostle,  "  the  course  marked  out  for  me."  3.  But  there
is  one  further  stage  of  conquest  dependent  upon  the  most  stem  self-discipline.  II
there  be  anything  that  a  man  would  seem  entitled  to  call  his  own,  it  is  his  thought.
Surely  in  thought,  at  least,  man  is  free ;  surely  "  I  can  think  what  I  hke,"  as  it  is
the  expression  of  a  natural  craving,  so  it  is  the  statement  of  a  truth.  Scarcely ;
for  thought,  if  untrained,  undisciplined,  and  unrepressed,  becomes  a  tyrant,  not  a
slave ;  and  thought,  which  shares  the  heritage  of  our  nature's  blight,  can  only  fulfil
its  intended  function  when  purified  by  submission  to  the  law  of  sacrifice.  My
brothers,  to  plant  the  footstep  of  your  thoughts  on  the  track  of  Divine  Bevelation,
to  refuse  to  them  the  by-paths  of  ungoverned  fancy,  to  restrain  them  in  their  wild
impulsive  leaps,  is  to  start  them,  nay,  far  to  advance  them,  on  the  journey  which
ends  in  God.  Be  sure  that  to  "  learn  obedience "  to  the  truths  of  the  Christian
Faith,  to  bathe  the  mental  habits  in  the  cleansing  waters  of  the  Spirit,  who  gives
light,  humility,  courage,  and  truth,  is  the  one  way  possible  for  emancipating  the
mind  from  the  thraldom  of  corruption;  but  to  do  this,  how  hard,  how  full  of
Borrow,  how  severe  at  times  the  trial  and  the  strain ;  ah  me  I  as  in  other  things,  in
this  also,  "obedience  is  learned  by  the  things"  we  "suffer."  To  leave  men's
criticism,  and  desire  the  Bevelation  of  God ;  to  quit  our  own  miserable  inquiries,
and  choose  the  path  of  the  Pathless  One;  to  watch  against  the  wilfulness  that
slights,  the  sin  that  weakens  our  power  of  believing ;  this,  as  it  is  an  evidence  of
strength,  and  even  of  stern  decision,  is  not  lacking  in  an  element  of  trial,  requires
submission  to  the  law  of  sacrifice.  "  Kept  the  Faith,"  mark  yon  ;  for  as  to  reach
the  path  needed  some  self-conquest,  so  to  keep  the  track  required  unflagging
earnestness  and  persevering  power.  To  submit  to  the  Faith,  in  such  an  one  as
Paul,  meant  moral  earnestness ;  to  keep  it  implied  moral  force  ;  for  him,  as  for  all
men,  to  govern  thought  by  God's  revelation  implies  obedience  to  the  law  of  sacrifice.
Paul,  I  say,  did  it,  did  it  utterly,  did  it  also  in  the  face  of  extremest  external
difficulty,  did  it  when  to  be  f^'^^hful  to  conviction  implied  fierce  persecution  and
inevitable  death ;  it  is  a  triumphant  climax  that  last  stage  of  struggle — "  I  have
kept  the  Faith."  So  the  saintly  soul  advanced  to  that  completeness  of  surrender
which  is  completeness  of  power,  and  finds  expression  in  the  text.  In  fact,  spiritual
activity,  a  creaturely  temper,  and  a  humble  mind,  were  the  stages  of  his  self-
sacrifice.  One  question  remains — Whence  came  its  impulse  ?  whence  its  snstaining
strength  ?  The  answer  is  easy.  It  came  whence  only  it  can  come,  from  super-
natural, but  personal  affection.  My  friends,  we  are  not  all  St.  Pauls:  very  much
the  reverse  usually,  almost  infinitely  short  of  him  in  spiritual  vigour,  most  of  us.
But  being  all  professed  disciples  of  Jesus  Christ,  God  demands  of  each  of  as  in  our
degree,  submission  to  the  law  of  sacrifice.  1.  We  are  under  special  trial  when  the
Boul  is  subject  to  the  illumination  of  some  new  truth.  A  light  comes — such  a
course  long  lived  is  wrong,  or  is  not  the  best.  We  must  obey,  but  to  tu — for
man  is  veiy  frail  and  only  human — this  is  sharp.  2.  Or  we  lose  something
yery  dear.     It  may  be  an  old  friendship,  it  may  be  an  old  friend ;  it  may  be


833  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (chap.  it.

old,  long-cherished,  long-loved  dreams;  it  may  be  that  the  mystery  of  the
freshness  of  eariy  life,  once  making  all  things  fresh,  has  fled.  There  is,
remember,  nothing  lost  without  a  something  gained,  if  the  soul  walk  by  this  law,
mind  this  rule.  3.  Or,  as  you  may  be  this  week,  as  you  and  I  have  often  been,
there  may  be  a  time  of  temptation.  How  sorely  some  of  you  are  tried  I  know.
How  not  seldom  England's  commercial  greatness  means  that  young  souls  must
often  choose  between  the  loss  of  place,  which  means  loss  of  maintenance — some-
times  too  for  wife  and  children  dearer  than  self — and  the  loss  of  peace  with  God.
This  I  am  not  forgetting.  Oh  brother,  tempted,  you  or  I,  to  wrong,  in  the  interests
of  self-advancement,  are  we  not  after  aU  only  victims  submitted  to  the  law  of
sacrifice  ?  Do  not  shrink.  It  is  severe  and  painful,  but  it  is  the  law  of  life.  4.  And
there  is  death.  True,  here  we  have  no  choice  ;  but  still,  when  that  comes,  how  we
shall  comport  ourselves  may  depend  in  very  large,  in  very  serious  measure,  on  our
habit  of  sacrifice  now.  Every  life,  believe  it,  to  be  trained  for  God,  for  goodness,
must  be  trained  by  sacrifice.  Every  work,  believe  it,  that  you  do  will  be  of  lasting
value  in  proportion  to  the  amount  of  sacrifice  entailed  in  doing.  In  fact,  it  is  by
submission  to  this  law  that  the  Church  teaches  you  how  to  use  the  world.  This
vorld  may  be  viewed  in  many  lights,  so  many-sided  it  is,  so  strange  1  For  instance,
it  is  a  burying-earth,  a  world  of  death,  a  huge  and  sombre  grave.  "  The  world  is
full  of  death  1  "  We  tread  on  the  dust  of  a  thousand  generations,  and  other
pilgrims,  children  of  our  children,  shall  tread  on  ours  when  we  lie  low  1  Stop  1  A
powerful  principle  can  transfigure  everything,  even  the  horror  of  death.  The  world
is  an  altar  of  sacrifice :  lives  have  been  lived,  and  therefore  deaths  have  been  died
of  abundant  fruitfulness  and  unending  power.  Why  ?  Because  these  souls,  which
live  each  an  endless  life,  have  expressed  themselves  in  sacrifice,  have  lost,  have
strangled  the  only  death-giving  principle,  the  principle  of  self,  in  undying  devotion
to  truth  and  holiness.  Further,  then :  the  world  is  the  vestibule  of  a  palace  of  com-
plete achievement.  However,  all  here  seems  stamped  with  imperfection,  branded
with  the  trade-mark  of  unfinished  labour,  yet  death,  on  such  terms,  is  in  truth  the
entrance  to  essential  life;  sacrifice,  the  birth-throe  of  a  spirit  satisfied.  (Canon  Knox
Little.)  Ready  to  he  offered  : — I.  Things  which  make  it  diffiouIiT  to  say  this.  1.
The  enjoyment  of  life.  2.  Attachment  to  friends.  3.  The  anticipated  pain  of  dissolu-
tion. 4.  Uncertainty  about  the  future.  II.  Things  which  makb  ix  east,  at  least
COMPARATIVELY,  TO  SAY  THIS.  1,  The  Bad  experience  of  life's  ills.  2.  The  con-
sciousness of  having  finished  one's  Ufe-work.  3.  The  pre-decease  of  Christian  friends.
4.  An  ever-nearing  and  enlarging  prospect  of  heaven's  glory.  (T.  Whitelaw,  D.D.)
Death  anticipated: — 1.  The  godly,  by  a  spiritual  instinct  and  sagacity,  foresee
their  ends;  so  did  Jacob  (Gen.  xlviii.  21),  and  Joshua  (xxiii.  14),  and  Christ  (John
xvii.  2),  and  Peter  (ii.  14).  They  always  watch  and  wait  for  their  Master's
coming.  Their  acts,  diseases,  and  disquietments  which  they  meet  withal  from
the  world  are  as  so  many  petty  deaths  unto  them.  A  man  that  dwells  in  an
old  crazy  house  where  the  walls  fall  down,  the  foundation  sinks,  the  pillars  bend,
and  the  whole  building  cracks,  concludes  such  a  house  cannot  long  stand.  As  for
the  wicked  they  are  insensible  and  secure,  and  though  grey  hairs,  which  are  signs
of  old  age  and  death  approaching,  be  here  and  there  upon  them  yet  they  know  it
not  (Hosea  vii.  9).  2.  Death  is  not  dreadful  to  good  men.  The  apostle  speaks  of  it
here  not  by  way  of  lamentation,  but  of  exultation.  Death  to  him  was  but  a
departing  from  one  room  to  another,  from  a  lower  room  to  a  higher,  from  earth  to
heaven,  from  troubles  to  rest,  from  mortality  to  immortality.  They  are  long  since
dead  to  the  world,  and  so  can  part  with  it  more  ea.  ly.  The  wicked  look  on  death
as  a  dreadful,  dismal  thing ;  but  God's  people  looking  on  it  through  the  spectacles
of  the  gospel,  see  it  to  be  a  conquered  enemy,  having  its  sting  taken  out  (Hosea  xiii.
15),  so  that  what  Agag  said  vainly  and  vauntingly,  a  Christian  may  speak  truly
and  seriously  :  "  The  bitterness  of  death  is  past"  (1  Sam.  xv.  32).  3.  The  soul  of
man  is  immortal.  Death  is  not  an  annihilation,  but  a  migration  of  the  soul  from
the  body  for  a  time.  4.  The  death  of  the  martyrs  is  a  most  pleasing  sacrifice  to
God.  6.  The  death  of  the  martyrs  doth  confirm  the  truth.  The  Church  is  God's
garden,  and  it  is  watered  and  enriched  by  the  blood  of  martyrs.  (T.  Hall,  B.D.)
Paul  the  martyr,  Chrittian,  conqueror : — I.  The  information  here  given  of  Paul's
DEATH  AB  A  MARTYR.  1.  He  looked  ou  his  death  as  an  offering  on  behalf  of  the
gospel.  2.  He  looked  on  his  death  as  a  departure  from  every  temporal  bondage.
II.  The  declaration  here  given  of  Paul's  labour  a8  a  Christlin.  1.  As  a
soldier  in  the  army.  2.  As  a  runner  in  a  race.  3.  As  a  faithful  servant  to  hia
Master.     III.   Tbb  declaration  here  oivek  or  Paul's  bbward  as  a  oomqubbob.


CHAP.  IT.)  11,  TIMOTHY,  833

I.  The  preciousness  of  this  reward.  2.  The  excellent  Giver  of  this  reward.  3.
The  solemn  time  of  obtaining  this  reward.  4.  The  liberality  of  the  Giver.  "Not
to  me  only,"  &c.  (M.  Jones.)  Looking  oxit  toward  heaven: — 1.  He  looks
downward  into  the  grave  (ver.  6)  whither  he  was  going,  and  there  he  sees
comfort.  2.  He  looks  backward  and  views  his  well-spent  life  with  joy  and
comfort,  and  in  a  holy  gloriation  breaks  forth,  "  I  have  fought  the  good  fight,"
&c.  3.  He  looks  upward,  and  there  he  sees  heaven  prepared  for  him.  But
doth  not  thiB  savour  of  vain-glory  and  spiritual  pride  ?  1.  Answer :  Not  at  all,
for  the  apostle  speaks  not  this  proudly,  as  if  he  had  merited  anything  at  the
hand  of  God.  2.  He  speaks  this  partly  to  comfort  Timothy,  and  to  encourage
him  to  walk  in  his  steps,  keeping  faith  and  a  good  conscience.  3.  To  encourage
himself  against  the  reproach  of  his  reproaching  violent  death,  he  eyes  that
heavenly  reward  and  that  crown  of  hfe  prepared  for  such  as  have  fought  the
good  fight  as  he  had  done.  (T.  Hall,  B.B.)  The  Christian's  course,  conflict,  and
crown: — I.  The  view  in  which  the  apostle  kepbesents  his  decease.  1.  He
expresses  neither  terror  nor  reluctance,  on  account  of  the  violent  nature  of  the
death  which  awaited  him,  but  speaks  of  it  calmly  as  a  sacrifice  and  offering  to  God.
His  last  and  most  solemn  testimony  would  thus  be  given  to  the  truths  of  God,
which  he  had  everywhere  proclaimed ;  and  his  blood,  when  poured  out,  would
simply  resemble,  as  his  words  imply,  the  mixture  of  blood  and  wine  which  was
poured  upon  the  altar  in  the  ancient  sacrifices.  His  death  would  merely  form  the
concluding  part  of  that  offering,  which  he  had  made  of  himself  to  the  service  of
his  Lord  ;  and  he  seemed  rather  to  welcome  than  to  vsithhold  the  termination  of
the  sacrifice.  The  decease  of  every  Christian  may  be  likewise  called  an  offering.
We  are  all  required  to  "  yield  ourselves  to  God  "  ;  to  present  ourselves  to  him  as
living  sacrifices  ;  and  in  our  dying  hour,  or  in  our  devout  preparations  for  it,  we
may  bear  our  testimony  to  His  perfections,  by  manifesting  our  firm  faith  in  His
promises  and  our  fuU  submission  to  his  will.  2.  But  the  apostle  here  speaks
farther  of  his  decease,  in  a  sense  still  more  applicable  to  that  of  all  men ;  *'  the
time  of  my  departure  "  (or  as  his  words  directly  signify,  "  the  time  of  my  loosing
anchor  ")  "  is  at  hand."  Thus  he  teaches  us  to  take  a  much  more  enlarged  view
of  our  existence  than  to  regard  our  death  as,  strictly  speaking,  the  last  of  its  acts;
and  rather  to  consider  the  dissolution  of  our  mortal  frames  as  the  transferring  of
that  existence  from  the  service  of  God  on  earth  to  the  presence  of  God  in  heaven.

II.  The  reflections  with  which  the  apostle  here  looks  back  upon  his  life
ON  earth.  1.  Justly  does  he  speak  of  his  life  as  a  fight,  in  which  he  had  been
engaged,  and  which  he  had  maintained  with  the  most  unshaken  resolution  to  that
very  hour.  2.  This  service  he  farther  likens  to  a  race,  to  one  of  those  contests  of
bodily  strength,  or  speed,  or  skill,  in  which  it  was  common  in  those  days  for  men
to  seek  the  prize  of  victory,  and  in  which  it  was  accounted  the  highest  earthly
honour  to  gain  the  corruptible  crown.  "  I  have  finished  my  course."  In  this
course  of  the  Christian  he  had  long  and  perseveringly  run,  and  was  now  approach-
ing the  goal  with  the  prize  full  in  his  view.  He  was  the  more  encouraged  in  his
anticipation  of  the  recompense  placed  before  him  by  the  consideration  that  he  had
♦'  kept  the  faith " ;  that  he  had  not  only  run  the  Christian  race,  but  had  duly
observed  the  rules  of  the  contest.  "  If  a  man  strive  for  mastery,  yet  is  he  not
crowned  except  he  strive  lawfully  "  ;  and  the  first  law  of  the  race  here  spoken  of  is
to  "  walk  by  faith,"  •'  to  run  with  patience,  looking  unto  Jesus,"  to  be  animated  in
every  step  and  turn  of  your  course  by  a  devout  love  to  His  name,  a  humble  trust
in  His  grace,  a  fervent  desire  of  His  glory.  In  this  manner  had  the  apostle  kept
his  fidelity  to  his  Lord,  both  in  fulfilling  with  diligence  the  portion  of  service  as-
signed to  him  and  in  his  course  of  labour  "  living  by  the  faith  of  the  Son  of  God."
By  His  grace  and  to  his  glory  he  has  done  the  work  given  him  to  do ;  and,  through
his  promised  mediation,  he  now  looked  for  the  end  of  his  faith,  the  salvation  of
his  soul.  III.  The  hopes  by  which  the  dying  apostle  is  cheered  in  view  op
AN  eternal  world.  You  are  thus  called  to  exercise  a  rational  regard  to  your  own
true  happiness,  looking  forward  to  an  eternal  blessedness,  which  can  be  compared
to  nothing  less  than  crowns  and  kingdoms ;  a  settled  approbation  of  perfect
righteousness,  desiring  to  receive,  as  the  sources  of  your  felicity,  the  approbation
and  favour  and  future  presence  of  the  righteous  Judge  of  all  the  earth ;  a  benevo-
lent sympathy  in  the  best  interests  of  others,  delighting  in  the  thought  that  so
many  of  your  fellow-creatures  may  participate  in  your  company,  in  the  same
blessed  inheritance ;  and  finally,  a  devout  sentiment  of  love  to  the  Son  of  God,
anticipating  with  joy  His  own  appearing,  as  the  consummation  of  all  this  felicitj


834  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oiU».  IT

to  yoor  own  soals  and  to  multitudes  of  His  redeemed  of  every  age  and  people.
(JaToes  Brewster.)  A  prisoner's  dying  thoughts  : — I.  The  guiBT  coimAaH  WHioa
LOOKS  DEATH  ruui  IN  THB  rAOs  WITHOUT  A  TBBMOB.  The  language  implies  that
Paul  knows  his  death  hour  is  all  but  here.  As  the  revised  version  more  accurately
gives  it,  "  I  am  already  being  offered  " — the  process  is  begun,  his  sufferings  at  the
moment  are,  as  it  were,  the  initial  steps  of  his  sacrifice — "and  the  time  of  my
departure  is  come."  The  tone  in  which  he  tells  Timothy  this  is  very  noticeable.
There  is  no  sign  of  excitement,  no  tremor  of  emotion,  no  affectation  of  stoicism  in
the  simple  sentences.  1.  We  may  all  make  our  deaths  a  sacrifice,  an  offering  to
God,  for  we  may  yield  up  our  will  to  God's,  and  so  turn  that  last  struggle  into  an
act  of  worship  and  self-surrender.  2.  To  those  who  have  learned  the  meaning  of
Christ's  resurrection,  and  feed  their  souls  on  the  hopes  that  it  warrants,  death  is
merely  a  change  of  place  or  state,  an  accident  affecting  locality,  and  little  more.
We  have  had  plenty  of  changes  before.  Life  has  been  one  long  series  of  departures.
This  is  different  from  the  others  mainly  in  that  it  is  the  last,  and  that  to  go  away
from  this  visible  and  fieeting  show,  where  we  wander  aliens  among  things  which
have  no  true  kindred  with  us,  is  to  go  home,  where  there  will  be  no  more  pulling
up  the  tent-pegs,  and  toiling  across  the  deserts  in  monotonous  change.  How
strong  is  the  conviction,  spoken  in  that  name  for  death,  that  the  essential  life  lasts
on  quite  unaltered  through  it  all  I  How  slight  the  else  formidable  thing  is  made.
We  may  change  climates,  and  for  the  stormy  bleakness  of  life  may  have  the  long
still  days  of  heaven,  but  we  do  not  change  ourselves.  II.  The  PEACEnrii  look
BACKWABDS.  We  may  feel  like  a  captain  who  has  brought  his  ship  safe  across  the
Atlantic,  through  foul  wedther  and  past  many  an  iceberg,  and  gives  a  great  sigh  of
relief  as  he  hands  over  the  charge  to  the  pilot,  who  will  take  her  across  the  harbour
bar  and  bring  her  to  her  anchorage  in  the  landlocked  bay  where  no  tempests  rave
any  more  for  ever.  Such  an  estimate  has  nothing  in  common  with  self-oom-
placency.  It  coexists  with  a  profound  consciousness  of  many  a  sin,  many  a  defeat,
and  much  unfaithfulness.  It  belongs  only  to  a  man  who,  conscious  of  these,  is
"  looking  for  the  mercy  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  unto  eternal  life,"  and  is  the  direct
result,  not  the  antagonist,  of  lowly  self-abasement,  and  contrite  faith  in  Him  by
whom  alone  oar  stained  selves  and  poor  broken  services  can  ever  be  acceptable.
Let  ns  learn  too  that  the  only  life  that  bears  being  looked  back  upon  is  a  life  of
Christian  devotion  and  effort.  It  shows  fairer  when  seen  in  the  strange  cross  lights
that  come  when  we  stand  on  the  boundary  of  two  worlds,  with  the  white  radiance
of  eternity  beginning  to  master  the  vulgar  oil  lamps  of  earth,  than  when  seen  by
these  alone.  All  others  have  their  shabbiness  and  their  selfishness  disclosed  then.
in.  The  tbicuphant  look  roBWAsn.  That  crown,  according  to  other  words  of
Scripture,  consists  of  "  life  "  or  "glory" — that  is  to  say,  the  issue  and  outcome  of
believing  service  and  faithful  stewardship  here  is  the  possession  of  the  true  life,
which  stands  in  union  with  God,  in  measure  so  great,  and  in  quality  so  wondrous
that  it  lies  on  the  pure  locks  of  the  victors  like  a  flashing  diadem,  all  ablaze  with
light  in  a  hundred  jewels.  The  completion  and  exaltation  of  our  nature  and
characters  by  the  illapse  of  "  life  "  so  sovereign  and  transcendent  that  it  is  ••  glory  "
is  the  consequence  of  all  Christian  effort  here  in  the  lower  levels,  where  the  natural
life  is  always  weakness  and  sometimes  shame,  and  the  spiritual  life  is  at  the  best
but  a  hidden  glory  and  a  struggling  spark.  There  is  no  profit  in  seeking  to  gaze
into  that  light  of  glory  so  as  to  discern  the  shapes  of  those  who  walk  in  it,  or  the
elements  of  its  lambent  fiames.  Enough  that  in  its  gracious  beauty  transfigured
souls  move  as  in  their  native  atmosphere  I  Enough  that  even  our  dim  vision  can
see  that  they  have  for  their  companion  '*  One  like  nnto  the  Son  of  Man."  It  is
Christ's  own  life  which  they  share ;  it  is  Christ's  own  glory  which  irradiates  them.
(A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  A  Christian's  death : — I.  We  begin  with  making  some  observa-
tions on  THE  SOURCES  or  that  consolation  which  supfobted  this  eminent  servant  of
God  at  the  time  when  his  defabtubb  was  at  hand.  It  was  the  reflection  upon  a
well-spent  life ;  it  was  the  consciousness  of  a  strenuous  and  immovable  fidelity  in
the  religious  warfare  which  formed  his  habitual  preparation  for  death,  and  laid  the
foundation  of  his  joyful  hopes.  The  only  sovereign  and  efficacious  remedy  against
the  fears  of  dissolution  is  to  mortify  the  power  of  sin  within  the  soul,  and  to
make  all  our  vicious  appetites  to  die  before  us,  for  the  sting  of  death  is  sin.  He
that  hath  risen  above  the  influence  of  sin  can  live  beyond  all  possibility  of  any
great  annoyance  from  the  terrors  of  the  last  enemy.  How  animating  a  scene  is  the
deathbed  of  the  righteous  man  I  What  can  disturb  his  last  and  peaceful  moments  t
The  recollection  of  his  trials  and  patience,  the  many  acts  of  piety  and  benevolence


ORAf.  IT.]  n.  TIMOTHY,  838

which  his  memory  can  then  suggest,  all  rise  to  view,  to  refresh  his  retiring  soal,  to
smile  npon  his  departing  spirit,  and  render  it  saperior  to  the  frowns  yt  death,  which
he  is  thns  enabled  to  consider,  not  as  a  stern  and  inexorable  tyrant  sent  to  execute
the  vengeance  of  heaven,  bat  as  the  messenger  of  love  and  peace  commissioned  to
close  a  troublesome  and  mortal  life,  and  to  put  him  in  possession  of  one  glorious
and  eternal.  11.  From  the  manner  in  which  the  apostle  expresses  the  founda-
tion of  his  tranquillity  and  hopes,  we  may  observe,  in  the  second  place,  what  is  thb

NATUBE     OF     THAT    SERVICE     IN    WHICH     THE     ChBISTIAN     IS    BNOAOED,    and    of    that

strenuous  and  immovable  fidelity  which  is  indispensably  requisite  to  complete  his
character :  "  I  have  fought  a  good  fight,  I  have  finished  my  course,  I  have  kept  the
faith."  It  is  the  uniform  declaration  of  the  Almighty  to  all  the  sons  of  men,  that
it  is  no  easy  thing  to  be  a  Christian,  but  that  through  much  tribulation  we  must
enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God.  We  wrestle  not  with  flesh  and  blood,  but  with
principalities  and  powers,  with  the  rulers  of  the  darkness  of  this  world,  with
spiritual  wickedness  in  high  places.  Our  combat  does  not  endure  only  for  a  little,
nor  is  our  security  the  reward  of  a  few  hours  of  steady  opposition,  but  almost  every
step  we  take  through  the  wilderness  of  life  exposes  us  to  some  new  attack ;  we  are
often  assaulted  by  all  the  deceivableness  of  unrighteousness,  and  through  th«
whole  of  life  we  maintain  an  unceasing  struggle.  Nor  are  aU  our  enemies  open
and  declared.  Equally  dangerous  are  our  secret  foes,  these  insidious  passions
which  lodge  within  us,  ever  ready  to  catch  at  the  bribes  of  an  alluring  world,  and
to  open  for  it  a  secret  passage  to  the  heart.  Thus  surrounded  with  dangers  on
every  hand,  how  absolutely  necessary  is  it  to  be  strong,  to  quit  ourselves  like  men,
to  brace  the  mind  with  firmness  and  vigour,  to  keep  the  attention  constantly
directed  to  every  quarter  from  which  we  may  be  assaulted  ?  Thanks  be  to  Ood,
however,  we  are  not  left  to  struggle  alone:  there  is  an  omnipotent  grace  which
gives  strength  to  the  feeble.  The  law  of  the  Christian  dispensation  is  this :  We
are  commanded  to  labour  with  as  vigorous  efforts  as  if  the  whole  success  of  that
work  depended  on  ourselves  alone,  and,  at  the  same  time,  with  the  humility  and
diffidence  of  a  mind  conscious  of  its  own  imbecility,  and  sensible  of  the  necessity
of  Divine  grace  to  render  all  its  endeavours  effectual.  The  man  who  is  thus
disposed  has  no  reason  to  dread  the  greatest  dangers :  "  He  who  is  with  thee  is
greater  than  he  who  is  against  thee :  the  Lord  is  thy  life  and  thy  salvation,  whom
shalt  thou  fear  ?  The  Lord  is  the  strength  of  thy  life,  of  whom  shalt  thou  be
afraid  ?  "  The  sacred  influence  of  His  grace  shall  continually  descend  to  guide
thy  doubtful  steps,  to  invigorate  every  languid  efiort,  to  teach  thy  hands  to  war  and
thy  fingers  to  fight,  and  to  crown  thee  with  final  success  and  triumph.  III.  Which
leads  us  naturally  to  turn  our  thoughts,  in  the  third  place,  to  that  blessed  and
OLOBious  BEWABD,  SPECIFIED  IN  THE  TEXT,  by  the  exprcssion  of  a  crown  of  righteous-
ness. This  expression  has  an  evident  allusion  to  those  crowns  bestowed  by  the
ancients  on  brave  and  intrepid  warriors ;  to  those  marks  of  honour  and  respect  by
which  they  were  wont  to  distinguish  particular  feats  of  valour.  It  intimates  to  us
that  high  and  splendid  triumph  which  shall  be  at  last  conferred  on  the  faithful  and
undaunted  servants  of  the  Most  High  God ;  that  ineffable  dignity  which  shall  be
bestowed  on  them  in  the  day  of  Christ's  appearance ;  and  recalls  to  our  thoughts
that  most  interesting  period  when  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  shall  descend  with
ineffable  pomp  and  majesty,  with  the  voice  of  the  archangel,  and  with  the  trump
of  God.  How  great,  0  God,  is  that  goodness  which  Thou  hast  laid  up  for  them
that  serve  Thee,  and  wrought  for  them  that  fear  Thy  name  before  the  sons  of  men.
Thou  shalt  hide  them  for  ever  in  the  secret  of  Thy  pavilion  ;  Thou  shalt  defend
them  from  the  strife  of  tongues,  and  from  the  pride  of  men.  Such  honour  shall  all
the  saints  of  God  possess ;  such  shall  be  the  reward  of  the  steady  friends  of  Jesus.
Thus  blessed  shall  they  be  who  are  found  holy  and  undefiled  in  the  world ;  they
shall  have  a  right  to  the  tree  of  life ;  they  shall  enter  through  the  gate  into  the
city,  and  reign  with  Jesus  for  ever  and  ever.  IV.  Our  last  observation  is  founded
on  the  declaration  in  the  text,  that  this  honour  shall  be  conferred  on  those,  and
THOSE  alone,  who  LOVE  THB  APPEARANCE  OF  Jesus.    Shall  the  treasures  of  Divine

Srace  ever  be  prostituted  to  enrich  the  unworthy  ?  or,  shall  the  impious  man  ever
e  raised  to  that  happiness  which  he  hath  always  despised?  No,  the  decree  hath
passed,  a  decree  which  shall  never  be  reversed,  that  unless  we  are  renewed  in  the
spirit  of  oar  minds  we  cannot  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  This  decree  is
no  arbitrary  law  ;  it  is  founded  in  nature ;  it  is  implied  in  the  very  reason  of  things,
that  none  but  the  pure  in  heart  are  qualified  for  relishing  the  pleasures  of  that
immortal  inheritacne.     For,  what  is  heaven  ?    Not  a  total  alteration  of  state,  but


336  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it.

reason,  and  every  pioas  and  virtuous  disposition  dilated  and  expanded  to  its
highest  pitch.  What  are  the  immortal  joys  which  it  contains  but  the  sscurity,  the
increase,  and  the  perfection  of  virtue  ?  (J.  Main,  D.D.)  Sayings  of  Christians  at
the  end  of  life : — Bev.  J.  Newton,  who  lived  to  a  good  old  age,  used  to  tell  his  frienda
in  his  latter  days,  "  I  am  like  a  parcel  packed  up  and  directed,  only  waiting  for  the
carrier  to  take  me  to  my  destination."  When  Dr.  Wardlaw  was  visited  by  Norman
McLeod  in  his  dying  hour,  and  was  asked  by  him  if  he  could  not  wish,  like  Enoch,
to  escape  the  pains  of  death,  "No,"  he  said,  most  touchingly,  "I  would  enter  heaven
by  the  way  that  Jesus  went. "  '•  I  die  no  more,"  were  the  exultant  words  of  old
Dr.  Bedford,  as  he  fell  down  in  death.  The  Bev.  Dr.  Punshon,  working  and  suffer-
ing, fulfilled  a  sort  of  double  life  until  his  Divine  Mas  er  called  him  home.  Then,
in  deeply  reverent  tones,  looking  upward,  he  said,  with  a  firm  voice,  "  Christ  is
to  me  a  bright  reality.  Jesus !  Jesus  1  "  What  a  moment  for  his  beloved  wife
when  she  saw  a  smile  of  rapture  on  his  face,  then  marked  him  bow  his  weary
head,  and  enter  into  the  rest  eternal  I  Readiness  for  death  : — Sir  John  Burgh,  a
brave  soldier,  who  received  a  mortal  wound  in  the  Isle  of  Bees,  and  being
adviKcd  not  to  fear  death,  but  to  prepare  himself  for  another  world,  answered,
"  I  thank  God  I  fear  not  death ;  these  thirty  years  together  I  never  rose  out
of  my  bed  in  the  morning,  that  ever  I  made  account  to  live  till  night."  Contrasted
deatlis  : — There  is  one  more  point  of  tremendous  reminiscence,  and  that  is  the  last
hour  of  life,  when  we  have  to  look  over  all  our  past  existence.  What  a  moment
that  will  be !  I  place  Napoleon's  dying  reminiscence  on  St.  Helena  beside  Mrs.
Judson's  dying  reminiscence  in  the  harbour  of  St.  Helena,  the  same  island,  twenty
years  afterwards.  Napoleon's  dying  reminiscence  was  one  of  delirium  —  Tete
d'armee — "  Head  of  the  Army."  Mrs.  Judson's  dying  reminiscence,  as  she  came
home  from  her  missionary  toil  and  her  Ufe  of  self-sacrifice  for  God,  dying  in  the
cabin  of  the  ship  in  the  harbour  of  St.  Helena,  was,  "  I  always  did  love  the  Lord
Jesus  Christ."  And  then  she  fell  into  a  sound  sleep  for  an  hour,  and  woke  amid
the  songs  of  angels.  I  place  the  dying  reminiscence  of  Augustus  Caesar  against
the  dying  reminiscence  of  the  Apostle  Paul.  The  dying  reminiscence  of
Augustus  Caesar  was,  addressing  his  attendants,  "  Have  I  played  my  part
well  on  the  stage  of  life  ? "  and  they  answered  in  the  affirmative,  and  he
said,  "  Why,  then,  don't  you  applaud  me  ? "  The  dying  reminiscence  of
Paul  the  apostle  was,  "I  have  fought  a  good  fight,  I  have  kept  the  faith;  hence-
forth there  is  laid  up  for  me  a  crown  of  righteousness,  which  the  Lord  the  righteous
Judge  will  give  me  in  that  day,  and  not  to  me  only,  but  to  all  them  that  love  His
appearing."  Augustus  Caesar  died  amid  pomp  and  great  surroundings.  Paul
uttered  his  dying  reminiscence  looking  up  through  the  wall  of  a  dungeon.  God
grant  that  our  dying  pillow  may  be  the  closing  of  a  useful  life,  and  the  opening  of  a
glorious  eternity.  (T.  De  Witt  Talmage.)  Death  a  departure  : — It  is  the  most
melancholy  circumstance  in  the  funerals  of  our  Christian  friends,  when  we  have
laid  their  bodies  in  the  dark  and  silent  grave,  to  go  home  and  leave  tbem  behind ;
bat,  alas  1  it  is  not  we  that  go  home  and  leave  them  behind  ;  no,  it  is  they  that  are
gone  to  the  better  home,  and  have  left  us  behind.  {Matthew  Henry.)  Bishop
Ken  in  life  and  death : — Nothing  could  be  more  beautiful  than  Ken's  life.  His
days  at  Longleat  are  amongst  the  treasured  memories  of  one  of  England's  fairest
spots ;  and  his  last  journeys  derive  a  tender  pathos  from  the  singular  fact  of  his
carrying  his  shroud  in  his  portmanteau — he  remarking  that  it  "  might  be  as  soon
wanted  as  any  other  of  his  habiliments."  He  put  it  on  himself  some  days  before
the  last ;  and  in  holy  quietness  and  peace,  his  death  was  as  beautiful  as  his  Ufe.
(J.  Stoughton,  D.D.)  Passing  on  the  torch  : — Bengel  says  that  Paul  was  about  to
deliver  up  to  Timothy  before  his  decease  the  lamp  or  torch-light  of  the  evangelical
office.  Bengel  alludes,  remarks  Dr.  James  Bryer,  to  the  ancient  torch-races  of  the
\afiiraSTi<popot,  in  which  the  torch  was  handed  by  the  runners  from  hand  to  hand.
Carrying  on  the  battle  : — A  brave  soldier  in  the  day  of  battle,  if  he  hears  that  a
regiment  has  been  exterminated  by  the  enemy's  shot  and  shell,  says,  "Then  those
of  as  that  survive  must  fight  like  tigers.  There  is  no  room  for  us  to  play  at
fighting.  If  they  have  slain  so  many,  we  must  be  more  desperately  valiant."  (C.
H.  Spurgeon.)  The  time  of  my  departure  la  at  hand. — A  last  look-out : — I.  Oor
DEPABTORE.  We  loosc  our  cable,  and  bid  farewell  to  earth,  it  shall  not  be  with
bitterness  in  the  retrospect.  There  is  sin  in  it,  and  we  are  called  to  leave  it ;  there
has  been  trial  in  it,  and  we  are  called  to  be  delivered  from  it ;  there  has  been
•orrow  in  it,  and  we  are  glad  that  we  shall  go  where  we  shall  sorrow  no  more.
There  have  been  weakness,  and  pain,  and  suffering  in  it,  and  we  are  glad  that  wa


CHIP.  IT.]  II.  TIMOTHY.  837

shall  be  raised  in  power ;  there  has  been  death  in  it,  and  we  are  glad  to  bid  fare-
well  to  shioads  and  to  knells;  but  for  all  that  there  has  been  such  mercy  in  it,
Buch  lovlngkindness  of  God  in  it,  that  the  wilderness  and  the  solitary  place  have
been  made  glad,  and  the  desert  has  rejoiced  and  blossomed  as  a  rose.  We  will  not
bid  farewell  to  the  world,  execrating  it,  or  leaving  behind  us  a  cold  shudder  and  a
sad  remembrance,  but  we  will  depart,  bidding  adieu  to  the  scenes  that  remain,  and
to  the  people  of  God  that  tarry  therein  yet  a  little  longer,  blessing  Him  whose
goodness  and  mercy  have  followed  us  all  the  days  of  our  life,  and  who  is  now
bringing  us  to  dwell  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  for  ever.  But  if  I  have  had  to  speak
in  a  somewhat  apologetic  manner  of  the  land  from  which  we  depart,  I  shall  need  to
nse  many  apologies  for  my  own  poor  talk  about  the  land  to  which  we  are  bouni
Ah,  whither  goest  thou,  spirit  loosened  from  thy  clay — dost  know  ?  Whither  goest
thou  ?  The  answer  must  be,  partly,  that  we  know  not.  None  of  us  have  seen  the
streets  of  gold  of  which  we  sang  just  now ;  those  harpings  of  the  harpers,  harping
with  their  harps,  have  never  fallen  on  these  ears ;  eye  hath  not  seen  it,  ear  hath
not  heard  it ;  it  is  all  unrevealed  to  the  senses  ;  flesh  and  blood  cannot  inherit  it,
and,  therefore,  flesh  and  blood  cannot  imagine  it.  Yet  it  is  not  unknown,  for  God
hath  revealed  it  unto  us  by  His  Spirit.  Spiritual  men  know  what  it  is  to  feel  th»
spirit,  their  own  new-born  spirit,  living,  glowing,  burning,  triumphing  within  them.
They  know,  therefore,  that  ii  the  body  should  drop  off  they  would  not  die.  They
feel  there  is  a  life  within  them  superior  to  blood  and  bone,  and  nerve  and  sinew.
They  feel  the  life  of  God  within  them,  and  none  can  gainsay  it.  Their  own  ex-
perience has  proven  to  them  that  there  is  an  inner  life.  Well,  then,  when  that
inner  life  is  strong  and  vigorous,  the  spirit  often  reveals  to  it  what  the  world  of
spirits  will  be.  We  know  what  holiness  is.  Are  we  not  seeking  it  ?  That  is
heaven — perfect  holiness  is  heaven.  We  know  what  peace  means ;  Christ  is  our
peace.  Best — He  gives  us  rest ;  we  find  that  when  we  take  His  yoke.  Best  is
heaven.  And  rest  in  Jesus  tells  us  what  heaven  is.  II.  The  time  of  oub  depab-
TUBE,  though  unknown  to  us,  is  fixed  by  God — unalterably  fixed ;  so  rightly,  wisely,
lovingly  settled,  and  prepared  for,  that  no  chance  or  haphazard  can  break  the  spell
of  destiny.  IH.  The  time  is  at  hand.  In  a  certain  sense,  every  Christian  may
say  this ;  for  whatever  interval  may  interpose  between  us  and  death,  how  very
short  it  is  1  Have  you  not  all  a  sense  that  time  flows  faster  than  it  did  ?  In  our
childish  days  we  thought  a  year  was  quite  a  period  of  time,  a  very  epoch  in  our
career ;  now  as  for  weeks — one  can  hardly  reckon  them  I  We  seem  to  be  travelling
by  an  express  train,  flying  along  at  such  a  rate  that  we  can  hardly  count  the
months.  Why,  the  past  year  only  seemed  to  come  in  at  one  door  and  go  out  at  the
other ;  it  was  over  so  soon.  We  shall  soon  be  at  the  terminus  of  life,  even  if  we
live  for  several  years ;  but  in  the  case  of  some  of  us,  God  knows  of  whom,  this  year,
perhaps  this  month,  will  be  our  last.  1.  Is  not  this  a  reason  for  surveying  our
condition  again  ?  If  our  vessel  is  just  launching,  let  us  see  that  she  is  seaworthy.
It  would  be  a  sad  thing  for  us  to  be  near  departing,  and  yet  to  be  just  as  near  dis-
covering that  we  are  lost.  I  charge  every  man  and  woman  within  this  place,  sine*
the  time  of  his  departure  may  be  far  nearer  than  he  thinks,  to  take  stock,  and
reckon  up,  and  see  whether  he  be  Christ's  or  no.  2.  But  if  the  time  of  my  depar-
ture be  at  hand,  and  I  am  satisfied  that  it  is  all  right  with  me,  is  there  not  a  caU
for  me  to  do  all  I  can  for  my  household  ?  3.  Let  me  try  to  finish  all  my  work,
not  only  as  regards  my  duty  to  my  family,  but  in  respect  to  all  the  world  so
far  as  my  influence  or  ability  can  reach.  4.  If  the  time  of  our  departure  is  at
hand,  let  it  cheer  us  amid  our  troubles.  Sometimes,  when  our  friends  go  to
Liverpool  to  sail  for  Canada,  or  any  other  distant  region,  on  the  night  before
they  sail  they  get  into  a  very  poor  lodging.  I  tbdnk  I  hear  one  of  them
grumbling,  "What  a  hard  bed  I  What  a  small  room  1  What  a  bad  look-out !  "
•'Oh,"  says  the  other,  "never  mind,  brother;  we  are  not  going  to  live  here;
we  are  off  to-morrow."  Bethink  you  in  like  manner,  ye  children  of  poverty,
this  is  not  yonr  rest.  Put  up  with  it,  you  are  away  to-morrow.  5.  And  if  the
time  of  my  departure  is  at  hand,  I  should  like  to  be  on  good  terms  with  all
my  friends  on  earth.  6.  If  the  time  of  my  departure  is  at  hand,  then  let  me
guard  against  being  elated  by  any  temporal  prosperity.  Possessions,  estates,
creature  comforts  dwindle  into  insignificance  before  this  outlook.  7.  Lastly,  if
the  time  of  our  departure  is  at  hand,  let  us  be  prepared  to  bear  our  testimony.
We  are  witnesses  for  Christ.  Let  us  bear  our  testimony  before  we  are  taken  up  and
mingle  with  the  cloud  of  witnesses  who  have  finished  their  course  and  rested  frum
their  labours.   Let  us  work  for  Jesus  while  we  can  work  for  Him.    (C.  H.  Spurge(m.)

22


•88  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [ohav.  it.

Th4  dying  ChrUtian: — ^It  is  recorded  of  one  of  onr  moat  distingnished  British
essayists,  that  he  addressed  to  an  irreligious  nobleman  these  solemn  words,  "  I  have
sent  tor  yon  tiiat  yoa  may  see  how  a  Christian  can  die."  Many  critics  have  thought
that  the  apostle's  request  to  Timothy,  "  Do  thy  diligence  to  come  shortly  unto  me,"
was  prompted  by  a  desire  not  only  to  have  his  companionship  in  the  time  of  tribula-
tion, but  to  impart  religious  counsel,  and  above  all,  that  he  might  be  a  witness  of  the
last  moments  of  his  aged  father  in  Christ,  the  apostle.  Whatever  difference  of  opinion
may  be  entertained  of  Addison's  saying  to  the  nobleman,  who  can  doubt  the  wisdom
and  piety  of  Paul's  wish?  I.  Litb  pbesent,  ob  the  apostlk's  befleotions  on
DTiNO.  How  calm  his  mind  I  Whilst  our  views  and  feelings  may  be  altered  by  the
nearness  of  the  last  enemy,  io  Paul  it  seemed  the  same  whether  death  was  mmly
seen  in  the  distance,  or  the  interval  be  measured  by  a  single  step.  The  words,  "  I
am  now  ready  to  be  offered  "  probably  contain  an  allusion  to  the  heathen  custom
of  pouring  wine  and  oil  on  the  head  of  the  victim  when  about  to  be  offered  in  sac-
rifice. The  apostle  felt  himself  to  be  as  near  to  death  as  that  very  victim  ;  every
preparation  having  been  made,  he  only  had  to  await  the  fatal  blow.  How  could
such  a  man  fear  death  when  for  years  he  had  been  a  ••  living  sacrifice "  in  the
service  of  his  Master,  and  was  now  awaiting  death  as  the  consummation  of  the  sac-
rifice 7  The  other  figure  is  not  less  beautifol.  The  apostle  had  hitherto  felt  himself
bound  to  the  present  world  as  a  ship  to  its  moorings,  but  now  anchor  was  to  be
weighed,  fastenings  to  be  loosened,  and  sails  to  be  unfurled.  But  though  the  vast,
the  boundless  ocean  stretched  out  before  him,  he  felt  himself  to  be  no  mere  adven-
turer— a  Columbus  going  in  search  of  an  undiscovered  land.  Though  known  only
by  report,  he  knew  that  the  report  of  this  new  world  was  not  the  speculation  or
idle  conjecture  of  man.  Thus,  elsewhere,  he  is  found  saying,  "  having  a  desire  to
depart  [to  loose  cable]  and  to  be  with  Christ,  which  is  far  better."  How  does  the
repetition  of  these  figures  show  that  his  feelings  were  not  transient  impulses,
but  ihe  settled  habits  of  his  mind.  How  intelligent  was  this  confidence !  His
was  not  the  peace  of  ignorance,  or  of  a  perverted  view  of  the  mercy  of  God.
Here  was  his  assurance  of  a  triumph  over  the  last  foe,  "  I  know  whom  I  have
believed,  and  am  persuaded  that  He  is  able  to  keep  that  which  I  have  committed
unto  Him  against  that  day."  And  is  there  not  something  sublime  in  this  state  of
mind  ?  What  a  contrast  does  it  present  even  to  some  of  those  cases  of  supposed
religions  triumph  over  death  which  men  of  the  world  have  quoted  from  classic
antiquity.  For  what  was  it  that  made  the  apostle  so  resigned,  so  willing,  so  longing
to  meet  death  ?  Was  it  a  feeling  of  misanthropy  from  the  base  treatment  he  had
received  from  his  fellow  creatures,  including  even  his  professed  friends  ?  Was  it
disappointed  ambition,  the  world  refusing  him  its  laurels?  Was  it  anxious  suspense
from  being  in  prisons  and  deaths  oft  ?  Was  it  the  infirmity  of  old  age,  drying  up
all  the  sources  of  the  enjoyment  of  life?  Whilst  these  may  be  the  secret  motives
which  have  urged  many  men  of  the  world  to  desire  departure,  no  such  selfishness
was  enthroned  in  the  apostle's  breast,  as  you  may  learn  from  his  reflections :  ••  For
I  am  in  a  strait  betwixt  two,  having  a  desire  to  depart,  and  to  be  with  Christ,  which
is  far  better."  *•  We  are  confident,  I  say,  and  willing  rather  to  be  absent  from  the
body  and  to  be  present  with  the  Lord."  H.  Let  ns  look  at  life  past  ;  ob,  thb
apostle's  betbospeot.  1.  Here  is  life  reviewed  in  reference  to  its  conflicts.  Life
is  not  only  a  race,  but  a  conflict — not  only  a  stretching  forward  for  the  prize,  but
one  continuous  struggle  with  besetting  foes :  it  calls  not  only  for  activities,  but
resistance.  Say  you  this  is  a  repulsive  view  of  religion  ?  We  reply,  is  not  self-
denial  necessary  for  success  in  all  the  departments  of  life  ?  Is  it  not,  moreover,
as  salutary  as  indispensable?  Instead  of  complaining  of  this  battle  of  life,  ask
yourselves  if  the  self-knowledge  thereby  obtained,  the  opportunity  afforded  for  the
development  of  graces,  the  vigour  given  by  exercise  to  every  virtue,  be  not  mora
than  a  compensation?  2.  Life  is  here  reviewed  in  reference  to  the  individual
sphere  of  active  duties.  We  might  here  propose  several  questions.  Is  a  man  sent
into  the  world  by  his  Creator  only  to  follow  out  his  own  inclinations,  or  is  he  in  any
sense  born  to  the  fulfilment  of  some  great  end  in  the  kingdom  of  Qod's  providence*
We  might  ask  again  if  the  individual  believer  sooner  or  later  may  not  find  out  his
particular  vocation,  and  arrive  at  some  satisfactory  conclusion  as  to  what  end  he
was  bom,  or  for  what  cause  he  came  into  the  world.  Do  not  wants,  gifts,  counsels
of  friends,  oft  unmistakably  point  to  the  work  assigned  by  the  Disposer  of  all
things  ?  Will  not  the  prayer,  "Lord,  what  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do?  "  be  answered,
so  that  the  suppliant  shall  be  able  to  say,  "  This  is  my  coarse."  If,  then,  there  ii  •
course  prescribed  by  Divine  providence  for  each  of  as,  is  it  not  oor  interest  u  well


OHAT.  IT.]  IL  TIMOTHY.  88f

ms  onr  obligation  to  puraae  it  f  3.  Life  is  here  reviewed  in  reference  to  religioai
beliefs,  or  our  fidelity  to  truth.  By  the  word  faith  here  is  meant  the  Ghristian
religion,  bo  called  because  it  is  a  revelation  made  to  man's  faith ;  "  the  righteous-
ness of  Ood  is  revealed  from  faith  to  faith."  But  all  cannot  say,  "  I  have  kept  the
faith."  Could  Phygellus,  or  Hermogenes,  or  Hymenseus,  utter  such  words?  The
patience  and  the  faith  of  the  saints  are  often  severely  tried,  and  blessed  are  they
of  whom  it  was  said,  "Here  are  they  that  keep  the  faith  of  Jesus."  If
any  think  lightly  of  adherence  to  the  faith,  let  them  ponder  over  the  death
bed  confession  of  one  who  had  swerved  from  the  truth.  "  It  seemed,"  says
a  writer  in  the  Quarterly  Review,  "that  Hume  received  a  religious  education
from  his  mother,  and  early  in  life  was  the  subject  of  strong  and  hopeful
religions  impressions ;  but  as  he  approached  to  manhood  they  were  effaced,  and
confirmed  infidelity  succeeded.  Maternal  partiality,  however  alarmed  at  first,  came
to  look  with  less  pain  upon  this  declaration,  and  filial  love  and  reverence  seem  to
have  been  absorbed  in  the  pride  of  philosophical  scepticism :  for  Hume  now  applied
himself  with  unwearied,  and,  unhappily,  with  successful  efforts,  to  sap  the  founda-
tion of  the  mother's  faith.  Having  succeeded  in  this  dreadful  work,  he  went  abroad
into  foreign  countries,  and,  as  he  was  returning,  an  express  met  him  in  London
with  a  letter  from  his  mother,  informing  him  that  she  was  in  a  deep  decline,  and
would  not  long  survive.  She  said  she  found  herself  without  any  support  in  her
distress ;  that  he  had  taken  away  that  source  of  comfort  upon  which  in  all  cases  of
affliction  she  used  to  rely,  and  that  now  she  found  her  mind  sinking  into  despair :
she  did  not  doubt  that  her  son  would  afford  her  some  substitute  for  her  religion  ;
and  conjured  him  to  hasten  home,  or  at  least  send  her  a  letter  containing  such  con-
solations as  philosophy  can  afford  a  dying  mortal.  Hume  was  overwhelmed  with
angnish,  hastened  to  Scotland,  travelling  night  and  day,  but  before  he  arrived  his
mother  had  expired."  Is  it  nothing,  then,  to  "  hold  fast  the  form  of  sound  words,"
and,  on  a  dying  bed,  to  exclaim,  "  I  have  kept  the  faith  "  ?  III.  Let  its  koticb
LiFB  TO  ooMB,  OR  THK  apostlb's  soblimb  ANTICIPATIONS.  The  raco  was  nearly  run,
the  conflict  was  well-nigh  ended ;  it  now  only  remained  that  the  crown  should  be
bestowed.  The  crown  was  to  be  one  of  righteousness.  Not  that  the  apostle  felt
he  could  claim  it,  for  he  who  styled  himself  less  than  the  least  of  all  saints  would
be  the  first  to  cast  his  crown  at  the  feet  of  the  Royal  Redeemer,  exclaiming,  "  Thou
alone  art  worthy  "  ;  but  it  was  called  •*  a  crown  of  righteousness  "  because  won  in
the  cause  of  righteousness,  and  conferred  upon  him  by  One  who  is  '•  not  unrighteous
to  forget  your  work  and  labour  of  love,  which  ye  have  showed  towards  His  name."
In  every  age  the  attainment  of  a  crown  has  been  the  summit  of  human  ambition.
For  it,  usurpers  have  dethroned  monarchs — warriors  have  stood  in  the  breach —
navigators  have  defied  the  fury  of  the  deep — philosophers  have  strained  intellect
night  as  well  as  day ;  for  it  the  foot-racer,  and  the  boxer,  and  the  charioteer  have
endured  severest  bodily  discipline — all — all  reaching  after  the  goal  of  worldly
honour,  all  trying  to  distance  their  competitors — all  dissatisfied  with  the  present,
and  reaching  to  that  which  is  before.  Now  Christianity  addresses  such  aspirants,
and  points  them  to  something  better,  to  crowns  purer,  brighter,  and  more  enduring.
But  what  may  be  the  crowns  which  the  Lord  the  righteous  Judge  shall  bestow,  we
shall  not  venture  to  describe.  Sure  we  are,  they  are  not  merely  symbols  of  sove-
reignty, or  ensigns  of  victory,  or  tokens  of  national  gratitude  to  earthly  benefactors.
The  conqueror  there  will  not  be  crowned  with  olives,  or  parsley,  or  any  other  such
fading  leaves.  It  will  not  consist  in  the  praises  of  men,  or  worldly  elevation  abova
the  millions  of  our  fellow-creatures.  It  will  not  be  awarded  for  human  merit,  nor
will  the  wearer  be  conscious  of  any  feeling  of  claim :  the  weight  of  his  glory  will
rather  weigh  him  down.  It  will  not  be  of  such  a  character  as  shall  endanger  his
holiness,  or  that  shall  afterwards  require  a  thorn  in  the  flesh  lest  the  victor  should
be  exalted  above  measure.  It  will  not  be  the  joy  and  rapture  of  an  hour,  awakened
by  the  excitement  of  the  novelty,  to  be  followed  by  ennui  and  disappointment.  It
will  not  awaken  envy  among  the  millions  of  the  glorified,  but  rather  raise  higher
joy  as  they  see  one  wearing  a  more  brilliant  diadem  than  the  rest.  The  crown  will
consist  in  nothing  that  will  divert  the  mind  from  the  Eternal  All,  and  cause  it  to
seek  satisfaction  in  self.  The  real  joy  will  be  that  it  has  been  awarded  by  God's
own  Son,  placed  on  the  brow  by  His  own  hand — that  it  will  reflect  higher  glory  on
the  Qiver — that  it  will  be  prostrated  at  His  feet.  In  a  word,  the  honour  will  consist
in  the  presence  and  favour  and  likeness  of  God.  But  we  pause  and  tremble,  lest
we  should  darken  counsel  by  words  without  knowledge.  We  must  wait  untU  w«
wsar  it,  before  we  shall  fully  understand  the  words — "  a  crown  of  life" — "  a  orowa


340  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  !▼.

of  glory" — "a  crown  that  fadeth  not  away" — "  a  crown  of  righteousness,"  {J.  S.
Pearsall.)  Ready  for  home  : — I.  As  a  depabtuke  to  anotheb  countky.  As  when
the  ship  puts  to  sea,  it  is  for  the  purpose  of  sailing  to  another  port,  so  Paul  looked
forward  to  death  as  a  "  departure  "  for  another  country.  The  sailor  does  not  leave
the  port  with  the  prospect  of  an  eternal  cruise  in  unknown  seas,  or  for  the  purpose
of  ultimately  losing  himself  somewhere  in  some  mysterious,  undefined  nothing.
II.  As  A  DEPAETURE  TO  A  BETTEB  coTJNTET.  He  was  Willing  to  sail.  Now  Paul  was
no  misanthrope,  who  had  become  so  sick  of  human  society  that  he  longed  to  be  rid
of  it.  He  was  not  weary  of  life.  Then  why  did  he  wish  to  go  ?  Was  he  amongst
those  eternal  grumblers  who  themselves  do  all  the  "  howling,"  and  then  complain
that  the  world  is  a  "  howling  wilderness  "  ?  By  no  means  1  His  desire  to  depart
was  not  because  this  was  bad,  but  because  that  was  "  better  "  ;  not  because  he  had
had  enough  of  Christian  society  and  Christian  service — that  was  good — but  because
he  wished  to  be  with  Christ,  which  was  infinitely  preferable.  IH.  As  A  depabtuer
10  A  BETTER  COUNTRY,  WHICH  WAS  HIS  HOME.  Paul  Compared  himself  to  a  sailor  who,
lying  in  a  foreign  port,  was  awaiting  orders  to  sail  for  home.  Such  a  man,  though
in  a  land  of  pleasure  and  plenty,  would  sit  and  long  to  be  away.  As  he  thought  of
friends  beloved  across  the  sea,  he  would  count  the  weeks  and  days  when  he  hoped
to  see  them  once  again.    Not  unlike  this  are  the  Christian's  dreams  of  heaven.

IV.   As  A  DEPARTUEE   FOB  HOME,  THE   TIME   OF   WHICH  WAS   FIXED.      "  The  time  Of  my

departure  is  at  hand."  The  Psalmist  says,  "  My  times  are  in  Thy  hand."  "  My
times  1  "—that  is,  all  my  future  is  with  God.  He  knows — 1.  When  I  shall  depart.
2.  Whence  I  shall  depart.  3.  How  I  shall  depart.  Two  Cistercian  monks  in  the
reign  of  Henry  VHI.  were  threatened,  before  their  martyrdom,  by  the  Lord  Mayor
of  that  time,  that  they  should  be  tied  in  a  sack,  and  thrown  into  the  Thames.
"  My  lord,"  answered  one,  "  we  are  going  to  the  kingdom  of  heaven ;  and  whether
we  go  by  land  or  water  is  of  very  little  consequence  to  us."  So  our  thoughts
should  be  fixed  on  the  goal  rather  than  on  the  path  by  which  it  is  reached ;  on  the
rest  that  remains  rather  than  on  the  toil  through  which  it  is  obtained.  V.  As  A
DEPARTUEE  FOB  HOME,  THE  TIME  OF  WHICH  WAS  NEAR.  "  The  time  of  my  departure  is
at  hand."  The  sailor,  lying  in  a  foreign  port,  with  his  cargo  complete,  his  sails
"  bent,"  and  the  wind  fair  for  home,  contemplates  with  joy  the  fact  that  the  day  is
near  when  the  order  will  come  to  bid  him  sail.  Thus  Paul  waited  for  death.  To
him  the  disease,  or  the  accident,  or  the  martyrdom,  would  be  but  as  the  postman
who  brought  the  letter — the  letter  for  which  he  longed  with  unutterable  desire.

VI.    As   A  DEPAETUEE   FOB  HOME,  FOE  WHICH  HE  WAS   PEBFECTLY   READY.       "  I  am  HOW

ready,"  said  he.  And  so  he  was.  As  one  by  one  he  saw  the  cords  being  unloosened
which  bound  bim  to  this  world — as  loved  ones  were  taken  away— as  sickness,
disease,  or  age  told  him  that  the  time  was  at  hand  when  he  was  to  depart,  he
viewed  the  whole  with  the  complacent  satisfaction  of  the  sailor  who  sees  his  vessel
being  unmoored  to  sail  for  home.  {W.  H.  Burton.)  Joy  of  a  faithful  minister  in
view  of  eternity  : — I.  The  character  of  a  faithful  minister.  1.  He  loves  the  gospel
which  he  preaches.  2.  He  does  not  shun  to  declare  all  the  counsel  of  God,  but
•ndeavours  to  preach  the  gospel  as  fully  and  as  plainly  as  possible.  3.  He  will  uni-
formly and  perseveringly  perform  the  self-denying  duties  of  his  office,  which  are  of
a  less  public  nature,  but  of  no  less  importance,  than  his  ministrations  on  the
Sabbath.  In  visiting  the  sick  and  the  dying,  he  will  deal  plainly  as  well  as  ten-
derly with  them.  Whenever  he  is  called  to  converse  with  persons  about  the  state
of  their  minds,  whether  they  are  in  stupidity,  distress,  or  doubt,  he  wiU  not  daub
with  untempered  mortar,  nor  endeavour  to  comfort  those  who  ought  not  to  be  com-
forted. He  will  contend  earnestly  for  the  faith  which  was  once  delivered  unto  the
saints.  H.  What  reasons  he  may  have  to  rejoice  in  the  near  peospect  of
ETERNITY.  1.  He  has  good  reason  to  rejoice  that  he  chose  the  work  of  the  ministry
in  preference  to  any  other  employment  in  life.  The  most  useful  employment  must
be  allowed  to  be  the  most  important  and  desirable.  2.  He  has  good  reason  to
rejoice  in  the  close  of  Ufe  and  in  the  view  of  eternity,  that  God  has  enabled  him
to  be  faithful.  3.  He  has  good  reason  to  rejoice  in  the  close  of  his  ministry,  because
God  has  given  him  assurance  that  all  his  faithful  labours  shall  produce  some
valuable  and  important  effects,  either  sooner  or  later.  4.  He  has  good  ground
to  rejoice  when  the  time  of  his  departure  is  at  hand,  because  God  has  promised  him
an  ample  reward  for  all  his  sincere  services.  {N.  Emmons,  D.D.)  A  Christian's
death : — I.  The  importance  of  pbepabation  fob  our  departure.  1.  This  is  the  last
and  closing  scene  of  human  life.  2.  How  serious  a  thing  it  is  to  die.  3.  Because
diseaM  and  the  period  introductory  to  our  dissolution  are  special  seasons  given  to


•hap.it.]  II.  TIMOTHY.  841

ns  in  which  to  glorify  God  and  bring  credit  to  religion.  4.  This  is  the  last  oppor-
tunity we  have  of  doing  anything  for  God,  for  the  Church,  for  our  families,  and  for
the  world.  II.  The  manner  in  which  a  Christian  should  die.  1.  Amidst  the
darkness,  languor,  and  pain  of  a  sick  bed,  a  Christian  man  ought  to  engage  in  com-
mending the  ways  of  God  and  religion  to  those  about  him.  The  words  of  dying
saints  have  been  called  "living  oracles  " ;  and  so  they  should  be.  2.  We  should
then  attend  to  the  duty  of  exhorting  others  who  are  walking  in  the  ways  of  the
Lord.  3.  We  ought  to  commend  ourselves  and  others  to  God  in  the  devout  exercise
of  prayer.  4.  In  the  exercise  of  strong  faith.  {A.  Waugh,  D.D.)  Calmness  in
death — its  philosophy : — I.  A  soul-absorbing  interest  in  the  great  cause  op  uni-

TERSAL  truth  AND  BENEVOLENCE.  II.  An  ACCURATE  CONCEPTION  OF  WHAT  DEATH
BEAIiLT  is  TO  THE  GOOD.  III.  DELIGHTFUL  MEMORIES  OF  THE  MANNER  IN  WHICH  HE  HAD
SPENT  HIS  LIFE.      IV.    A  SOUL-ENRAPTURING  VISION  OF  THE  FUTURE   INTO  WHICH  HE  WAS

ABOUT  ENTERING.  {HomiUst.)  Good-bye  to  the  world : — The  way  out  of  this  world
is  so  blocked  up  with  cofl&n,  and  hearse,  and  undertaker's  spade,  and  screwdriver,
that  the  Christian  can  hardly  think  as  he  ought  of  the  most  cheerful  passage  in  all
his  history.  We  hang  black  instead  of  white  over  the  place  where  the  good  man
gets  his  last  victory.  We  stand  weeping  over  a  heap  of  chains  which  tbe  freed  soul
has  shaken  off,  and  we  say,  '•  Poor  man  I  What  a  pity  it  was  he  had  to  come  to
this."  Come  to  what?  By  the  time  people  have  assembled  at  the  obsequies,  that
man  has  been  three  days  so  happy  that  all  the  joy  of  earth  accumulated  would  b«
wretchedness  beside  it ;  and  he  might  better  weep  over  you  because  you  have  to
stay,  than  you  weep  over  him  because  he  has  to  go.  Paul,  in  my  text,  takes  that
great  clod  of  a  word,  "  death,"  and  throws  it  away,  and  speaks  of  his  •'  departure,"
a  beautiful,  bright,  suggestive  word,  descriptive  of  every  Christian's  release.  Now,
departure  implies  a  starting-place,  and  a  place  of  destination.  'When  Paul  left  this
world,  what  was  the  starting-point  ?  It  was  a  scene  of  great  physical  distress.  It
was  the  Tullianum,  the  lower  dungeon  of  the  Mamertine  prison.  The  top  dungeou
was  bad  enough — it  having  no  means  of  ingress  or  egress  but  through  an  opening
in  the  top.  Through  that  the  prisoner  was  lowered,  and  through  that  came  all  the
food,  and  air,  and  light  received.  It  was  a  terrible  place,  that  upper  dungeon ;  but
the  Tullianum  was  the  lower  dungeon,  and  that  was  still  more  wretched,  the  only
light  and  the  only  air  coming  through  the  roof,  and  that  roof  the  floor  of  the  upper
dungeon.  It  was  there  that  Paul  spent  his  last  days  on  earth,  and  it  is  there  that
I  see  him  to-day,  in  the  fearful  dungeon,  shivering,  blue  with  cold,  waiting  for  that
old  overcoat  which  he  had  sent  for  up  to  Troas,  and  which  they  had  not  yet  sent
down,  notwithstanding  he  had  written  for  it.  Oh,  worn-out,  emaciated  old  man,
surely  you  must  be  melancholy.  No  constitution  could  endure  this  and  be  cheerful;
bat  I  press  my  way  through  the  prison  until  I  come  up  close  to  where  he  is,  and  by
the  faint  light  that  streams  through  the  opening  I  see  on  his  face  a  supernatural
joy,  and  I  bow  before  him  and  I  say,  "  Aged  man,  how  can  you  keep  cheerful  amid
all  this  gloom  ?  "  His  voice  startles  the  darkness  of  the  place  as  he  cries  out,  "  I
am  now  ready  to  be  offered,  and  the  time  of  my  departure  is  at  hand."  Hark  I
what  is  that  shuffling  of  feet  in  the  upper  dungeon  ?  Why,  Paul  has  an  invitation
to  a  banquet,  and  he  is  going  to  dine  to-day  with  the  King.  Those  shuffling  feet
are  the  feet  of  the  executioners.  They  come,  and  they  cry  down  through  the  hole
of  the  dungeon,  *•  Hurry  up,  old  man.  Come,  now,  get  yourself  ready."  Why,
Paul  was  ready.  He  had  nothing  to  pack  up.  He  had  no  baggage  to  take.  He
had  been  ready  a  good  while.  I  see  him  rising  up,  and  straightening  out  his
stiffened  limbs,  and  pushing  back  his  white  hair  from  his  creviced  forehead,  and
see  him  looking  up  through  the  hole  in  the  roof  of  the  dungeon  into  the  face  of  his
executioner,  and  hear  him  say,  "  I  am  now  ready  to  be  offered,  and  the  time  of  my
departure  is  at  hand."  Then  they  lift  him  out  of  the  dungeon,  and  they  start  with
him  to  the  place  of  execution.  They  say,  "  Hurry  along,  old  man,  or  you  will  feel
the  weight  of  our  spear.  Hurry  along."  "  How  far  is  it,"  says  Paul,  "  we  have  to
travel?  "  "  Three  miles."  Oh,  three  miles  is  a  good  way  for  an  old  man  to  travel
after  he  has  been  whipped  and  crippled  with  maltreatment.  But  they  soon  get  to
the  place  of  execution — Acquaa  Salvia — and  he  is  fastened  to  the  pillar  of  mar-
tyrdom. I  see  him  looking  up  in  the  face  of  his  executioner,  and  as  the  grim
official  draws  the  sword,  Paul  calmly  says,  "  I  am  now  ready  to  be  offered,  and  the
time  of  my  departure  is  at  hand."  One  sharp,  keen  stroke,  and  Paul  does  go  to
the  banquet,  and  Paul  does  dine  with  the  King.  What  a  transition  it  was  1  From
the  malaria  of  Eome  to  the  finest  climate  in  all  the  universe — the  zone  of  eternal
beauty  and  health.    From  shipwreck,  from  dungeon,  from  the  biting  pain  of  the


84S  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [oxAt.  tr.

elm-wood  rode,  from  the  sharp  sword  of  the  headsman,  he  goes  into  the  most
brilliant  assemblage  of  heaven,  a  king  among  kings,  multitudes  of  the  sainthood
rushing  out  and  stretching  forth  hauds  of  welcome ;  for  I  do  really  think  that,  ai
on  the  right  hand  of  Ood  is  Christ,  so  on  the  right  hand  of  Christ  is  Paul,  the
second  great  in  heaven.    He  changed  kings  likewise.     Before  the  hour  of  death,
•ad  ap  to  the  last  moment,  he  was  under  Nero,  the  thick-necked,  the  cruel-eyed,
the  filthy  lipped.    But  the  next  moment  he  goes  into  the  realm  of  Him  whose  reign
ifi  love,  and  whose  courts  are  paved  with  love,  and  whose  throne  is  set  on  pillars  of
love,  and  whose  sceptre  is  adorned  with  jewels  of  love,  and  whose  palace  is  lighted
with  love,  and  whose  lifetime  is  an  eternity  of  love.    When  Paul  was  leaving  so
much  on  this  side  the  pillar  of  martyrdom  to  gain  so  much  on  the  other  side,  do
yon  wonder  at  the  cheerful  valedictory  of  the  text,  "  The  time  of  my  departure  ia
at  hand  "  ?    Now,  why  cannot  all  the  old  people  of  my  congregation  have  the  same
holy  glee  as  that  aged  man  had?    You  say  you  most  fear  the  struggle  at  the
moment  the  soul  and  body  part.    But  millions  have  endured  that  moment,  and
why  may  not  we  as  well  ?    They  got  through  with  it,  and  so  can  we.    Besides  this,
all  medical  men  agree  in  saying  that  there  is  probably  no  struggle  at  all  at  the  last
moment — not  so  much  pain  as  the  prick  of  a  pin,  the  seeming  signs  of  distress
being  altogether  involuntary.    But  you  say,  "  It  is  the  uncertainty  of  the  future."
Now,  child  of  God,  do  not  play  the  infidel.     After  God  has  filled  the  Bible  till  it
can  hold  no  mote  with  stories  of  the  good  things  ahead,  better  not  talk  about
nnoertainties.     But  you  say,  "  I  cannot  bear  to  think  of  parting  from  friends  here."
If  you  are  old,  you  have  more  friends  in  heaven  than  here.     Besides  that,  it  ia
more  healthy  there  for  you  than  here,  aged  man ;  better  climate  there  than  these
hot  summers,  and  cold  winters,  and  late  springs ;  better  hearing ;  better  eyesight ;
more  tonic  in  the  air ;  more  perfume  in  the  bloom ;  more  sweetness  in  the  song.
I  remark  again:  all  those  ought  to  feel  this  joy  of  the  text  who  have  a  holy
curiosity  to  know  what  is  beyond  this  earthly  terminus.     And  who  has  not  any
curiosity  about  it  ?    A  man,  doomed  to  die,  stepped  on  the  scaffold,  and  said,  in
joy,  "  Now  in  ten  minutes  I  will  know  the  great  secret."    One  minute  after  the
vital  functions  ceased,  the  little  child  that  died  last  night  knew  more  than  Jonathan
Edwards,  or  St.  Paul  himself  before  they  died.    Friends,  the  exit  from  this  world,
or  death,  if  you  please  to  call  it,  to  the  Christian  is  glorious  explanation.     It  is
demonstration.    It  is  illumination.    It  is  sunburst.     It  is  the  opening  of  all  the
windows.    It  is  shutting  up  the  catechism  of  doubt  and  the  unrolling  of  all  the
scrolls  of  positive  and  accurate  information.    I  remark  again :  we  ought  to  have
the  joy  of  the  text,  because  leaving  this  world  we  move  into  the  best  society  of  the
universe.     You  see  a  great  crowd  of  people  in  some  street,  and  you  say,  "  Who  is
passing  there  ?    What  general,  what  prince,  is  going  up  there  7  "    Well,  I  see  a
great  throng  in  heaven.     I  say,  "  Who  is  the  focus  of  all  that  admiration  ?    Who
is  the  centre  of  that  glittering  company?  "   It  is  Jesns,  the  champion  of  all  worlds,
the  favourite  of  all  ages.   (T.  De  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.)        Presentiment  of  death: —
In  one  of  his  last  letters  Livingstone  wrote,  "  During  a  large  part  of  this  journey
I  had  a  strong  presentiment  that  I  should  never  live  to  finish  it.     It  is  weakened
now  as  I  seem  to  see  the  end  towards  which  I  have  been  striving  looming  in  the
distance.    This  presentiment  did  not  interfere  with  the  performance  of  any  duty :
it  only  made  me  think  a  great  deal  more  of  the  future  state  of  being."         Uneon-
tciout  sense  of  the  end  of  life : — Churchill,  in  the  unfinished  "  Journey,"  the  last
fragment  found  among  his  papers,  showed  a  strange  unconscious  kind  of  sense  of
being  near  his  end.    He  calls  it  the  plain  unlaboured  Journey  of  a  Day,  and  closes
with  the  line — '*  I  on  my  journey  all  alone  proceed  !  "    The  poem  was  not  meant  to
close  here,  but  a  greater  Hand  interposed.     That  line  of  mournful  significance  is
the  last  that  was  written  by  Churchill  1   (Timbs.)       Welcoming  death: — Of  Bradford
it  is  said,  that  when  the  keeper's  wife  said  to  him,  "  Oh,  sir,  I  am  come  with  heavy
tidings — you  are  to  be  burnt  to-morrow  "  ;  taking  off  his  hat  and  laying  it  upon
the  ground,  and  kneeling  and  raising  his  hands,  he  said,  "  Lord,  I  thank  Thee
for  this  honour.    This  is  what  I  have  been  waiting  for,  and  longing  for."    {W.
Jay.)        Byron  and  St.  Paul— a  contrast: — For  a  contrast  of  worldly  despair  with
Christian  confidence  at  the  end  of  life,  compare  with  the  words  of  Paul  in  3  Tim.
iY.  ft-8  the  following,  which  are  reckoned  the  last  verses  of  Byron's  pen  :—

••  My  days  are  in  the  yellow  leaf.
The  flowers,  the  fruits  of  love  are  gone;
The  worm,  the  canker,  and  the  grief,
Are  mine  alone.


«air.  IT.]  n.  TIMOTHY,  843

The  fire  that  on  my  bosom  preyg
Is  lone  as  some  volcanic  isle,
Mo  torch  is  lifted  at  its  blaze

A  funeral  pile  I  ••    (J.  F.  B.  TMing,  B.A.)

I  hKW  fonght  *  ffood  fight. — The  holy  war: — I.  The  two  armies.  1.  The  vrmj
of  the  saints.  (1)  Their  Captain-General  is  the  Lord  Jesua  Christ.  (2)  The  offioen
are  the  ministers  of  Christ,  and  all  who  are  active  and  useful  in  His  service.  (3)
The  soldiers  are  the  saints.  (4)  The  enlisting — conversion.  (5)  The  nnifonn — the
graces  of  the  Spirit,  and  the  robe  of  righteousness.  (6)  The  armour — helmet  of
salvation,  At,  (7)  The  instruction  of  the  young  soldiers— Bible.  (8)  The  allies
— angels.  2.  The  army  of  the  enemy.  (1)  Generals — sin,  Satan,  and  world.  (2)
Soldiers — the  wicked.  (3)  Allies — evil  spirits.  EL  The  battle.  1.  What  kind
of  a  battle  ?  (1)  A  good  battle.  (2)  A  hot  battle.  (3)  A  very  profitable  battle.
(4)  A  battle  that  must  be  constant.  2.  Where  fought  ?  Whole  world.  3.  When
shall  it  be  finished?  At  death  for  each  individual  soldier;  at  the  day  of  judgment
for  the  whole  army.  in.  The  victobt.  1.  Is  certain.  2.  Shall  be  held  in  ever-
lasting remembrance.  {A.  Fletcher,  D.D.)  Moral  warfare  : — 1.  It  is  lawful
sometimes  to  speak  of  those  gifts  and  graces  which  God  hath  given  us,  that  we
may  comfort  and  quicken  others  by  our  example.  2.  The  sweetest  songs  of  the  saints
have  been  towards  their  last  ends.  The  sun  shines  sweetliest  when  it  is  setting,
the  wine  of  the  spirit  is  strongest  in  the  saints  when  they  are  drawing  to  an  end.
His  motions  are  quickest  when  natural  motions  are  slowest ;  as  we  see  in  Moses
his  swan-like  song  (Deut.  xxzi.-xzxiii.),  and  David  how  sweetly  doth  he  sing  a  little
before  he  dies  of  God's  mercies  to  himself,  of  the  covenant  of  free  grace  which  God
had  made  with  him,  and  His  judgments  on  the  sons  of  Belial  (2  Samuel  xxii;  1-8).
Joshua  dying,  how  sweetly  doth  he  exhort  the  people  to  obedience  by  setting  before
them  the  mercies  of  God  (Joshua  xxiv.).  All  Christ's  sayings  are  excellent,  but
none  so  sweet  and  comfortable  as  those  which  He  delivered  a  little  before  His
death.  Wicked  men  when  they  die  they  set  in  a  cloud,  and  like  the  going  out  of  a
candle  they  leav«  a  stench  behind  them :  as  their  bodies,  so  their  names  rot  and
stink  when  they  are  dead  and  gone.  As  wicked  men  grow  worse  and  worse  and
their  last  days  are  their  worst,  so  good  men  grow  better  and  better,  and  their  last
days  are  their  best ;  having  but  a  little  time  to  live  in  the  world,  they  are  willing  to
leave  it  with  a  good  savour.  3.  The  sweet  resent  which  a  good  conscience  hath  of
a  well-spent  life  is  matter  of  singular  comfort  and  rejoicing  in  death.  4.  Every
faithful  Christian  is  a  spiritual  soldier.  (1)  In  war  there  is  watching,  soldiers  must
stand  on  their  guard  continually  for  fear  of  a  surprisal  to  the  loss  of  all.  (2)  In
warring  there  must  be  arming,  another  man  may  go  unarmed,  but  he  that  is  a
soldier  must  be  armed.  (3)  He  must  have  skill  and  knowledge  how  to  manage  his
weapons,  his  hands  must  be  taught  to  war  and  his  fingers  to  fight.  (4)  Courage
and  valour.  Even  Babshakeh  could  say  counsel  and  strength  are  for  war  (2  Kings
xviii.  20).  Policy  and  power  are  very  requisite  for  a  soldier.  (5)  In  respect  of
hardship  a  soldier  must  be  a  hardy  man.  (6)  In  respect  of  obedience.  A  soldier
is  nnderthe  most  absolute  command  of  any  man.  He  must  obey  and  not  dispute
the  commands  of  his  commander  to  whom  by  oath  he  is  bound  to  be  faithful.
(7)  In  respect  of  order.  In  war  there  is  much  order.  Soldiers  must  keep  rank  and
file,  they  must  abide  in  that  place  and  keep  on  that  ground  on  which  their  com-
mander sets  them.  (8)  In  respect  of  their  unsettled  abode.  A  soldier  whilst  he
is  in  actual  service  hath  no  settled  abode,  but  he  is  always  either  marching,  charg-
ing, watching,  fighting,  lying  in  his  tent  for  a  night  or  two  and  is  gone.  (9)  A
soldier  must  attend  the  wars,  he  must  forsake  house,  land,  wife,  children  and  other
lawful  delights  (for  a  time  at  least),  and  give  up  himself  to  his  martial  affairs ;  he
cannot  work  and  war,  follow  a  trade  and  fight  too ;  but  he  must  wholly  devote  him-
self to  his  military  employment  that  he  may  please  his  commander.  (10)  In  respect
of  unity,  soldiers  must  be  unanimous.  United  forces  prevail  much,  but  if  soldiers
be  divided  and  mutiny  they  ruin  themselves.  (11)  Lastly,  In  respect  of  activity
a  soldier's  life  is  a  laborious  life,  they  are  cut  out  for  action,  they  must  never  be
idle.  Now,  the  Lord  will  have  us  all  to  fight  for  these  reasons  :  1.  For  the  greater
manifestations  of  His  own  glory.  He  could  deliver  His  people  without  fighting,  but
then  the  glory  of  His  wisdom,  power  and  goodness  in  their  preservation  and
deUverance  would  not  be  so  perspicuous  to  the  world  ;  nor  His  justice  in  downfall  of
His  enemies  be  so  apparent  to  all.  2.  For  the  good  of  His  people,  hereby  He  exer-
eiseth  their  graces  and  keeps  them  from  rusting.    Yirtue  decays  if  it  have  not  som«


844  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap.  it.

opposite  to  qaicken  it,  and  draw  it  out ;  hereby  also  He  proves  their  valour  and
makes  it  more  apparent  to  others.     The  skill  of  a  pilot  is  not  known  till  a  storm,
nor  the  valour  of  a  soldier  till  the  day  of  battle.     3.  To  make  us  long  for  our  rest
in  heaven.    4.  This  spiritual  fight  is  a  good  fight.    It  is  not  warring  after  the  flesh,
but  a  spiritual,  holy,  honourable  war  (2  Cor.  x.  3,  4).     It  is  a  good  fight  in  nine
respects.     1.  Of  the  author.     2.  The  man.     3.  The  matter.     4.  The  manner.
6.  The  end.     6.  The  armour.     7.  The  issue.     8.  The   fellow-soldiers.     9.  The
reward.     It  is  a  great  comfort  to  be  an  old  soldier  of  Christ.      Men  cashier  old
decrepit  men  out  of  their  camps  ;  but  the  older  soldiers  we  are  in  Christ's  Church
the  better  and  the  more  acceptable  to  Him.    (T.  Hall,  B.D.)        The  good  fight : — ^A
general  retrospect  of  Christian  life  may  fill  the  soul  with  rejoicing  at  the  end  of
life.     It  is  the  life  that  men  live  that  is  the  evidence  that  they  are  fit  to  die.    Aa
against  a  selfish,  sordid  life  the  gleams  of  a  lately-inspired  hope  are  but  doubtful
evidences.    A  consciousness  of  imperfection  and  of  sins  need  not  dim  the  hope
that  men  have,  nor  the  triumph  that  they  express  in  their  last  hours — nay,  it  may
increase  as  the  sufferings  of  a  campaign  lend  added  lustre  to  the  victory.     So,  as
one  glances  back  and  sees  how  the  grace  of  God  sustained  him  in  all  the  imperfec-
tions of  a  long  life,  so  one  may  at  last  be  bold  to  affirm  his  fidelity  and  safety  and
become  prophetic  of  that  which  is  before  him.    For  every  man  that  is  born  and
lives  is  building ;  and  the  builder  invariably  must  hew.     For  the  material  of  which
character  is  built,  as  of  houses,  is  either  wood  or  clay,  unfitted ;  and  the  clay
must  be  moulded,  and  the  brick  must  be  burned,  and  the  carpenter  must  hew  the
log,  and  there  will  be  heaps  of  chips  wherever  there  has  been  skilful  work.    But
when  at  last  the  mansion  stands  out  in  all  its  fair  proportions,  and  its  scaffolding
is  removed,  and  the  chips  and  uncleanliness  are  all  taken  away,  that  is  what  men
look  at ;  and  he  would  be  a  woeful  workman  that  should  go,  after  he  has  completed
his  building,  to  count  his  chips  and  all  the  fragments  of  stone,  lime,  and  litter.
That  is  indispensable  to  this  process  of  unbuilding  in  this  Ufe  of  character,  as  it  is
in  external  dwellings.     It  is  said  of  Michael  Angelo  by  one  of  his  biographers  that
when  the  sacred  enthusiasm  seized  him  he  went  at  a  statue  with  such  vengeance
and  vigour,  that  in  one  hour  he  cast  off  more  stones  that  a  workman  could  carry
away  in  several  hours  ;  and  Paul  was  sometimes  like  that  in  the  vigour  with  which
he  was  emancipating  the  true  spirit  within  himself.     He  had  made  a  good  life.
He  had  lived  it.    He  stood  therefore  in  the  consciousness :  "  I  am  a  completed
man.     No  matter  how  long  I  was  in  building;  no  matter  what  the  dealing  was  by
which  I  was  brought  where  I  am  now,  I  have  fought  a  good  fight,  I  have  kept  the
faith,  and  I  know  that  there  is  laid  up  for  me  the  crown."     This  was  a  glorious
confidence  ;  the  rational  certainty  that  our  purposes  and  fulfilments  are  not  incon-
sistent with  the  true  humihty  nor  with  the  realisation  that  we  are  saved  by  grace.
Paul  looked  forward.     "  I  have  fought  a  good  fight ;  I  have  finished  my  coarse ;  I
have  kept  the  faith;  henceforth" — manacled,  abandoned,  as  he  elsewhere  shows
himseK  to  have  been  ;  the  poorest  man  in  creation,  the  most  unfortunate,  stripped
and  barren — "henceforth,"  he  cries,  from  out  of  his  weary  prison,  "there  is  for
me  " — not  captivity — "  there  is  for  me  a  throne,  a  crown,  and  a  sceptre.     I  am  a
monarch."     Some  men  have  said  this  when  bereft  of  reason ;  but  here  is  a  man  in
the  use  of  his  highest  reason  that  is  able  to  say,  "A  crown  is  laid  up  for  me  "  ;
and  as  he  looked  up  he  could  well  say,  in  his  thought :  "  0,  crown,  wait  1  I    am
coming  for  thee;   it  is  mine;    no  one  shall  take    it   from  me;  wait  for  me."
"  I  have  a  crown  laid  up  for  me — a  crown  of  righteousness  which  the  Lord,  the
righteous  Judge,  shall  give  to  me  that  day."   What  is  a  crown  but  a  sign  of  eminence,
of  glory,  and  of  power  ?    What  is  a  crown  of  righteousness  but  a  crown  that  is
made  up  of  all  the  elements  that  constitute  righteousness  ?    It  was  the  sum  total
of  all  the  highest  conditions  and  fruits  of  his  very  nature,  and  the  nature  was  of
Divine  origin  and  likelihood.      He  had  the  vision  of  pre-eminent  manhood;  a
glorified  love ;  a  glorified  conscience ;  a  glorified  sympathy,  with  all  that  ordains
one  to  the  nobler  condition  of  being  laid  before  Him,  and  all  was  expressed  in  that
crown  of  righteousness.     "A  monarch,  and  my  monarchy  lies  in  the  glorification
of  my  whole  nature,  for  I  shall  be  as  the  Lord."     Here  was  no  anticipation  of
hoping  that  he  should  "  get  to  heaven  somehow. "  There  was  certainly  no  intimation
that  he  expected  to  escape  into  heaven  so  as  by  fire.    He  had  no  idea  of  sleeping  a
thousand  years,  or  ten  thousand  years,  and  then  appearing  in  glory.    The  vision
was  before  him,  near  at  hand,  and  the  step  off  the  platform  of  this  earth  was  to
be  a  step  on  to  the  pavement  of  heaven.     How  the  elements  of  grandeur  exist  in
this  life  I      You  are  the  crown-builders,  you  that  are  living  for  Chriat  and  fol


OHAT.lT.]  11.  TIMOTHY,  845

heaven.  No  one  that  was  ever  disengaging  gold  from  the  quartz  would  ever  see  in
it  those  miracles  of  art  that  at  last  shall  be  made  out  of  it.  We  are  creating,  in
this  life,  the  material  for  our  crown,  for  all  the  things  in  the  soul  that  are  of  their
nature  and  tendency  Divine — every  thorough  impulse  to  the  right,  every  impulse
that  is  willing  to  sacrifice  a  present  pleasure  for  the  sake  of  higher  joy  of  purity
and  nobility —  all  would  seem  to  us  to  be  the  scattering  of  grace  in  our  lives ;  they
are,  all  of  them,  flakes  of  gold;  they  are,  all  of  them,  the  material  of  which
crowns  aie  made,  and  men,  in  this  life,  are  caged  eagles,  that,  looking  out  on  the
sun  and  heavens,  know  that  they  would  fly,  but  they  have  not  room  to  spread  their
wings.  Ten  thousand  intimations,  ten  thousand  aspirations,  struggling  desires,
and  longings  are  breaking  in  the  hearts  of  men,  and,  because  they  cannot  execute
them  and  bring  them  forth  to  real  action  in  this  life,  they  are  not  dead.  In  the
early  spring  the  root  and  the  bud  are  checked  and  held  back.  They  are  not  an-
nihilated ;  they  wait.  The  rose  is  sealed  up  and  cannot  deliver  itself,  but  it  is  the
rose ;  and  the  root  that  dimly  throws  the  evidence  of  itself  above  the  ground  is
itself,  though  it  cannot  yet  develop  itself.  But  by  and  by,  when  soft  southern
rains  and  sweet  suns  begin  to  beam,  week  after  week,  the  little  garden  breaks  out
into  blossom.  And  in  this  life,  where  we  are  checked  and  hindered  and  tempted
over  much,  where  we  find  that  we  cannot  carry  out  our  best  purposes,  and  are
failing  on  the  right  and  on  the  left,  the  attempts  to  do  it  are  so  many  attempts  to
bud  and  blossom,  but  the  sun  is  not  warm  enough  yet.  But  when,  by  and  by,  the
Sun  of  Righteousness  shall  arise  with  healing  on  its  beams  upon  our  liberated  selves,
we  shall  break  forth  into  the  full  glory  of  the  kingdom  of  God.  (U.  W.  Beecher.)
A  noble  career: — I.  Splendid  achievements  in  eegaed  to  the  duties  op  lite.

1.  Victorious  soldiership.    (1)  His  behaviour  was  good.    (2)  His  cause  was  good.

(3)  His  Leader  was  good.     (4)  His  armour  was  good.     (5)  His  victory  was  good.

2.  The  successful  athlete.     (1)  Ambition.      (2)  Self-denial.     (3)  Concentration.

(4)  Perseverance.  3.  The  faithful  steward.  He  had— (1)  embraced,  (2)  lived,  (3)
spread,  (4)  defended  the  truth,  II.  Geeat  tranquillity  in  eegabd  to  the  teials
OF  LIFE.  1.  His  knowledge  of  them.  (1)  Of  their  honours—"  To  be  offered."
Martyrdom.  (2)  Of  their  nearness — "Is  at  hand."  2.  His  preparedness  for
them — "Ready."  3.  His  benefit  by  them — "Departure."  III.  Gloeious  ex-
pectation IN  REGAED  TO  THE  REWARD  OF  LIFE.  1.  In  valuo  it  wiU  be  the  highest
possible.  "Crowns."  2.  In  principle  it  will  be  the  most  indisputable.  "Crown
of  righteousness."  3.  In  bestowal  it  will  be  the  most  honourable.  (1)  Given  by
the  Highest  Being.  (2)  On  the  most  august  occasion.  (3)  In  association  with  the
most  distinguished  company.  {B.D.Johns.)  Paul's  review  of  his  life : — I.  The
PAST  FILLED  HIM  WITH  SATISFACTION.  1.  He  had  been  a  warrior.  And  his  contest
was  with  no  phantom  or  abstraction ;  not  with  a  mere  principle  of  evil,  employed
without  wiU  or  intelligence,  but  with  a  real  enemy.  Paul  evidently  acted  con-
tinually under  the  impression  that  he  was  in  an  enemy's  country, — that  he  was
watched  by  an  invisible  foe,  resisted  by  a  being  mightier  than  priest  or  prince.
He  recognised  a  terrible  unity  in  sin — an  energy  and  ubiquity  which  are  angelic.
He  considered  himself  an  officer  in  an  army  which  has  regiments  contending  in
battlefields  far  away  from  this  earth.  Paul's  enemy  was  God's  enemy.  He  had
no  quarrels  of  ambition,  or  revenge,  or  covetousness,  or  pride,  to  settle.  His  eye
was  fixed  on  the  prince  who  led  the  revolt  in  heaven,  and  had  brought  it  down  to
earth.  Against  him  Paul  proclaimed  an  open  and  uncompromising  war — a  war
of  extermination;  and  he  extended  it  to  everything  that  enlisted  under  Satan.
Hence  it  began  in  his  own  heart,  against  the  traitors  long  entertained  there ;  and
with  them  he  proclaimed  an  unrelenting  war.  2.  He  had  been  a  racer,  also.
What  was  the  goal  ?  It  was,  to  attain  and  accomplish  the  highest  ends  man  can
seek ;  the  highest  personal  perfection  consistent  with  being  on  earth ;  attaining,  as
he  styles  it,  "  to  the  resurrection  of  the  dead "  ;  the  exalting  Christ  among  men ;
the  leading  men  to  him ;  the  confirmation  of  the  Churches  in  their  faith ;  the
leaving  behind  him  writings  which  should  be  the  means  of  glorifying  God,  edifying
His  people,  and  converting  men,  to  the  end  of  time.  He  had  aimed  at  these
achievements;  and,  by  the  grace  of  God,  he  had  accomplished  them.  3.  He  had
been  a  steward.  His  life  presented  in  this  aspect  a  trust  discharged.  "  I  have
kept  the  faith."  II.  A  futdee  filled  with  blessedness.  He  had  honoured  his
Redeemer,  and  he  knew  that  Christ  would  honour  him.  He  looked  for  "  a  crown."
It  has  been  a  common  thing  in  the  world's  history  to  contend  for  a  crown.  The
Christian  hero  here  stands  on  the  level  of  the  earthly  hero.  But,  when  we  come
to  compare  the  nature  of  these  respective  crowns,  the  character  of  their  conflicts,


848  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [ohap.  if.

and  the  mnpires  to  whom  the  warriors  look,  the  Christian  rises  to  an  elevation  in>
finitely  above  the  earthly  hero.  There  is  nothing  selfish  in  the  war,  the  victory,
or  the  coronation.  (JB.  N.  Kirk,  D.D.)  Paul  the  hero : — I.  Here  is  a  man
whose  entire  being  is  under  the  supremaot  of  conscience.  With  other  men  oon-
ecienoe  often  has  theoretical  sapremacy;  with  St.  Paul  its  reign  was  actual.  Other
men  may  waver  and  fluctuate  in  their  obedience  to  its  behests ;  St.  Paul  is  held  to
this  central  power  as  steadily  as  the  planets  to  the  sun.  There  was  no  sham  about
this  man.  What  he  seemed  to  be,  that  he  was.  What  he  declared  to  another,
that  his  inmost  soul  commended  as  truth  and  attested  to  its  own  secret  tribunal,
n.  His  life  was  also  under  the  dominion  of  another  regnant  power — the  scfkeuaot
OF  AN  ovEBMASTEBiNO  pcRPOBE.  Evcry  man  needs  the  inspiration  of  a  great  purpose
and  a  great  mission  to  lift  him  above  the  pettiness  and  cheapness  which  are  the
bane  of  ordinary  lives.  Some  great  undertaking,  with  an  element  of  heroism  and
moral  sublimity  in  it,  the  very  contemplation  of  which  quickens  the  blood  and  fires
the  soul  and  awakens  an  ever-present  sense  of  the  dignity  and  significance  of  life —
this  is  an  essential  condition  of  all  great  achievement.  Such  an  inspiring  purpose
and  ennobling  work  stirred  the  heart  and  stimulated  the  powers  of  St.  PauL
Though  nothing  low  had  previously  ruled  or  influenced  him,  it  happened  to  him —
as  it  has  to  many  another  man  at  his  conversion — that  the  supreme  purpose  of
life  was  formed  in  that  supreme  hour  when  the  transforming  touch  of  the  Divine
hand  was  felt  upon  the  soul,  and  life's  sublime  work  opened  before  the  clarified
vision.  III.  But  the  supremacy  of  conscience  and  of  a  great  purpose  are  not  suffi-
cient hi  themselves  alone  to  produce  such  a  character  and  such  a  life  as  St.  Paul
presents  for  our  study.  To  these  two  ruling  forces  must  be  added  another — greater
than  either,  and  co-ordinate  with  both — thb  bupbeuact  of  an  all-conquebino
FAITH.  Christ  to  him  was  not  a  myth,  not  merely  the  incomparable  Teacher  of
Ga,lilee,  not  the  theoretic  and  historic  Saviour  of  men ;  He  was  infinitely  more  than
that,  the  ever-present  Partner  of  his  life,  the  unfailing  Source  of  his  strength.
His  faith  perpetually  saw  this  personal  Jesus,  felt  the  warm  beating  of  His  loving
heart,  heard  His  sacred  voice  in  solemn  command  or  inspiring  promise,  and  walked
with  Him  as  with  an  earthly  friend.  As  well  separate  the  spirit  from  the  body,  the
beating  heart  from  the'respiring  lungs,  as  separate  this  inspired  apostle  from  this
inspiring  Christ.  Anything  is  possible  to  such  a  man.  Indeed,  it  is  no  longer  a
question  of  human  ability  at  all,  but  of  human  co-operation  with  the  Divine  Christ —
the  natural  man  giving  the  supernatural  agency  full  play  and  power.  ( G.  H.Payne,  D.  D.)
1  have  flnished  my  course. — The  Christian' $  course: — I.  We  are  to  consider
THE  WAT  OB  PATH  IN  WHICH  THE  Chbistian  IS  TO  BUN.  1.  The  Way  in  which  the
Christian  is  to  run  is  a  way  of  faith  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  2.  The  way  the
Christian  is  to  run  is  a  way  of  holiness  (Psa.  oxix.  32;  1  Thess.  iv.  7).  Christians,
in  proceeding  on  this  course,  do  it  not  with  the  same  life  and  vigour ;  some  appear
cold  and  indifferent,  whilst  others  are  quick  and  lively  ;  some  make  great  advances,
whilst  others  go  on  by  slow  degrees.  Some  begin  the  heavenly  race  soon,  in  the
bloom  of  life,  whilst  others  loiter  till  towards  the  evening  of  their  days.  H.  We
now  come  to  consider  how  wb  abb  to  run,  that  wb  mat  finish  oub  coubse  with
ADVANTAOB.  1.  That  WO  may  run  the  Christian  race  well,  it  is  necessary  that  we
cast  off  every  weight.  2.  We  must  begin  and  continue  in  a  dependence  upon
Christ.  3.  We  must  run  with  patience,  courage,  and  resolution.  4.  We  must  be
watchful  and  diligent.  Be  upon  your  guard.  Christian,  the  way  you  rvm  is  diffi-
cult, and  it  is  attended  with  many  snares  and  temptations.  5.  We  must  keep
pressing  forward  and  persevere  to  the  end  of  our  course.  Ton  may  meet  with
many  discouragements,  but  still  keep  on,  the  further  you  go,  the  less  ground
remains  to  be  trod,  therefore  let  not  your  hearts  be  troubled.  HI.  The  encodbaob-
HBNT  Christians  have  to  bun  this  race.  1.  There  is  a  glorious  crown  before  as.
2.  He  that  begins  aright  shall  at  length  certainly  finish  his  course.  8 .  Every  one
that  finishes  his  course  shall  as  surely  receive  the  prize.  To  conclude,  with  some
improvement  of  the  point.  (1^  The  further  we  proceed  in  our  text,  the  more  we
see  the  difficulty  of  the  Christian  life,  and  the  vanity  of  their  hopes  who  content
themselves  with  a  mere  form.  (2)  How  foolish  are  all  those  that  run  after  perish-
ing enjoyments,  and  neglect  the  prize  of  immortality.  (8)  What  arguments  are
there  for  running  this  race.  (I)  How  should  every  one  that  has  begun  this
race  rejoice  in  the  encouragements  that  have  been  offered.  {S.  Hayward.)
The  finished  race: — To  this  end  we  must  run — 1.  Rightly.  2.  Speedily.  8.
Patiently.  4.  Cheerfully.  6.  Circumspectly.  6.  Eesolutely.  7.  Perseveringly.
(T.  Hall,  B.D.)      Best  at  last: — In  our  Christian  course  it  is  but  too  generally


BHAP.  IT.]  II.  TIMOTHY,  847

and  too  truly  observed,  that  as  we  grow  older  we  grow  colder;  we  become  more
Black,  remiss,  and  weary  in  well  doing.  The  reverse  oaght  to  be  the  case,  for  the
reason  assigned  by  the  apostle  when  stirring  up  his  converts  to  vigour  and  zeal
and  alacrity :  he  says, "  For  now  is  our  salvation  nearer  than  when  we  believed."  In
a  race  the  push  is  made  at  last.  (Bishop  Home.)  I  have  kept  the  faith. —
Keeping  the  faith: — ^What  does  St.  Paul  mean  by  the  faith  which  he  has  kept?
Is  he  rejoicing  that  he  has  been  true  to  a  certain  scheme  of  doctrine,  or  that  he  has
preserved  a  certain  temper  of  soul  and  spiritual  relationship  to  God?  For  the
term  "  faith  "  is  a  very  large  one.  There  can  be  no  doubt,  I  think,  that  he  means
both,  and  that  the  latter  meaning  is  a  very  deep  and  important  one,  as  we  shall
see.  But  this  term,  "  the  faith,"  did  signify  for  him,  beyond  all  doubt,  a  certain
group  of  truths,  all  bound  together  by  their  common  unity  of  source  and  unity  of
purpose.  Paul  was  too  wise  and  profound  not  to  keep  this  always  in  sight.
That  there  must  be  intellectual  conceptions  as  the  base  of  strong,  consistent,  and
effective  feeling  is  a  necessity  which  he  continually  recognises ;  and  the  faith  which
he  is  thankful  to  have  kept  is,  first  of  all,  that  truth  which  had  been  made  known
to  him  and  to  the  Church  by  God.  The  first  thing,  then,  that  strikes  us  is  that,
when  Paul  said  that  he  had  kept  the  faith,  he  evidently  believed  that  there  was  a
faith  to  keep.  The  faith  was  a  body  of  truth  given  to  him,  which  he  had  to  hold
and  to  use  and  to  apply,  but  which  he  had  not  made  and  was  not  to  improve.  We
want,  then,  to  consider  the  condition  of  one  who,  having  thus  learned  and  held  a
positive  faith,  continues  to  hold  it — holds  it  to  the  end.  He  keeps  the  faith.  We
need  not  confine  our  thought  to  St,  Paul.  An  old  man  is  dying,  and  as  he  lets  go
the  things  which  are  trivial  and  accidental  to  lay  hold  of  what  is  essential  and  im-
portant to  him,  this  is  what  comes  to  his  mind  with  special  satisfaction :  "  I  have
kept  the  faith. "  The  true  faith  which  a  man  has  kept  up  to  the  end  of  his  life
must  be  one  that  has  opened  with  his  growth  and  constantly  won  new  reality  and
colour  from  his  changing  experience.  The  old  man  does  beheve  what  the  child
believed ;  but  how  different  it  is,  though  still  the  same.  It  is  the  field  that  once
held  the  seed,  now  waving  and  rustling  under  the  autumn  wind  with  the  harvest
that  it  holds,  yet  all  the  time  it  has  kept  the  corn.  The  joy  of  his  life  has
richened  his  belief.  His  sorrow  has  deepened  it.  His  doubts  have  sobered  it.
His  enthusiasms  have  fired  it.  His  labour  has  purified  it.  This  is  the  work  that
life  does  upon  faith.  This  is  the  beauty  of  an  old  man's  religion.  His  doctrines
are  like  the  house  that  he  has  lived  in,  rich  with  associations  which  make  it
certain  that  he  will  never  move  out  of  it.  His  doctrines  have  been  illustrated  and
strengthened  and  endeared  by  the  good  help  they  have  given  to  his  life.  And  no
doctrine  that  has  not  done  this  can  be  reaUy  held  up  to  the  end  with  any  such  vital
grasp  as  will  enable  us  to  carry  it  with  us  through  the  river,  and  enter  with  it  into
the  new  life  beyond.  And  again,  is  it  not  true  that  any  belief  which  we  really
keep  up  to  the  end  of  hfe  must  at  some  time  have  become  for  us  a  personal  convic-
tion, resting  upon  evidence  of  its  own  ?  I  know,  indeed,  how  much  a  merely  tradi-
tional religion  will  inspire  men  to  do.  I  know  that  for  a  faith  which  is  not  really
theirs,  but  only  what  they  call  it,  "  their  fathers'  faith,"  men  will  dispute  and
argue,  make  friendships  and  break  them,  contribute  money,  undertake  great
labours,  change  the  whole  outward  tenor  of  their  life.  I  know  that  men  will  suffer
for  it.  I  am  not  sure  but  they  will  die  to  uphold  a  creed  to  which  they  were  born,
and  with  which  their  own  character  for  firmness  and  consistency  has  become
involved.  All  this  a  traditional  faith  can  do.  It  can  do  everything  except  one,
and  that  it  can  never  do.  It  can  never  feed  a  spiritual  life,  and  build  a  man  up  in
holiness  and  grace.  Before  it  can  do  that  our  fathers'  faith  must  first  by  strong
personal  conviction  become  ours.  And  here  I  think  that,  rightly  seen,  the  culture
of  our  Church  asserts  its  wisdom.  The  Church  has  in  herself  the  very  doctrine  of
tradition.  She  teaches  the  child  a  faith  that  has  the  warrant  of  the  ages,  full  of
devotion  and  of  love.  She  calls  on  him  to  beUeve  doctrines  of  which  he  cannot
be  convinced  as  yet.  The  tradition,  the  hereditation  of  belief,  the  unity  of  the
human  history,  are  ideas  very  familiar  to  her,  of  which  she  constantly  and  beauti-
fully makes  use.  And  yet  she  does  not  disown  her  work  of  teaching  and  arguing
and  convincing.  She  cannot,  and  yet  be  true  to  her  mission.  She  teaches  the
young  with  tbe  voice  of  authority;  she  addresses  the  mature  with  the  voice  of
reason.  And  now  have  we  not  reached  some  idea  of  the  kind  of  faith  which  it  ia
possible  for  a  man  to  keep  ?  What  sort  of  a  creed  may  one  hold  and  expect  to
hold  it  always,  live  in  it,  die  in  it,  and  carry  it  even  to  the  life  beyond  ?  1.  In  the
first  place,  it  must  be  a  creed  broad  enough  to  allow  the  man  to  grow  within  it,  to


848  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaj.  it.

contain  and  to  supply  his  ever- developing  mind  and  character.  It  will  not  be  a
creed  burdened  with  many  details.  It  will  consist  of  large  truths  and  principles,
capable  of  ever-varying  applications  to  ever-varying  life.  So  only  can  it  be  clear,
strong,  positive,  and  yet  leave  the  soul  free  to  grow  within  it,  nay,  feed  the  soul
richly  and  minister  to  its  growth.  2.  And  the  second  characteristic  of  the  faith  that
can  be  kept  will  be  its  evidence,  its  proved  truth.  It  will  not  be  a  mere  aggrega-
tion of  chance  opinious.  The  reason  why  a  great  many  people  seem  to  be  always
changing  their  faith  is  that  they  never  really  have  any  faith.  They  have  indeed
what  they  call  a  faith,  and  are  often  very  positive  about  it.  They  have  gathered
together  a  number  of  opinions  and  fancies,  often  very  ill-considered,  which  they
say  that  they  believe,  using  the  deep  and  sacred  word  for  a  very  superficial  and
frivolous  action  of  their  wills.  They  no  more  have  a  faith  than  the  city  vagrant
has  a  home  who  sleeps  upon  a  different  door-step  every  night.  And  yet  he  does
Bleep  somewhere  every  night ;  and  so  these  wanderers  among  the  creeds  at  each
given  moment  are  believing  something,  although  that  something  is  for  ever  alter-
ing. We  do  not  properly  believe  what  we  only  think.  A  thousand  speculations
come  into  our  heads,  and  our  minds  dwell  upon  them,  which  are  not  to  be  there-
fore put  into  our  creed,  however  plausible  they  seem.  Our  creed,  our  credo,  any-
thing which  we  call  by  such  a  sacred  name,  is  not  what  we  have  thought,  but  what
our  Lord  has  told  us.  The  true  creed  must  come  down  from  above,  and  not
out  from  within.  {Bp.  Phillips  Brooks.)  On  keeping  the  faith: — I.  What  is
MEANT  BY  KEEPING  THE  FAITH.  1.  It  may  signify  that  we  firmly  believe  the  doc-
trines God  has  revealed,  and  steadfastly  maintain  them.  We  read  of  a  "  faith
once  delivered  to  the  saints  "  (Jude  3).  These,  therefore,  coming  from  God  are
certainly  worthy  of  our  credit,  deserve  our  notice,  and  ought  to  be  steadfastly
maintained  by  us.  2.  The  expression  signifies  that  we  faithfully  observe  the  vows
and  engagements  we  have  brought  ourselves  under,  to  our  glorious  Master,  and
hold  on  with  integrity  and  constancy  in  His  service.  II.  The  necessity  and  im-
portance OP  KEEPING  THE  FAITH.  1.  It  is  the  distinguishing  characteristic  of  a
real  Christian.  That  profession  that  is  not  set  upon  good  principles  will  never
hold.  2.  In  keeping  the  faith,  the  Christian's  comfort  is  greatly  promoted.  The
glorions  doctrines  of  faith  are  of  the  most  excellent  nature ;  they  abundantly
recompense  the  Christian  in  his  steady  belief  of  and  attachment  to  them,  by  the
unspeakable  supports  they  yield  in  every  circumstance  and  station  of  life.  3.  Keep-
ing the  faith  is  necessary  to  promote  the  honour  of  Christ,  and  to  secure  the
Christian  from  those  errors  and  snares  to  which  he  stands  exposed.  4.  Without  a
steadfast  perseverance  in  the  faith  our  hopes  of  heaven  are  vain  and  deceitful.
Perseverence  in  the  faith  does  not  entitle  us  to  eternal  life,  but  there  is  no
eternal  life  without  it.  A  word  or  two  of  .improvement.  (1)  Is  keeping  the  faith
the  distinguishing  character  of  a  Christian?  Then  how  few  are  there  in  the
present  age.  The  honours  of  the  world  lead  away  some,  the  sensualities  of
Ufe  ensnare  others.  (2)  Is  perseverance  in  the  faith  the  character  of  a  real
Christian?  How  melancholy  must  their  state  be  who  never  yet  set  forward
in  the  ways  of  God.  (3)  Is  it  so  important  to  keep  the  faith  ?  Then
let  us  seriously  examine  our  own  hearts  concerning  it,  (S.  Hay  ward.)
Guarding  the  faith : — I.  The  pbeciousness  of  that  which  he  had  kept.  He  was
the  emissary  of  the  great  Physician,  who  had  but  one  remedy,  one  panacea  for  the
one  radical  disease  of  man.  In  Eomehe  said, "  I  am  not  ashamed  of  the  gospel  of
Christ,  for  it  is  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation  unto  every  one  that  believeth,  to
the  Jew  first,  and  also  to  the  Greek."  In  Corinth  he  would  say,  "  The  Jews  require
a  sign,  and  the  Greeks  seek  after  wisdom;  but  we  preach  Christ  crucified,  to  the
Jews  a  stumbling-block,  and  to  the  Greeks  foolishness ;  but  to  them  that  are  called,
both  Jews  and  Greeks,  Christ  the  power  of  God,  and  the  wisdom  of  God."  In
Galatia  he  would  say,  "  God  forbid  that  I  should  glory  save  in  the  Cross  of  our  Lord
Jesus  Christ,  whereby  the  world  is  crucified  unto  me,  and  I  unto  the  world."  II.
The  8TBEN0OTJSNES8  WITH  WHICH  HE  HAD  GUABDED  IT.  Think  you  that  he  had  no
difficulties  with  which  to  cope  ?  Was  there  to  him  no  maze  in  Providence,  no
labyrinth  which  he  found  it  impossible  to  track  and  thread  ?  Providence  in  many
of  its  movements  was  to  him,  as  to  us,  an  impenetrable  mystery ;  but  still  he  "  kept
the  faith."  Think  you  that  he  found  no  difficulties  in  comprehending  the  dispensa-
tions through  which  God  had  manifested  Himself  to  man ;  and  that  the  wonder
never  rose  up  in  his  mind  how  it  was  that  thousands  of  years  had  to  pass  away
before  the  incarnation  of  the  Son  of  God  and  the  redemption  of  the  Cross  ?  He
must  have  been  less  than  man,  or  greatly  more  than  man,  if  he  could  have  sounded


CHAP.  IT.]  II.  TIMOTHY,  849

this  depth. ;  but  still  he  "  kept  the  faith."  III.  His  success  in  guarding  the  faith.
How  he  kept  it  he  does  not  tell  us  here ;  but  we  catch  glimpses,  here  and  there,  of
the  secret  of  his  power.  He  kept  it  on  his  knees,  kept  it  when  he  prayed  night  and
day  with  tears.  And  be  sure  there  is  no  faith,  no  true  faith,  no  faith  that  mil  hold
a  man  firm,  which  can  be  kept  apart  from  fellowship  with  God.  We  can  keep  a
creed  without  Divine  help — we  can  keep  a  creed  through  the  force  of  prejudice —
through  the  force  of  obstinacy — through  the  force  of  ignorance — through  the  force
of  custom  and  social  sanction — through  the  force  of  policy.  To  keep  a  creed  is  the
easiest  thing  in  the  world,  for  it  can  He,  made  up  and  dead,  in  some  undisturbed
chamber  of  the  brain.  But  oh  I  to  keep  a  faith  is  far  from  easy ;  for  a  faith  to  be  a
faith  at  all  must  be  living,  and  if  it  be  living,  it  must  meet  the  onset  of  a  thousand
circumstances  by  which  it  will  be  tested.  It  will  be  tested  by  the  influence  of  our
obstinate  corruption — it  will  be  tested  by  the  temptations  of  the  world,  by  its
maxims  and  customs — it  will  be  tested  by  promises  of  advantage  if  only  we  will  be
faithless  to  our  profession — it  wUl  be  tested  by  changes  in  our  circumstances,
whether  they  be  from  poverty  to  wealth,  or  from  wealth  to  poverty — it  will  be  tested
by  those  strange  aspects  of  providence  which  bewUder  at  times  the  strongest  minds,
and  make  their  feet  almost  to  slip — it  will  be  tested  by  the  indifference  or  lukewarm-
ness  of  those  around  us.  Happy  the  man  who  brings  his  faith  through  all  these
things.  He  is  like  a  fire-safe,  which  guards  its  treasure  unhurt,  amid  the  flames
which  have  raged  around  it  in  vain.  (E.  Mellor,  D.D.)  Martyrdom : — To  die  for
truth  is  not  to  die  for  one's  country,  but  for  the  world.  (J.  P.  Bichter.)  Keeping
the  faith : — When  Bernard  Palissy,  the  inventor  of  a  kind  of  pottery  called  Palissy
ware,  was  an  old  man,  he  was  sent  to  the  French  prison  known  as  the  Bastille
because  he  was  a  Protestant.  The  king  went  to  see  him,  and  told  him  he  should  be
set  free  if  he  would  deny  his  faith.  The  king  said,  '*  I  am  sorry  to  see  you  here,  but
the  people  will  compel  me  to  keep  you  here  unless  you  recant."  Palissy  was  ninety
years  old,  but  he  was  ashamed  to  hear  a  king  speak  of  being  compelled,  so  he  said,
"  Sire,  they  who  can  compel  you  cannot  compel  me  I  I  can  die  I  "  And  he
remained  in  prison  until  he  diei  St.  Paul  keeping  the  faith : — Paal  kept  the
faith  at  Antioch,  even  when  the  infatuated  crowd  attempted  to  drown  his  voice  with
their  clamour,  and  interrupted  him,  contradicting  and  blaspheming.  He  kept  the
faith  at  Iconium,  when  the  envious  Jews  stirred  up  the  people  to  stone  him.  He
kept  the  faith  at  Lystra,  when  the  fate  of  Stephen  became  almost  his,  and  he  was
dragged,  wounded  and  bleeding,  outside  the  ramparts  of  the  town,  and  left  there  to
languish,  and,  for  aught  they  cared,  to  die.  He  kept  the  faith  against  his  erring
brother  Peter,  and  withstood  him  to  the  face,  because  he  was  to  be  blamed.  He
kept  the  faith  when  shamefully  treated  at  PhUippi,  and  made  the  dungeon  echo
back  the  praises  of  his  God.  He  kept  the  faith  at  Thessalonica,  when  lewd  fellows
of  the  baser  sort  accused  him  falsely  of  sedition.  He  kept  the  faith  at  Athens,  when,
to  the  world's  sages,  he  preached  of  Him  whom  they  ignorantly  worshipped  as  the
unknown  God.  He  kept  the  faith  at  Corinth,  when  compelled  to  abandon  that
hardened  and  obdurate  city,  and  to  shake  off  the  dust  from  his  garment  as  a
testimony  against  it.  He  kept  the  faith  at  Ephesus,  when  he  pointed  his  hearers
not  to  Diana,  but  to  Jesus  Christ  as  their  only  Saviour.  He  kept  the  faith  at
Jerusalem,  when  stoned  by  the  enraged  and  agitated  mob — when  stretched  upon  the
torturing  rack,  and  bound  with  iron  fetters.  He  kept  the  faith  at  Csesarea,  before
the  trembling,  conscience-stricken  Felix,  when  he  reasoned  of  righteousness,
temperance,  and  judgment  to  come.  He  kept  the  faith  before  Agrippa,  and,  by  his
earnestness,  compelled  the  king  to  say,  "Almost  thou  persuadest  me  to  be  a
Christian  " ;  and  even  in  the  closing  hours  of  life,  when  the  last  storm  was  gathering
over  his  head,  when  lying  in  the  dark  and  dismal  Boman  cell,  he  wrote  these
triumphant  words,  "  I  am  now  ready  to  be  offered,  and  the  time  of  my  departure  ia
at  hand.  I  have  fought  a  good  fight,  I  have  finished  my  course,  I  have  kept  the
faith.  Henceforth  there  is  laid  up  for  me  a  crovm  of  righteousness,  which  the  Lord,
the  righteous  Judge,  shall  given  me  at  that  day."  [J.  R.  Macduff.)  Keeping  the
faith : — The  apostle  kept  the  faith.  But  does  not  the  faith  keep  the  man  ?  It  does  ;
yet  only  as  he  keeps  it.  The  battery  keeps  the  gunners  only  as  they  stand  to  the
guns.  The  fort  keeps  the  garrison,  yet  only  as  they  guard  its  walls.  Never  was  a
time  when  fidelity  on  guard  was  more  needed  than  now,  when  the  sappers  are
approaching  the  citadel  of  the  faith,  and  there  is  treason  in  the  camp  of  heaven —
men  in  Christ's  uniform,  having  been  so  deceived  by  successful  crime,  and  so  blinded
by  dalliance  with  mammon  as  to  give  utterance  and  organisation  to  the  shameless
sentiment  that  the  prosperity  of  a  community  can  be  built  upon  sin.    It  is  a  trae


350  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (chip.  iv.


Boldier's  business  to  gnard  the  faith.  The  Boman  sentinel  that  was  exhomed  at
Pompeii,  grasping  his  spear,  perished  rather  than  desert  his  post.  He  wears  the
immortality  of  earth.  But  he  that  guards  the  faith,  when  dug  out  of  the  forces  that
overwhelm  him  while  he  stands  his  ground,  shall  inherit  the  immortality  of  God,
and  walk  with  warrior  feet  the  streets  of  gold,  a  living  king  over  a  lofty  realm.
[J.  Lewis.)  A  crown  of  rlgliteouBnesB. — The  crown  oj  righteousness : — I.  Let  us
consider  the  prize  the  apostle  had  in  view,  "  a  crown  of  righteousness."  Royalty
is  the  highest  pitch  of  human  grandeur.  Those  that  wear  earthly  crowns  have  got
to  the  very  summit  of  earthly  honour,  and  are  in  that  station  in  which  centres  all
worldly  glory  and  happiness.  What  an  idea  is  this  similitude  designed  to  give  us
then  of  that  glorious  world,  where  every  saint  wears  an  unfading,  incorruptible  and
immortal  crown  ?  1.  This  crown  consists  of  perfect  and  everlasting  righteousness.
The  sparks  of  this  crown  are  perfect  holiness  and  a  conformity  to  God.  2.  This
crown  was  purchased  by  the  righteousness  of  Jesus  Christ.  It  cost  a  valuable  price,
and  therefore  is  of  inestimable  worth.  3.  We  come  to  the  possession  of  this  crown
in  a  way  of  righteousness.  Its  being  purchased  for  us  does  not  lay  a  foundation
for  our  slothfulness,  sin  and  security.    II.  Consider  the  person  by  whom  this

CBOWN   IS   bestowed,   AND   HiS   CHARAOTEB  AS  A  BIGHTEOtJS   JUDGE.      TMs  iUustrioUS

person  is  everywhere  represented  to  be  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.    Thus,  Acts.  xvii.  31.
Christ  is  the  appointed  person,  and  He  is  every  way  fitted  for  the  great  and  important
work.  He  being  God  as  well  as  man :  He  is  absolutely  incapable  of  committing  the  least
mistake  or  error.    And  He  is  a  righteous  judge.    He  will  display  His  righteousness
in  the  last  sentence  that  He  will  pass  upon  every  creature.    III.  Consider  when  this
CROWN  shall  be  completely  possessed  AND  BE  FULLY  GIVEN.    It  is  here  said  to  be
given  "  at  that  day,"  viz.  :  The  day  of  Christ's  appearance  to  judge  the  world.   IV.
Consider  the  persons  to  whom  this  crown  shall  be  given.     •'  To  all  those  who  love
His  appearing."    The  apostle  was  one  of  that  happy  number.    They  love  His  appear-
ing, for  then  every  enemy  will  be  vanquished.     {S.  Hayward.)      The  heavenly  crown
assured  .-—This  assurance  is— 1.  Attainable.    2.  Tenable.     3.  Desirable.    (T.  Hall,
B.D.)      The  crown  of  righteousness : — I.  The  reward.    It  is  described  as  a  "  crown
of  righteousness  " ;  and,  without  question,  such  a  phrase  conveys  the  idea  of  some-
thing exquisitely  pure,  brilliant,  and  honourable.     The  crown  is  the  reward  of
a  conqueror;  the  righteousness  is  the  diadem  of  deity  Himself.     And  yet  we
cannot  deny  that  it  would  be  difficult  to  follow  the  idea  into  detail,  and  keep
unimpaired  its  interest  and  its  beauty.    There  is  something  indefinite  in  the
phraseology,  if  we  wish  to  ascertain  from  it  the  precise  character  of  the  recompense.
When,  however,  we  turn  to  the  Being,  by  whom  the  recompense  will  be  bestowed,
and  find  Him  described  as  "  the  Lord,  the  righteous  Judge,"  we  may  gain  that
precision  of  idea  which  is  not  elsewhere  to  be  procured.    For  we  should  never  forget
that,  by  our  thoughts  and  actions,  we  lie  exposed  to  God's  righteous  indignation.
And  from  this  we  may  proceed  to  another  fact.    We  require  you  to  observe  that  a
surprising  change  must  have  been  effected  ere  a  sinner  can  dwell  with  anything  of
dehght  on  the  title  now  under  review .    We  press  on  you  the  truth,  that  if  the
crown  is  to  be  bestowad  by  the  hands  of  the  Lord,  the  righteous  Judge,  the  recipient
mast  have  been  the  subject  of  a  great  moral  revolution ;  for  he  is  not  only  to  be
acquitted,  he  is  actually  to  be  recompensed.     The  bliss  of  an  angel  may  be  great,
the  splendour  of  an  angel  may  be  glorious ;  but  it  was  not  for  angels  that  Jesus  died,
it  was  not  for  angels  that  Jesus  rose.     There  will  be  for  ever  this  broad  distinction
between  the  angels  and  the  saints.     The  angels  are  blessed  by  the  single  right  of
creation ;  the  saints  by  the  double  right  of  creation  and  redemption.    Who,  then,
can  question  that  the  portion  possessed  by  saints  will  be  more  brilliant  than  that
(ossessed  by  the  angels  ?    II.  The  time  at  which  the  crown  shall  be  bestowed.
t  must  be  that  day  when,  with  the  cloud  for  His  chariot,  the  archangel's  trump
for  His  heraldry,  and  ten  thousand  times  ten  thousand  spirits  for  BUs  retinue,  the
Man  of  Sorrows  shall  approach   the  earth,  and  wake  the  children  of  the  first
resurrection.      And  from  this  we  conclude  that  St.  Paul  did  not  expect  the  con-
summation of  his  happiness  at  the  very  instant  of  his  departure  from  the  flesh.
He  knew,  indeed,  that  to  be  "  absent  from  the  body  "  is  to  be  "  present  with  the
Lord  "  ;  he  knew  that  in  the  transition  of  a  moment  the  prison  dungeon  would  be
exchanged  for  the  palace,  the  turmoil  of  earth  for  the  deep  rapture  of  peace  which
never  ends;  but  he  knew  also  that  the  crowning  time  of  the  saints  shall  not  precede
the  second  coming  of  their  Lord.    The  crown,  indeed,  was  prepared,  but  then  it  was
•'laid  up."      It  should  never  be  forgotten,  that  the  resurrection  of  the  body  ig
indispensable  to  the  completeness  of  happiness.     If  it  be  not,  the  whole  scheme


E


CHAP.  IT.]  IL  TIMOTHT.  851

of  Christianity  is  darkened,  for  the  Redeemer  undertook  to  redeem  matter,  as  well
as  spirit.  III.  The  pebsons  on  whom  the  crown  shall  be  bestowed.  There  is
nothing  more  natural  to  man,  but  nothing  more  opposed  to  religion,  than  selfish-
ness.  He  who  has  earthly  riches,  may  desire  to  keep  them  to  himself ;  he  who  has
heavenly,  must  long  to  impart  them  to  others.  It  is  an  exquisitely  beautiful
transition,  which  St.  Paul  here  makes,  from  the  contemplation  of  his  own  portion,
to  the  mention  of  that  which  is  reserved  for  the  whole  company  of  the  faithful :
"  not  to  me  only,  but  unto  all  them  also  that  love  His  appearing."  He  could  not
gaze  on  his  own  crown,  and  not  glow  with  the  thought,  that  myriads  should  share
the  coronation.  Ye  wish  to  ascertain  whether  ye  be  of  those  who  love  His  appear-
ing. Take  these  simple  questions,  and  propose  them  to  your  hearts,  and  pray  of
God  to  strengthen  you  to  give  faithful  answers.  Do  ye  so  hate  what  is  carnal  that
it  would  be  delightful  to  you  to  be  at  once  and  for  ever  set  free  from  the  cravings  of
earthly  desires  ?  Do  ye  so  long  to  be  pure  in  thought,  in  word,  and  in  deed,  that
you  feel  that  perfection  in  holiness  would  be  to  you  the  perfection  of  happiness  ?
But,  finally,  if  we  would  win  the  *'  crown  of  righteousness  "  which  is  spoken
of  by  St.  Paul,  we  must  use  the  means.  (H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  The  crown  of
righteousness : — The  crown  of  righteousness  is  a  crown  whereof  righteousness  is
the  material.  This  crown  is  of  the  same  fabric  and  texture  as  that  which  it  should
decorate ;  it  is  a  crown  whose  beauty  is  moral  beauty,  the  beauty  not  of  gold  or
precious  stones,  but  of  those  more  precious,  nay,  priceless  things  which  gold  and
gems  can  but  suggest  to  us,  the  beauty  of  justice,  truthfulness,  purity,  charity,
humility,  carried  to  a  point  of  refinement  and  of  high  excellence,  of  which  here  and
now  we  have  no  experience.  Once  and  once  only  was  such  a  crown  as  this  worn
upon  earth,  and  when  it  was  worn  to  human  eyes  it  was  a  crown  of  thorns.  It
may  seem  to  be  a  difficulty  in  the  way  of  this  statement  that  the  happiness  is  said
elsewhere  to  consist  in  the  beatific  visions — that  is  to  say,  in  the  complete  and
uninterrupted  sight  of  God,  whom  the  blessed  praise  and  worship  to  all  eternity.
•'  We  know  we  shaU  be  like  Him,  for  we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is."  But  what  is  it
that  makes  this  vision  of  God  the  source  of  its  promised  happiness?  What  is  it
in  God  that  will  chiefly  minister  to  the  expected  joy  ?  Is  it  His  boundless  power?
Is  it  His  unsearchable  wisdom?  Will  they  cry  for  ever,  "Almighty,  Almighty,
Almighty,"  or  "  All-knowing,  All-knowing,  All-knowing  "  ?  Will  they,  do
they  not  say,  without  fatigue,  without  desire  for  change,  "Holy,  holy,  holy"?
And  why  is  this  ?  Because  essentially  God  is  a  moral  being,  and  it  is  by  His  moral
attributes  that  He  perfectly  corresponds  to,  and  satisfies  the  deepest  wants  in  our
human  nature.  The  ••  crown  of  righteousness  "  means  a  share,  such  as  it  is  possible
for  a  creature  to  have  in  God's  essential  nature,  in  His  justice,  His  purity,  and  His
love ;  since  while  we  can  conceive  of  Him,  had  He  so  willed  it,  as  never  having
created  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  we  cannot,  we  dare  not,  think  of  Him,  in  any
relation  with  other  beings  as  other  than  just,  true,  loving,  merciful — in  other  words,
as  other  than  holy.  He  is,  indeed,  Himself,  the  "  crown  of  righteousness,"  the
crown  with  which  He  rewards  the  blessed,  and  there  is  no  opposition  between  the
idea  of  such  a  crown  and  the  beatific  vision.  They  are  only  two  different  accounts
of  that  which  is  in  its  essence  the  same.  "  The  crown  of  righteousness  I "  Some
crown  or  other,  I  apprehend,  most  men  are  looking  for,  if  not  always,  yet  at  some
time  in  their  lives ;  if  not  very  confidently,  yet  with  those  modified  hopes  which
regard  it  as  possibly  attainable.  Human  nature  views  itself  almost  habitually  as
the  heir  apparent — of  some  circumstances  which  are  an  improvement  on  the
present.  An  expectation  of  this  kind  is  the  very  condition  of  effort  in  whatever
direction,  and  no  amount  or  degree  of  proved  delusion  would  appear  permanently
to  extinguish  it.  But  the  crowns  which  so  many  of  us  hope  may  be  laid  up  for  ua
somewhere,  and  by  some  one — what  are  they?  There  is  the  crown  of  a  good
income  in  a  great  mercantile  community  like  our  own.  This  is  the  supreme
distinction  for  which  many  a  man  labours  without  thought  of  anything  beyond.
And  closely  allied  to  this  is  another  crown — the  crown  of  a  good  social  position.
"  I  have  made  great  efforts,  tempered  with  due  discretion ;  I  have  finished  the
course  which  has  appeared  to  bring  me  unbounded  pleasure,  but  which  has  really
meant  incessant  weariness.  I  have  observed  those  laws  of  social  propriety,  which
are  never  to  be  disregarded  with  impunity  ;  and  so  henceforth  there  awaits  me  an
assured  position,  in  which  I  indeed  may  be  reviled,  but  from  which  I  cannot  be
dislodged — a  position  which  society  cannot  but  award,  sooner  or  later,  to  those  who
struggle  upward  in  obedience  to  her  rules."  And,  then,  there  is  the  crown  of
political  power.    "  I  have  fought  against  the  foes  of  my  party  or  my  country ;  I


863  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it.

have  finished  a  course  of  political  activity  which  has  borne  me  onwards  to  the  end.
I  have  kept  to  my  principles,  or  I  have  shown  that  I  had  reason  to  modify  or  to
abandon  them ;  henceforth  there  is  laid  up  for  me  a  crown  of  political  influence
which  is  almost  from  the  nature  of  the  case  independent  of  ofiSce,  and  which  a
great  country  will  never  refuse  to  those  who  served  it  long  and  have  served  it  well."
And  once  more  there  is  the  crown  of  a  literary  reputation.  "  I  have  had  a  hard
time  of  it ;  I  have  finished  what  I  proposed  to  it ;  I  have  been  true  to  the  require-
ments of  a  great  and  exacting  subject ;  henceforth  there  is  reserved  for  me  the  rare
pleasure  of  a  reputation  which  wealth  and  station  cannot  command,  and  which
envy  cannot  take  away ;  henceforth  I  have  a  place  in  the  great  communion  of  the
learned,  those  elect  minds  in  whom  genius  is  wedded  to  industry,  and  whose  works
are  among  the  treasures  of  the  human  race."  Here  are  the  crowns,  or  some  of
them,  for  which  men  toil  and  with  which  are  they  not  seldom  rewarded.  But  do
they  last  ?  ....  As  we  get  nearer  death,  the  exaggerations  of  self-love  cease  to
assert  themselves  ;  we  see  things  more  clearly  as  they  reaUy  are  ;  we  distinguish
that  which  lasts  from  that  which  passes  ;  we  understand  the  immense  distinction
between  all  the  perishable  crowns  and  the  "  crown  of  righteousness."  That  crown
does  not  pass.  It  is  laid  up,  it  is  set  aside  for  its  destined  wearer  by  the  most
Merciful  Redeemer,  who  is  also  the  Eternal  Judge,  and  who  watches  with  an  un-
speakable, tender  interest  each  conqueror  as  he  draws  nearer  and  nearer  to  the  end
of  his  earthly  course,  and  as,  in  the  name  of  the  great  redemption,  he  dares  to  claim
it.  (Canon  Liddon.)  A  crown  of  righteousness : — If  I  had  three  things  to
wish,  I  should  wish  for  Paul's  threefold  crown.  1.  The  crown  of  grace,  a  great
measure  of  grace  to  do  Christ  much  service.  2.  His  crown  of  joy,  a  great  measure
of  joy  to  go  through  with  that  service.  3.  The  crown  of  glory  which  he  was  here
assured  of.  In  the  words  we  have  first  the  concluding  particle,  henceforth,  lastly,
as  for  that  which  remains.  1.  A  crown  is  not  given  till  the  victory  be  gained
(ohap.  ii.  5).  2.  It  notes  the  perpetuity  of  the  glory,  incorruptible,  never  fading
crown  (2  Pet.  i.  4 ;  1  Cor.  ix.  24).  3.  It  notes  the  perfection  of  it,  as  the  crown
compasseth  the  head  on  every  side  ;  so  there  is  nothing  wanting  in  this  crown  of
life.  So  the  saints  in  glory  shall  be  crowned  with  goodiess  when  aU  the  faculties
of  the  soul  and  members  of  the  body  shall  be  perfect  and  filled  with  glory.  4.  It
represents  to  us  the  dignity  of  the  saints  and  the  glory  of  their  reward.  They  are
all  kings  and  shaU  be  crowned.  The  day  of  judgment  is  their  coronation  day.  Of
righteousness — 1.  Because  it  is  purchased  for  us  by  the  righteousness  of  Christ.  By
His  perfect  righteousness  and  obedience  He  hath  merited  this  for  us.  2.  In  respect
of  His  promise,  His  fidelity  bindeth  Him  to  perform  it.  God  hath  promised  a  crown
of  life  to  such  as  serve  Him  sincerely  (James  i.  12 ;  1  John  ii.  25 ;  Rev.  ii.  10 ;
iii.  21).  3.  It  may  be  called  a  crown  of  righteousness,  because  it  is  given  only  to
righteoos  men,  and  so  it  showeth  who  shall  be  crowned,  and  what  is  the  way  to  it ;
but  not  for  what  merits  or  desert  of  ours  it  is  given.  (T.  Hall,  B.D.)  The  crown
of  righteousness : — It  is  not  the  diadem  of  noble,  prince,  or  king,  but  the  wreath  of
victory  for  those  who  have  contended  (See  Matt.  xi.  12),  This  crown  can  never
fit  the  brows  of  the  indolent,  the  lover  of  ease,  the  self-indulgent  man  of  the
world  who  acquiesces  in  Christian  doctrines  and  Christian  customs,  whether  of
worship  or  social  life,  because  he  shuns  the  trouble  of  inquiry  and  of  choice.  To
contend,  to  strive,  to  fight  is  the  first  condition  of  conquering,  even  as  the
conqueror  alone  can  win  the  crown.  Who,  in  that  day,  will  deem  the  contest
too  hard  when  he  has  received  the  crown?  Then,  again,  it  is  the  crown  of
righteousness;  and  righteousness  is  the  square  and  the  perfection  of  all  moral
character  and  virtue,  moulded  and  shaped  by  Christ's  Spirit  after  Christ's  example.
Therefore,  only  that  stage  of  character  in  which  feeling,  desire,  choice  and  motive
are  genuine  and  pure,  can  be  expressed  by  this  word.  This  fabric  of  righteousness
thus  inwrought  into  the  man  himself  will  receive  its  topstone  from  Christ.  No  bye-
ways,  no  short  cuts  leadtoheaven,  only  the  narrow  way  of  righteousness.  (D.  Trinder,
M.A.)  A  crown  without  cares : — The  royal  life  which  Paul  anticipated  in  heaven  will
not  only  be  a  life  of  dignity,  and  power,  and  grandeur,  but  it  will  be  all  that,  without
any  of  the  disagreeable  concomitants  which  earthly  royalty  has  to  experience.  In
this  world  greatness  and  care  are  twins.  Crowns  more  commonly  prove  curses  than
blessings  to  those  who  wear  them.  Isaac,  the  son  of  Comnenus,  one  of  the  most
virtuous  of  eastern  rulers,  was  crowned  at  Constantinople  in  1057.  Basil,  the
patriarch,  brought  the  crown  to  him  surmounted  with  a  diamond  cross.  Taking
hold  of  the  cross,  the  Emperor  said, "  I,  who  have  been  acquainted  with  crosses  from
mj  cradle,  welcome  thee ;  thou  art  my  swcxd  and  shield,  for  hitherto  I  have  con«


THiP.  I?.]  n.  TIMOTHY,  853

quered  with  suffering."  Then  taking  the  crown  in  his  hand  he  added :  "  This  is
but  a  beaatifal  burden,  which  loads  more  than  it  adorns."  The  crown  of  the
triumphant  Christian  is  a  crown  of  righteousness,  which  will  neither  oppress  the
head,  afflict  the  heart,  nor  imperil  the  Ufe  of  any  that  receive  it,  ((J.  TJnderhill.)
Historic  crowns  : — Napoleon  had  a  magnificent  crown  made  for  himself  in  1804.  It
was  this  crown  that  he  so  proudly  placed  upon  his  head  with  his  own  hands  in  the
cathedral  of  Notre  Dame.  It  is  a  jewelled  circle,  from  which  springs  several  arches
surmounted  by  the  globe  and  cross,  and  where  the  arches  join  the  circle  there  are
alternately  flowers  and  miniature  eagles  of  gold.  After  his  downfall,  it  remained
in  the  French  Treasury  until  it  was  assumed  by  another  Bonaparte,  when  Napoleon
III,  made  himself  Emperor  in  1852.  It  is  now  in  the  regalia  of  France,  which  have
only  just  been  brought  back  to  Paris  from  the  western  seaport  to  which  they  were
Bent  for  security  during  the  Prussian  invasion,  just  as  the  Scottish  regalia  were  sent
to  Dunnottar.  If  we  may  judge  from  some  of  the  German  photographs  of  the  Em-
peror William,  the  crown  of  the  new  German  Empire  is  of  a  very  peculiar  shape,
apparently  copied  from  the  old  Carlovingian  diadem.  It  is  not  a  circle,  but  a  poly-
gon, being  formed  of  flat  jewelled  plates  of  gold  united  by  the  edges,  and  having
above  them  two  arches  supporting  the  usual  globe  and  cross.  Of  the  modem
crowns  of  continental  Europe,  perhaps  the  most  remarkable  is  the  well-known
triple  crown  or  Papal  tiara,  or  perhaps  we  should  say  tiaras,  for  there  are  four  of
them.  The  tiara  is  seldom  worn  by  the  Pope ;  it  is  carried  before  him  in  proces-
sion, but,  except  on  rare  occasions,  he  wears  a  mitre  like  an  ordinary  bishop.  Of
the  existing  tiaras,  the  most  beautiful  is  that  which  was  given  by  Napoleon  I.  to
Pius  VII.  in  1805,  It  is  said  to  be  worth  upwards  of  £9,000.  Its  three  circlets  are
almost  incmsted  with  sapphires,  emeralds,  rubies,  pearls  and  diamonds ;  and  the
great  emerald  at  its  apex  is  said  to  be  the  most  beautiful  in  the  world.  A  lost
crown : — A  lady  in  a  dream  wandered  around  heaven,  beholding  its  glories,  and  came
at  last  to  the  crown-room.  Among  the  crowns  she  saw  one  exceedingly  beautiful.
•'  Who  is  this  for  ?  "  •'  It  was  intended  for  you,"  said  the  angel,  ••  but  you  did  not
labour  for  it,  and  now  another  will  wear  it."  Seeking  to  obtain  a  crown : — A
French  officer,  who  was  a  prisoner  upon  his  parole  at  Beading,  met  with  a  Bible.
He  read  it,  and  was  so  impressed  with  the  contents  that  he  was  convinced  of  the
folly  of  sceptical  principles  and  of  the  truth  of  Christianity,  and  resolved  to  become
a  Protestant.  When  his  gay  associates  rallied  him  for  taking  so  serious  a  turn,  he
said,  in  his  vindication,  "I  have  done  no  more  than  my  old  schoolfellow,  Berna-
dotte,  who  has  become  a  Lutheran."  "  Yes,  but  he  became  so,"  said  his  associates,
"  to  obtain  a  crown,"  "  My  motive,"  said  the  Christian  officer,  ••  is  the  same ;  we
only  di£fer  as  to  the  place.  The  object  of  Bernadotte  is  to  obtain  a  crown  in
Sweden;  mine  is  to  obtain  a  crown  in  heaven."  More  crowns  left: — On  one  occa-
sion, preaching  from  the  text  of  St,  Paul,  "  I  have  fought  a  good  fight,  I  have
finished  my  course,"  he  suddenly  stopped,  and  looking  up  to  heaven,  cried  with  a
loud  voice,  "  Paul !  are  there  any  more  crowns  there  ?  "  He  paused  again.  Then,
casting  his  eyes  upon  the  congregation,  he  continued,  "  Yes,  my  brethren,  there  are
more  crowns  left.  They  are  not  all  taken  up  yet.  Blessed  be  God  1  there  is  one  for
me,  and  one  for  all  of  you  who  love  the  appearing  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ."
{Life  of  Father  Taylor.)  A  congruous  crown: — There  is  such  a  congruity
between  righteousness  and  the  crown  of  life,  that  it  can  be  laid  on  none  other  head
but  that  of  a  righteous  man,  and  if  it  could,  all  its  amaranthine  flowers  would
shrivel  and  faU  when  they  touched  an  impure  brow.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)
Preaching  for  a  crown: — The  Rev,  H,  Da  vies,  sometimes  called  "the  Welsh
apostle,"  was  walking  early  one  Sabbath  morning  to  a  place  where  he  was  to
preach.  He  was  overtaken  by  a  clergymen  on  horseback,  who  complained  that
he  could  not  get  above  half  a  guinea  for  a  discourse,  "  Oh,  sir,"  said  Mr.
Davies,  "I  preach  for  a  crown!"  "Do  you?"  replied  the  stranger,  "then
you  are  a  disgrace  to  the  cloth,"  To  this  rude  observation  he  returned  this
meek  answer,  "  Perhaps  I  shall  be  held  in  still  greater  disgrace,  in  your  estimation,
when  I  inform  you  that  I  am  now  going  nine  miles  to  preach,  and  have  but  seven-
pence  in  my  pocket  to  bear  my  expenses  out  and  in  ;  but  I  look  forward  to  that
crown  of  glory  which  my  Lord  and  Saviour  will  freely  bestow  upon  me  when  He
makes  His  appearance  before  an  assembled  world."  Sliall  give  me  at  that  day. —
St,  Paul  a  witness  for  immortality  : — As  example  is  better  than  precept,  so  is  the
man  more  valuable  than  his  doctrine,  when  he  lives  it.  And  when  we  study  the
apostle  as  he  appears  to  us  in  his  last  written  letter,  we  come  face  to  face  with  the
exemplification  in  living  reality  of  a  sublime  doctrine,  which  proves  itself  stronger

23


364  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it.

than  adversity,  animating  and  supporting  a  great  soul  amid  circumstances  which
threaten  to  afflict  and  even  crush  its  hopes.  The  chains  hung  round  his  hands  and
feet.  Death  menaced  him  with  every  approaching  footstep.  Only  a  tyrant's
breath  stood  between  him  and  the  executioner's  sword.  In  such  a  moment  a  man  ia
likely  to  be  true  to  himself.  False  reckonings  are  corrected,  self-flatteries  cease  ;
then,  if  ever,  he  faces  his  real  position.  I.  St.  Paul  bequeaths  the  example  of  a
FINISHED  CAREEB.  Labour  and  suffering,  threatenings  and  persecution,  have  failed  to
wrest  from  him  the  prize  which,  above  all  others,  is  most  worth  keeping — the  faith
of  God  as  revealed  in  Christ.  II.  What  had  he  in  the  present  ?  A  certain  conviction
that  a  treasure  was,  at  the  very  moment  when  he  wrote,  laid  up  in  safe  keeping  for
his  future  benefit.  Though  the  Boman  sword  shall  soon  sever  the  apostle's  wearied
head  from  his  weakened,  tired  body,  the  crown  shall  survive,  and  he,  too,  who  shall
wear  it.  Death  will  not  extinguish  his  being,  nor  bear  him  off  into  the  great  stream
of  existences  that  have  passed  away.  The  followers  of  Auguste  Comte,  the  so-
called  Positivist,  profess  to  hope  for  an  immortality  in  the  mass  of  human  beings
that  follow  in  our  wake,  as  if  the  fact  that  others  are  living  were  a  compensation
for  our  dying,  or  as  if  we  could  live  again  in  those  who  carry  on  the  race  and  profit
by  our  example.  Not  so  the  great  apostle.  There  is  laid  up  for  me,  for  that  being
who  has  wrestled,  who  has  fought,  who  has  kept  the  faith,  the  crown  of  righteous-
ness, even  as  I  am  being  kept  to  wear  it.    Ill   How  geandly  does  the  peospect  oe-

THE  FUTUBE  BURST  UPON  THE  KEEN  EYE  OF  THE  FAITHFUL  WABEIOB  !   The  hope  of  thiS

crown  is  not  a  privilege  of  a  few,  still  less  a  monoply  for  himself.    Not  only  does
he  know  that  it  is  kept  safe  for  him,  but  he  tells  the  day  and  the  manner  of  its  be-
stowal.   The  day  of  labour  gives  place  to  one  of  rest,  strife  is  followed  by  peace,
Buffering  is  forgotten  in  undying  vigour  of  mind  and  body.    This  certainty  ol
future  recompense  at  the  hand  of  Christ,  the  Eighteous  Judge,  blends  with  what
has  gone  before,  and  adds  to  this  legacy  all  that  was  wanting  to  its  completeness.
The  benefits  of  past  experience,  the  certainty  of  present  conviction,  and  the
assured  hope  of  a  righteous  award  in  the  great  day  of  account,  from  One  who  lives
and  has  made  His  life  felt  in  the  holy  strivings  and  faithful  efforts  of  His  redeemed
servants  on  earth ;  these  form  a  triple  cord  which  cannot  easily  be  broken.    (D.
Trinder,  M.A.)        An  assured  hope : — I.  An  assured  hope  is  a  tbue  and  Scriptural
THiNQ.    It  cannot  be  wrong  to  feel  confidently  in  a  matter  where  God  speaks  un-
conditionally— to  believe  decidedly  when  God  promises  decidedly— to  have  a  sure
persuasion  of  pardon  and  peace  when  we  rest  on  the  word  and  oath  of  Him  that
never  changes.    It  is  an  utter  mistake  to  suppose  that  the  believer  who  feels  assur-
ance is  resting  on  anything  he  sees  in  himself.    II.  A  believeb  may  neveb  abbive
AT  this  assured  HOPE,  WHICH  Paul  expeesses,  AND  YET  BE  SAVED.    "  A  letter,"  says
an  old  writer,  '•  may  be  written,  which  is  not  sealed ;  so  grace  may  be  written  in  the
heart,  yet  the  Spirit  may  not  set  the  seal  of  assurance  to  it."    A  child  may  be  bom
heir  to  a  great  fortune,  and  yet  never  be  aware  of  his  riches;  may  live  childish,
die  childish,  and  never  know  the  greatness  of  his  possessions,     HI.  Why  an
ASSURED  HOPE  IS  EXCEEDINGLY  TO  BE  DESIRED.    1.  Bccause  of  the  present  comfort
and  peace  it  affords.    2.  Because  it  tends  to  make  a  Christian  an  active  working
Christian.    3.  Because  it  tends  to  make  a  Christian  a  decided  Christian.    4.  Be-
cause it  tends  to  make  the  holiest  Christians.    IV.  Some  probable  causes  why  an
ASSURED  hope  IS  SO  SELDOM  ATTAINED.    1.  A  defective  vicw  of  the  doctrine  of  justi-
fication.    2.  Slothfulness  about  growth  in  grace.     3.  An  inconsistent  walk  in  life.
(Bp.  Ryle.)       All  them  also  that  love  His  appearing :— I.  Who  they  abe  that
LOVE  THE  Lobd's  APPEARING : — I  might  auswcr  such  a  question  very  shortly  by  say-
ing, those  who  are  prepared  for  it.     "  But  who,"  you  may  ask,  "  is  the  prepared
servant?  "  I  answer — he  who  has  received  that  Lord  as  his  Redeemer,  who,  he  ex-
pects, will  be  his  Judge.    II.  Why  they  love  it.    If  you  had  received  a  multitude
of  obligations  from  an  unseen  friend,  you  would  surely  long  to  set  your  eyes  upon
him.    If  you  heard  that  you  were  soon  to  meet  him,  you  would  be  pleased  exceed-
ingly ;  you  would  exclaim,  "  Oh,  come  the  day  1 "    And  here  then  is  a  reason  why
the  saved  sinner  loves  to  think  of  the  appearing  of  his  Saviour.    The  very  sight  of
his  Redeemer  will  be  rapture  to  his  soul.    But  look  at  the  words  immediately  be-
fore our  text,  and  there  you  will  see  a  further  reason  of  the  fact  we  are  consider-
ing.   There  are  we  told  of  a  prize  which  the  believer  has  to  look  for  in  the  day  of
his  Lord's  coming.    It  will  be  a  day  when  the  present  evil  course  of  things  will  be
for  ever  over.    Again,  the  Lord's  people  love  the  day  of  His  appearing,  because
then  He  will  be  All  in  All.     (A.  Roberts,  M.A.)        The  love  of  Christ's  appearance
the  character  of  a  sincere   Christian:—!.    I  shall   open  ihk  chabactbb  ol    a


CHAP.  IV.]  II.  TIMOTHY.  356

einoere  Christian.  1.  There  must  be  a  firm  persuasion,  or  assent  of  mind,  upon
just  grounds,  to  the  truth  of  this  proposition.  That  Christ  will  appear ;  for
it  is  a  wise  and  reasonable  love,  not  a  rash  and  unaccountable  thing.  They
don't  love  they  don't  know  what,  or  without  a  sufficient  reason.  "They  look
for  these  things  according  to  His  promise"  (2  Pet.  iii.  13).  2.  It  imports
earnest  desire  of  it.  This  is  essential  to  the  love  of  anything.  Love  always
works  by  desire  towards  an  absent  good,  and  so  it  is  constantly  represented.
Looking  for  the  blessed  hope  and  glorious  appearance.  And  to  them  who  look  for
Him  shall  He  appear  the  second  time.  The  word  signifies  earnest  desire,  looking
with  great  expectation.  The  Church  is  represented  making  this  return  to  Christ,
"Behold  I  come  quickly:  Even  so  come  Lord  Jesus  "  (Rev.  xxii.  22).  They  often
think  it  long,  and  are  ready  to  say,  in  the  warmth  of  their  desire,  and  under  the
sense  of  present  burdens.  Oh,  when  will  He  come  t  why  are  His  chariots  so  long  a
coming  ?  But  then  it  is  not  a  rash  and  impatient  desire,  or  an  impetuous,  unruly
passion.  Though  they  earnestly  desire  it,  they  are  content  to  stay  the  proper  season,
and  wait  with  patience  notwithstanding  the  longest  delay,  and  the  greatest  exercise
in  the  mean  time.  3.  There  is  pleasure  and  satisfaction  in  the  expectation  and
hope  of  it.  This  is  the  nature  of  love  too.  It  is  desire  towards  an  absent  object,
but  delight  in  it  when  present.  Besides  that  there  is  a  pleasure  in  the  desire.
Now,  though  the  appearance  of  Christ  is  a  future  thing,  yet  the  thoughts  of  it,  and
the  hopes  of  it,  are  present  things.  4.  It  is  powerful  and  influential.  The  ex-
pectation of  His  appearance  will  not  only  give  a  pleasure,  but  form  the  mind
suitable  to  it,  and  direct  the  conduct  of  the  life.  For  example,  it  will  engage  to
answerable  diligence,  excite  to  faithfulness,  and  promote  a  constant  readiness  and
preparation  for  it.  II.  I  shall  consider  the  ekasons  of  it,  and  show  why  sincere
Christians  have  such  a  love  to  His  appearance.  1.  With  respect  to  Christ,  who  is
to  appear.  This  will  be  evident  if  you  consider  either  His  person  or  His  appear-
ance itself.  He  is  the  great  object  of  their  love  now.  Whom  having  not  seen,
they  love,  from  the  representations  of  Him  in  the  gospel,  and  the  benefits  they
receive  from  Him.  And  how  can  they  but  love  His  appearance  whom  they  so  greatly
love  ?  And  His  appearance  will  be  most  highly  honourable  to  Him  ;  for  He  will
appear  in  the  state  of  a  judge  and  the  majesty  of  a  king.  He  will  then  appear  as
He  really  is,  and  not  in  disguise,  or  under  a  disadvantage.  And  how  reasonable  is
the  love  of  His  appearance  in  this  view,  as  every  way  most  honourable  to  Him,  and
the  greatest  display  of  His  glory  before  the  world  ?  2.  With  respect  to  themselves.
It  will  be  every  way  to  their  advantage.  Our  Lord  says,  "  Thou  shalt  be  recom-
pensed at  the  resurrection  of  the  just :  When  He  shall  appear,  they  will  be  like
Him,  and  receive  a  crown  of  life."  III.  The  pefvilege  and  blessing  annexed  to
this  character,  and  which  belongs  to  it ;  the  righteous  Judge  will  give  them  a  crown
of  righteousness.  Conclusion.  1.  Let  us  often  contemplate  the  appearance  of
Christ.  This  is  the  noblest  subject  of  thought,  and  of  the  greatest  concern  to  us.
The  consideration  of  this  is  proper  to  raise  our  love  to  Him,  and  reconcile  our
minds  to  His  dispensations  towards  us.  2.  The  great  difference  between  sincere
Christians  and  other  men.  They  love  to  think  of  His  appearance,  but  others  dread
it ;  tbey  wish  and  long  for  it,  but  others  are  afraid  of  it,  and  wish  He  would  never
come  at  all,  or  say  in  scorn,  Where  is  the  promise  of  His  coming  ?  3.  Can  we
make  out  this  character?  Are  we  lovers  of  His  appearance?  Is  it  the  powerful
motive  to  proper  duty,  and  all  suitable  regard  to  Him  ?  4.  How  great  is  the  Divine
mercy  in  bestowing  such  a  blessing  upon  sincere  Christians.  (W.  Harris,  D.D.)
Loving  the  Second  Advent : — See  where  St.  Paul  places  a  "  love  "  of  the  Second
Advent.  He  was  writing  as  "Paul,  the  aged,"  with  his  own  "crown  of
righteousness"  now  full  in  view.  But  who  shall  sbareit?  The  rest  of  the
college  of  the  apostles?  Those  who  had  "fought,"  his  "good  fight" — run
his  "course" — and  "kept"  his  "faith"  to  the  end?  He  stretches  the
bond  of  fellowship  far  higher.  He  makes  the  condition  of  the  attainment  very
simple ;  but  perfectly  definite.  All  that  is  required  to  get  the  "  crown,"  is
to  "  love  "  very  dearly  Him  that  brings  it.  There  are  four  attitudes  of  mind  in
which  we  may  stand  respecting  the  "  appearing  "  of  Christ.  By  far  the  worst  ia
"indifference  "  ;  and  that  indifference  may  be  either  the  dullness  of  ignorance,  or
the  apathy  of  the  deadneSs  of  the  moral  feelings.  The  next  state  is  "fear."
There  is  always  something  very  good  when  there  is  "  fear."  It  requires  faith  to
"fear."  But  above  "fear"  is  "hope."  "Hope"  is  expectation  with  desire;
knowledge  enough  to  be  able  to  anticipate,  and  grace  enough  to  be  able  to  wish  it.
And  here  the  ladder  is  generally  cut  off ;  but  God  carries  it  one  step  higher —


356  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.  it.

"love."  "Love"  is  as  much  above  "hope"  as  "hope"  is  above  "fear" — for
"hope"  maybe  selfish,  "love"  cannot  be;  "hope"  maybe  for  what  a  person
gives,  "  love  "  must  be  for  the  person  himself.  Therefore  a  man  might  deceive
himself,  by  thinking  all  was  right  in  his  soul,  because  he  "  hoped  "  for  the  Second
Advent ;  but  he  might,  after  all,  be  set  upon  the  pageant ;  and  the  rest ;  and  the
reward.  But  to  the  individual  that  "  loves  "  it,  there  must  be  something  infinitely
dear  in  it;  and  that  one  dear  thing  is  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  All  Rome  "hoped ',
for  the  return  and  the  triumph  of  Caesar — but  Caesar's  own  child  "  loved  "  him'
Bemember  no  motive  concerning  anything  ever  satisfies  God,  until  it  is  the  reflex  of
His  own  motive ;  and  God's  motive  is  always  "love."  Christ  will  come  "  lovingly"
— therefore  He  must  be  met  "  lovingly."  But  the  "love  of  Christ's  appearing  "  is,
evidently,  not  a  simple  idea ;  but  one  composed  of  many  parts.  I  would  separate  four,
which  four  at  least  go  to  make  it.  The  moment  of  the  manifestation — the  original
word  is  the  epiphany — "epiphany,"  you  know,  is  the  same  as  "manifestation" —
the  moment  of  the  manifestation  of  Christ  will  be  the  moment  of  the  manifestation
of  all  His  followers.  Then,  perhaps,  for  the  first  time  in  their  united  strength  and
beauty — declared,  and  exhibited,  and  vindicated,  and  admired,  in  the  presence  of
the  universe.  And,  oh  I  what  a  subject  of  "  love"  is  there.  Some  we  shall  see  se-
lecting and  individualising  us,  as  they  come,  with  the  well-remembered  glances  of
their  loving  smiles.  But  all  sunny  in  their  sacred  sweetness  and  their  joyous  come-
liness. Never  be  afraid  to  "  love  "  the  saints  too  much.  Some  speak  as  if  to
"love"  Christ  were  one  thing — but  to  "love"  the  saints  were  another  thing;  and
they  almost  place  them  in  rivalry  1  But  the  saints  are  Christ.  They  are  His
mystical  body,  without  which  Christ  Himself  is  not  perfect.  Another  part  of  "  the
appearing  " — very  pleasant  and  very  loveable  to  every  Christian — will  be  the  exhi-
bition that  will  then  be  made  of  the  kingdom  and  the  glory  of  Jesus.  If  yon  are  a
child  of  God,  every  day  it  is  a  very  happy  thought  to  you,  that  Christ  gains  some
hononr.  Only  think  what  it  will  be  to  look  all  around  as  far  as  the  eye
can  stretch,  and  all  is  His!  "On  His  head  are  many  crowns  1"  His  sceptre
supreme  over  a  willing  world  1  Every  creature  at  His  feet  1  His  own,  all-perfect  1
His  name  sounded  upon  every  lip  1  His  love  perfect  in  every  soul  I  But  there
is  another  thing  after  which  you  are  always  panting — you  are  very  jealous
over  it  with  an  exceeding  jealousy.  Tou  are  in  the  habit  of  tracing  the  ebb
and  flow  of  it  every  night,  with  the  intensest  interest.  I  mean,  the  image
of  Christ  upon  your  soul.  "  Why  am  I  not  more  like  Him  ?  Does  His  like-
ness increase  at  all  in  me?  When  shall  I  be  entirely  conformed — no  separate
will — no  darkening  spot  upon  the  little  mirror  of  this  poor  heart  of  mine,  to
prevent  His  seeing  His  own  perfect  mind  there?"  But  now  you  stand  before
Him — in  His  unveiled  perfections — and  yon  are  like  Him — for  you  "  see
Him  as  He  isl"  And  if  "His  appearing"  is  to  appear  in  you,  is  not  that
cause  to  love  Him  ?  Therefore  all  His  Church  love  Him — because  then  they  shall
be  as  that  "  sea  of  glass  "  before  the  throne,  wherein  God  can  look  and  see  Him-
self again  in  their  clear  truth,  and  their  holy  stillness,  and  their  unsullied  bright-
ness!  But  why  speak  of  the  shadows  when  you  will  have  the  substance?  We
shall  look  on  Him  and  there  will  not  be  a  feeling  which  ever  throbbed  in  a  bosom
which  will  not  be  gratified  1  There  will  not  be  a  desire,  which  ever  played  before
the  eye,  which  will  not  be  surpassed  1  Another  mark  of  the  believer  is  that  he
loves  the  person  of  Christ.  Others  may  love  His  work — he  loves  Him — for  His  own
sake — because  He  is  what  He  is.  He  loves  Him  to  be  with  him — to  see  him — to  know
him — to  converse  with  him.  This  fills  his  heart.  All  that  is ' '  love,"  and  it  is  satisfied.
But,  will  not  all  other  "  love,"  that  ever  was  "  loved,"  be  as  no  "  love,"  to  the  "  love  "
that  will  then  fill  the  soul  ?  {J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  A  crown  for  all  the  saints  : — A
king  rejoices  in  his  crown,  not  only  because  it  is  rich  in  gems  and  a  symbol  of
power,  but  because  he  is  the  only  man  in  the  kingdom  who  has  one  or  who  is  per-
mitted to  wear  one.  Suppose  that  some  peer  of  the  realm  or  some  rich  commoner
should  have  a  crown  royal  made  for  himself,  and  should  wear  it  in  pubUc,  what  would
the  king  do  ?  Would  he  be  glad  that  there  was  somebody  else  who  possessed  and  was
worthy  of  that  symbol  of  royalty  ?  Would  he  say  :  "  I  would  that  all  my  people
were  kings  ?  "  No,  indeed  1  That  presumptuous,  self-crowned  subject  would  either  be
pat  in  an  asylum  as  a  lunatic  or  in  prison  as  a  traitor.  Such  is  the  Christian  spirit
in  contrast  with  that  ofselfishness.  Such  is  the  joy  of  heaven  in  contrast  with  that
of  earth.  Let  us  see  how  much  purer  and  nobler  it  is.  The  Christian  spirit,  so
beautifully  illustrated  by  the  great  apostle  when  he  could  not  think  of  his  own
without  thinking  also  of  the  crowning  of  his  brethren,  is  the  spirit  that  will  fill


«HAP.  IT.]  II.  TIMOTHY.  357

heaven  with  the  joy  that  springs  from  love.    VTould  that  we  had  more  of  it  here
and  now.

Vers.  9-11.  Come  shortly  unto  me. — Companionship : — I.  Httuan  coup&nionships
ABB  TEBY  NBCEBSABT.  The  ear  thirsts  for  a  friend's  voice ;  the  heart  hangers  for  a
friend's  love.  II.  Human  coupanionshifs  abb  veby  chanoino.  Changes  are  caused
by  distance,  death,  depravity.  III.  Human  companionships  abe  often  gbeat  bless-
INOB.  Luke  was  with  Paul.  Mark  was  to  be  brought  to  him.  Timothy  was  coming
to  him.  rV.  Human  companionships  sometimes  peove  great  atflictions.  Demas,
Alexander.  Men  suffer  most  when  ••  wounded  in  the  house  of  their  friends."  V.
Human  companionships  must  sometimes  fail  us.  Friends  are  sometimes  scared  by
poverty,  failure,  shame.  Besides,  companionship  can  do  little  in  our  intense  bodily
pain,  mental  anguish,  spiritual  conflict,  throes  of  death.  (U,  R.  Thomas.)  The
society  of  good  men  desirable: — 1.  Personal  presence  is  to  be  preferred  before
writing.  2.  The  society  and  help  of  good  men  is  much  to  be  desired.  There
is  much  comfort  and  good  to  be  gained  thereby.  3.  The  strongest  Christians
sometimes  may  be  helped  by  weaker.  A  Paul  may  stand  in  need  of  a  Timothy.
4.  A  minister  upon  weighty  and  just  occasions  may  lawfully  be  absent
from  his  flock  for  a  time.  5.  We  may  love  one  friend  more  than  another.
Timothy  was  Paul's  beloved  son  in  the  faith  (1  Tim.  i.  2).  (T.  Hall,  B.D.)
Best  men — lessons  from  their  life : — L  The  best  men,  in  the  pbesence  of  death,
abb  not  disregaedful  of  human  sympathy.  Even  Christ  took  three  disciples
with  Him  to  Gethsemane.  II.  The  best  men  abe  sometimes  exposed  to  great
SOCIAL  tbials.  All  of  us  are  constantly  losing  friends,  from  one  cause  or  another.
in.  Thb  best  men  ABE  SUBJECT  TO  COMMON  NEEDS.  Men,  if  they  are  to  be  clothed,
must  procure  their  own  garments  ;  if  they  are  to  be  educated  and  informed,  must
use  their  own  faculties.  IV.  The  best  men  abe  sometimes  tboubled  by  theib
infebiobs.  "  Alexander  the  coppersmith."  It  requires  no  greatness  to  do  mischief.
The  most  contemptible  characters  are  always  the  most  successful  in  this  work.
Lessons — 1.  Value  true  friends.  2.  Anticipate  social  desertions.  3.  Do  not  look
for  miraculous  interpositions  to  supply  your  needs.  Do  not  be  painfully  surprised
if  you  have  enemies,  (Homilist.)  Friends  in  adversity  : — To-day  Colonel  C.  cama
to  dine  with  us,  and  in  the  midst  of  our  meal  we  were  entertained  with  a  most
agreeable  sight.  It  was  a  shark,  about  the  length  of  a  man,  which  followed  our
ship,  attended  with  five  smaller  fishes,  called  pilot-fish,  much  like  our  mackerel,  but
larger.  These,  I  am  told,  always  keep  the  shark  company,  and,  what  is  more  sur-
prising, though  the  shark  is  so  ravenous  a  creature,  yet,  let  it  be  never  so  hungry,
it  will  not  touch  one  of  them.  Nor  are  they  less  faithful  to  him  ;  for,  as  I  am  in-
formed, if  the  shark  is  hooked,  very  often  these  httle  creatures  will  cleave  close  to
his  fins,  and  are  often  taken  up  with  him. — Go  to  the  pilot-fish,  thou  that  forsakest
a  friend  in  adversity,  consider  his  ways,  and  be  ashamed.  {G.  miitefield.)  Man's
craving  fw  society  : — Man  is  a  social  being.  He  is  made  to  feel  for,  and  with,  his
fellow-men.  Sociality  is  a  joy,  a  strength,  a  light  to  him.  He  is  revealed,  regaled,
renewed,  by  fellowship.  When  there  is  community  of  views,  sympathy  of  feel-
ings, it  causes  a  wonderful  development  of  his  nature,  and  gives  it  wonderful  power.
It  is  a  lamp,  a  feast,  a  buttress  of  his  being.  It  is  everything  whereby  he  can  be
ministered  unto,  or  help  to  minister.  God  is  social :  "  The  God  of  the  spirits  of  all
flesh."  Christ  is  social:  "The  Head  of  the  body,  the  Church."  Christianity  is
social :  ••  The  fellowship  of  the  gospel."  Man  is  social :  "  Come  shortly  unto  Me."
{A.J.  Morris.)  Isolation  undesirable: — "One  man  is  no  man."  True,  there
are  some  cold,  misanthropic  souls  that  shun  their  fellows,  like  some  plants  that
shrink  and  shrivel  at  a  touch,  and  that  even  take  an  awful  pride  in  solitude  and
isolation ;  but  this  is  disease,  or  sin,  or  both.  The  finest  natures  are  furthest  removed
from  it.     (Ibid.)        Demas  hath  forsaken  me. — Demas : — I.  His  pbevious  histoby.

iSee  Philemon  24 ;  CoL  iv.  14).  You  see  from  this  noted  instance  of  unfaithfulness
low  far  a  man  may  go  in  the  profession  of  Christianity,  how  richly  he  may  seem  to
be  partaking  of  its  privileges,  and  how  highly  he  may  be  honoured  by  its  most  de-
voted friends,  and  yet  have  no  part  or  lot  in  it  at  last.  Trust  not  in  mere  professions,
however  loud — in  mere  external  privileges,  however  distinguishing — in  mere  intel-
lectual gifts,  however  excellent — in  mere  occasional  impressions,  however  lively — ■
in  mere  outward  services  to  the  cause  of  Christ,  however  zealous.  You  may  be  a
fellow-labourer  with  Paul,  and  yet  a  castaway.  II.  His  subsequent  faithlessness.
He  refused  to  stsmd  by  the  apostle  in  his  hour  of  trial,  withheld  from  him  his  former
sympathy,  withdrew  from  those  Christian  labours  in  which  he  had  once  been  noted


358  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOB.  [chap.  IT.

as  a  sharer  with  him,  and  shunned  to  be  any  longer  seen  in  his  society.  He  wa3
not  prepared  to  "  endure  hardness  as  a  good  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ."  That  want  or
wcnkness  of  faith  which  he  had  hitherto  concealed  from  others,  and,  probably,  from
himself  also,  could  not  be  any  longer  disguised.  That  world  which  he  had  long
loved  secreUy,  without  perhaps  being  aware  of  the  strength  of  his  attachment  to  it,
he  now  openly  clung  to  and  embraced.  III.  The  cause.  Preferring  his  temporal
interests  to  his  Christian  duties,  he  went  back  and  walked  no  more  with  the  apostle.
To  love  the  world,  and  the  things  that  are  in  the  world,  is  one  of  the  chief  sources
of  danger  to  our  soul's  welfare — of  which  we  are  taught  in  Scripture  to  beware.  It
is  true  there  is  no  reason  why  a  Christian  should  not  engage  as  industriously  as
other  men  in  the  necessary  business  of  life,  and  avail  himself  as  thankfully  of  its
varied  blessings.  It  is  one  thing,  however,  to  use  this  world  in  due  subordination
to  religion,  and  it  is  quite  another  thing  to  serve  if  as  our  master,  or  to  rest  in  it
as  our  chosen  portion.  Even  with  those  who  do  not  thus  love  the  world,  its  in-
fluence is  hostile  in  many  things  to  their  spiritual  welfare.  Countless  are  the
hindrances  it  places  in  their  way — wily  and  ensnaring  the  allurements  which  it
spreads  for  them.  By  its  fair  looks,  and  winning  smiles,  and  flattering  and  crosses,
entices  them  to  ein  ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  its  frowns,  and  threats,  promises,  it
and  hardsl  ips,  deter  them  from  duty.  Now,  if  such  be  the  influence  of  the  world
even  over  those  who  do  not  set  their  hearts  upon  it,  how  much  more  powerful  must
its  influence  be  on  such  as  have  yielded  up  to  it  their  full  affection !  In  them,  alas !
the  wicked  world  without  is  fatally  seconded  by  the  wicked  heart  within.  The  world
no  sooner  knocks,  than  the  kindred  spirit  is  ready  to  open  a  wide  and  effectual  door
for  its  admission.  Temptations  to  vanity  meeting  with  a  vain  heart  find  it  not  only
a  sure  but  an  easy  conquest.  So  was  it  in  the  case  of  Demas,  His  worldliness  of
spirit  led  him  to  forsake  the  Christian  cause,  when  he  saw  that  he  could  not  longer
adhere  to  it  without  endangering  or  prejudicing  his  temporal  interests.  How  many
a  fair  promise  has  it  blighted  1  how  many  a  hopeful  beginning  has  it  checked  1  how
often,  when  the  good  seed  was  ready  to  spring  up,  have  "  the  cares  of  the  world,
and  the  deceitf  ulness  of  riches,"  checked  the  rising  plant,  and  rendered  it  unfruitful !
{T.  J.  Crawford,  D.D.)         Demas: — I,  Many  of  tou  ake  young  men  who  have

BEEN  RELIGIOUSLY  EDUCATED  IN  BOMB  DISTANT  HOME,  AND  HAVE  BEEN  BENT  HEBE,  OB
HAVE  COME  HERE,  FOB  THE  PURSUITS  OF  BUSINESS.  H.  CONSIDEB,  DEAR  FRIENDS,
WHOSE   CONSCIENCES   DECLARE   YOU   TO   BELONG   TO   THIS   CLASS,    WHAT   IT    IS    YOU    HATE

FORSAKEN,  OR  ARE  FORSAKING.  1.  You  are  forsaking  honour  and  conscience.  2.
You  are  forsaking  the  company  of  those  you  most  respect.  3.  And  not  only  so,  but
you  are  forsaking  the  pursuits  which  will  most  ennoble  your  natures.  4.  But  worst
of  all,  in   forsaking  religion,  you  are  forsaking  you   God  and  Saviour.    III.  To

COMPLETE   THIS   SUBJECT,   LET  US  ASK   FOB  WHAT,   CONSIDERED   AT  ITS  VERY    BEST,   YOU

LEAVE  ALL  THAT  IS  BEST  AND  NOBLEST  AND  HIGHEST  ?  Demas  had  forsakcn  Paul,
because  he  loved  the  then  present  world.  I  suppose  that,  in  some  shape  or  other,
is  the  reason  why  you  have  forsaken  religion  to  the  extent  to  which  you  have  for-
saken it.  It  is  really  Satan's  trap  into  which  you  have  gone ;  but  the  bait  has  been
this  present  world.  You  do  not  love  penury,  disease,  privation,  remorse,  anguish,
death.  Oh,  not  at  all  I  you  love  pleasure,  success,  money-getting,  if  you  can  get  it
easily.  All  the  other  things,  the  dark  sides  of  this  present  world,  drunkenness,
debauchery,  covetousness,  immorality,  over-reaching,  you  are  not  in  love  with  these.
No  1  You  are  lovers  of  pleasure,  according  to  your  idea  of  pleasure.  Suppose  you
could  gain  the  world,  the  whole  world  (and  at  best  it  will  be  an  utterly  unnoticeable
and  infinitesimal  portion  of  it  you  will  ever  get),  and  in  the  chase  should  lose  your
own  soul  1  (R,  T.  Verrall,  B.A.)  The  apostasy  of  Demas  : — Now,  whatever  may
have  been  the  circumstances  under  which  Demas  first  made  profession  of  Christi-
anity, it  is  very  clear  that  that  profession  must  have  exposed  him  to  hardship  and
danger,  for  he  became  a  companion  of  St.  Paul  at  the  very  time  when  that  apostle
was  hunted  down  by  persecution.  It  is  not,  therefore,  to  be  supposed  that,  in  em-
bracing Christianity,  Demas  was  conscious  of  acting  with  any  insincerity.  He  must
have  considered  himself  a  firm  believer  in  Christ,  and  must  have  been  so  considered
by  those  who  had  the  best  power  of  judging.  Ah !  it  is  in  this  that  the  case  of
Demas  is  full  of  melancholy  warning.  We  do  not  find  that  he  was  scared  by  the
perils  which  encompassed  the  profession  of  Christianity.  It  was  love  of  the  world
which  caused  this  promising  disciple  to  make  shipwreck  of  faith,  and  of  a  good
conscience.  He  who  could  scorn  danger  or  endure  hardship  could  not  withstand
the  blandishments  of  the  world,  which  plied  him  with  its  pleasures.  We  have  no
security  but  in  constant  prayer,  in  constant  war ;  and  it  should  make  you  mora


•EAT.  IT.J  II.  TIMOTHY,  869

diligent  than  ever  in  supplication,  more  vehement  than  ever  in  resistance,  to  hear
St.  Paul  say  of  Demas — Demas  who  ministered  to  him  in  prison,  Demas  whom  ho
called  his  fellow-labourer — thatjfcemas  had  forsaken  him,  "(having  loved  this  present
world."     And  now  we  would  turn  your  thoughts  from  the  progress  which  Demas
must  have  made  in  Christianity  to  the  advantages  which  he  enjoyed.     We  wish
you  to  observe  him,  not  merely  as  forsaking  St.  Paul,  but  as  forsaking  him  when
that  apostle  was  on  the  very  eve  of  martyrdom.     Who  can  question  that  there  came
to  him,  in  the  solitude  of  his  prison,  glorious  visitations  from  the  invisible  world,
that  the  consolations  of  God  abounded  towards  him,  and  that,  whilst  the  fetters
were  on  the  body,  the  spirit  soared  as  with  an  eagle's  wing,  and  gazed  upon  the
inheritance  that  fadeth  not  away.     Oh  1  to  have  been  with  him  as  he  had  to  tell  of
the  comforts  and  satisfactions  thus  vouchsafed,  to  have  stood  by  him  as  the  soul
came  back  from  its  sublime  expatiations,  laden  as  it  were  with  the  riches  of  Para-
dise !    Who  could  have  doubted  the  truth  of  Christianity — who  could  have  refused
to  adhere  to  its  profession — who  could  have  hesitated  between  its  promises  and  any
present  advantage — with  the  prisoner  Paul  for  his  preacher,  with  the  prisoner  Paul
for  his  evidence  ?    Ah,  be  not  too  confident  1    It  was  the  prisoner  Paul  whom  Demas
forsook.    Forsook?  Why,  one  would  have  thought  the  common  feelings  of  humanity
would  have  kept  him  constant  1    To  desert  the  old  man  in  his  hour  of  trial — to
leave  him  without  a  friend  as  the  day  of  his  martyrdom  approached — who  could  be
80  ungenerous ?    Ah!  pronounce  not  a  hasty  judgment.    Demas  did  this — Demas
who  had  for  a  long  time  been  assiduous  in  ministering  to  the  apostle — and  Demas
did  this  only  because,  like  many — too  many — amongst  ourselves,  he  loved  this
present  world.    Learn  ye,  then,  how  weak  are  those  extraordinary  advantages  when
the  heart  is  incUned  to  yield  to  the  fascinations  of  the  world — how  these  fascinations
may  be  said  to  steal  away  the  heart,  so  that  he  who  is  enslaved  by  them  loses,  to
all  appearance,  the  best  sensibilities  of  his  nature.    And  let  no  hearer  henceforward
think,  that  because  he  may  have  delight  in  hearkening  to  the  pathetic  or  powerful
speech  of  a  favourite  minister,  he  must  be  rooted  in  attachment  to  Christ  and  His
reUgion.    Let  no  minister  henceforward  think,  that  because  he  has  gained  an  in-
fluence over  men's  minds,  he  must  have  gained  a  hold  on  their  hearts.    And  in
what  mode  may  Christians  hope  to  deliver  themselves  from  love  of  the  world?
This  is  an  important  question.     It  is  useless  to  show  how  fatal  is  the  love,  if
we  cannot  show  also  how  it  may  be  subdued.    There  is  no  denying  that  the
world  addresses  itself  very  strongly  to  our  affections,  and  that  the  correspondence
which  subsists  between  its  objects  and  our  natural  desires,  gives  to  its  tempta-
tions a  force  which  can  hardly  be  exaggerated;  and  we  are  sure  that  these
temptations  are  not  to  be  withstood,  unless  love  of  the  world  is  dispossessed
by  love  of  something  better  than  the  world.    You  will  not  cease  to  love  the
world,  you  will  not  grow  weaker  in  attachment  to  the  world,  through  the  influence
of  any  proof,  however  elaborate,  that  the  world  is  not    worth   loving.    It  is
only  by  fixing  the  affections  on  things  above,  that  they  can  be  drawn  from  things
below.    There  may  be  weariness,  there  may  be  dissatisfaction,  there  may  be  even
disgust  with  the  vanities  of  earth,  but  nevertheless  these  vanities  will  occupy  the
heart,  unless  displaced  by  the  realities  of  heaven.    You  see,  then,  what  you  have
to  do.    You  have  to  meditate  upon  God  and  upon  heaven,  striving  to  acquire  higher
and  higher  thoughts  of  Divine  majesty.    There  is  not  one  of  you  who  will  become
a  Demas,  if  you  keep  this  in  mind.     This  is  what  you  may  call  a  recipe  against
apostasy.    It  is  not  a  recipe  composed  upon  abstract  and  speculative  opinions,  but
drawn  from  the  known  workings  and  pleadings  of  the  heart.     The  heart  will  attach
itself  to  what  it  feels  to  be  a  greater  good  in  preference  to  a  lesser.    {H.  Melvill,  B.D.)
The  apostasy  of  Demas  : — In  the  long  line  of  the  Doges,  in  the  grand  old  palace  in
Venice,  one  space  is  empty,  and  the  black  curtain  which  covers  it  attracts  more
attention  than  any  one  of  the  fine  portraits  of  the  merchant  kings.    From  that
panel,  now  so  unsightly,  once  smiled  the  sallow  face  of  Marino  Falieri,  afterwards
found  guilty  of  treason  against  the  state,  and  blotted  out,  so  far  as  might  be,  from
remembrance.     The  text  reveals  the  fate  of  one  who  had  filled  a  much  mora
honoured  place,  and  who,  yielding  to  temptation,  sank  to  still  lower  depths.    Poor,
foohsh  Demas  has  gained  for  himself  a  most  unenviable  notoriety.     Once  he  was
not  only  a  Church-member,  but  he  was  accounted  as  no  ordinary  man  among  his
brethren.    Twice  in  the  friendly  salutations  with  which  St.  Paul  usually  closes  his
*pistles  he  mentions  Demas  with  honour  (Philemon  24 ;  Col.  iv.  14).     Two  years
later  he  wrote  in  sorrow  of  heart,  "Demas  hath  forsaken  me,"  &c.     It  was  neither
cowardice  nor  self-indulgence  which  had  caused  his  ruin,  but  simply  the  love  of  the


860  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [ohap.  it.

world ;  the  very  danger  to  which  so  many  are  exposed  in  our  own  day,  when  the
beguiling  blandishments  of  sin,  rather  than  the  terrors  of  persecution,  are  the
devil's  most  successful  devices.  There  is  no  shadow  of  a  reason  to  suppose  that
Demas  had  not  devoted  himself  at  the  outset  in  downright  sincerity  and  earnestness
to  God's  service ;  but  his  weakness  was  such  as  might  prove  the  ruin  of  any  one
who  does  not  keep  every  avenue  to  his  heart  diligently  guarded,  lest  an  inordinata
love  of  temporal  things  force  an  entrance  there.  It  is  recorded  of  the  King  of
Navarre,  then  claiming  to  be  a  good  Protestant,  that  being  urged  by  Beza  to
behave  himself  in  a  more  manly  way  for  the  cause  of  God,  he  made  answer,
that  he  was  "  really  the  friend  of  the  reformers,  but  that  he  was  resolved
to  put  out  no  further  to  sea  than  he  might  get  safely  back  to  shore  in  case
a  storm  should  unexpectedly  arise."  In  other  words,  he  would  not  hazard  his
hopes  of  the  crown  of  France  for  the  sake  of  his  religion.  You  know  the  sequel
of  his  story.  Like  Demas,  he  loved  "this  present  world  "better than  he  loved  God.
He  proved  a  traitor  to  his  religion,  and  bartered  his  heavenly  crown  for  a  fading  one
of  earth.  Some  years  ago,  a  young  woman  was  hanged  in  England  for  murder,  who
had  been  tempted  to  commit  the  awful  deed  for  the  sake  of  a  five  pound  note,  and
this  note  proved  to  be  a  counterfeit  1  To  run  such  a  risk,  and  to  receive  such  bitter
wages  !  Do  those  people  fare  better  than  this  wretched  woman  who  desert  God's
service  for  the  world's  poor  bribes  ?  Can  the  possession  of  hoards  of  wealt^,  or  the
fading  memories  of  past  enjoyments,  bring  peace  in  a  dying  hour  ?  An  Arab  lost
his  way  in  a  desert,  and  was  in  danger  of  perishing  from  hunger,  when  he  was
fortunate  enough  to  reach  a  brackish  well,  and  close  by  he  discovered  a  little  leather
bag.  "Ah!  here's  just  what  I  need,"  he  cried,  with  joy;  "dates,  or  nuts,  to
appease  my  gnawing  hunger  1  "  He  hastily  opened  the  bag,  but  only  to  cast  it  away
with  contempt.  It  was  filled  with  pearls  I  What  value  did  they  possess  for  one
who  was  about  to  die  ?  Just  as  much  as  the  world  will  be  to  those  who  have  sold
everything  else  to  gain  it.  {J.  N.  Norton,  D.D.)  Demaa  the  deserter : — I  was
very  much  affected — as  probably  you  have  been  affected — by  reading  the  accounts
of  the  punishment  of  deserters  in  the  army.  Nothing  in  battle  is  so  blood-chilling
and  horrible.  It  is  so  cool,  so  individual,  so  premeditated  a  life-taking.  The  leading
forth  of  the  offender  before  his  whole  regiment ;  the  rehearsal  of  his  disgrace  to  all
his  comrades ;  the  pinioning  of  his  arms ;  the  bandaging  of  his  eyes  that  he  may
not  see  what  comrade  takes  his  life ;  the  open  coffin  beneath  him  hungry  for  its
prey ;  the  file  of  soldiers  all  aiming  at  one  poor  fluttering  heart  (as  if  sportsmen
should  shoot  a  bird  already  caged) ;  the  ringing  volley ;  the  lightning-like  death
under  a  dozen  wounds — all  this  is  enough  to  drive  the  kindred  of  the  deserter  to  the
verge  of  madness.  The  mother  whose  son  lies  in  the  sacred  mould  of  Gettysburg
or  Chattanooga  is  happy  in  comparison  with  her  whose  hapless  boy  was  blown  into
eternity  from  the  coffin  of  a  deserter  1  And  why  is  the  deserter's  doom  made  so
awful  ?  Simply  because  the  crime  is  so  great  and  the  consequences  of  the  crime  so
fatal  to  the  interests  of  an  army  and  of  the  cause  for  which  an  army  fights.  If
desertion  will  destroy  an  army,  then  the  army  must  destroy  desertion.  His  crime
is  punished  so  fearfully  that  other  men  will  be  deterred  from  imitating  his  bad
example.  Now  history  has  marked  to  infamy  more  than  one  deserter  of  his  country,
or  of  a  sacred  cause.  Benedict  Arnold  stands  already  in  American  history,  bandaged,
pinioned,  shot  through  with  the  volleys  of  a  nation's  abhorrence  I  In  Scripture  his-
tory hangs  Judas  the  arch -deserter.  In  our  text  we  read  of  another.  Paul  has
pilloried  the  unhappy  man.  Every  man  who  has  ever  brought  disgrace  on  his
Christian  profession,  or  has  fallen  out  of  his  church-standing  had  some  secret  reason
for  his  fall.  He  deserted  under  the  seduction  of  some  besetting  sin.  If  we  could
come  at  the  sad  roll  of  all  the  backsliders  or  open  apostates  we  might  read  over  the
specifications  like  these  :  "  Deserted  from  moral  cowardice,"  or  *'  Deserted  through
neglect  of  prayer,"  or  "  Deserted  from  love  of  the  wine-bottle,"  or  "  Deserted  through
the  enticements  of  irreligious  associates,"  or  "  Deserted  through  unbelief."  Demas'a
name  has  the  Holy  Spirit's  specification  beside  his  name.  He  deserted  for  •'  love  of
the  world  I  "  "  Whoso  loveth  the  world,  the  love  of  God  is  not  in  him !  "  This  is
the  last  we  read  of  poor  Demas.  Tradition  says  that  he  sank  so  low  as  to  become  a
priest  in  an  heathen  temple  1  But  if  this  were  so  or  not  we  need  not  discuss.  We
do  know  that  he  forsook  his  Master's  cause  in  its  hour  of  peril,  and  preferred
the  "world  "  to  Christ.  Paul  encountered  the  world  ;  went  into  its  thickest,  saw
its  brightest  allurements ;  met  its  fiercest  assaults,  and  its  most  attractive  lures  to
his  ambition.  He  never  deserted.  Why  ?  He  never  loved  it ;  he  so  loved  Jesufl
that  he  could  not  love  the  world.     Demas  loved  the  world.    It  would  have  done  him


CHAP.  IV.3  n.  TIMOTHY.  361

no  harm  if  he  had  not.  It  will  do  you  none  as  long  as  you  keep  it  out  of  your  heart.
But  when  it  works  into  the  soul  it  eats  out  the  loyalty  to  Christ  and  consumes  the
spirituality  of  the  soul.  Do  you  remember  reading  in  your  childhood,  in  that
favourite  volume  of  Oriental  stories,  about  Sinbad's  voyage  into  the  Indian  Ocean  ?
Do  you  remember  that  magnetic  rock  that  rose  from  the  surface,  surrounded  by  a
placid  and  a  glassy  sea  ?  Silently  the  ship  was  attracted  towards  it ;  silently  the
bolts  were  drawn  out  of  the  vessel's  sides  one  by  one,  by  the  magnetic  rock  I  And
when  the  fated  vessel  drew  so  near  that  every  bolt  and  clamp  was  unloosed,  the
whole  structure  of  bulwarks  and  masts  and  spars  tumbled  into  helpless  rubbish  on
the  sea,  and  the  sleeping  sailors  awoke  to  their  drowning  agonies  !  So  stands  the
magnetic  rock  of  worldly  enchantments  !  Its  attraction  is  silent,  slow,  but  powerful  to
the  soul  that  floats  within  its  range  1  Under  its  speU,  bolt  after  bolt  of  resolution,
clamp  after  clamp  of  Christian  obligation  is  drawn  out.  One  neglect  of  duty  paves
the  way  for  another.  One  desertion  accustoms  the  man  to  the  path  of  evil,  until  he
is  used  to  what  a  Christian  never  should  "  get  used  to  " — sinning !  A  backslider
gets  so  accustomed  to  neglect  of  secret  devotion  that  he  passes  by  the  bolted  closet-
door  with  as  little  concern  as  he  passes  by  the  doors  of  his  neighbours  in  the  street.
He  becomes  habituated  to  a  deserted  Bible,  a  deserted  sanctuary,  a  deserted  Sabbath-
school,  to  a  neglected  heart,  to  a  deserted  Saviour.  At  length  he  finds  that  the
Friend  he  has  deserted,  deserts  him.  The  Qod  whom  he  has  offended  withdraws
His  presence.  This  is  the  penalty  of  sin  I  No  deserter  from  Jesus  escapes  un-
punished. And  a  most  invariable  penalty  which  the  forsaker  of  God  suffers  is — a
sense  of  God's  frowns,  which  sometimes  drives  the  transgressor  to  recklessness,
sometimes  to  despair.  Then  does  the  unfaithful  Christian  find  that  "  it  is  an  evil
thing  and  a  bitter  to  depart  from  the  living  God."  His  by-path  meadow  leads  to
"  Doubting  Castle  "  and  the  dungeons  of  "  Giant  Despair."  {T.  L.  Cuyler,  D.D.)
Demat : — I.  Let  us  see  what  ib  told  vb  conceeninq  this  Demas.  1.  This  man
was  no  hypocrite.  He  had  not  turned  Christian  for  some  selfish  hope  of  worldly
good  or  gain.  There  never  are  many  of  these.  In  those  days  probably  there  were
none.  2.  Nor  was  he  a  timid  follower  of  Jesus.  It  was  rather  bleak  and  stormy
for  Mr.  Facingbothways  to  show  himself,  who  is  usually  a  very  dainty  and  delicate
fellow  and  cannot  stand  much  exposure.  Like  the  cuckoos  and  the  swallows  his
season  is  the  summer,  and  the  first  touch  of  frost  is  enough  to  send  him  away.
3.  Nor  was  he  moved  only  by  a  passing  glow  of  enthusiasm.  It  is  not  unlikely
that  some  were — the  devotion  of  an  impulsive  nature  to  the  noble  and  the  good,  es-
pecially to  the  noble  and  the  good  in  persecution.  They  receive  the  seed  of  the  Word
with  joy,  but  anon  the  sun  is  up  and  it  is  withered,  for  it  has  no  root.  4.  And
further,  it  was  not  that  Demas  had  no  religious  opportunities  and  fellowship.
That  little  company,  knit  together  as  it  was  by  such  bonds  of  sympathy  and
fellowship  constantly  met  in  Paul's  house.  Think  how  the  soul  of  Demas  was
stirred  by  the  great  utterances  of  St.  Paul.  H.  What  was  it  that  buined  him  ?
Having  loved  this  present  world.  1.  Was  it  avarice  ? — the  cursed  love  of  gold  ?
That  vice  that  grows  with  the  years  and  fattens  on  its  gains  :  that  creeps  from  pru-
dence to  saving,  from  saving  to  scraping,  from  scraping  to  grubbing,  from  grubbing
to  gripping  the  gold  more  than  life.  So  clutching  his  money-bags  does  Demas  go
forth,  leaving  Paul  the  aged  forsaken.  The  love  of  money  makes  many  a  Demas
still.  If  that  was  it,  pity  him.  Of  all  pitiable,  ill-tempered,  miserable  people  in
the  world,  this  is  the  worst.  Of  all  fools  hell  laughs  most  loudly  at  the  miser,  who
could  not  use  it  when  he  had  it  and  then  left  it  behind.  But  how  can  we  warn
him  ?  Alas,  Demas  is  the  first  to  sigh  and  shake  his  head,  and  say  how  dreadful
it  is,  and  never  suspect  that  you  mean  him.  The  miser  never  thinks  himself  rich.
2.  Was  it  love  of  pleasure,  of  the  world's  ways  and  the  world's  approbation  ?  The
world  kills  more  men  with  its  smiles  than  with  its  frowns.  Samson  can  kill  the
young  lion  that  roars  against  him,  but  is  himself  coaxed  to  death  by  Delilah.  3.  And
yet  again,  it  may  have  been  neither  avarice  nor  worldliness  that  killed  him,  but  a
gradual  process  of  spiritual  neglect.  So  away  on  the  coast  I  have  seen  some  pro-
jecting crag,  bold  and  mighty,  joined,  as  it  seemed,  and  rooted  with  all  the  solid
continent :  one  with  the  ground  that  stretched  down  through  the  round  world  and
away  under  the  seas  to  the  shores  of  the  far  west,  and  inl»nd  bound  to  the
hills  that  were  topped  and  crested  with  the  granite  crags — there  it  stood  facing  the
blasts  of  the  Atlantic,  defying  them  and  looking  proudly  forth  on  the  wild  seas  that
stormed  and  tossed  below  it.  Yes,  winds  and  waves  would  never  have  fetched  it
down.  But  within  were  hollow  places,  tiny  streams  that  washed  the  deepening
water-ooorses :  then  came  the  silent  frosts  that  gnawed  at  it,  crumbling  undemeatS


862  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oHip.  vr.

It ;  so  hollowed  ont  within ;  then  came  some  day  the  crash  and  din  of  thnnder  and
clonds  of  dust  that  darkened  heaven  and  the  proud  headland  was  hurled  far  down
below,  dashed  by  the  tumbling  seas  and  swept  triumphantly  by  the  wild  waves.
Oh,  are  you  the  man,  whose  prayers  were  once  fervent  pleadings  with  God,  and
now  they  are  an  empty  round  of  phrases  ?  Thy  danger  is  great.  A  little  longer —
only  that,  a  little  longer,  and  of  thee  too  it  must  be  spoken — he  hath  forsaken  me.
4.  Here  is  the  record  of  the  basest  ingratitude.  A  black  ingratitude  that  rouses
our  indignation.  St.  Paul  had  most  likely  been  the  means  of  bringing  him  to  the
knowledge  of  the  truth.  He  could  not  have  failed  to  lead  him  to  the  richer  enjoy-
ment of  the  truth.  Now  when  his  company  would  have  cheered  the  apostle  in
his  dungeon  loneliness  we  find  the  record — "  Demashath  forsaken  me,  having  loved
this  present  world."  Ah,  thou  Demas  of  to-day,  think  how  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ
hath  come  down  from  His  glory  in  very  love  to  thee.  He  sighs— He  saith,  Thoa
hast  forsaken  Me.  Oh,  Demas,  thou  hast  made  a  bad  bargain.  Thirsty  ambition
in  place  of  quietness  and  rest.  The  devil  as  thy  master  in  place  of  the  loving
Lord.  The  bondage  instead  of  the  life  of  goodness.  And  for  wages  at  the  last
heaven  given  up  for  hell.  Thou  hast  a  thorn  in  thy  pillow.  Thy  religion  is
dead,  buried  ;  but  its  ghost  haunts  thee  still  and  will  haunt  thee.  It  meets  thee  in
stiU  and  lonely  places  and  whispers  of  what  used  to  be.  Thy  religion  gone  and  thy-
self spoiled  for  this  world,  and  undone  for  the  world  which  is  to  come.  (M.  G.  Pearse.)
The  danger  of  backsliding : — I.  It  is  the  lot  op  God's  dearest  childken  to  bh

OFTENTIMES   FORSAKEN   OF  THOSE   THAT  HAVE  BEEN   MOST  NEAR  UNTO   THEM  (Matt.  XXVl.

66 ;  Psa.  cxix.  87 ;  xxvii.  10 ;  1  Kings  xix.  10).  1.  That  they  may  be  made  con-
formable to  their  head,  Christ  Jesus,  who  was  left  alone  of  His  beloved  disciples,
and  had  none  to  comfort  Him.  2.  That  they  may  fly  to  Christ,  in  whom  all  true
comfort  lies.  II.  Those  that  have  gone  fab  in  religion  mat  tet,  notwithstand-
IKQ,  fall  away,  and  BECOME  APOSTATES.  1.  Because  they  rest  on  their  own  strength,
and  there  is  no  support  in  man  to  uphold  himself.  2.  Because  Satan,  that  grand
apostate,  is  fallen  from  the  truth  himself,  and  he  labours  to  draw  others  to  fall  back
with  him.  III.  How  shall  we  persevere  in  goodness  ?  1.  Labour  for  a  true  grace.
2.  Get  a  strong  resolution  against  all  oppositions.  3.  Labour  to  know  the  truth,
and  to  practise  what  thou  knowest.  4.  Get  the  love  of  God  in  thy  heart.  5.  Strive
to  grow  daily  in  a  denial  of  thyself.  6.  Labour  to  have  Divine  truths  engrafted  in
thee,  that  so  they  may  spring  forth  in  thy  life.  7.  Grow  deeper  and  deeper  in
humiliation.  IV.  The  love  of  Christ  and  the  world  cannot  lodge  toqetheb
IN  ONE  heart.  They  are  two  masters,  ruling  by  contrary  laws.  {R.  Sibbes.)  The
falling  away  of  Demas : — 1.  The  expression,  "  Demas  hath  forsaken  me,"  &o.,
probably  means,  in  the  first  instance,  that  he  loved  his  life  too  well  to  risk  it  by
ftrther  companionship  with  one,  all  but  condemned,  and  whose  martyrdom  might
be  the  signal  for  his  own.  2.  But  the  expression  involves  something  more.  That
"  love  of  this  present  world,"  which  assaulted  Demas  under  the  lone  roof  of  the
apostle,  is  what  we  can  all  understand,  and  a  snare  which  is  more  or  less  laid  for
us  all.  It  was  the  result  of  not  having  counted  the  cost  of  what  might  be  required
of  him ;  a  perilous  ••  looking  baf^k,"  after  •*  having  put  his  hand  to  the  plough,"  and
therefore  being  "  unfit  for  the  kingdom  of  God."  In  his  former  home  at  Thessalo-
nica  there  might  be  a  comparative  security  to  be  obtained.  There  he  might  find  a
comparative  easement  from  a  confessor's  labour  ;  a  retirement  from  the  responsi-
bility of  a  more  marked  and  active  disciple.  There,  at  all  events,  he  migbt  not  be
called  upon  to  defend  his  faith  ;  to  sustain  it  against  the  onset  of  impiety  and  false
doctrine ;  but  might  indulge  the  illusion  of  adhering  to  it  in  what  the  world  calls
"  peace."  There,  in  short,  freed  from  the  severer  claims  of  an  appointed  trial,  h«
might  live  as  seemed  best  in  his  own  eyes  ;  and  cling  to  the  vain  hope  of  reconciling
the  duty  of  a  Christian  with  the  divers  conflicting  habits  and  temptations,  which
beset  the  man  of  •'  this  present  world."  {Canon  Puchle.)  Demas  : — Observations :
1.  It  is  lawful  (in  some  cases)  to  name  men.  The  apostle,  to  make  others  fear
apostasy,  names  this  backslider.  Our  application  must  be  as  a  garment  fitted  for
the  body  it  is  made  for :  a  garment  that  is  fit  for  everybody,  is  fit  for  nobody.  What
is  spoken  in  general  to  all,  few  will  apply  to  themselves.  The  only  way  to  benefit
our  people  is  to  a]>ply  the  plaster  to  their  particular  sores.  This  made  Ahab  to  put
on  sackcloth  (1  Kings  xxi.  20),  and  brought  in  so  many  thousand  converts  (Acts  ii.
87).  One  preacher  that  thus  faithfully  applieth  the  Word  to  his  people,  shall  do
more  good  in  one  year  than  another  that  preacheth  in  a  general  way,  and  never
Cometh  home  to  the  consciences  of  the  people,  shall  do  in  many.  2.  The  godly
must  look  sometimes  to  be  forsaken  by  their  bosom  friend.     Demas  was  Paal'a


CHAP.  IT.]  n.  TIMOTHY.  368

iotlmate  acqnaintance  and  coadjutor,  yet "  Demas  bath  forsaken  me."  True  friend-
ehip  is  like  a  well-built  arch  which  standeth  at  first  at  a  greater  distance,  and  thence
leisurely  groweth  up  into  a  greater  closure  at  the  top,  and  so  it  will  stand  the  better
for  weight.  3.  Eminent  professors  may  become  grand  apostates.  Demas  is  a
preacher  of  the  gospel,  Paul's  coadjutor,  and  is  joined  with  Luke  the  evangelist  (Col.
iv.  14),  yet  for  all  this  "  Demas  hath  forsaken  me."  Nothing  but  sincerity  can  pre-
serve as  from  apostasy.  Let  us  therefore,  especially  at  our  first  setting  forth,  dig
deep,  lay  a  good  foundation,  consider  what  the  truth  may  cost  us,  and  ask  ourselveB
whether  we  can  deny  ourselves  universally  for  Christ.  If  we  cannot,  or  will  not,  we
are  not  fit  to  be  Christ's  disciples,  we  shall  shrink  in  the  wetting,  and  start  aside
like  a  broken  bow  when  a  temptation  comes  (2  Thess.  ii  10,  11).  4.  The  inordinate
love  of  this  present  world  is  the  highway  to  apostasy.  It  is  not  the  world  or  the
creatures  which  are  good  in  themselves,  but  the  excessive  and  inordinate  love  of
them,  which  ruins  men.  6.  This  world  shall  have  an  end  and  all  things  in  it,  it
is  not  an  everlasting  world,  it  is  but  this  present  world,  whose  pomp  and
pleasures  soon  vanish  away  (1  Cor.  vii.  29,  30,  31).  6.  Sin  blotteth  a  man's  name,
and  blemisheth  his  reputation.  Demas,  for  his  worldliness,  had  a  brand  set  on
his  name  to  the  6nd  of  the  world.  7.  It  is  an  aggravation  of  a  man's  sin  to
sin  deliberately  against  light  and  conviction.  Demas  doth  not  sin  here  through
passion  or  fear,  but  deliberately.  (1)  He  sinned  against  great  light,  he  being  a
professor,  yea,  a  preacher  of  the  gospel,  could  not  offend  (in  this  kind  especiaSy)
through  ignorance.  (2)  Demas  sinned  against  great  love.  God  had  enlightened
him,  and  made  him  a  preacher  of  the  gospel,  gave  him  a  room  in  the  affections  of
his  chosen  vessel  Paul,  who  made  him  his  coadjutor.  (3)  He  sinned  against  the
light  of  good  example.  Paul  went  before  him  in  doing  ana  suffering,  and  glories  in
all  as  comfortable  and  honourable,  yet  Demas  deserts  him,  and  is  not  this  our  sin  f
(4)  To  sin  upon  a  light  temptation  aggravateth  a  sin.  Now  Demas  had  no  just
ground  for  flinching.  If  he  feared  suffering  for  Christ,  he  knew  the  promise,  That  he
who  forsaketh  father,  or  mother,  or  lands,  or  hfe,  for  Christ,  shall  have  a  hundred-
fold in  this  present  world,  and  could  he  have  brought  his  life  and  estate  to  a  better
market  ?  If  he  loved  the  world  and  found  sweetness  in  that,  is  there  not  more  sweet-
ness in  Him  that  made  the  world  ?  (5)  To  draw  others  into  sin,  aggravateth  sin.
Demas,  by  his  evil  example,  brought  an  evil  report  on  the  gospel,  and  did  tacitly
and  interpretatively  say  there  is  much  more  sweetness  in  the  world  than  in  Christ,
and  so  drew  others  from  the  truth.  (6)  The  greater  the  person  that  sins  the  greater
is  his  sin.  Theft  in  a  judge  is  worse  than  in  an  inferior  person ;  for  Demas,  a
teacher  of  others,  to  teach  apostasy,  draws  men  into  sin.  Such  cedars  fall  not
alone,  but  crush  the  shrubs  that  be  under  them.  (T.  Hall,  B.D.)  Demas: —
I.  The  Chbistian  utb  according  to  Deuas.  Chrysostom,  assuming  that  Demas
left  Paul  in  order  to  go  back  to  his  friends,  expressively  describes  his  purpose  by
saying,  "He  chose  to  luxuriate  at  home."  If  that  was  so,  he  did  only  what  most
Christian  people  are  doing  now.  He  still  believed  in  Jesus  as  the  Saviour  of  sinners,
and  hoped  to  be  accepted  for  His  sake ;  he  purposed  to  abstain  from  the  things
forbidden  by  the  law ;  and,  this  done,  he  thought  himself  at  liberty  to  seek  and
enjoy  the  full  measure  of  worldly  good  which  he  was  able  to  obtain.  In  other  words,
he  wished  to  lead  a  Christian  life,  but  with  the  least  possible  quantity  of  self-denial.
He  wished,  in  the  selfish  acceptation  of  the  phrase,  to  make  the  best  of  both  worlds.
His  Christian  ideal  was  a  negative  one,  and  consisted  in  not  breaking  the  gospel
commandments,  rather  than  in  laboriously  doing,  or  being,  anything  great  or  good.
It  may  often  happen — in  our  case  it  will  generally  happen — that  the  best  service  we
can  render  to  others  and  to  Christ  is  to  be  done  at  home ;  yet  it  is  possible,  it  is
common,  to  remain  at  home,  and  not  to  render  it,  but  simply  to  luxuriate  there,  our
lives  regulated  by  that  love  of  this  present  world  which  Demas  showed.  Indeed,
whatever  the  sphere  may  be  in  which  we  are  best  able  to  serve  others  and  Christ —
whether  the  home  circle,  or  the  wider  arena  of  social  life,  or  the  haunts  of  business,
or  the  Sabbath-school,  or  the  sick,  or  the  poor — are  we  not  tempted  to  occupy  it
after  the  manner  of  Demas  ?  IL  The  Chbistian  lite  AOCOBDma  to  Paul.  Not,
how  little  can  I  do,  but,  how  much,  was  the  ruling  principle  with  Paul.  Not,  what
would  be  easiest  for  me,  but,  what  most  acceptable  to  Christ.  Not  a  cold  calcuo
lation  in  the  interest  of  self,  but  a  warm  devotion  to  the  welfare  of  all.  Loyalty,
gratitude,  generous  enthusiasm,  are  its  features ;  and,  surely,  they  are  among  the
noblest  qualities  of  human  character.  Cold  and  grudging  selfishness  marks  the
other  conception.  They  hardly  deserve  to  be  called  two  forms  of  the  Christian  life,
for  only  one  has  the  Spirit  of  Christ  at  all.    Yes,  let  us  remember  even  the  noble-


861  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHip.  if

ness  of  Paul  was  but  a  reflection  of  the  nobleness  of  Christ.  It  was  at  that  sourea
the  flame  of  his  soul  was  kindled :  "  The  love  of  Christ  constrained  him."  Ill  5'hr
Chkistian  life  begun  with  Paul  and  ended  with  Demas.  The  Spirit  which
founded  the  Christian  Church  was  the  spirit  of  Paul ;  but,  as  soon  as  the  days  of  its
freshness  and  persecution  were  over,  the  spirit  of  Demas  prevailed.  And  the  history
of  individuals  is  apt  to  be  similar.  (T.  M.  Herbert,  M.A.)  Demas: — In  old
times  your  London  Bridge  and  our  Netherbrow  Port  in  Edinburgh  were  garnished
with  human  heads  ;  and  in  days  when  tyrants  and  persecutors  were  on  the  throne,
alongside  those  of  many  notorious  criminals,  many  a  good  and  patriotic  head  hung
there  to  bake  and  wither  in  the  sun.  That  may  appear  to  you  a  barbarous  custom ;
in  a  sense  it  was ;  notwithstanding,  it  came  down,  in  a  way,  almost  to  our  own
times.  Years  ago,  yet  in  our  time,  in  sailing  down  your  Thames,  you  saw  certain
strange  and  fearful  objects  standing  up  within  tide-mark  on  the  shore,  between  you
and  the  sky;  they  were  gibbets,  with  dead  men  hung  in  chains.  Contrary  as  such
a  custom  is  to  the  feelings  and  sentiments  of  the  present  day,  the  object  of  those
who  observed  that  custom  was  a  good  one.  They  had  a  better  end  in  view  than
merely  the  frightening  of  those  who,  happening  to  pass  that  way  by  night,  heard
the  wind  whistle  though  the  holes  in  the  empty  skuU,  or  the  rusty  chains  creak  as
the  body  swept  round  and  round.  Piracy,  with  all  its  awful  atrocities  on  men  and
women,  was  a  much  more  common  crime  in  those  days  than  it  is  now ;  and  the
Bailors  who  dropped  down  the  river  and  passed  these  frightful  objects,  carried  away
with  them  a  salutary  lesson.  They  were  pirates  who  were  hung  in  chains,  and  they
who  looked  saw  in  them  the  abhorrence  with  which  society  regarded,  and  the
vengeance  with  which  justice  would  pursue  the  perpetrators  of  so  great  a  crime.
♦'Bebuke  before  aU,"  said  the  apostle,  "that  others  may  fear";  and  these  men
were  thus  hang  in  chains  that  others  might  see  and  be  afraid.  Nevertheless,  these
monuments  of  sin  and  of  justice,  however  offensive  they  may  be  to  our  taste,  or
however  suitable  they  might  be  to  the  ruder  customs  of  ruder  times,  were  not  per-
petual. The  work  of  decay  went  on,  and  bone  dropping  away  from  bone  left  empty
the  chains  ;  mother  earth  received  into  her  bosom  the  last  relic  of  her  guilty  child,
and  the  crime  and  the  criminal  were  soon  forgotten.  More  enduring  monuments  of
Bin  and  its  punishment  than  these  have  perished  in  the  wreck  of  all  things.  For
long  ages  the  stony  figure  of  a  woman  stood,  with  her  cold,  grey  eyes  turned  on  the
Bea  that  had  buried  the  sinners,  but  not  the  saints,  of  Sodom.  Lonely  and  awful
form — the  travellers  that  skirted  the  shores  of  the  Dead  Sea,  and  the  shepherds
that  tended  their  flocks  on  the  neighbouring  mountains,  regarded  her  with  all  horror
and  terror ;  and  never  did  living  creature  deliver  such  a  sermon  on  the  words,
"  Whoso  putteth  his  hand  to  the  plough  and  looketh  back,  is  not  worthy  of  the
kingdom  of  God,"  as  did  that  dumb  statue  1  But  time  that  destroys  all  things
destroyed  that,  and  now  travellers  have  sought  in  vain  for  even  the  vestige  of  a  reho
that,  were  it  found,  would  be  far  more  interesting  and  far  more  impressive  than  all
your  Greek  and  Eoman  marbles,  anything  dug  out  of  quarry  or  carved  by  sculptor's
chisel.  She  who,  loving  the  world  too  well,  looked  back  on  Sodom,  has  ceased  to
exist  in  stone  :  she  lives,  however,  in  story,  and  we  would  do  well,  in  and  amid  the
temptations  of  this  world,  often  to  "  remember  Lot's  wife."  The  purpose  our  fore-
fathers had  in  hanging  pirates  in  chains,  and  the  purpose  God  Himself  had  in
turning  that  woman  into  a  pillar  of  salt,  the  Apostle  Paul  had  in  his  treatment  of
this  man  whom  he  holds  up  here  as  a  beacon  to  all  future  ages.  He  did  not  write
this  of  Demas  to  revenge  himself  on  Demas  ;  he  was  above  that.  He  did  not  write,
•'  Demas  hath  forsaken  me,  having  loved  the  present  world,"  out  of  spleen  or  anger
against  this  poor  and  pitiable  apostate.  Nothing  of  the  kind.  Nor  was  Demas  the
only  man  that  at  one  time  forsook  Paul.  There  were  others  stricken  with  such  panic,
as  will  sometimes  seize  the  bravest  troops.  All  his  friends  deserted  him.  Ah  1  but  even
then  there  was  an  essential,  and  now  tliere  is  an  eternal  difference  between  them.  I
do  not  deny  that  others  fled,  but  then  they  returned,  they  rallied  ;  they  washed  out
with  martyr's  blood  the  stains  of  their  disgrace.  They  fled,  I  grant ;  they  fled  the
field,  but  only  for  a  time — Demas  for  ever ;  they  abandoned  the  fight — Demas  the  faith.
Theirs  was  the  failing  of  the  disciples  for  whom  our  Lord  pled  the  kind  apology,  "  The
spirit  is  willing,  but  the  flesh  is  weak."  Demas's  was  the  sin  and  crime  of  Judas.
He  abandoned  for  aye  and  for  ever  the  cause  of  Jesus.  I.  Demas's  history  and
Demas's  fall.  Men  live  after  they  are  dead.  I  do  not  mean  merely  that  they  live
in  another  world  after  they  are  dead,  but  that,  in  a  sense,  after  they  are  dead  they
live  here — some  in  their  good  works,  and  others  in  their  bad.  Many  a  man  would
never  have  been  heard  of  in  this  world  at  all  but  for  his  crimes.    His  crimes  are  the


CHAP.  IV.]  n.  TIMOTHY,  865

Bait,  wherewith  his  memory  is  salted ;  he  lives  in  them.  But  for  them  he  had  passed
a  happy  life,  obscure,  no  doubt,  but  happy ;  and  when  he  died  had  gone  down  to  his
grave  unnoticed  and  unknown.  Now  that  is  not  the  case  of  Demas.  The  truth  is,
if  this  Second  Epistle  to  Timothy  had  never  been  written,  or  if  it  had  pleased
God  to  have  let  this  Second  Epistle  to  Timothy  perish,  like  some  other  writings
of  the  apostles,  perhaps  you  might  have  called  this  church  after  Demas ;  Demas
might  have  had  his  name  in  the  calendar  of  saints.  This  man  fell  from  a  height
which  few  of  us  have  reached  or  ever  will  reach,  and  all  the  more  impressive,  there-
fore, is  the  story  of  his  fall.  He  was  indeed  a  fallen  star  1  The  reverse  of  Paul,
who  fell  a  persecutor  and  rose  an  apostle,  this  man  was  an  apostle,  but  is  an  apos-
tate now ;  he  was  a  professor,  but  he  is  a  renegade  now ;  he  was  a  brave  soldier  of
the  cross,  but  he  is  a  base  deserter  and  traitor  now,  having  deserted  and  abandoned
all  for  which  a  man  should  live.  What  a  fall  was  there  I  Scripture  drops  the  cur-
tain on  Demas  just  where  we  see  him  here,  like  a  dishonoured  knight  from  whose
heels  the  spurs  he  has  won  have  been  hacked — just  where  we  see  him  as  a  soldier
who,  his  facings  plucked  from  his  breast,  is  dismissed  as  a  deserter.  No  other  word
in  Scripture  about  Demas  after  that ;  the  caitain  drops,  and  he  vanishes.  But  let
tradition  lift  her  curtain,  and  if  she  speaki  the  truth — and  there  is  no  reason  to
doubt  her  story — it  happened  that  Demas,  as  I  could  have  prophesied,  or  you  or  any
one  else — ^went  from  bad  to  worse,  down  and  down,  and  lower  still,  from  one  depth
of  infamy  to  another,  till  in  the  last  sight  we  get  of  Demas,  there  he  is  yonder,  a
priest  in  a  heathen  temple,  offering  sacrifices  to  dead  stocks  and  stones !  Unhappy,
miserable  man,  whether  he  died,  as  he  might  have  died,  with  a  recollection  of  better
days,  stung  with  remorse,  howling  in  despair,  or  whether  he  died  defiant  of  Christ,
like  JuUan  the  royal  apostate,  who,  when  vanquished  by  the  Christian  hosts,
caught  the  sword  from  his  mortal  wound,  and  tossed  it  up  to  heaven,  and  cried,
expiring  in  the  effort,  "  The  Nazarene  has  conquered  I  "  Unhappy  man,  whether
he  died  one  way  or  the  other  I  II.  What  made  Demas  fall  ?  what  brought  him
down  from  his  high  position  ?  Sailing  once  on  a  Highland  loch  where  the  crags
went  sheer  down  into  the  water,  the  boatman  called  my  attention  to  a  very  remark-
able fragment  of  rock.  There  it  stood,  tilted  up  on  its  narrow  edge,  threatening
destruction  to  every  one  below  it,  and  to  all  appearance  ready,  at  the  touch  of  an
infant's  finger,  to  leap  with  a  sudden  plunge  into  the  depths  below.  What  had  tilted
that  enormous  table  into  that  upright  position  ?  No  arms  of  brawny  shepherds  had
set  it  there ;  no  earthquake,  rolling  along  the  mountains  and  turning  it  upward,  as
earthquakes  sometimes  do,  had  turned  it,  nor  had  lightning,  leaping  from  a  cleft  on
the  mountain's  summit,  struck  it,  split  it,  shivered  it,  or  raised  it  on  its  narrow  edge.
The  task  belonged  to  a  much  quieter  and  less  obtrusive  agent  than  these.  Borne  on
the  wings  of  the  tempest,  or  dropped  by  some  passing  bird,  a  seed  fell  into  a  crevice
of  the  rock  ;  sleeping  the  winter  through,  but  finding  there  a  shelter  and  a  congenial
soil,  it  sprang  with  the  spring,  fed  by  rains  and  by  dews  it  grew,  and  put  up  its  head
and  spread  out  its  branches,  and  struck  deep  its  roots,  worming  them  deep  into  the
crannies  of  the  rock,  and  wrapping  it  round  and  round.  That  table,  as  they  grew,
and  thickened,  and  strengthened,  was  slowly  and  silently  raised  and  separated  from
its  bed,  and  then  one  day  there  came  a  storm  roaring  down  the  glen,  and  seizing  the
tree,  whose  leafy  branches  caught  the  wind  like  sails,  turned  that  tree  into  a  lever,
and  working  upon  the  rock,  raised  it  and  set  it  where  I  saw  it  just  on  the  edge  of  the
dizzy  crag,  and  there  it  stood,  waiting  till  another  storm  should  come  to  hurl  it  over
into  the  mossy  waters  of  that  wUd  mountain  lake.  Whether  that  stone  has  fallen
yet  I  do  not  know,  but  it  will  fall ;  and  just  as  that  shall  fall,  so  fell  Demas ;
BO  many  have  fallen,  and  so  you  and  I,  but  for  preserving  grace,  would  fall  too.
Do  not  mistake  the  Bible.  The  Bible  does  not  say  a  word  against  the  world.  It  is
not  the  world,  it  is  not  riches,  it  is  not  fame,  it  is  not  honour,  it  is  not  the  innocent
enjoyment  of  the  world  that  the  Bible  condemns ;  it  is  the  love  of  the  world.  Beware
of  that  I  Let  it  once  enter,  let  it  get  lodgment  in  your  heart,  though  it  is  simply  a
tiny  seed,  let  it  grow  there,  let  it  be  fed  by  indulgence,  let  it  strike  its  roots,  let  it
worm  them  into  the  crevices  and  crannies  of  your  heart,  and  it  will  do  this  so  silently
that  you  wiU  never  suspect  it,  and  you  will  never  know  it,  and  others  will  never
know  it,  till  one  day  the  storm  shall  come.  What  was  it  that  brought  on  Demas'a
fall  f  Why  was  it  that  persecution  destroyed  Demas  ?  Why,  because  persecution
acted  on  Demas  just  as  the  storm  did  on  the  tree  that  got  its  seed  into  the  rock.  But
that  that  tree  bad  its  seed  and  its  roots  round  about  that  rock,  the  rock  had
defied  all  tempests,  though  they  blew  their  worst ;  and  Demas — persecution
might  have  made  him  a  beggar,  persecution  might  have  cast  him  into  the  deepest


866  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  iv.

dungeon  Borne  had,  perBeontion  might  have  bronght  him  to  the  scaffold,  bat  if
Demas  had  never  loved  the  world,  all  that  persecution  had  done  would  have  been  to
destroy  his  wealth,  to  destroy  his  health,  and  to  destroy  his  life,  but  it  had  never
destroyed  him ;  and  on  that  day  when  Paul  stood  with  his  grey  head  before  a  mighty
crowd  coming  to  see  him  die,  Demas  bad  stood  at  his  side ;  they  had  stood  together
in  the  battle-field,  they  had  stood  together  in  the  pulpit,  they  had  stood  together
before  Jews  and  heathens,  and  that  day  had  they  stood  together  again  ;  one  chain
of  love,  as  of  iron,  binding  them  still,  they  had  fought  together  and  they  had  fallen
together,  their  heads  had  rolled  on  the  same  scaffold,  one  chariot  had  oorne  these
brothers  to  the  grave,  and  over  their  mangled  remains,  carried  by  devout  men  to
burial,  a  weeping  church  had  raised  one  monument,  and  I  will  tell  you  what  she
would  have  put  on  it ;  copying  the  words  of  David  she  might  have  said,  "  They  were
lovely  and  pleasant  in  their  lives,  and  in  their  death  they  were  not  divided."  Alas !
I  have  an  epitaph  for  Demas,  taken  from  the  same  touching  lament,  but  con-
sisting of  oUier  words — "How  are  the  mighty  fallen,  and  the  weapons  of  war
perished  I "  Such  is  the  epitaph  of  Demas  I  He  was  laid  in  an  apostate's  grave,
and,  not  excepting  a  drunkard's,  there  is  no  grave  the  grass  grows  on  so  hopeless  as
the  apostate's.  Lessons  :  1.  "Put  not  your  trust  in  princes,"  says  David.  "  Put
not  your  trust  in  preachers,"  says  Demas.  A  blazing  star  quenched  in  darkness,
oh  I  how  does  Demas  teach  them  that  stand  high  to  walk  humbly,  and  them  that
are  high-placed  not  to  be  high-minded.  It  is  well  to  carry  a  low  sail,  even  when  the
wind  blows  strong.  2.  Have  you  a  pious  father  or  mother,  a  pious  wife  or  children,
pious  brothers  or  sisters — are  you  a  servant  in  a  pious  family,  or  are  your  friends
pious  and  your  associations  good?  Ah  1  how  does  this  teach  you  not  to  count  too
much  on  man  I  Why,  there  is  Demas ;  what  is  your  society  to  his  ?  Demas  lived
in  the  holiest  society  out  of  heaven ;  Demas  was  the  bosom  friend  and  associate  of
one  of  the  holiest,  and  I  will  say  of  one,  in  point  of  soul,  of  the  noblest  and  loftiest
men  that  ever  lived — the  Apostle  Paul.  There  is  no  man  in  this  house  so  little  likely
to  be  engrossed  with  the  business,  to  be  entangled  with  the  cares,  to  be  fascinated
with  the  pleasures  of  this  world,  as  was  that  man  Demas ;  and  yet  he  fell ;  he  fell,
and  if  he  fell,  who  of  as  is  to  stand?  Oh  I  how  does  his  history  sound  in  my  ear
like  that  old  prophet's  voice,  "Howl,  fir-tree,  for  the  cedar  is  fallen  I "  8.  Ah,  what
a  lesson  is  this  for  you  and  me,  and  all  those  who  live  under  the  best  religious  influ-
ences, for  us  to  take  care  that  we  do  not  reckon  upon  them,  but  that  we  watch  and
{>ray  lest  we  enter  into  temptation.  The  world's  smiles  are  more  to  be  dreaded  than
ts  frowns  ;  its  sordid  sophistry,  than  its  sharpest  sword.  Let  the  love  of  the  world
get  into  a  man's  heart,  and  there  is  no  pleader,  no  counsel,  no  man  that  ever  made
the  worse  appear  the  better,  so  successful  as  that  is ;  for  the  world  has  a  tongue  to
convince  the  man  who  has  the  love  of  it,  that  virtue  is  vice,  and  vice  is  virtue.  (T.
Outhrie,  D.D.)  The  relapsed  Christian : — He  reminds  us  of  the  piteous  spectacle
of  a  man  emerging  from  the  watery  element  in  which  he  has  been  plunged,  and  for
a  moment  gaining  a  footing  upon  the  shore,  but  caught  by  the  retiring  wave,  or
losing  his  bold,  he  is  once  more  carried  into  deep  water  with  the  danger  of  being
finally  engulfed  in  the  waves,  unless  by  another  strenuous  effort  he  should  regain
the  shore  and  reach  a  standing  above  the  power  of  the  surge.  {J.  Let/child,  D.D.)
Having  loved  this  present  world — Th£  connection  between  love  of  the  world  and
apostasy  : — ^Love  of  the  world  —love  of  the  world's  opinions,  and  the  world's  habits,
and  the  world's  tastes,  and  the  world's  privileges,  and  the  world's  dispositions,  for
their  own  sakes,  diminish  faith,  by  bringing  us  more  into  contact  with  visible  things.
It  is  the  privilege  of  faith  to  gaze  upon  the  invisible,  to  behold  and  to  lay  hold  of  those
things  which  the  natural  eye  sees  not,  which  the  natural  intellect  comprehends  not,  and
which  the  natural  powers  cannot  grasp.  But  if  the  love  of  the  world  constrains  me  to
grovel  in  the  dust,  to  be  busied  andezercised  and  made  carefulovermuch  with  the  things
that  are  seen,  soon  may  the  far-scanning  sight  of  faith  be  impaired  and  enfeebled,  tUl
at  length  it  scarcely  deserves  the  name,  and  brings  not  the  comfort  and  imparts  not
the  joy.  Do  we  not  know  that  the  natural  eye,  when  engaged  upon  minute  visible
objects  which  have  to  be  brought  near  to  it,  accommodates  itself  to  the  distance ;
and  the  strong  and  healthful  eye  at  length  becomes  short-sighted,  and  cannot  gaze
Qpon  the  distant  prospect  in  its  brightness,  and  looks  confusedly  on  the  landscape
that  woos  admiration  ?  And  so  it  is  with  the  spiritual  perception.  Let  me  be  em-
ployed in  the  minute  things  of  this  world — the  poor  trifles  after  which  the  men  of
ihis  world  toil — and  I  may  look  upwards  in  vain  ;  the  spiritual  sun  may  be  shining
upon  me,  in  its  meridian  splendour,  but  my  sight  may  be  so  dinmied,  that  with  my


CHAP.  IT.]  IT.  TIMOTHY.  867


parbh'nd  spiritnaHty  I  shall  be  forced  to  look  np  and  say— Where  is  itf  The  love
of  the  world  also  diminishes  our  hope ;  because  it  induces  us  to  seek,  and  in  a  certain
sense  enables  us  to  find,  satisfaction  in  present  enjoyment.  The  young  heart  gazes
npon  the  world  and  upon  its  enticements,  and  is  it  not  constrained  to  say — "  How
delightful — how  attractive  "  ?  And  the  grey-headed  worldling,  who  has  luxuriated
In  worldly  enjoyments,  has  no  range  of  hope  beyond  that  which  the  little  limited
circle  of  his  present  existence  gives  him.  Let  me  be  content  with  present  enjoy-
ment— let  me  be  content  with  worldly  success — let  me  be  satisfied  with  all  I  can
Ferceive  while  passing  as  a  traveller  rapidly  through  this  world,  and  I  apprehend
should  not  be  over-much  anxious  to  build  up  a  "  hope  "  that  is  "  full  of  immor-
tality " ;  I  should  be  inclined  to  say — "  I  want  no  better  heaven,  I  do  not  wish  for
anything  beyond  this,  I  do  not  desire  to  hope  for  more."  How  it  becomes  us  to
entreat  you,  with  all  earnestness  and  affection,  to  beware  of  a  Christian  profession
which  does  not  separate  you  from  the  world !  Nothing  is  more  delusive  than  to
become  acquainted  with  the  letter  of  God's  Word,  to  feel  desires  after  the  experience
of  its  comfort,  to  make  a  Christian  profession,  to  join  Christian  assemblies,  to  mingle
in  Christian  ordinances,  and  yet  to  be  still  numbered  with  those  who  say  to  the
world  by  their  conduct — "  Thou  art  my  God  I  "  But  if  you  find  your  profession  haa
been  genuine — if  you  have  "  tasted  that  the  Lord  is  gracious  " — beware  of  the  first
•ymptoma  of  dechne.    (G.  Fi$k,  LL.B.)        The  foolish  love  of  the  world  ;—

Judge  in  thyself,  0  Christian  t  is  it  meet

To  set  thine  heart  on  what  beasts  set  their  feet  ?

'Tis  no  hyperbole,  if  you  be  told,

You  delve  for  dross  with  mattocks  made  of  gold.

Afiections  are  too  costly  to  bestow

Upon  the  fair-faced  nothings  here  below :

The  eagle  scorns  to  fall  down  from  on  high,

The  proverb  saith,  to  pounce  a  silly  fly ;

And  can  a  Christian  leave  the  face  of  God

T'  embrace  the  earth,  and  doat  upon  a  clod  I    (John  Flavel.)

WorldUnett  fatal  to  religion : — In  Brazil  there  grows  a  common  plant,  which  forest-
dwellers  caJl  the  matador,  or  "  murderer."  Its  slender  stem  creeps  at  first  along
the  ground  ;  but  no  sooner  does  it  meet  a  vigorous  tree  than,  with  clinging  grasp,
it  cleaves  to  it,  and  climbs  it,  and,  as  it  climbs,  keeps  at  short  intervals  sending  out
arm-like  tendrils  that  embrace  the  tree.  As  the  murderer  ascends,  these  Ugatures
grow  larger  and  clasp  tighter.  Up,  up,  it  climbs  a  hundred  feet,  nay,  two  hundred
if  need  be,  until  the  last  loftiest  spire  is  gained  and  fettered.  Then,  as  if  in  triumph,
the  parasite  shoots  a  huge,  flowery  head  above  the  strangled  summit,  and  thence,
from  the  dead  tree's  crown,  scatters  its  seed  to  do  again  the  work  of  death.  Even
thus  worldliness  has  strangled  more  Churches  than  ever  persecution  broke.  {S.  Goley.)
Danger  of  the  world : — As  you  love  your  souls,  beware  of  the  world ;  it  has  slain  its
thousands  and  ten  thousands.  What  ruined  Lot's  wife  ? — the  world.  What  ruined
Achan? — the  world.  What  ruined  Haman? — the  world.  What  ruined  Judas? —
the  world.  What  ruined  Simon  Magnus  ? — the  world.  What  ruined  Demas  ? — the
world.  And  "  what  shall  it  profit  a  man,  if  he  shall  gain  the  whole  world  and  lose
his  own  soul  ?  "  The  world  pictured  by  fancy  : — In  the  mirage  of  the  desert,
objects  are  said  to  become  strangely  distorted — a  mud-bank  exhibiting  the  appear-
ance of  a  magnificent  city  with  domes  and  towers,  a  few  stunted  bushes  are  trans-
formed into  a  forest  of  stately  trees.  Is  not  the  world  with  its  hollow,  fading
distinctions  thus  transformed  in  our  idle,  fooKsh  fancy  ?  We  attach  an  importance
to  its  treasures,  praise,  ambitions,  pleasures,  utterly  false  and  exaggerated.  (W.
L.  Watkinson.)  The  border -land  between  Christ  and  the  world: — Centuries  ago
it  was  dangerous  for  any  one  to  live  on  the  border-land  between  England  and
Scotland.  Let  us  take  care  not  to  dwell  on  the  border-land  between  Christ  and
the  world.  Counteractives  to  worldliness  : — Let  the  declining  Christian  strive
against  the  deteriorating  and  retrograding  tendency  to  worldliness.  Let  him  exer-
cise his  faith  in  strong  realisations  of  celestial  things,  which  alone  are  able  to
counteract  the  debasing  impressions  of  terrestrial  ones.  Let  him  accustom  himself
to  look  upon  aU  things  here  in  the  light  of  eternity.  The  fascinations  of  the  world
will  then  appear  to  hun  as  a  brilliant  bubble,  which  will  soon  burst,  and  its  troubles
but  as  a  dark  vapour  that  appeareth  but  for  a  little  while  and  then  vanisheth
away.    For  his  warning,  let  him  contemplate  the  fearful  catastrophe  threatened  to


368  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iy.


those  who  draw  back  from  God  to  the  world.  He  has  only  to  open  his  eyes  to  see
in  what  numerous  instances  this  passage  of  Scripture  has  been  verified:  "They
that  will  be  rich  fall  into  temptation  and  a  snare,"  &c.,  resembling  covetous  mer-
chants, who  overload  their  vessel  with  a  freight  which  impedes  its  course  and
endangers  its  safety.  What  a  fatal  shipwreck  of  faith  and  a  good  conscience  have
many  suffered  from  this  cause :  and  who  can  tell  whither  it  may  carry  him  who
surrenders  himself  to  its  influence  ?  Upon  the  principle  of  a  relapse  being  more
difficult  to  cure  than  the  original  disease,  let  him  be  doubly  on  his  guard  against
this  tendency.  (J.  Leifchild,  D.D.)  Crescena  to  Gal&tiA.—Crescens  is  gone  to
Galatia,  Titus  to  Dalmatia  :—l.  Good  men  will  be  doing  good  wherever  they  are.
Paul  was  now  a  prisoner,  yet  he  preached  constantly  in  prison,  and  there  converted
Onesimus  (Philemon  9).  2.  Though  some  may  forsake  us  and  the  truth,  yet  God
hath  others  that  are  faithful.  What  if  Demas  be  gone,  yet  Crescens,  Titus,  Timothy,
Mark,  and  Luke  abide  constant;  no  storms  nor  tempests  can  beat  them  off;  if  Saul
oppose  David,  yet  Jonathan  will  stick  to  him.  (T.  Hall,  B.D.)  Only  Luke  is
with  me. — The  beloved  physician  : — I.  The  inducements  to  beiiain  with  St.  Paul.
1.  There  was  the  power  of  friendship.  From  the  earlier  references  to  Demas,  we
may  conclude  that  he  had  been  associated  with  the  apostle  in  companionship  in
trial  and  labour.  Intimacy  and  affection  were  motives  to  stay  with  him.  2.  There
was  the  sense  of  chivalry.  However  Demas  might  be  tempted  to  go,  a  noble  spirit
would  have  said,  Not  now,  when  it  is  a  time  of  comparative  loneliness,  need,  and
danger.  3.  Interest  in  the  faith.  From  his  former  relationship  with  St.  Paul  w^
must  assume  knowledge  and  admiration  for  the  faith.  He  had  seen  Christianity,
accepted  it,  and  had  been  privileged  to  witness  its  power  in  the  personal  piety  and
devotedness  of  St.  Paul.  II.  The  temptations  to  go.  1.  The  world's  temptation
of  Demas  was  probably  not  through  her  seductive  glitter  of  pleasure  and  pomp,  but
through  her  frowns.  The  apostle  was  under  a  cloud.  Few  seem  willing  to  take
him  by  the  hand.  Notice  how  joyously  he  recognises  the  courageous  kindness  of
Onesiphorus  (chap.  i.  16,  17).  2.  Perhaps  we  may  hazard  a  conjecture  respecting
the  character  of  Demas.  May  he  not  have  been  one  of  those  whose  rehgious  life  is
just  strong  enough,  or  rather  weak  enough,  to  live  in  a  rehgious  atmosphere,  but
utterly  unable  to  live  when  unsupported  by  Christian  society  ?  3.  The  way  in  which
such  a  character  would  desert.  Not  openly,  but  by  degrees.  Excuses  to  omit
dangerous  duties,  and  even  at  the  last  perhaps  only  leave  St.  Paul  on  some  plausible
pretext  to  go  to  Thessalonica.  The  old  apostle  saw  through  it :  "  Having  loved
this  present  world."  III.  The  contbasted  conduct  of  St.  Luke.  1.  While  Demas
at  Thessalonica,  St.  Luke  at  Rome.  His  helpfulness  to  St.  Paul.  The  knowledge
of  the  physician,  with  its  frequently  induced  sympathetic  power  and  insight.  The
spiritual  refreshment  of  a  brotherly  heart.  Demas  lives  the  life  of  him  who  seeks
to  save  hfe,  but  loses  it  in  aU  its  nobility  and  opportunities  of  doing  kindness.
Luke  is  ready  to  lose  life,  but  saves  its  true  vitality.  2.  For  the  retrospect  of
Christendom  tells  us  that  St.  Luke  in  his  devotedness  has  saved  his  life,  while
Demas  has  lost  it.  The  latter  is  a  beacon-warning ;  the  former  a  guiding  light,  a
name  in  the  Church— loved  where  Christ  is  loved,  honoured  where  the  apostle  is
honoured,  for  constancy,  kindliness,  and  intrepid  faith.  Learn  therefore  that — 1.
Chivalry  is  not  strong  enough  against  the  world-spirit.  2.  A  religion  which  is  only
dependent  on  the  personal  influence  of  others  will  prove  faulty  in  the  time  of  trial.
'i.  Thus  only  the  inner  strength  supplied  by  Christ  can  keep  us  strong ;  not  Paul,
not  Apollos,  not  the  wisdom  of  men,  but  Christ.  For  the  difference  between  St.
Luke  and  Demas  was  not  in  outward  circumstances.  They  were  equally  tried.  It
is  Christ  in  us  which  is  the  hope  of  glory,  a  glory  the  earnest  of  which  is  seen  in  the
scorn  of  earth  and  the  triumph  of  faith  over  her  frown  or  her  smile.  (W.  B.
Carpenter, M. A.)  St.  Luke  the  Evangelist : — We  know  but  very  little,  historically,
of  St.  Luke.  His  birthplace  appears  to  have  been  Antioch,  the  metropolis  of  Syria,
and,  from  his  profession  as  a  physician,  we  conclude  him  to  have  been,  as  indeed  his
writings  prove  him,  a  man  of  liberal  education.  Antioch  was  distinguished  as  the
seat  of  hterature;  and  St.  Luke  had  probably  availed  himself  of  the  advantages
presented  by  his  native  place.  We  have  no  information  in  regard  to  the  calling
and  conversion  of  St.  Luke,  and  of  his  becoming  a  physician  of  the  soul  as  well  as
the  body.  Many  suppose  him  to  have  been  converted  by  St.  Paul  at  Antioch,  and
BO  to  have  had  no  acquaintance  with  Christianity  until  after  the  death  of  its
Founder.  Others  again  maintam  that  Luke  was  one  of  the  seventy  disciples  whom
Jesus  sent  forth  to  publish  the  gospel.  However  this  mny  have  been,  it  is  in  connec-
tion with  St.  Paul  that  St.  Luke  is  first  mentioned  in  the  New  Testament.     From


CHAT.  IT.]  II.  TIMOTHY.  869

Acta  xvi.  to  zzviii.  we  learn  that  he  accompanied  St.  Paul  in  many  of  his  labours
and  journeyinga,  and  was  with  him  at  Rome  during  his  two  years'  imprisonment.
We  are  wholly  without  authentic  information  as  to  the  after  life  of  St.  Luke.
Various  spheres  of  labour  are  assigned  to  him  by  various  writers,  and  much
obscurity  rests  on  the  timej  place,  and  manner  of  his  death.    The  most  ancient
authors,  however,  say  nothing  of  his  martyrdom ;  and  this  would  seem  to  show
that  he  died  a  natural  death ;  though  others,  indeed,  allege  that  he  went  out  of  Ufa
stretched  on  an  olive  tree.    But  whilst  so  httle  material  is  furnished  by  the  biogra-
phers of  St.  Luke,  we  are  in  possession  of  his  writings,  and  by  these  "  he,  being
'  dead,  yet  speaketh."    There  has  never  been  debate  in  the  Church  that  the  Gospel
which  bears  his-  name,  and  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  were  written  by  St.  Luke.
These  were  his  legacies  to  all  after  ages,  and  for  these  must  he  be  held  in  honour  so
long  as  there  is  any  love  for  the  gospel.  And  with  these  writings  in  our  hands,  who
that  has  any  sense  of  the  worth  of  revelation  will  hesitate  to  describe  St.  Luke  as
"  a  brother  whose  praise  is  in  the  gospel  throughout  all  the  churches  "  ?    Or  who,
like  St.  Paul,  if  he  had  no  other  companion,  would  not  feel  that,  in  having  this
evangelist,  he  had  books  on  which  to  draw  that  he  could  never  exhaust,  and  which
would  continually  furnish  him  with  spiritual  information,  so  that  he  could  never
be  in  loneliness,  never  at  a  loss  for  guidance  and  instruction,  even  though  he  should
have  to  say  with  the  apostle  in  our  text — "  Only  Luke  is  with  me."    And  what  we
venture  to  assert  is,  that  the  history  which  he  has  produced  outweighs,  in  value  to
ourselves,  eitl^pr  of  the  other  three  which  the  New  Testament  contains.     We
venture  to  afi&rm  that,  if  only  one  Gospel  is  to  be  preserved,  that  that  Gospel  should
be  the  Gospel  according  to  St.  Luke.     The  debate  must  lie  between  the  Gospels  of
St.  Luke  and  St.  Matthew  ;  for  neither  in  the  Gospel  of  St.  Mark,  nor  in  that  of
St.  John  is  any  account  given  of  the  parentage  and  birth  of  Jesus  Christ ;  so  that,
with  no  other  document  in  our  hands,  we  should  be  uninformed  upon  facts  whicli
lay  at  the  very  root  and  foundation  of  Christianity.    We  should  have  no  proof  of
the  fulfilment  of  prophecies  declaratory  that  Christ  should  be  born  of  a  virgin,
without  taint  of  original  sin  ;  and  we  could  therefore  make  no  way  in  building  up
the  fabric  of  our  most  holy  faith.    You  will  admit,  then,  that  if  only  one  Gospel  be
retained,  it  must  be  that  of  St.  Matthew  or  St.  Luke,  inasmuch  as  these  contain
what  is  wanting  in  the  others,  the  account  of  Christ's  miraculous  nativity,  and  this
account  is  indispensable  to  our  knowledge  of  redemption  ;  but  if  we  are  to  choose
between  the  Gospels  of  St.  Matthew  and  St.  Luke,  the  far  fuller  manner  in  which
St.  Luke  gives  the  circumstances  of  the  birth  of  our  Saviour  might  of  itself  deter-
mine upon  which  to  decide  for  the  history.    And  when  you  add  to  this  that  St.
Luke  is  the  evangelist  who  has  preserved  for  us  the  parables  and  incidents  most
adapted  to  our  case,  and  most  comforting  to  our  feelings,  and  that  from  his  writings
we  draw  a  prayer  which  is  the  very  epitome  of  petitions,  "  God  be  merciful  to  me,
a  sinner  " ;  that  it  is  he  who  draws  for  us  that  most  affecting  of  pictures,  the  picture
of  the  father's  rushing  to  meet  the  prodigal  son  whilst  yet  a  great  way  off,  folding
him  in  his  arms,  and  giving  him  his  embrace ;  that  in  the  pages,  moreover,  of  this
evangelist  it  is  that  we  behold  the  good  Samaritan  pouring  oil  and  wine  into  the
wounds  of  the  sufferers ;  that  we  are  warned  by  the  sudden  summons  to  the  rich
fool,  who,  within  a  hair's  breadth  of  death,  talked  of  building  larger  bams ;  by  the
torments  of  Dives,  who  exchanged  the  luxuries  of  a  palace  for  the  plagues  of  hell;
that  we  are  comforted  by  Christ's  gracious  words  to  the  thief  on  the  cross ; — ay,  if
it  be  thus  true  that  we  turn  to  the  Gospel  of  St.  Luke  for  whatever  is  most  exqui-
sitely tender,  most  persuasive,  most  encouraging,  most  startling  in  the  registered
actions  and  sayings  of  the  Saviour,  then  it  is  not  to  be  doubted  that  our  chief  debt
of  gratitude  is  due  to  this  evangelist;  that  if  we  had  lost  all  the  others— Crescen 3
unto  Galatia,  Titus  unto  Dalmatia,  Matthew,  Mark,  and  John  having  departed  from
this  present  world — it  might  still  be  with  the  tone  of  those  who  felt  they  had  kept
the  one  from  whom  most  might  be  learned,  that  we  took  up  the  language  of  our
text  and  exclaimed  with  St.  Paul,  "  Only  Luke  is  with  me."    We  now  turn  to  look
at  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  a  work  which  stands  quite  by  itself,  and  whose  worth,
therefore,  cannot  be  measured  by  comparing  it  with  others.     If  we  had  not  this
book  we  should  have  no  inspired  record  whatever  of  the  actions  and  sayings  of  the
first  preachers  of  Christianity,  and  consequently  its  value  must  be  estimated  by  the
injury  which  would  be  occasioned  by  the  total  want  of  such  a  record.    The  removal
of  the  Acts  from  the  New  Testament  would  be  altogether  a  different  thing  from
the  removal  of  one  of  the  Gospels ;  in  the  latter  case  the  deficiency  would  be  at
least  partially  supplied  by  the  remaining  writings,  whereas  in  the  former  there

24


370  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it.


would  be  left  no  document  to  which  we  could  refer.  The  book  of  the  Acts  is  to  the
Holy  Spirit  what  the  Gospels  are  to  the  Saviour— a  record  of  His  entering  on  H13
office,  and  fulfilling  Hie  great  work  in  the  scheme  of  human  redemption.  And  can
we  dispense  with  one  record  any  more  than  with  the  other  ?  Is  it  not  indispensable
to  the  completeness  of  the  evidences  of  Christianity — the  showing  how  each  Person
In  the  ever-blessed  Trinity  has  interposed  on  our  behalf— that  we  should  be  able  to
point  to  apostles  and  to  apostolic  men,  receiving  supernatural  gifts,  and  going  forth
with  a  more  than  human  strength  to  a  warfare  with  principaUties  and  powers  ?  It
is  one  thing  to  prove  a  work  valuable,  and  another  to  show  that  its  loss  would  be
fatal.  It  is  this  that  we  endeavour  to  do,  by  exhibiting  the  Acts  as  the  Gospel  of
the  Holy  Ghost,  and  as  the  record  of  transactions  which  involve  the  interest  and
the  permanence  of  the  whole  Gentile  Church.  And  when  we  have  shown  yon  tbat
without  this  book  you  would  be  left  ignoraiit  of  the  coming  of  the  Comforter ;  that
you  would  know  nothing  of  the  manifestations  by  which  the  seal  of  Divinity  was
finally  set  on  Christianity— yea,  be  unacquainted  with  redemption  as  the  joint
work  of  the  three  Persons  in  the  Godhead ;  and  when  we  have  further  shown  you
that,  take  away  this  book,  and  you  take  away  all  the  register  of  God's  ordering  the
removal  of  liie  middle  wall  of  partition,  so  that  the  Gentiles  might  be  received
without  submitting  themselves  to  the  institutions  of  Moses,  and  we  think  we  have
shown  enough  to  convince  you  that  you  owe  St.  Luke,  at  least,  as  much  for  his
Acts  of  the  Apostles  as  for  his  Gospel ;  and,  therefore,  we  again  say— Crescena
might  have  departed  to  Galatia,  Titus  to  Dalmatia,  and  you  might  be  left  alone  in
a  prison,  almost  without  associates,  almost  without  books ;  but  could  you  be  lonely?
oonld  you  be  forced  to  speak  as  if  deprived  of  high  companionship  and  intercourse
vrith  those  in  whom  a  Christian  has  the  deepest  interest,  and  access  to  the  best  stores
of  comfort  and  of  knowledge,  if  you  could  say  of  yourself,  as  St.  Paul  says  in  our
text— '•Only  Luke  is  with  me"?  (H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  St.  Luke  an  example  of
true  friendship  .—Most  of  that  which  goes  by  the  name  of  friendship  is  as  rootless
as  an  aquatic  plant  that  turns  its  broad  leaves  and  flowers  to  the  summer's  sun.
Men  desecrate  the  holy  name  of  friendship  by  applying  it  to  alliances,  conferences,
and  leagues.  JBut  true  friendship  is  one  of  the  sweetest  and  best  of  earthly  things,
if,  indeed,  it  can  be  called  earthly.  Friendship  is  the  best  developed  fruit  of  love.
It  is  the  escape  for  the  pent-up  soul.  Friends  can  do  for  each  other  what  modesty
forbids  them  to  do  for  themselves.  They  can  keep  down  each  other's  vanity,  and
keep  up  each  other's  courage.  Friendship  has  the  physician's  skill,  the  nurse's
vigilance,  the  mother's  devotion.  How  may  we  procure  this  blessed  boon  ?  Friend-
ship  cannot  be  created  by  the  jugglery  of  oaths  and  grasped  hands.  True  friendship
ought  to  be  grounded  in  the  love  of  God ;  it  ought  to  be  well  chosen,  cemented  by
nature  and  rehgion,  developed  by  time,  tested  by  adversity,  consecrated  by  associa-
tions. Let  such  friendship  be  held  at  high  value.  Let  no  trivial  thing  imperil  it.
Let  it  be  cherished  by  confidence  unstinted,  by  demonstrations  of  aJBfection,  by
sincerity  and  truth,  by  faith  and  trust,  by  mutual  forbearance  and  sacrifice.  Such
friendship  will  be  an  oasis  in  the  arid  waste  of  selfishness,  and  it  will  be  an  antici-
pation for  the  life  to  come.  (R.  S.  Barrett.)  The  friendship  of  St.  Luke  and  St.
Paul;— That  St.  Paul  should  be  drawn  to  St.  Luke  is  no  wonder,  for  there  must
have  been  great  similarity  in  their  tastes,  both  being  men  of  highly  cultivated
minds ;  but  that  St.  Luke  should  throw  in  his  lot  with  St.  Paul,  the  homeless,
persecuted  man,  who  was  an  outcast  from  his  own  people,  and  who  went  in  constant
danger  of  his  life — this  betokens  a  strength  of  mind  such  as  is  met  with  but  rarely,
and  a  friendship  of  no  ordinary  kind.  And  we  can  hardly  guess  at  the  value  to  St.
Paul  of  the  friendship  of  such  a  man  as  St.  Luke,  even  if  we  take  it  on  the  low
standard  of  the  value  of  services  which  he  would  be  able  to  render  to  the  Apostle.
Being  an  educated  man,  he  would  be  able  to  assist  in  many  ways ;  for  instance,  as
his  amanuensis,  and  as  being  more  competent  than  others  to  deal  with  the  more
cultivated  heathen  with  whom  they  were  brought  in  contact.  But  all  this  would
be  as  nothing  compared  with  the  common  bond  which  would  knit  their  soula
together,  their  love  for  their  risen  Lord.  The  world  can  show  us  friendship,  and
that,  too,  of  a  high  order  ;  it  has  done  so  in  past  history  ;  it  can  do  so,  no  doubt,
even  now.  Similarity  of  tastes,  the  pursuit  of  a  common  object,  the  necessities  of
daily  life,  may  draw  men  very  closely  together,  and  make  them  friends  in  the  sensa
in  which  the  world  uses  tiie  term.  But  there  is  a  deeper  sense  than  that :  for
Christianity  has  done  the  same  for  friendship  as  it  has  for  whatever  else  it  has
touched— it  has  raised  and  it  has  sanctified  it.  St.  Paul  and  St.  Luke  were  uot
oi^y  friends,  but  each  had  a  common  friend  in  the  Lord  Jesus.    In  Christ  Jesos


CHAT.  IT.]  11.  TIMOTHY.  871

they  were  \ii\i  together  by  a  bond  stronger  than  any  which  the  world  could  forge,
and  the  secret  of  St.  Luke's  devotion  to  St.  Paul  was  not  only  community  of  taste
and  feeling,  but  the  love  of  God  which  was  shed  abroad  in  their  hearts  through
Jesus  Christ  their  common  Lord  and  Master.   We  often  hear  people  speak  of  others
as  their  friends,  or  of  themselves  as  being  the  friends  of  others ;  but  it  would  be
weU  if  we  thought  a  little  more  about  what  a  friend  might,  or  what  a  friend  ought
to  be,  before  we  aUowed  ourselves  to  use  the  word.    How  can  there  be  true  friend-
ship between  the  Christian  and  the  man  of  the  world  ?    How  can  there  be  true
friendship  between  those  whose  deepest  and  purest  feelings  are  not  in  accord?
{W.  O.  Abbott,  M.A.)        Luke,  the  beloved  physician: — To  account  for  his  being
alone  with  Paul  at  that  solemn  and  trying  time  we  do  not  need  to  charge  unfaith-
fulness upon  all  who  had  been  Paul's  companions  during  his  confinement  in  Borne.
Did  Paul  keep  Luke  there,  perhaps,  because  he  needed  his  professional  care  in  his
old  age,  after  so  many  toils  and  hardships  and  exposures  by  land  and  by  sea  ?    Did
Luke  refuse  to  leave  him  because  his  watchful  eye  saw  that  Paul  needed  his  pro-
fessional care  more  than  Paul  knew  or  would  willingly  acknowledge  ?    Had  he  the
tact  to  conceal  this  professional  solicitude  under  the  equally  true  desire  to  enjoy
Paul's  company  and  instruction,  and  to  fiU  his  own  mind  and  memorandum-book
with  those  memories  which  the  Holy  Spirit  was  moving  him  to  write  to  "  most
excellent  Theophilus  "  and  to  us  ?    HI  might  not  be  a  minister  of  the  gospel,  a
pastor  taking  care  of  souls,  I  know  not  what  else  I  would  rather  be  than  a  physician,
skilled  to  minister  at  bedsides  and  in  chambers  of  the  sick,  worthy  to  be  looked  to
by  anxious  households  when  the  chill  shadow  of  death  makes  them  shudder,  worthy
to  be  trusted  as  a  sentry  by  a  community  when  the  •'pestilence  walketh  in  dark-
ness."   The  highest  skill  in  medicine  is  not  all  that  such  a  trusted  and  beloved
physician  must,  have ;  or,  rather,  skill  in  a  physician  includes  much  more  than
knowledge  of  anatomy  and  physiology  and  the  materia  medica.    It  includes  high
acquaintance  with  the  human  soul  in  its  peculiar  powers  and  in  their  relations  to
the  body.     It  involves  not  merely  knowledge  of  the  body,  as  a  thing  which  it  has
dissected,  a  machine  whose  parts  it  has  taken  asunder  and  handled.    It  involves
reverence  for  that  body  as  the  supreme  handiwork  of  Jehovah,  whose  infinite  skill
and  care  are  illustrated  in  all  its  joints  and  members,  all  its  parts  and  organs,  all
its  processes  and  powers.    It  involves  tender  appreciation  of  all  the  liabilities  and
capabilities  of  such  a  soul  in  such  a  body.     It  involves  genuine  sympathy  with
sufferers,  suffusing  and  beautifying,  not  enfeebling  nor  hindering  the  business  of
relieving,  making  it  not  less  effective  and  successful  business  because  clothed  upon
with  graces  which  present  it  ever  as  intercourse,  conversation,  fellowship.     {H.  A.
Nelson,   D.D.)        A  faithful  friend: — A  faithful  friend  will  not  forsake  us  in
our  deepest  distress.    A  faithful  friend — and  such  a  one  was  Luke — ^loves  at  all
times  (Prov.  xvii.  17).    Though  Paul  be  a  prisoner  and  ready  to  be  martyred,  yet
Luke  keeps  with  him  still ;  though  all  forsake  him,  yet  he  will  stick  to  him.    Pot-
friendship  will  vanish,  especially  in    adversity.      Job  (vi.  15)  complains  of  his
friends  that  they  had  deceived  him  like  a  brook ;  they  were  not  like  a  river  which
is  fed  by  a  spring  and  hath  a  pereimity  of  flowing,  but  like  a  brook  which  runs  ia
moist  times  when  there  is  least  need  of  it,  but  in  a  drought  it  fails ;  like  swallowa
which  fly  about  us  in  summer,  but  in  winter  they  leave  us  and  hide  themselves  in
hollow  trees  or  the  like.     Such  vermin  abound  which  run  to  full  bams,  but  outrun
them  when  empty.    Most  worship  the  rising,  few  the  setting  sun.    (T.  Hall,  B.D.)
Take  Mark,  and  bring  Mm  with  thee. — The  quarrel  about  John  Mark  (see  Acts  xv.
36-39) : — L  The  shabp  quabrel  between  Paul  and  Barnabas.     They  were  both
good  men,  both  men  of  cultivated  spirit  and  of  fine  Christian  character,  and  yet
they  got  into  a  violent  passion  about  a  matter  that  one  would  think  might  have
been  easily  arranged  if  discussed  forbearingly  and  wisely.     The  only  wise  thing
about  the  whole  matter  was  the  separation.    It  is  far  better  for  Christian  people
who  cannot  work  comfortably  together  to  separate  than  to  keep  up  an  endless  bick-
ering, or  a  dull,  sulky  anger  which  only  reveals  the  smouldering  fire  that  sooner  or
later  is  sure  to  burst  forth.     1.  The  most  godly  men  are  still  liable  to  sharp  and
sudden  falls.    2.  Those  who  are  engaged  in  the  same  work  may  have  antagonistio
views  on  matters  of  prudence.    H.  The  two  different  stages  of  Mark's  life.
Sometimes  a  poor-looking  material  works  out  better  than  we  expected.     The
unpromising  youth  often  surprises  us  by  very  superior  development  in  after  years.
Soldiers  who  have  quailed  before  the  first  fire  of  their  first  battle  have  distinguished
themselves  as  brave  men  in  after  years.     There  is  really  nothing  more  common
than  this  contradiction  of  all  early  promises,  both  for  good  and  bad,  which  daily


373  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [chip.it.

life  brings  to  us.  Life  and  character  have  so  many  sharp  turnings  that  you  can
never  calculate  what  direction  they  shall  ultimately  take.  This  was  the  case  with
John  Mark.  Jn  the  former  of  these  passages  he  is  brought  before  us  as  a  young
man.  The  opinion  Paul  had  of  him  then  was  a  very  contemptible  one.  He  had
set  his  hand  to  the  plough,  and  looked  back.  Seventeen  years  after  Paul  is  in
prison  at  Rome,  and  writes  thence  this  letter  to  Timothy.  And  in  it  comes  this
honourable  and  affectionate  mention  of  the  very  man  who  seventeen  years  before
he  had  held  at  so  cheap  a  rate,  "  Take  Mark,  and  bring  him  with  thee,  for  he  ia
profitable  to  me  for  the  ministry."  A  bright  midday  to  a  very  unpromising  morn-
ing 1  We  are  constrained  to  suspect,  after  all,  that,  though  Paul  had  prudence  and
justice  on  his  side,  on  that  former  occasion,  yet  Barnabas  had  the  finer  intuition
when  he  kept  his  faith  in  his  nephew,  notwithstanding  his  disgraceful  delinquency.
After-events  certainly  proved  that  the  unpromising  youth  had  in  him  the  making
of  a  strong  man.  How  much  of  Mark's  after  strength  was  due,  on  the  one  hand,
to  the  paternal  faith  and  protection  of  Barnabas,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  to  the
tonic  administered  to  him  by  Paul's  contemptuous  refusal,  we  cannot  say.  Probably
both  had  a  good  effect.  The  scornful  glance  with  which  a  brave  man  looks  on  a
delinquent,  by  inflaming  his  self-respect,  may,  while  it  mortifies  his  soul,  impel  him
to  bolder  things.  And,  on  the  other  hand,  to  feel  that  though  we  have  miserably
failed,  there  is  one  heart  that  still  believes  in  our  capacity,  and  one  hand  that  never
loses  its  grasp  of  ours,  is  heaven's  good  angel  to  our  life.  Many  a  coward  life  has
been  made  brave  by  that  ministering  angel.  Many  a  one-time  sinner  has  been
made  a  saint  by  the  faithfulness  with  which  one  hand  has  continued  to  hold  his  in
confident  love,  and  not  seldom  that  hand  has  been  the  soft  hand  of  a  brave  and
trusting  woman.  Stick  to  the  coward  a  little  longer,  and  you  may,  by  God's  grace,
make  a  brave  man  of  him  yet  1  Stick  to  the  sinner  a  little  longer,  and  you  may
yet  write  his  name  in  the  roll  of  the  saints  1  (E.  H.  Higgins.)  Good  men  easily
reconciled  to  good  men : — There  was  formerly  a  sharp  contention  between  Paul  and
Barnabas  about  this  Mark,  who  for  fear  forsook  Paul  and  left'  him  in  Pamphilia
(Acts  xiii.  13,  xv.  37-39),  which  made  Paul  that  he  would  not  suffer  him  to  visit
the  brethren.  Superiors  in  gifts  and  grace  may  sometimes  have  need  of  the  help
of  inferiors.    A  Paul  may  send  for  a  Mark  to  help  him.     (T.  Hall,  B.D.)

Yer  13.  The  cloke  .  .  .  the  hooks  .  .  .  the  parchments. — Paul — his  cloak  and
hit  books : — I.  Let  us  look  at  this  memorable  cloak  which  Paul  left  with  Carpus
at  Troas.  Troas  was  a  principal  seaport-town  of  Asia  Minor.  Very  likely  the
apostle  Paul  was  seized  at  Troas  on  the  second  occasion  of  his  being  taken  before
the  Boman  emperor.  The  soldiers  usually  appropriated  to  themselves  any  extra
garment  in  the  possession  of  an  arrested  person,  such  things  being  considered  as
the  perquisites  of  those  who  made  the  arrest.  The  apostle  may  have  been  fore-
warned of  his  seizure,  and  therefore  prudently  committed  his  few  books  and  his
outer  garment,  which  made  up  all  his  household  stuff,  to  the  care  of  a  certain
honest  man  named  Carpus.  Although  Troas  was  full  six  hundred  miles'  journey
from  Rome,  yet  the  apostle  Paul  is  too  poor  to  purchase  a  garment,  and  so  directs
Timothy,  as  he  is  coming  that  way,  to  bring  his  cloak.  He  needs  it  much,  for  the
sharp  winter  is  coming  on,  and  the  dungeon  is  very,  very  chilly.  1.  Let  us
perceive  here  with  admiration,  the  complete  self-sacrifice  of  the  apostle  Paul  for
the  Lord's  sake.  Remember  what  the  apostle  once  was.  He  was  great,  famous,
and  wealthy.  Ah !  how  he  emptied  himself,  and  to  what  extremity  of  destitution
was  he  willing  to  bring  himself  for  Christ's  name  sake.  The  Saviour  must  die  in
absolute  nakedness,  and  the  apostle  is  made  something  like  Him  as  he  sits
shivering  in  the  cold.  2.  We  learn  how  utterly  forsaken  the  apostle  was  by  his
friends.  If  he  had  not  a  cloak  of  his  own,  could  not  some  of  them  lend  him  one  ?
No  ;  he  is  so  utterly  left,  that  although  he  is  ready  to  die  of  ague  in  the  dungeon,
not  a  soul  will  lend  or  give  him  a  cloak.  What  patience  does  this  teach  to  those
similarly  situated  I  In  your  greatest  trials  do  you  find  your  fewest  friends  ?  Have
those  who  once  loved  and  respected  you  fallen  asleep  in  Jesus  ?  And  have  others
turned  out  to  be  hypocritical  and  untrue  ?  "  Notwithstanding  the  Lord  stood  with
me,  and  strengthened  me."  So  now,  when  man  deserts  you,  God  will  be  your
Friend.  3.  Our  text  shows  the  apostle's  independence  of  mind.  Why  did  not  he
borrow  a  cloak  ?  Why  did  not  he  beg  one  ?  That  is  not  the  apostle's  taste  at  all.
He  has  a  cloak,  and  though  it  is  six  hundred  miles  away,  he  will  wait  until  it
comes.  A  Christian  man  would  do  well  to  remember  that  it  is  never  to  his
honour,  though  it  is  not  always  to  his  dishonour,  to  beg.    4.  We  see  here,  how


CHAP.  IV.]  17.  TIMOTHY.  378


Tery  little  the  apostles  thought  of  how  they  were  dressed.    Paul  wants  enough  to
keep  hun  warm  ;  he  asks  no  more.    When  good  Bishop  Hooper  was  led  out  to  be
burnt,  he  had  been  long  in  prison,  and  his  clothes  were  so  gone  from  him,  that  h?
borrowed  an  old  scholar's  gown,  full  of  rags  and  holes,  that  he  might  put  it  on,  and
went  limping  with  pains  of  sciatica  and  rheumatism  to  the  stake.    We  read  of
Jerome  of  Prague,  that  he  lay  in  a  damp,  cold  dungeon,  and  was  refused  anything
to  cover  him  in  his  nakedness  and  cold.    Every  saint  is  an  image  of  Christ,  but  a
poor  saint  is  His  express  image,  for  Christ  was  poor.    So,  if  you  are  brought  to
Buch  a  pitch  with  regard  to  poverty,  that  you  scarcely  know  how  to  provide  things
decent  by  way  of  raiment,  do  not  be  dispirited  ;  but  say,  "  My  Master  suffered  the
flame,  and  so  did  the  apostle  Paul "  ;  and  so  take  heart,  and  be  of  good  cheer.     5.
Paul's  cloak  at  Troas  shows  me  how  mighty  the  apostle  was  to  resist  temptation.
"  I  do  not  see  that,"  you  say.     The  apostle  had  the  gift  of  miracles.    Our  Saviour,
though  able  to  work  miracles,  never  wrought  anything  Uke  a  miracle  on  His  own
account ;  nor  did  His  apostles.    Miraculous  gifts  were  entrusted  to  them  with
gospel  ends  and  purposes,  for  the  good  of  others,  and  for  the  promotion  of  the
truth ;  but  never  for  themselves.     II.  We  wiU  look  at  his  books.     We  do  Hot
know  what  the  books  were  about,  and  we  can  only  form  some  guess  as  to  what  the
parchments  were.     Paul  had  a  few  books  which  were  left,  perhaps  wrapped  up  in
the  cloak,  and  Timothy  was  to  be  careful  to  bring  them.    1.  Even  an  apostle  must
read.    He  is  inspired,  and  yet  he  wants  books  1     He  has  been  preaching  at  least
for  thirty  years,  and  yet  he  wants  books  !   He  had  seen  the  Lord,  and  yet  he  wants
books  1    He  had  had  a  wider  experience  than  most  men,  and  yet  he  wants  books  I
He  had  been  caught  up  into  the  third  heaven,  and  had  heard  things  which  it  was
unlawful  for  a  man  to  utter,  yet  he  wants  books  1  He  had  written  the  major  part  of
the  New  Testament,  and  yet  he  wants  books  1     The  apostle  says  to  Timothy,  and
80  he  says  to  every  preacher,  "Give  thyself  unto  reading."    The  man  who  never
reads  will  never  be  read  ;  he  who  never  quotes  will  never  be  quoted.     He  who  will
not  use  the  thoughts  of  other  men's  brains  proves  that  he  has  no  brains  of  his  own.
2.  Paul  herein  is  a  picture  of  industry.    He  is  in  prison ;  he  cannot  preach :  what
will  he  do  ?    As  he  cannot  preach,  he  will  read.    As  we  read  of  the  fishermen  of
old  and  their  boats.      The  fishermen  were  gone  out  of  them.    What  were  they
doing  ?    Mending  their  nets.    So  if  Providence  has  laid  you  upon  a  sick  bed,  and
you  cannot  teach  your  class — if  you  cannot  be  working  for  God  in  public,  mend
your  nets  by  reading.    If  one  occupation  is  taken  from  you,  take  another,  and  let
the  books  of  the  apostle  read  you  a  lesson  of  industry.    III.  We  now  want  to  have
AN  INTKBVIEW  WITH  THE  APOSTLE  Paul  HIMSELF,  for  WO  may  leam  much  from  him.
The  poor  old  man,  without   his  cloak,  wraps  his  ragged  garment  about  him.
Sometimes  you  see  him  kneeling  down  to  pray,  and  then  he  dips  his  pen  into  the
ink,  and  writes  to  his  dear  son  Timothy.     No  companion,  except  Luke,  who  occa-
sionally comes  in  for  a  short  time.      Now,  how  shall  we  find  the  old  man  ?    What
sort  of  temper  will  he  be  in  ?     1.  We  find  him  full  of  confidence  in  the  religion
which  has  cost  him  so  much.    2.  But  he  is  not  only  confident.    You  will  notice  that
this  grand  old  man  is  having  communion  with  Jesus  Christ  in  his  sufferings.     3.
Triumphant.     4.  In  expectation  of  a  crown.     {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)        The  cloak  at
Troas : — Doubtless  the  cloak  was  an  old  companion  ;  it  may  have  been  wetted  many
a  time  with  the  water  torrents  of  Pamphylia,  and  whitened  with  the  dust  of  the  long
Boman  roads,  and  stained  with  the  brine  of  shipwreck,  when,  on  the  rocky  cliffs  of
Malta,  the  Euroclydon  was  driving  the  waters  into  foam  ;  he  may  have  slept  in
its  warm  shelter  on  the  uplands  under  the  canopy  of  the  stars;  it  may  have
covered  his  trembling  limbs,  bruised  with  the  brutal  rods  of  the  lictors,  as  he  lay
that  night  in  the  dungeon  of  Philippi ;  and  now  the  old  man  thinks,  as  he  calls
himself,  with  a  passing  touch  of  self-pity,  an  ambassador  in  chains,  and  as  ha
sits  shivering  in  some  gloomy  cell  under  the  walls,  or,  it  may  be,  on  the  rocky
floor  of  the  Palladio,  in  the  wintry  nights  that  are  coming  on,  he  bethinks  him  of
the  old  cloak,  and  asks  Timothy  to  bring  it  with  him.     "  The  cloke  that  I  left
at  Troas  with  Carpus,  when  thou  comest  bring  with  thee,  and  the  books,  but
especially  the  parchments  " — the  Biblia  and  the  papyrus  books,  few  we  may  b«
sure  and  yet  old  friends.    Perhaps  he  had  bought  some  of  those  very  books  in  the
school  of  Gamaliel  at  Jerusalem,  or  had  received  some  of  them  as  presents  from
his  wealthier  converts.    Perhaps  among  them  may  have  been  some  of  those  books
in  which,  as  we  can  trace  from  his  Epistles,  he  had  read  the  poems  of  his  native
poet,  Aratus,  or  some  of  the  pamphlets  of  Plato,  or  the  wisdom  of  Solomon.    The
papyrus  books,  then,  "but  especially  the  parchments,"  that  is,  especially  tha


874  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it.

works  inscribed  on  vellum — what  were  these  ?  Was  there  any  doooment  amongst
them  which  would  have  been  useful  to  prove  his  rights  as  a  Boman  citizen  ?  Were
there  any  precious  rolls  of  Isaiah  and  the  Psalms,  or  the  lesser  prophets,  which
fatber  or  mother  may  have  given  him  as  a  life-long  treasure  (for  in  these  days
parchments  were  valuable  things]in  the  far-oS  days  when,  Uttle  dreaming  of  all  that
awaited  him,  he  played  as  a  happy  boy  in  the  dear  old  Tarsian  home?  Dreary
and  long  are  the  days ;  longer  and  drearier  still  are  the  evenings  in  that  Boman
dungeon,  and  often  the  rude  legionary  soldier,  who  detests  to  be  chained  to  a  sick
and  suffering  Jew,  is  coarse  and  cruel  to  him.  And  he  cannot  always  be  engaged
in  the  sweet  session  of  silent  thought,  even  in  the  sweet  hopes  of  the  future  or  the
remembrance  of  the  past.  He  knows  Scripture  well,  but  it  will  be  a  deep  joy  to
read  once  more  how  David  and  Isaiah,  in  all  their  troubles,  learned,  like  his  own
poor  self,  to  suffer  and  be  strong.  Who,  as  he  reads  this  last  message,  can  help
remembering  the  touching  letter  written  from  the  damp  cells  of  his  prison  by  our
own  noble  martyr,  William  Tyndale,  one  of  the  greatest  of  our  translators  of  the
English  Bible :  "  I  entreat  your  lordship,"  he  writes,  "  and  that  by  the  Lord  Jesus,
that,  if  I  was  to  remain  here  for  the  winter,  you  would  beg  the  Commissary  to  be
■0  kind  as  to  send  me,  from  the  things  of  mine  which  he  has,  a  warmer  cap  ;  I
feel  the  cold  painfully  in  my  head ;  also  a  warmer  cloke,  for  the  one  I  have  is  very
thin ;  also  some  cloth  to  patch  my  leggings.  My  overcoat  is  worn  out,  my  shirts
even  are  threadbare.  The  Commissary  has  a  woollen  shirt  of  mine  if  he  will  be
BO  kind  as  to  send  it.  But  most  of  all  I  entreat  your  kindness  to  do  yoar  best  with
the  Conomissary  to  be  so  good  as  to  send  me  my  Hebrew  Bible,  grammar,  and
vocabulary,  that  I  may  spend  my  time  in  that  pursuit. — William  Tyndale."  The
noble  martyr  was  not  thinking  of  St.  Paul ;  but  history  repeats  itseU,  and  what  is
this  fragment  from  the  letter  which  he,  too,  wrote  so  soon  before  his  death,  but  the
Bame  thing  as  "  the  cloke  which  I  left  at  Troas  with  Carpus,  bring  with  thee,  and
the  books,  but  especially  the  parchments"?  I.  Does  it  not  show  us  that  this
great  and  holy  apostle  was  first  a  man  like  ourselves  ;  a  tried  and  suffering  man
with  human  wants  and  human  sympathies ;  aye,  and  human  Limitations,  and  with
transcendentally  severer  trials,  yet  with  no  greater  privileges  than  we  enjoy  ?  Doea
he  not  call  to  us  with  more  clear  encouragement,  "  Faint  not,  dear  brother,  dear
sister  in  the  Lord ;  I,  too,  was  weak ;  I,  too,  was  tempted  ;  but  thou,  no  less  than
I,  canst  do  all  things  through  Christ  which  strengtheneth  us  "  ?  11.  Then,  in
what  a  lovely  light  of  manliness,  good  sense,  and  contentment  does  this  place  the
apostle's  character  1  The  sword,  he  well  knows,  is  hanging  over  his  head  whose
flash  shall  slay  him,  but  life  is  hfe.  Until  the  Lord  calls  him,  there  is  no  reason  at
all  why  life  should  not  go  on,  not  only  in  its  quiet  duties,  but  also  with  such  small
blessings  as  it  yet  may  bring.  There  is  no  flaring  fanaticism,  no  exaggerated  self-
denial,  here.  The  wintry  nights  will  be  cold  and  dull ;  there  is  no  sort  of  merit  in
making  them  colder  and  duller.  That  is  why  he  writes  for  the  cloak  and  the  dear
old  books.  God,  for  our  good,  sends  us  all  trials  enough  to  bear,  but  it  is  only  for
our  good.  There  is  not  the  least  reason — it  is  not  even  right — to  create  tortures
and  miseries  for  ourselves  which  God  has  not  sent  us.  We  are  allowed  to  take
and  we  ought  to  take  every  harmless  and  every  innocent  gift  which  God  permits  to
us,  and  to  thank  Him  for  it.  HI.  Then,  look  at  the  matter  in  one  more  Light.
What  is  it  that  a  life  of  ceaseless  ungrudging  labour  has  left  to  St.  Paul  ?  What
earthly  possessions  has  the  apostle  gained  as  the  sum  total  of  services  to  the
world,  unparalleled  in  intensity  and  unparalleled  in  self-denial  ?  Perhaps  he  wants
to  leave  some  small  memento  behind  him,  some  trifling  legacy  by  which  some  true
heart  may  remember  him  "ere  the  rippled  sea  of  life  flows  smooth  once  more  over
his  nameless  grave."  Just  as  the  hermit  St.  Antony  left  the  great  bishop  St.
Athanasius  his  one  sole  possession,  which  was  his  sheep-skin  cloak,  so  St.  Paul,
perhaps,  might  have  liked  to  leave  to  the  kind  and  faithful  Luke,  or  to  the  true
and  gentle  Timothy,  the  cloak,  the  books,  the  parchments.  But,  oh,  how  small  a
result  of  earth's  labours,  if  earth  were  everything,  worth  far  less  than  a  dancer  gets
for  a  single  figure  in  a  theatre,  or  an  acrobat  for  a  fling  on  the  trapeze  ;  not  worth
one-millionth  part  of  what  a  patent  brings  in  for  some  infinitesimal  invention  I
Oh,  the  work  and  the  reward  are  not  the  same  for  eternity.  It  is  not  for  such
rewards  that  the  great  high  service  of  the  world  is  done.  Earth's  rewards,  observe,
have  marvellously  small  relations  to  intrinsic  values.  The  singer  who  has  a  fine
note  in  her  voice  may  blaze  in  diamonds  worth  a  king's  ransom.  But  the  thinker
who  has  raised  the  aim  and  nature  of  nations  may  £e  unnoticed  ;  and  the  poet,
who  has  enriched  the  blood  of  the  earth,  may  be  left  to  starve.    Paul  pours  out  his


CHAP.  IT.)  11.  TIMOTHY.  875

whole  life  as  a  libation  on  God's  altar,  in  agonies  for  his  fellow-men ;  he  cleanses
the  oastoms,  he  brightens  the  hope,  be  purifies  the  life  of  men ;  he  adds,  for
centuries,  to  the  untold  ennoblement  of  generations ;  what  is  the  sum  total  of  his
earthly  reward  ?  What  is  the  inventory  of  all  his  earthly  possessions  as  he  sits
upon  his  prison  floor?  Just  "the  cloke  that  I  left  at  Troas,  and  the  books,  but
especially  the  parchments."  Would  that  content  you  ?  Do  you  think  that  he
sighed  or  was  envious  of  evildoers,  when  he  contrasted  his  sole  possessions — that
cloak  and  those  few  books,  which  were  all  that  he  had — with  the  jewels  of  the
adventurer  Agrippa,  or  the  purple  of  the  execrable  Nero  ?  Not  one  whit.  They
were  not  what  he  had  aimed  at.  He  sat  loose  to  those  earthly  interests  on  which
men's  minds  are  sometimes  to  the  last  so  deplorably  and  so  hideously  fixed.  No ;
better  as  it  is.  He  will  thank  God  for  such  warmth  as  he  may  find  in  the  cloak  and
such  consolation  as  the  books  may  bring  him,  and,  for  the  rest,  he  will  trust  death,
and  he  will  throw  himself  on  God.  (Archdeacon  Farrar.)  Note-books  of  his
own  making  or  collecting :  these  are  highly  prized  by  students.  Julias  Cffisar,
being  forced  to  swim  for  his  life,  held  his  commentaries  in  one  hand  above  water,
and  swam  to  land  with  the  other.  (J.  Trapp.)  A  great  love  of  book$ : — ^An
incident  of  my  own  experience  has  often  interested  me,  and  may  not  be  without
interest  to  you.  I  learnt  one  evening  in  London — it  was  at  an  evening  party  at
which  many  persons  were  assembled— from  a  friend  of  mine  that  a  friend  of  his
and  mine  was  lying  dangerously,  and,  as  it  turned  out,  fatally  ill  in  his  chambers
in  the  Temple.  That  friend  of  mine  was  the  late  Sir  David  Dundas,  who  was  for
many  years  in  Parliament,  and  with  whose  friendship  for  many  years  I  was
favoured.  I  went  down  the  next  morning  to  ask  after  him,  and,  if  it  were  proper,
to  see  him.  He  invited  me,  through  his  servant,  into  his  room,  and  I  found  him
upon  his  bed  of  sickness,  feeble,  not  able  to  talk  much,  and  scarcely  able  to  turn
himself  in  his  bed.  We  had  some  little  conversation,  and  in  the  course  of  it  he
offered  to  me  something  like  a  benediction.  He  said — I  remember  his  words  very
well — "  I  have  never  pretended  to  be  a  learned  man  or  a  scholar,  but  God  has  given
me  a  great  love  for  books."  He  then  referred  to  the  writings  of  the  celebrated  Lord
Bacon,  and  taking  a  quotation  from  a  letter  which  that  eminent  person  had  written
to  a  friend,  he  turned  to  me  and  said,  "  May  God  lead  you  by  the  hand."  That
was  one  of  the  passages  fixed  in  his  mind  from  his  reading  of  the  words  of  Lord
Bacon.  Now,  that  was  a  solemn  hour  with  my  friend — if  I  may  quote  a  very
expressive  and  beautiful  line  from  one  of  Scotland's  real,  but  one  of  her  minor
poets,  Michael  Bruce — "  When  dim  in  his  breast  life's  dying  taper  bums."  At
that  solemn  hour,  reviewing  his  past  life,  reviewing  the  enjoyment  he  had  par-
taken of,  he  thanked  God  for  having  given  him  "  a  great  love  of  books."  Two  days
after  that— I  think  the  second  or  third  after  that  interview — ^that  "  dying  taper  "
was  extinguished,  and  my  friend  passed  into  the  unseen  world.  {John  Bright.)
A  good  book  a  lasting  companion : — Truths  which  it  has  taken  years  to  glean  are
therein  at  once  freely  but  carefully  communicated.  We  enjoy  communion  with  the
mind,  though  not  with  the  person  of  the  writer.  Thus  the  humblest  man  may
surround  himself  by  the  wisest  and  best  spirits  of  past  and  present  ages.  No  one
can  be  solitary  who  possesses  a  book ;  he  owns  a  friend  that  will  instruct  him  in
moments  of  leisure  or  of  necessity.  It  is  only  necessary  to  turn  over  the  leaves,
and  the  fountain  at  once  gives  forth  its  streams.  You  may  seek  costly  furniture  for
your  homes,  fanciful  ornaments  for  your  mantelpieces,  and  rich  carpets  for  your
floors ;  but,  after  the  absolute  necessaries  for  a  home,  give  me  books  as  at  once  the
cheapest,  and  certainly  the  most  useful  and  abiding  embellishments.  {Family
Friend.)  Choice  of  books : — What  books  you  will  choose  as  your  intimate  friends
will  depend  upon  your  humour  and  taste.  Dr.  Guthrie's  choice  seemed  to  me
charming.  He  told  me  that  he  read  through  four  books  every  year — the  Bible,
••  The  Pilgrim's  Progress,"  four  of  Sir  Walter  Scott's  novels,  which  he  reckoned  as
one  book,  and  a  fourth  book,  which  I  have  forgotten,  but  I  think  it  was  "Robinson
Crusoe."  You  will  choose  some  books  because  they  soothe  and  quiet  you ;  some
because  they  are  as  invigorating  as  mountain  air;  some  because  they  amuse  you  by
the  shrewdness  of  their  humour ;  some  because  they  give  wings  to  your  fancy ;
gome  because  they  kindle  your  imagination.  {R.  W.  Dale.)  Mental  occupation
in  prison: — Exile  and  imprisonment  are  among  the  darkest  tragedies  of  existence."
But  Ovid,  banished  from  the  luxurious  and  learned  capital  to  the  barbarians  of
Tomis,  in  the  inhospitable  waste  along  the  Euxine,  stripped  of  property,  wife,  and
children,  saved  himself  from  despair  by  labour,  and,  surrounded  by  hopeless
savagery,  produced  some  of  the  finest  of  his  works.    Boethius,  the  last  and  noblest


876  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [cha».  it.

of  the  ancients,  before  the  darkness  of  the  Middle  Ages  fell  on  Earope,  lying  under
unjust  sentence  of  death  in  the  tower  of  Pavia,  forbidden  books,  intercourse  with
fellow-scholars,  preserved  his  sanity  and  fortitude  to  face  a  cruel  death  by  writing
"  The  Consolation  of  Philosophy."  "Don  Quixote,"  which  convulsed  a  nation  with
merriment,  was  the  solace  of  an  undeserved  imprisonment,  which  bodily  suffering
made  more  unendurable.  The  dungeon  of  Walter  Baleigh  was  his  calm  study.  In
the  condemned  cell  Madame  Koland,  less  moved  by  the  certainty  of  her  own  fate
than  by  apprehension  for  her  beloved  husband,  fortified  her  mind  against  possible
madness  by  the  composition  of  her  memoirs.  Lady  Jane  Grey  and  Mary  Queen  of
Scots  beguiled  imprisonment  of  half  its  terrors  with  hard  study  and  careful  writing.
{Harper's  Bazaar.)  An  affection  for  a  cloak  : — Newman  tells  us  (in  1840)  how
he  kept  an  old  blue  cloak  which  he  got  in  1823,  and  "had  an  affection  for  it,"
because  it  had  "  nursed  me  through  all  my  illness.  I  have  it  still.  I  have  brought
it  up  here  to  Littlemore,  and  on  some  cold  nights  I  have  had  it  on  my  bed.  I  have
so  few  things  to  sympathise  with  me  that  I  take  to  cloaks."  An  endeared  gar-
ment : — A  shawl  with  a  strange  history  was  buried  with  the  late  Professor  Cocker,
of  Michigan  University.  Shortly  before  his  death,  Dr.  Cocker  called  the  attention
of  his  pastor  to  a  worn  and  faded  shawl  spread  on  his  bed,  and  requested  to  have  it
wrapped  around  his  body  and  buried  with  him.  He  had  made  it  himself  when  a
young  man  in  England ;  had  worn  it  in  all  his  journeyings  to  and  from  over  the
Atlantic  and  Pacific  Oceans,  when  residing  in  Australia,  when  he  escaped  from  the
Fiji  Islanders  as  they  were  preparing  to  kill  and  roast  him,  and  when  he  was  ship-
wrecked. It  accompanied  him  when  he  landed  in  the  United  States,  and  even  clad
the  remains  of  his  dead  child  when,  penniless  and  disheartened,  he  first  arrived  in
Adrian.  It  is  not  surprising  that  a  garment  with  such  associations  had,  though
worn  and  faded,  become  precious  to  him,  and  his  desire  that  his  body  should  be
enshrouded  in  it  is  easily  understood.  Use  of  a  cloak  : — John  Welch,  the  old
Scotch  minister,  used  to  put  a  plaid  across  his  bed  on  cold  nights,  and  some  one
asked  him  why  he  put  that  there.  He  said  :  "Oh,  sometimes  in  the  night  I  want
to  sing  the  praises  of  Jesus,  and  I  get  down  and  pray.  Then  I  just  take  that  plaid
and  wrap  it  around  me  to  keep  myself  from  the  cold."  Cloak,  books,  and  parch-
ments : — Winter  was  coming  on,  and  his  somewhat  emaciated  frame  was  less  able
than  formerly  to  withstand  the  cold.  He  remembers  that  when  he  was  last  at
Troas,  he  left  his  heavy  overcoat  there,  in  charge  of  his  friend  Carpus,  probably
because  he  preferred  to  take  a  portion  of  his  journey  on  foot.  He  will  be  sure  to
need  it  as  the  weather  becomes  more  severe,  so  he  requests  Timothy,  who  is  now  at
Ephesus,  to  bring  it  with  him  when  he  comes  west  to  Italy.  I.  Take  cake  or
TODB  BODILY  HEAXTH.  Youug  men  are  often  particularly  neglectful  on  this  matter.
Many  is  the  man  whose  constitution  has  been  undermined  for  life  by  his  own
carelessness  as  a  youth  in  respect  of  food,  rest,  and  clothing.  II.  Maintain  the
CULTURE  OF  TOUR  MIND.  Do  not  be  SO  sngrossed  with  business,  that  you  rarely
open  an  instructive  book.  Do  not  forget  that  your  intellect  wants  to  be  stimulated
and  fed,  as  it  cannot  be  if  you  think  of  nothing  but  bills,  and  accounts,  and  orders,
and  invoices,  and  what  is  vulgarly  and  expressively  called  "shop."  A  sailor,  who
had  circumnavigated  the  globe  with  Captain  Cook,  was  pressed  by  his  friends  to
give  them  some  account  of  the  wonders  he  had  seen,  and  at  last  consented  to  do  so
on  a  certain  evening.  A  large  and  eager  company  assembled,  in  expectation  of  a
great  intellectual  treat ;  when  the  rough  mariner  thus  began  and  ended  his  descrip-
tion of  his  travels :  "  I  have  been  round  the  world  with  Captain  Cook,  and  all  that
I  saw  was  the  sky  above  me  and  the  water  beneath  me."  And,  truth  to  tell,  there
are  young  men  who  show  little  more  discernment  than  that  blunt  sailor.  They  have
no  intellectual  ambition,  no  thirst  for  knowledge,  no  passionate  desire  for  self-
improvement.  If  business  is  going  on  well,  and  their  salary  is  regularly  paid,  and
they  have  enough  to  eat  and  drink,  they  are  content.  There  is  no  systematic  study;
no  training  of  the  mind,  no  whetting  or  sharpening  of  the  intellectual  faculties.  I
warn  you,  young  men,  against  so  ignoble  a  use  of  what  is,  in  some  respects,  the
best  part  of  life.  Lord  Bacon's  opinion  upon  books  he  thus  expressed :  "  That
histories  make  men  wise ;  poets,  witty ;  mathematics,  subtle ;  natural  Boienoe,
deep  ;  moral  philosophy,  grave ;  logic  and  rhetoric,  able  to  debate. "  As  you  would
•possess  such  qualities,  then,  your  reading  must  be  cathoUc  and  extensive.  III.
Especially  see  to  the  welfare  of  the  soul.  However  limited  be  your  reading,
Bee  that  the  Bible  has  its  rightful  place.  It  is  said  that  in  the  British  Museum
alone  there  are  so  many  books  that  the  mere  mechanical  reading  of  them  would
demand  a  thousand  years.     So  you  cannot  read  everything — ^yon  mast  make  youz


CHAP.  IT.]  11.  TIMOTHY.  877

selection  ;  but  oh  1  let  this  peerless  volume  reign  supreme  in  your  library.  Let  it
be  the  monarch  of  your  bookshelves.  There  is  an  old  Latin  proverb,  which  is  good
enough  so  long  as  the  Bible  is  out  of  account,  "  Cave  ah  homine  unius  libri  " — i.e.,
"  Beware  of  a  man  of  one  book."  But  when  that  one  book  is  the  Book  of  God,  the
counsel  may  be  inverted  ;  for  there  is  no  man  more  to  be  sought  after  than  the  man
who  daily  feeds  from  this  table,  and  drinks  from  this  well.  •'  Especially  the
parchments."  Let  no  general  reading,  however  excellent  and  instructive,  elbow
this  to  one  side.  Be  diligent  students  of  God's  Word,  "  and,"  as  Dr.  Doddridge
said,  "  you  shall  be  excellent  scholars  ten  thousand  years  hence  "  ;  whereas,  how-
ever proficient  in  secular  knowledge,  if  the  Bible  be  neglected,  you  shall  be  unfitted
for  the  occupations  of  the  redeemed  in  heaven.  You  have  a  richer  Bible  than  ever
Paul  possessed.  Those  clumsy,  greasy  "  parchments,"  written  by  laborious
scribes,  would  form  a  strange  contrast  to  such  triumphs  of  modern  skill  as  are  now
eent  out  in  millions  from  the  great  repository  in  Queen  Victoria  Street ;  and  you
can  place  in  your  waistcoat-pocket  treasures  of  inspiration,  which  in  the  apostle's
time  would  have  taxed  the  strength  of  a  man  to  carry.  The  greater,  then,  your
responsibility.  Oh,  make  good  use  of  your  Bibles !  Above  all,  accept  without
delay  the  Divine  salvation  revealed.  {J.  T.  Davidson,  D.D.)  The  cloak  and  the
parchments;  or,  man's  needs : — We  have  here — 1.  A  striking  illustration  of  the
manner  of  Divine  inspiration.  The  divinest  communications  of  truth  appear  in
connection  with  things  of  personal  and  secular  concern.  2.  A  beautiful  display  of
spiritual  self-possession.  3.  An  affecting  utterance  of  human  needs.  With  all  his
present  principles,  past  achievements,  and  future  destiny,  he  has  yet  necessities  as
well  as  resources.  Spirituality  did  not  destroy  his  physical  sensibilities ;  heroic
courage  and  independence  did  not  deaden  his  social  afiections  ;  supernatural  illu-
mination did  not  make  him  depreciate  the  ordinary  means  of  information  and
excitement.  I.  Physical.  "  The  cloak."  Paul  needed  a  garment,  and  wished  for
one.  To  slight  the  body  is  a  mark  of  heretics ;  to  destroy  it  is  to  be  a  murderer.
What  a  world  of  need  is  caused  by  its  possession  I  What  urgent  demands  does  it
make  on  care  and  effort,  skill  and  labour  !  But  the  thought  here  is,  that  the  body
is  a  source  of  trouble,  inconvenience,  dependence  ; — that  small  things  may  lead  to
its  discomfort  and  injury.  Let  but  the  ordinary  laws  of  nature  be  broken ;  let  but
the  ordinary  operations  of  life  be  suspended  ;  let  there  be  but  a  little  accident,  a
Blight  mistake,  a  temporary  forgetf ulness  ;  and  how  bitterly  are  we  made  to  feel  the
pressure  and  responsibility  of  our  material  charge  I  We  cannot  afford  to  trifle  with
or  ignore  it.  The  most  spiritual  and  independent  must  remember  the  mislaid  or
forgotten  dress.  IL  The  sociaIi.  "  When  thou  comest. "  "Do  thy  diligence  to
come  shortly  unto  me."  Man  is  a  social  being — made  to  feel  for  and  with  his
fellow-men.  He  is  revealed,  regaled,  renewed  by  fellowship.  It  is  a  lamp,  a  feast,
a  buttress  of  his  being.  It  is  everything  whereby  he  can  be  ministered  unto,  or  help
to  minister.  Fellowship  in  woe,  in  joy,  in  work,  in  thought,  is  a  rich  delight,  and
in  most  cases  a  great  necessity.  III.  The  spikitoal.  "  The  books,  especially  the
parchments."  We  know  not  what  these  were,  but  are  sure  they  were  books  tending
to  cultivation  of  mind  and  heart.  What  a  field  of  thought  is  opened  up  by  these
words !  See  the  ministry  of  minds ;  see  their  working  and  results  preserved  and
propagated  by  the  use  of  letters ;  see  the  labours  and  rewards  of  some  made  the
inheritance  of  others ;  and  all  this  beyond  the  sphere  of  personal  presence  and
immediate  influence  see  it  done  for  men  and  ages  unborn.  What  a  debt  we  owe  to
books  I  What  information  and  stimulus  I  what  means  of  growth !  what  instru-
ments of  knowledge,  joy,  and  power  1  "  Especially  the  parchments."  Some  think
these  were  a  kind  of  commonplace  book,  in  which  the  apostle  put  his  own  reflec-
tions and  precious  passages  met  with  in  his  reading.  If  so,  we  have  an  important
thought.  That  is  most  a  man's  own  which  he  has  originated,  or  thoroughly
appropriated  by  meditation.  Books  are  nothing  but  as  they  are  "  read,  marked,
learned,  and  inwardly  digested."  Lessons  :  1.  The  subject  teaches  humility.  2.
Gratitude.    3.  Benevolence.    4.  Self-interest.     (A.  J.  Morris.)  The  cloak  at

Troas : — It  appears  to  us  that  Paul's  request  for  his  cloak  left  at  Troas  affords  an
undesigned  proof  of  a  striking  feature  in  his  character — viz.,  that  sobriety  of  mind
which,  on  the  one  hand,  never  separates  the  things  of  earth  from  the  things  of
heaven ;  nor,  on  the  other  hand,  ever  esteems  spiritual-m'ndedness,  and  the  ardent
contemplation  of  unseen  things,  to  be  inconsistent  with  attention  to  the  ordinary
ongoings,  the  common  duties,  and  little  details  of  every-day  life.  Paul  was  not
further  removed  from  the  worldliness  which  never  seeks  to  ascend  in  heart  to
heaven,  than  from  the  fanaticism  and  morbid  pietism  we  sometimes  witness,  which


ST8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it.

only  condescends  to  visit  earth.  The  "  light  of  life  "  which  he  enjoyed  filled  and
blended  into  one  common  glory  the  things  of  earth  and  heaven,  of  time  and  of
eternity !  At  one  moment,  for  instance,  we  hear  him  exclaim  (vers.  6-8).  Yet,
when  his  conrse  was  being  finished,  his  death  near,  his  reward  sure,  and  while  he
sees  the  glories  of  heaven  opening  before  his  enraptured  eye,  it  is  even  then  that  he
expresses  his  anxiety  to  obtain  his  cloak  from  Troas.  What  evidence  does  this
coincidence  afford  of  calmness,  peace,  and  sobriety  of  mind  1  Such  we  have  some>
times  witnessed,  too,  in  aged  Christians  of  long  experience,  who,  on  their  death-
beds, could  gaze  upon  the  unseen  world  of  everlasting  rest,  on  which  they  were
entering  with  perfect  peace  and  full  assured  hope,  while,  at  the  same  time,  they
attended  with  cheerful  spirit  to  those  common  household  duties  and  famUy
arrangements  from  which,  in  person,  they  were  soon  to  be  for  ever  Beverea.
(Edinburgh  Chrittian  Magazine.)

Yet.  14.  Alexander  the  coppersmith  did  me  much   evil. — Indignation  an  im-
portant quality  in  a  true  man : — At  a  party  at  Dalkeith  Palace,  where  Mr. in

his  mawkish  way  was  finding  palliations  for  some  villaiuous  transaction,  Adam
Smith  waited  in  patient  silence  until  he  was  gone,  then  exclaimed,  "  Now  I  can
breathe  more  freely.  I  cannot  bear  that  man ;  he  has  no  indignation  in  him."  {W,
H.  Baxendale.)  Of  whom  be  thou  ware : — 1.  We  must  shun  the  society  of  incarable
sinners.  Whilst  men  are  hopeful  and  curable  we  must  try  all  means  to  win  them.
2.  Opposing  of  the  truth  is  very  grievous  to  a  gracious  Boul.  "  For  he  hath  greatly
withstood  our  words."  God's  people  are  baptized  with  fire  as  •*«11  as  with  water,
and  must  be  hot  and  not  lukewarm  or  indifferent  in  the  things  of  Ood.  3.  Wicked
men  do  not  so  much  oppose  our  persons  as  our  preaching.  They  hate  ua  not  as
men,  but  as  ministers,  because  we  publish  the  truth  that  condemns  their  wicked
practices.    (T.  Hall,  B.D.)

Vers.  16-18.  All  men  forsook  me. — Paul,  a  Chrittian*$  example  : — I.  Paul  for-
saken, AND  TET  FOBOIVINO  THOSE  WHO  HAS  WITHmiAWN  7B0H  HIU.      1.  The  apOStle  WaS

forsaken  by  his  friends  when  most  he  needed  them.  2.  Paul's  friends  leaving  him,
made  him  the  more  helpless.  3.  Paul's  friends  leaving  him,  discovered  their
frailty.  4.  The  apostle's  forgiving  spirit  is  particularly  worthy  of  our  notice.  II.
Paxjii  upheld,  and  thebefore  peeachino.  1.  Paul  was  upheld  by  Divine  grace.  2.
The  Lord  was  present  with  His  servant.  3.  The  Lord  stood  by  the  apostle  that  his
kind  of  preaching  might  be  fully  known.  4.  We  who  are  Gentiles  have  heard  the
apostle's  kind  of  preaching.  III.  Paul  delivered,  and  so  acknowledgino.  1.  This
was  a  seasonable  deliverance.  2.  This  was  a  great  deliverance.  3.  The  Lord  was
the  accomplisher  of  this  deliverance.  4.  Paul  gratefully  acknowledges  his  deliver-
ance. IV.  Paul  encouraged,  and  therefore  olobifyino.  1.  The  apostle  was
encouraged  to  look  for  a  glorious  destination — heavenly  kingdom — the  kingdom  of
glory.  2.  The  apostle  was  encouraged  to  look  for  Divine  preservation — shall  deUver
still.  3.  The  apostle  was  encouraged  in  his  expectations  by  former  deliverances
(2  Cor.  xi.  24-27  ;  31-33).  4.  In  the  whole,  Paul  glorified  the  Lord.  Conclusion :
1.  To  those  who  question  us  with  regard  to  our  hope,  we  should  be  able  to  give  an
answer.  2.  We  should  exercise  a  forgiving  spirit  towards  our  brethren.  3.  When
we  feel  our  own  weakneBS,  this  should  lead  us  to  look  to  the  Lord  for  assistance.  4,
We  should  glorify  God  for  all  our  deliverances.  6.  We  should  remember  that  the
Lord  alone  can  save  and  preserve  us.  What  will  those  do  who  forget  this  ?  (John
Miller.)  The  adversity  of  the  good : — I.  That  great  adversity  frequently
BEFALLS  the  BEST  OF  MEN.  This  shows — 1.  That  neither  adversity  nor  prosperity  is
any  test  of  character.     2.  That  there  must  come  a  period  of  retribution.    II.  Thai

GREAT  ADVERSITY  EXPOSES  THE  WEAKNESS  OF  OUR  BEST  FRIENDSHIPS.  III.  ThAT  GREAT
ADVERSITY  DEVELOPES  THE  MAGNANIMOUS  IN  THE  HEART  OF  THE  GOOD.      •'  I   pray  Qod,"

&c.    Like  Stephen  under  shower  of  stones,  and  Christ  on  cross.    IV.  That  great

ADVERSITY  DEMONSTRATES  EVER  MORE  THE  FAITHFULNESS  OF  GoD.    "  Notwithstanding  the

Lord  stood  by  me"  (Job  v.  19).  {Homilist.)  Man's  extremity  i$  Ood's  opportunity  : —
1.  All  men  forsook  me,  but  the  Lord  stood  by  me.  Hence,  observe :  that  man's
extremity  is  God's  opportunity,  or  when  man's  help  faileth  then  Gk)d  appeareth,
He  then  cometh  in  as  an  Auxiliary.  The  Lord  only  is  immutable,  He  never
faileth  His  at  their  need.  God's  people  are  never  less  alone  than  when  they
are  most  alone;  never  less  forsaken  than  when  they  are  forsaken  of  all.  2.
Strengthening  grace  is  the  gift  of  God.  "And  strengthened  me."  He  doth
not  only  give  ns  renewing  grace  and  then  leave  us  to  our  own  tree-will^  but


CHA?.  !▼.]  n.  TIMOTHY.  879

He  giveth  us  persevering  grace  also.  As  He  is  the  Author  of  our  grace  by
vocation,  so  He  is  the  finisher  of  it  by  preservation.  3.  Whilst  God  hath  any  work
for  His  servants  to  do,  He  will  assist  and  uphold  them  in  spite  of  all  oppositions.
"That  by  me  the  preaching  might  be  fuUy  known."  Though  Nero  rage  against  Paul,
and  all  men  forsake  him,  yet  God  will  assist  him  that  He  may  preach  the  gospel  to
the  world.  Our  comfort  is,  that  our  times  are  not  in  our  enemies'  hands  but  in  the
hands  of  a  gracious  God.  4.  God  would  have  His  truth  revealed  to  the  sons  of
men.  "  And  that  all  the  Gentiles  might  hear."  He  would  have  the  gospel  known
— fully  known — ^to  the  GentUes.  Truth  is  good,  and  the  more  common  it  ia  the
better.  Where  it  getteth  ground,  Satan's  kingdom  f alleth  like  lightning  from  heaven
suddenly  and  irresistibly  (Luke  x.  18).  Let  none  then  hide  their  talents,  but  as  the
Bun  freely  communicateth  its  light  and  heat  to  us,  so  let  us  freely  impart  our  gifts
unto  others.  5.  The  Church's  enemies  ofttimes  are  lions.  "  And  I  was  delivered
out  of  the  mouth  of  the  lion."  Lions  for  potency,  lions  for  policy  (Psa.  xvii.  12),
lions  for  cruelty,  lions  for  terror.  Be  serpents  for  policy,  and  not  for  poison,  lions
for  prowess,  and  not  for  rapine.  Be  not  familiar  with  these  lions,  come  not  near
their  dens  lest  they  make  a  prey  of  you,  have  no  fellowship  with  such  unfruitful
works  of  darkness  but  reprove  them  rather.  6.  God  many  times  suffers  His  dearest
children  to  fall  into  the  mouths  of  these  lions,  so  that  to  a  carnal  eye  they  seem
hopeless  and  helpless.  7.  That  God  will  deliver  His  from  this  great  danger.  He
that  brought  thee  into  the  mouth  of  the  lion  will  bring  thee  out  again  (Dan.  vi.  22).
(T.  Hall,  B.D.)  God's  goodness  in  the  greatest  distresses: — I.  Paul's  expebiencb  of
God's  loving  care  for  niiin  in  lus  pasT  deliverances.  Tl.  The  enemies  of  the  truth
are  oft  for  power,  always  for  malice — Uons.  2.  God  suffers  His  dearest  children  to
fall  into  the  mouths  of  lions.  3.  In  their  extremities  God  deUvers  them — (1)  By
suspending  the  malice  of  their  foes.  (2)  By  raising  up  one  lion  against  another.
(3)  By  diverting  them  from  their  intended  prey.  (4)  By  changing  their  nature  to
lambs.  (5)  By  showing  Himself  a  lion.  (6)  By  making  them  lions  to  themselves.
(7)  By  making  them  friends,  putting  some  conceit  or  fancy  into  their  heart.  (8)  By
making  His  own  people  lions  to  their  adversaries.  H.  Paul's  assubed  hope,  built
upon  his  experience.  1.  "  The  Lord  shall  deliver  me  from  every  evil  work."  God
preserves  from  evil  works  by  planting  the  graces  of  faith  and  fear  in  us.  2.  •  •  And
will  preserve  me  unto  His  heavenly  kingdom."  By  Himself,  and  by  inferior  agencies.
ni.  The  issue  of  both  his  expeeience  and  his  hopes.  As  they  flow  from  God's
grace,  so  he  ascribes  to  Him  the  glory.  We  honour  ourselves  when  we  honour  God ;
our  praising  God  causes  others  to  do  so.  (R.  Sibbes,  D.D. )  Deliverance  and
salvation  through  death: — "Deliver  us  from  evil,  for  thine  is  the  Kingdom,  the
power  and  the  glory,  for  ever.  Amen."  So  our  Lord  taught  us  to  pray.  Is  there
not  an  echo  of  the  prayer  in  these  words  of  the  prisoner  ?  Surely  it  is  not  accident
that  so  many  of  the  keywords  of  the  closing  petitions  of  the  Lord's  Prayer  recur
here.  And  this  burst  of  triumph  is  his  very  last  word  to  his  friend  Timothy,  with
the  exception  of  one  or  two  closing  personal  salutations.  That  bird  could  sing  in  a
darkened  cage,  and  had  the  firmest  and  brightest  hopes  when  all  seemed  darkest.  .
I.  Consider  then,  first,  the  peisoneb's  confidence.  It  is  quite  clear  that  he  expected  /
nothing  but  death.  Only  a  few  verses  before  he  has  said,  "  I  am  now  in  the  very
act  of  being  offered,  and  the  time  of  my  departure  is  at  hand. "  And  yet,  with  death
staring  him  in  the  face,  and  with  nothing  more  clear  to  his  anticipation  than  that
his  work  was  done,  and  that  there  only  remained  for  him  to  wait  for  the  crown,  he
breaks  into  this  rapture  of  triumph,  and  says,  "  The  Lord  will  deliver  me  from
every  evil  work,  and  will  preserve  me,"  or,  to  take  the  pregnant  expression  of  the
text,  "  save  mo  into  His  heavenly  kingdom."  May  we  not  learn  from  this  what  the
true  meaning  of  deliverance  from  evil  is  ;  and  what  therefore  is  meant  by  the  peti-
tion  when  it  occurs  in  the  pattern  prayer  ?  It  is  not  exemption  from  trial,  not
escape  from  even  the  uttermost  severity  of  it.  Whosoever  is  able  in  the  midst  of  all,
to  keep  firm  hold  of  his  faith  and,  by  his  faith,  of  his  Saviour,  has  received  deliver-
ance from  the  evil  which  pours  all  its  vials  of  plagues  upon  his  heafi.  For  the
only  thing  that  really  does  us  harm  is  that  which  drags  us  away  from  God.  "  He  i
shall  deUver  me  from  every  evil  work  " ;  not  because  the  sword  will  not  fall  upon
my  neck,  but  because,  when  it  does,  it  will  not  part  me  from  my  Christ.  "  He  shall
deliver  me  from  every  evil  work  "  ;  not  because  I  shall  not  taste  the  full  bitterness  of  1
the  cup  that  is  commended  to  my  lips,  but  because  in  the  very  act  of  drinking  the  \
most  nauseous  potion  I  shall  take  it  as  a  cup  of  salvation,  and  call  upon  the  name
of  the  Lord.  That  is  deliverance.  J  The  same  line  of  thought  may  be  suggested  in
Xeference  to  the  other  clause  of  this  expression  of  confidence,  which  teaches  us  to


380  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it.

look  at  the  last  of  the  so-called  evils.  Paul  expects  to  be  "  delivered /rom  "  and  to
be  •'  saved  into."  The  former  phrase  contemplates  removal  from  the  sphere  of  evil,
the  latter,  the  bringing  safely  into  another  sphere  where  evil  is  unknown,  even  that
kingdom  in  the  heavens  over  which  Christ  serenely  held  sovereign  sway,  while  Nero
afflicted  the  earth  with  a  delirium  of  blood  and  lust.  And  what  was  the  prose  fact
which  presented  itself  to  Paul's  faith,  thus  radiantly  clad  in  robes  of  triimiph  ?
Nothing  else  than  that  grim  form  of  Death,  feared  and  hated  of  men  as  the  worst
of  all  calamities,  seems  to  him  a  deliverer  and  angel-messenger  of  salvation,  who
came  "  not  to  destroy  men's  lives,  but  to  save  them,"  not  to  drive  them  into  the
gloomy  dominions  of  the  grave,  but  to  lead  them  safe  into  the  heavenly  kingdom
i  of  his  Lord  and  theirs.  For  Christ's  servants  Death  is  the  lackey  who  opens  the
)  doors  of  the  presence-chamber  of  the  King.  The  apostle  employs  in  my  text  a
different  preposition  to  describe  this  ultimate  deliverance  from  that  which  he  does
when  he  says,  "I  was  delivered  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  lion."  In  one  case  ha
represents  the  peril  as  though  he  was,  as  it  were,  dragged  from  between  the  teeth
that  threatened  to  devour  him.  In  the  other  case  the  deliverance  is  more  complete,
and  implies  complete  removal  away  from  the  sphere  in  which  evil  works.  Taken
together,  the  two  prepositions  in  the  two  clauses,  from  and  into,  present  the  idea  of
change  of  place,  or,  as  we  may  say,  a  migration  from  one  realm  and  order  of  things
to  another.  Thus  the  final  saving  is  here  regarded  as  a  deliverance  which  lifts  us
out  of  the  lower  levels  of  the  atmosphere,  where  evil,  like  some  wild  cyclone  sweeps
howling  and  destroying,  and  carries  us  into  the  quiet  regions  above,  where  loud
winds  never  call,  but  "  all  the  air  a  solemn  stillness  holds,"  though  stagnation  is
i  as  far  away  as  tumult.  II.  A  second  consideration  is  suggested  by  these  words —
'  namely,  the  ground  op  the  peisokeb's  coNFtDBNCE.  The  "and"  at  the  begin-
ning of  the  text  is  very  probably  spurious,  but  none  the  less  is  the  confidence
expressed  in  the  text  based  upon  the  experience  narrated  in  the  preceding  sentence.
There  Paul  thankfully  tells  Timothy,  "  I  was  delivered  out  of  the  mouth  of  the
lion."  Therefore  he  is  sure  that  the  future  will  be  like  the  past — "  I  was  delivered  "
— "the  Lord  shall  deliver."  That  experience,  then,  is  the  first  ground  of  his  con-
fidence. God's  "  hitherto  "  has  always  wrapped  up  in  it  a  "  henceforth."  All  that
He  has  been  He  will  be.  There  are  no  tenses  in  His  verbs.  The  past  and  the
future  are  smelted  down  into  one  eternal  and  unchangeable  present.  But  there  is
another  ground  of  confidence  on  which  I  may  touch  for  a  moment.  If  I  am  at  all
correct  in  tracing  any  kind  of  connection  between  the  words  of  my  text  and  the
Lord's  Prayer,  that  very  prayer  is  the  basis  of  the  confidence  which  is  here  ex-
pressed, and  Paul  is  sure  that  God  will  deliver,  and  that  he  will  come  to  Christ's
heavenly  kingdom  because  Jesus  Christ  taught  him  to  pray,  "  Deliver  me  from
evil."  So  he  makes  his  prayer  into  a  promise,  and  out  of  all  these  Christ-taught
petitions  he  wins  the  assurance  of  Christ-given  hopes.  Happy  they  who  so  pray
I  as  that  out  of  their  prayers  they  can  construct  confidences  I  III.  Lastly,  note  the
f  PRAISE  that  springs  fkom  THE  CONFIDENCE.  "  Uuto  Him  be  glory  for  ever  and
ever.  Amen."  Paul's  thankfulness  arises  from  his  anticipation,  and  not  from  the
realisation,  of  deliverance.  So  completely  did  this  man's  faith  make  real  to  him
at  the  moment  the  future  deliverance  that  irrepressibly  there  bursts  from  his  lips
this  great  thanksgiving  and  doxology.  If  the  anticipation  led  to  such  sweet  music
of  praise,  what  would  the  reality  do  ?  Ought  we  not  to  entertain  our  yet  unreceived
blessings  with  as  full  a  welcome  and  credence,  and  with  as  lively  a  gratitude,  as
speaks  here  ?  Should  we  not  draw  them  to  ourselves  before  they  come,  in  the
exercise  of  a  hope  based  upon  God's  faithful  promises  which  will  open  our  hps  to
show  forth  His  praise  ?  We  should  note  still  further  in  this  doxology  the  uncon-
ditional attribution  of  Divine  honour  to  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  Jesus  who  is  here
called  "  the  Lord,"  and  while  the  word  does  not  necessarily  imply  Christ's
divinity,  the  ascriptions  of  praise  here  unhesitatingly  laid  at  His  feet  can  neither
be  explained  nor  justified,  unless  the  speaker  owned  Him  as  Divine.  Paul's  Christ
was  not  a  Christ  who  had  once  done  sweet  and  great  things,  and  could  do  such  no
more,  but  a  Christ  working  to-day  for  His  servant.  Note,  too,  that  the  ascription
to  Jesus  of  glory  that  shall  shine  through  ages  of  ages  is  here  connected  with
Paul's  salvation.  He  did  not  think  himself  as  of  such  exceptional  importance  that
his  salvation  would  bring  more  glory  to  Jesus  Christ  than  that  of  others  would  do.
Lowly  self-oblivion  and  wondering  gratitude,  not  arrogance,  speak  here.  Precisely
because  he  is  so  unworthy  and  weak  does  the  apostle  think  that  the  power  and  love
which  would  and  could  save  him  call  for  endless  praise.  The  poorer  the  material
ihe  more  the  artist's  glory.   For  ever  and  ever  the  praise  of  the  glory  of  God's  grace  In


CHAP.  IV.]  IL  TIMOTHY.  881

Christ  will  ring  through  the  universe.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Conserving  grace : — 1.
The  experience  of  God's  former  deliverances  must  make  us  rest  upon  Him  for  future.
2.  "  From  every  evil  work."  Though  God  doth  not  save  His  people  from  suffering,
yet  He  vrill  save  them  from  sin  ;  and  though  He  leave  in  them  infirmities,  yet  He
will  free  them  from  enormities,  and  from  total  apostasy.  3.  God  is  the  preserver
of  His  people.  "  And  He  will  preserve  me  to  His  heavenly  kingdom."  But  especially
He  keeps  their  souls  in  an  holy  frame  till  He  bring  them  to  glory.  It  is  not  suf-
ficient that  we  light  a  lamp,  but  there  must  be  a  continual  supply  of  oil,  else  the
light  will  go  out.  So  it  is  not  sufficient  that  we  have  preventing,  preparing,  renew-
ing grace,  but  we  must  also  have  subsequent,  conserving,  perfecting,  persevering
grace  daily  given  in  to  preserve  us  from  apostasy.  We  have  always  need  of  a
Divine  maintenancy  till  we  have  finished  our  course  (Psa.  Ixxiii.  23).  And  this  He
will  do  in  despite  of  all  our  enemies  ;  if  anything  destroy  us  it  is  sm,  and  for  that
we  have  God's  hand  here  that  He  will  deliver  us  from  every  evil  work  that  might
any  way  ruin  us,  and  so  preserve  us  till  He  have  brought  us  to  heaven.  He  keeps
heaven  for  the  saints,  and  the  saints  for  heaven.  4.  God's  goodness  to  His  people
is  wholly  free.  All  His  dispensations  to  His  are  free  grace  and  pure  mercy.  6.
God  is  a  good  and  bountiful  Master  to  His  people.  6.  In  our  deepest  distress  we
should  have  an  eye  to  this  heavenly  kingdom.  So  doth  Paul  here.  Whatever  thy
sorrows  or  sufferings  be  here,  yet  remember  there  is  a  heavenly  kingdom  will  pay
for  all.  7.  God  will  bring  His  people  to  a  kingdom,  to  an  heavenly  kingdom.  (T.
Hall,  B.D.)  Never  a  friend  : — Paul  might  have  said,  as  Socrates  did.  My  friends,
I  have  never  a  friend.  And  as  Plato,  A  friend  is  a  very  mutable  creature.  (<7.
Trapp.)  Why  earthly  props  are  removed: — "  See,  father  1 "  said  a  lad  who  was
walking  with  his  father,  "  they  are  knocking  away  the  props  from  under  the  bridge ;
what  are  they  doing  that  for?  Won't  the  bridge  fall?"  "They  are  knocking
them  away,"  said  the  father,  "that  the  timbers  may  rest  more  firmly  upon  the
stone  piers  which  are  now  finished."  God  only  takes  away  our  earthly  props  that
we  may  rest  more  firmly  upon  Him.  (Elan  Foster.)  Folly  of  persecution  : — In
the  Indian  legend  a  mighty,  wicked  sorcerer  seeks,  with  very  poor  success,  to  keep
the  sun,  moon,  and  stars  in  three  separate  chests ;  and  those  who  have  sought  to
suppress  God's  servants  have  succeeded  no  better.  John  was  banished  to  Patmos,
but,  far  from  sinking  out  of  view  in  the  solitary  sea,  he  stands  before  the  world
amid  sublimest  illuminations,  like  his  own  "  angel  standing  in  the  sun."  They
drove  Lather  into  the  Wartzburg ;  but  there,  in  translating  the  Scriptures  into
German,  he  became  the  cynosure  of  all  eyes.  Bunyan's  enemies  consigned  him  to
Bedford  Gaol,  and  so  he  became  known  to  the  race,  one  of  the  foremost  of  the
immortals  of  Christendom.  {W.  L.  Watkinson.)  Divine  protection: — Mr.  J.  G.
Oncken  was  the  Baptist  pioneer  in  Germany,  and  in  his  younger  days  suffered  for
the  truth's  sake,  both  fine  and  imprisonment.  We  remember  his  pointing  out  to
as  the  spot  upon  the  Alster  where  he  baptized  his  converts  at  dead  of  night,  and
we  shall  never  forget  his  story  of  the  burgomaster  of  Hamburg,  who  held  up  his
finger  and  said,  "  You  see  that  finger  I  As  long  as  that  can  move  I  will  put  you
down."  "  Sir,"  said  Oncken,  "  I  see  your  finger,  but  I  also  see  an  arm,  which  you
do  not  see,  and  so  long  as  that  is  stretched  out  you  cannot  put  me  down."  (C  H.
Spurgeon.)  Confidence  in  God  : — John  Wesley  once  stood  out  very  nobly  in
disregarding  the  eyes  of  men  so  long  as  he  stood  acquitted  in  the  sight  of  God.
Among  his  many  persecutions  are  to  be  numbered  the  falling  back  of  former  friends,
including  his  wife.  These  turned  against  him,  and  pubUshed  many  spiteful  things,
even  defaming  his  character  in  a  shocking  manner.  Brother  Charles  hastened  off
in  alarm  and  indignation  to  inquire  what  defence  Brother  John  would  set  up.
There  was  no  time  to  lose  1  The  eyes  of  the  world  were  upon  him,  and  God's
enemies  and  his  own  would  be  glad  to  make  capital  out  of  so  contemptible  a  business !
What  was  Charles's  surprise  to  find  that  John  was  resolved  on  doing  simply
nothing  I  The  great  preacher  was  calm  and  comfortable  in  mind,  being  entirely
free  from  any  concern  for  the  future.  Why  should  he  be  perplexed  when  he  had
entrusted  God  with  his  all — even  with  his  reputation  ?  i  None  are  so  safe  as  those
whose  characters  are  in  God's  keeping.  Such  often  consider  that  they  dishonour
God  by  setting  up  puny  defences  of  their  own  against  the  cavils  of  the  wicked.
They  think  more  of  that  one  eye  of  God  which  is  ever  looking  on  them  than  of  the
eyes  of  men.  (C7.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  faithfulne»$  of  Jesus  : — It  is  recorded  of
a  good  man  that  his  last  day,  with  the  exception  of  a  few  intervals,  was  passed  in
nnoonscioosness.  Seeing  a  look  of  returning  intelligence,  one  asked,  "  Are  yoa
fhifiHtig  of  Jeraa  to-day?  "    His  reply  of  loving  trost  was  never  to  be  forgotten :


383  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  it.

"When  I  am  conscious  I  am  thinking  of  Jesus;  when  I  am  unconscious  Jesus  is
thinking  of  me."  Looking  up  for  help: — One  morning,  not  long  after  my
arrival  at  Llandrindod,  the  artist  was  showing  me  a  "  printed  proof  "  of  a  likeness
of  myself  recently  taken,  when,  in  reply  to  a  remark,  he  said,  "  You  see,  sir,  you
have  such  a  habit  of  looking  up."  The  words  came  to  me  with  a  meaning  he  did
not  intend  them  to  convey.  I  quite  rejoiced  to  hear  them.  {J.  T.  Wrenford,  M.A.)
Prayer  and  trust : — This  is  the  true  inmost  essence  of  prayer — not  that  we  should
prescribe  to  Him  how  to  answer  our  desires,  but  that  we  should  leave  all  that  in
His  hands.  The  apostle  Paul  said,  in  his  last  letter,  with  triumphant  cojafidence,
that  he  knew  that  God  would  "  deliver  him  and  save  him  into  His  everlasting
kingdom."  And  he  knew,  at  the  same  time,  that  his  course  was  ended,  and  that
there  was  nothing  for  him  now  but  the  crown.  How  was  he  "  saved  into  the  king-
dom "  and  "  delivered  from  the  mouth  of  the  lion  "  J  The  Bword  that  struck  oft
the  wearied  head  that  had  thought  so  long  for  God's  Church  was  the  instrument  of
the  deliverance  and  the  means  of  the  salvation.  For  us  it  may  be  that  a  sharper
sorrow  may  be  the  answer  to  the  prayer,  "  Preserve  Thy  servant."  It  may  be  that
God's  "  bowing  down  His  ear  "  and  answering  us  when  we  cry  shall  be  to  pass  us
through  a  null  that  has  finer  rollers,  to  crush  still  more  the  bruised  com.  But  the
end  and  the  meaning  of  it  all  will  be  to  "  rejoice  the  eoxil  of  the  servant "  with  a
deeper  joy  at  last.     {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)

Ver.  19.  The  household  of  Onesipherus. — An  extensive  blessing: — As  the  dew
that  falleth  on  the  mountains  runs  down  to  the  valleys,  and  the  precious  ointment
that  was  poured  upon  the  head  of  Aaron  ran  down  to  the  skirts  of  his  clothing
(Psa.  cxxxiii.),  so  the  blessing  which  God  pours  on  governors  eztendeth  itself  to
such  as  are  under  them.    {T.  Hall,  B.D.)

Ver.  20.  Trophimus  sick. — Unaccomplished  aims  : — How  many  broken-down
servants  of  God  are  there  to-day,  Christian  men  and  women,  who  have  proved  their
sincerity,  who  do  prove  their  sincerity,  but  whose  thin  hand  can  do  little  or  nothing
in  raising  the  stones  of  the  shrine  they  so  passionately  desire  to  build  ?  As  in  the
busiest  thoroughfares  of  great  cities  we  behold  wistful  faces  looking  down  from
hospital  windows,  longing  to  share  in  the  strong  life  of  the  streets ;  so  are  there
frail,  broken-down  watchers  of  the  work  of  God  who  long  to  share  the  toil  and
sacrifice  of  God's  workmen.     (W.  L.   Watkinson.)  Use  of  sickness  : — Hannah

More  made  the  following  entry  in  her  journal  (Jan.  21,  1798) :  "  Many  temptations
this  week  to  vanity.  My  picture  asked  for  two  publications.  Dedications — flattery
without  end.  God  be  praised,  I  was  not  flattered,  but  tired — twenty-four  hours'
headache  makes  me  see  the  vanity   of  all  this."    {J.  F.   B.    Tinling,  B.A.)

Ver.  21.  Come  before  winter. — Winter  voyages : — I.  The  voyage  to  thb  etebnai^
crrr.  1.  The  departure.  2.  The  voyage.  3.  The  guidance  of  the  helmsman.  4.
The  propulsion  of  all  progress  must  come  from  the  winds  of  heaven.  6.  Industry
on  board  the  ship.  6.  The  shipping  of  the  anchor.  7.  The  end  of  the  journey.
II.  The  avoidance  op  winter  risks.  Put  not  off  to  old  age,  &c.  III.  Thb
ADVENTURE  OF  DILIGENCE.  Make  hastc.  There  is  no  time  to  lose.  (S.  H.  Tyng,
Jun,,  D.D.)  Friendships: — Of  such  friendships  biography  happily  furnishes  us
with  many  examples : — Gray,  the  poet,  and  Mason ;  Cowper  and  Mrs.  Unwin ;
Tennyson  and  Arthur  Henry  Hallam ;  Keats  and  Severn ;  Elizabeth  Carter  and
Bishop  Seeker ;  Mrs.  Tait  and  Miss  Marsh.  This  collocation  of  names  reminds  us
of  the  old  fallacy  that  true  friendship  can  subsist  only  between  individuals  of
similar  character  and  disposition.  Never  was  there  a  greater  delusion !  A  man's
friend  is  never  his  counterpart,  but  his  complement ;  supplies  that  which  is  want-
ing in  himself.  And  this  is  the  use  and  value  of  friendship,  it  is  hke  an  offensive
and  defensive  alliance  between  two  equal  powers,  in  which  the  one  undertakes  to
furnish  a  military  and  the  other  a  naval  force,  it  provides  for  each  party  to  the
bond  that  which  he  or  she  most  needs.  (The  Fireside.)  Eubolus  and  Pudens,
and  Linus,  and  Claudia.  Eubiilus  is  mentioned  here  only.  It  has  been  thought
possible  that  Pudens  may  be  the  friend  of  the  poet  Martial,  whose  marriage  with
Claudia,  a  foreign  lady,  he  celebrates  in  Epigram  viii.  lib.  iv.,  supposing  that  other
epigrams  which  are  not  favourable  to  the  moral  character  of  Pudens  were  written
before  his  conversion.  An  inscription  found  at  Colchester  mentions  a  site  given  by
one  Pudens  for  a  temple,  built  under  the  sanction  of  a  British  king,  Claudius
Cogidubrius ;  and  it  has  been  conjectured  that  this  was  the  same  Pudens  who  was


CHAP.  IT.]  n.  TIMOTHY,  883

a  centurion  in  the  army,  and  who  may  have  married  the  daughter  of  Cogidubrius,
whose  name  would  consequently  have  been  Claudia.  The  Claudia  BuSna  of
Martial  was  a  Briton,  and  may  have  received  the  name  of  Bufina  from  Pomponia,
the  wife  of  Aulus  Plantius,  conmiander  in  Britain,  who  was  connected  with  the
Eufi  family,  and  was  accused  of  holding  foreign  superstitions.  All  this,  however,
is  very  uncertain.  Linus  is  probably  the  same  Boman  Christian  who  became  the
first  bishop  of  the  Church  there,  according  to  Ignatius  and  Eusebias.  {Bp.
Jackson.)

Ver.  22.  The  Lord  JeBUi  Christ  be  with  thy  spirit. — T?ie  highest  vnsh  of  true
friendship : — I.  Man  has  a  spiBrruAL  nature.  Spirit  is  something  that  is  unlike
matter — indivisible,  self -active,  self-conscious,  religious.  That  man  has  a  spirit  is —
1.  A  fact  most  demonstrable.  2.  A  fact  most  practically  ignored.  3.  A  fact  the
most  distinguishing — marking  as  oS  from  aU  mundane  existences.  II.  Man's
SPIRITUAL  NATURE  NEEDS  THE  couFANiONSHiF  OF  Christ.  1.  Christ  alone  Can
centraUse  its  affections.  2.  Christ  alone  can  enlist  unbounded  reliance.  III.  Com-
panionship WITH  Christ  is  an  attainable  blessing.  {Homilist.)  Christ  with
us : — I.  Let  us  inquire  in  what  sense  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  with  His  people.
We  cannot  hope  to  enjoy  His  bodily  presence.  It  was  expedient  that  He  should  go
away ;  and  still  it  is  expedient  that  He  should  remain  away.  Yet  in  His  spiritual
presence  He  can  be  with  us.  II.  He  is  with  us  when,  as  the  Universal  Euleb,  He
governs  all  things  fob  our  good.  But  the  prayer  of  Paul  for  Timothy  is,  "  The
Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with  thy  spirit."  What  we  need  is  a  consciousness  of  Christ's
presence— the  enjoyment  of  fellowship  with  Him.  As  the  eagle  soars  towards  the
sun,  so  he  soars  towards  God.  The  spirit  of  man  needs  God;  especially  God
manifest  in  the  flesh.  It  is  only  as  He  is  with  us — filling  us  with  all  the  fulness  of
God,  that  our  spirits  find  rest.  Then  we  are  assured  of  reconciliation,  forgiveness,
and  eternal  blessedness.  IH.  The  requirements  of  oub  earthlt  state  cause  us  to
need  the  presence  of  Christ.  We  are  exposed  to  temptation ;  how  shall  we  resist
it  unless  He  help  us  ?  IV.  Have  you  ever  thought  of  the  great  and  manifold
blessings  which  the  presence  of  Christ  brings  to  us  ?  No  visitor  brings  such  gifts.
1.  How  largely  He  increases  our  store  of  knowledge !  What  glorious  revelations
He  makes  of  His  own  beauty  and  worth,  shining  before  us,  like  the  sun,  in  the
brightness  of  His  own  light  1  2.  Then,  among  the  blessed  results  of  Christ's
presence,  and  not  the  least,  is  assimilation  to  His  image.  {W.  Walters.)  The
presence  of  Christ  with  His  people  desirable  : — All  who  desire  the  ministry,  which
Christ  has  established  amongst  them,  to  be  useful,  and  wise,  and  successful,  ought
frequently  to  pray,  "  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with  thy  spirit."  Nor  is  it  less
important  in  respect  to  their  own  individual  piety,  their  growth  in  grace,  and  their
preparation  to  go  into  eternity,  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with  their  own  spirits.
This  will  appear :  I.  From  a  consideration  of  the  inquiry.  In  no  other  way,
except  by  the  presence  of  Jesus,  can  we  arrive  at  a  purifying  and  sanctifying  know-
ledge of  the  Word  of  God.  11.  The  importance  of  praying,  the  Lord  Jesus  be  with
our  spirits,  will  be  manifest  from  the  neoessitt  of  His  presence  in  our  devo-
tions. This  alone  can  cause  our  prayers  to  go  up  before  God  as  a  sweet  savour.
in.  The  importance  of  praying  for  the  presence  of  Christ  is  manifest  from  its

INFLUENCE   ON   OUB   INTERCOURSE   WITH   THE    IMPENITENT,        Do    We   desirC   tO   Bet   an

example  such  as  Christ  set,  and  to  have  such  an  influence  as  He  shed  around  Him,
and  to  cause  the  mite  of  our  moral  power  to  fall  into  the  current  of  that  which  our
God,  and  the  Lamb,  and  aU  the  saints,  have  poured  forth  on  an  ungodly  world  ?
And  shall  we  not  desire  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  would  be  with  our  spirits  ?  IV.
What  can  we  do  in  our  intercoubse  with  the  Church  without  the  presence
OF  Christ  ?  V.  What  can  we  do  in  sickness  without  the  presence  of  Christ  ?
Conclusion :  1.  From  the  subject  we  learn  the  reason  why  so  many  are  fluctuating
in  their  religious  characters.  It  is  because  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  not  with  their
spirits.  2.  The  subject  shows  why  there  is  so  little  effort  for  the  salvation  of  the
impenitent  amongst  us.  It  is  because  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  not  enough  with  our
spirits.  3.  The  subject  explains  some  facts,  which  we  have  long  witnessed  but
have  not  understood.  (1)  It  explains  why  so  many,  who  have  named  the  name  of
Christ,  do  not  appear  to  be  Christians.  (2)  It  explains  why  so  many,  who  occasion-
ally appear  to  be  Christians,  are  generally  without  any  evidence  of  piety — The  Lord
Jesus  Christ  is  not  with  their  spirit.  (3)  It  explains  why  so  many  are  changing
their  religious  views  and  feelings,  while  they  do  not  appear  to  wish  to  abandon
religion  itself — The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  not  with  them.    (4)  It  shows  why  the


384  JX  TIMOTHY.  [chap.  it.

impenitent  have  bo  little  respect  for  the  Christian  character  amongst  us — The  Lord
JesQs  is  not  with  as,  as  a  Church.  (5)  It  shows  why,  when  so  many  persons  in  the
Church  and  aronnd  it  profess  to  be  full  of  faith  and  love,  there  are  few  or  none
converted.  (6)  It  shows  what  is  necessary  to  a  genuine  revival  of  religion — That
the  Lord  Jesus  be  with  ob.  (7)  It  shows  that  all  who  are  not  labouring  for  one,  seek-
ing for  one,  and  praying  for  one,  are  without  Christ — He  is  not  with  them.
{J.  Foot,  D.I).)  Grace  be  with  you. — Continual  grace : — The  acts  of  breathing
which  I  performed  yesterday  will  not  keep  me  alive  to-day ;  I  must  continue  to
breathe  i^esh  every  moment,  or  animal  life  ceases.  In  like  manner  yesterday's
grace  and  spiritual  strength  must  be  renewed,  and  the  Holy  Spirit  must  continue  to
breathe  on  my  sonl,  from  moment  to  moment,  in  order  to  my  enjoying  the  oonsola-
tions,  and  to  my  working  the  works  of  God.     {Toplady.)


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.

Titus. — Extremely  little  iB  known  of  Titai,  either  as  a  man  or  as  an  evangeliflt.
His  name  never  occnrs  in  the  history  of  the  Acts,  which  is  somewhat  strange,  as
we  know,  from  the  Epistle  to  the  Galatians,  that  he  was  with  Paul  and  Barnabas
at  Antioch,  and  accompanied  them  to  Jerusalem  when  they  went  to  have  the  dis-
pute settled  about  circomcision  (Oal.  ii.  1-3).  We  learn,  from  the  brief  notice  gives
us  of  what  took  place  on  that  occasion,  that  Paul  sternly  refused  to  have  him  oir-
cnmoised,  as  some  of  the  Jewish  Christians  wished,  because  he  saw  that  in  hii
case  the  principle  of  gospel  liberty  was  at  stake,  and  must,  at  whatever  hazard,  b&
vindicated.  It  therefore  appears  not  only  that  Titus  was  a  Gentile,  but  that  he
must  also  have  been  employed  chiefly  in  ministering  to  the  Gentiles,  or  to  churches
in  which  these  formed  the  predominating  element.  He  appears,  at  a  later  period^
to  have  been  with  Paul  and  Timothy  at  Ephesus,  doubtless  sharing  with  these  in
the  manifold  labours  attendant  on  the  planting  of  the  Church  in  that  centre  of
idolatry  and  corruption.  From  Ephesus  he  was  sent  forth  by  Paul  to  Corinth,  for
the  purpose  of  stimulating  the  brethren  to  get  forward  their  contributions  for  the
poor  saints  at  Jerusalem  (2  Cor.  viii.  6;  xii.  18).  He  rejoined  the  apostle  in
Macedonia,  and  cheered  him  with  the  report  he  brought,  not  only  of  the  progress
of  the  contributions,  but  also  of  the  salutary  effect  produced  by  the  First  Epistle  of
Paul  to  the  Church  at  Corinth  (chap.  vii.  6-15).     (P.  Fairbaim,  D.D.)

Titus  a  Stbono  Mah. — The  love  of  apology,  stimulating  suggestion,  and  fatherly
counsel  manifested  towards  Timothy  differs  greatly  from  the  manner  of  every
reference  to  Titus,  who  evidently  could  take  care  of  himself  and  be  safely  entrusted
with  intricate,  difficult,  and  delicate  negociations.  St.  Paul  appears  to  have
been  more  dependent  upon  Titus  than  Titus  was  upon  Paul.  He  is  described
as  the  apostle's  "  brother  and  companion  and  fellow -labourer "  (2  Cor.  viii.  23) ;
and  if  he  were  the  bearer  of  the  First  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians,  and  enforced  the
advice  of  the  apostle  upon  the  Church  which  had  for  the  moment  been  thrown
into  violent  confusion  by  "  that  wicked  person,"  he  must  have  been  a  man  of  strong
nerve  and  fine  tact.  . .  .  Titus  not  only  discharged  his  task  with  admirable  patience
and  success,  but  was  ready,  even  eager,  to  go  back  to  Corinth  with  the  second
letter,  and  to  complete  the  delicate  service  which  he  had  commenced  a  year  before
(c/.  2  Cor.  viii.  6  with  xii.  18).  Since  he  had  begun,  Paul  desired  him  also  to
finish  among  the  Corinthians  the  same  grace  or  gift.  The  eager  interest  with  which
he  responded  to  the  appeal  seemed  like  a  Divine  inspiration.  "  God,"  says  Paul,
*<  put  it  into  his  heart."  A  private  letter  addressed  to  Titus  in  the  midst  of  these
negociations  would  have  possessed  great  interest ;  but  we  know  nothing  of  his  pro-
ceedings until  many  years  have  elapsed.     {H.  R.  Reynolds,  D.D.)

BiooBAFHicAL  DETAiiiS.-^St.  Faul's  first  imprisonment  is  concluded,  and  his  last
trial  impending.   In  the  interval  between  the  two,  he  and  Titus  were  together  in  Crete


6  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.

(chap.  i.  5).  We  see  Titus  remaming  in  the  island  when  St.  Paul  left  it,  and
receiving  there  a  letter  written  to  him  by  the  apostle.  From  this  letter  we  gather
the  following  biographical  details  : — First  we  learn  that  he  was  originally  converted
through  St.  Panl's  instrumentality  (chap.  i.  4).  Next  we  learn  the  various  par-
ticulars of  the  responsible  duties  which  he  had  to  discharge  in  Crete.  He  is  to
complete  what  St.  Paul  had  been  obliged  to  leave  nnfinished  (chap.  i.  5),  and  he  is
to  organise  the  Church  throughout  the  island  by  appointing  presbyters  in  every
city.  Instructions  are  given  as  to  the  suitable  character  of  such  presbyters  (chap.
i.  6-9) ;  and  we  learn,  further,  that  we  have  here  the  repetition  of  instructions
furnished  by  word  of  mouth  (chap.  i.  5).  Next,  he  is  to  control  and  bridle  (chap,
i.  11)  the  restless  and  mischievous  Judaisers,  and  he  is  to  be  peremptory  in  so
doing  (chap.  L  13).  Injunctions  in  the  same  spirit  are  reiterated  (chap.  ii.  1,  15 ;
iii.  8).  He  is  to  urge  the  duties  of  a  decorous  and  Christian  life  upon  the  women
(chap.  ii.  3-5),  some  of  whom  (chap.  ii.  3)  possibly  had  something  of  an  official
character.  He  is  to  be  watchful  over  his  own  conduct  (chap.  ii.  7) ;  he  is  to
impress  upon  the  slaves  the  peculiar  duties  of  their  position  (chap.  ii.  9,  10) ;  he  is
to  check  all  social  and  political  turbulence  (chap.  iii.  1),  also  all  wild  theological
speculations  (chap.  iii.  9),  and  to  exercise  discipline  on  the  heretical  (chap.  iii.  10).
When  we  consider  all  these  particulars  of  his  duties,  we  see  not  only  the  confidence
reposed  in  him  by  the  apostle,  but  the  need  there  was  of  determination  and  strength
of  purpose,  and  therefore  the  probability  that  this  was  his  character ;  and  all  this
is  enhanced  if  we  bear  in  mind  his  isolated  and  unsupported  position  in  Crete,  and
the  lawless  and  immoral  character  of  the  Cretans  themselves,  as  testified  by  their
own  writers  (chap.  i.  12, 13).  The  notices  which  remain  are  more  strictly  personal.
Titus  is  to  look  for  the  arrival  in  Crete  of  Artemas  and  Tychicus  (chap.  iii.  12),  and
then  he  is  to  hasten  to  join  St.  Paul  at  Nicopolis,  where  the  apostle  is  proposing  to
pass  the  winter.  Zenas  and  Apollos  are  in  Crete,  or  expected  there ;  for  Titus  is
to  send  them  on  their  journey,  and  supply  them  with  whatever  they  need  for  it
(chap.  iii.  13).  (Dean  Howson.)  From  his  lonely  cell  on  the  eve  of  his  martyr-
dom, St.  Paul  penned  his  second  letter  to  Timothy,  and  in  that  touching  epistle
we  find  the  final  reference  to  Titus,  who  is  said  to  have  gone  into  Dalmatia.  There
is  no  reason  whatever  for  believing  that  Titus  had  deserted  his  father  in  the  faith,
or  that  in  this  journey  he  had  done  other  than  fulfil  the  wishes  of  the  dying  apostle.
.  .  .  Titus  left  behind  him  in  Crete  a  name  and  a  sacred  memory.  The  modem  Candia
claims  the  honour  of  his  tomb.  Two  considerable  churches  were  dedicated  to  him
in  the  island,  and  he  was  regarded  as  its  patron  saint.  After  the  conquest  of  Crete
by  Venice,  the  Venetians  also  claimed  Titus,  by  the  side  of  St.  Mark,  as  their  patron
too.  Pashley  discovered  a  fountain,  said  to  have  been  used  by  St.  Paul  for  the
baptism  of  his  converts,  and,  amid  other  superstitious  tributes  to  his  memory,  found
that  the  apostle  was  credited  with  having  driven  the  wild  beasts  from  the  island.
(H.  R.  Reynolds,  D.D.)  Titus  shares  with  Timothy  the  glory  of  having  given
up  everything  in  order  to  throw  in  his  lot  with  St.  Paul,  and  of  being  one  of  his
most  trusted  and  efficient  helpers.  What  that  meant  the  Epistles  of  St.  Paul  tell
us — ceaseless  toil  and  anxiety,  much  shame  and  reproach,  and  not  a  httle  peril  to
life  itself.  He  also  shares  with  Timothy  the  glory  of  being  willing,  when  the  cause
required  such  sacrifice,  to  separate  from  the  master  to  whom  he  had  surrendered
himself,  and  to  work  on  by  himself  in  isolation  and  difficulty.  The  latter  was
possibly  the  more  trying  sacrifice  of  the  two.  To  give  up  all  his  earthly  prospects
and  all  the  sweetness  of  home  life,  in  order  to  work  for  the  spread  of  the  gospel
side  by  side  with  St.  Paul,  was  no  doubt  a  sacrifice  that  must  have  cost  those  who
made  it  a  great  deal.  But  it  had  its  attractive  side.  Quite  independently  of  the
beauty  and  majesty  of  the  cause  itself,  there  was  the  delight  of  being  associated
with  a  leader  so  able,  so  sagacious,  so  invigorating,  and  so  affectionate  as  the


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  7

apostle  who  "  became  all  things  to  all  men  that  he  might  by  all  means  save  some."
Hard  work  became  light,  and  difficulties  became  smooth,  under  the  inspiriting
sympathy  of  such  a  colleague.  But  it  was  quite  another  thing  to  have  given  up
everything  for  the  sake  of  such  companionship  and  support,  or  at  least  in  the  fall
expectation  of  enjoying  it,  and  then  to  have  to  undergo  the  hard  work  and  confront
the  difficulties  without  it.  The  new  dispensation  in  this  respect  repeats  the  old.
Elisha  leaves  his  home  and  his  inheritance  to  follow  Elijah,  and  then  Elijah  is
taken  from  him.  Timothy  and  Titus  leave  their  homes  and  possessions  to  follow
St.  Paul,  and  then  St.  Paul  sends  them  away  from  him.  And  to  this  arrangement
they  consented,  Timothy  (as  we  know)  with  tears,  Titus  (we  may  be  sure)  with
much  regret.  And  what  it  cost  the  loving  apostle  thus  to  part  with  them  and  to
pain  them  we  see  from  the  tone  of  affectionate  longing  which  pervades  these  letters.
{A.  Plummer,  D.D.)

Genuineness. — With  regard  to  modem  objections,  it  may  be  freely  admitted  that
there  is  no  room  in  St.  Paul's  life,  as  given  in  the  Acts,  for  the  journey  to  Crete,
and  the  winter  at  Nicopolis,  required  by  the  Epistle  to  Titus.    But  there  is  plenty
of  room  for  both  of  these  outside  the  Acts — ^viz.,  between  the  first  and  second
Roman  imprisonments  of  the  apostle.    And,  as  we  have  already  seen  good  reason
for  believing  in  the  case  of  1  Timothy,  the  condition  of  the  Church  indicated  in
this  letter  is  such  as  was  already  in  existence  in  St.  Paul's  time ;  and  the  language
nsed  in  treating  of  it  resembles  that  of  the  apostle  in  a  way  which  helps  us  to
believe  that  we  are  reading  his  own  words,  and  not  those  of  a  skilful  imitator.
For  this  imitator  must  have  been  a  strange  person ;  very  skilful  in  some  things,
very  eccentric  in  others.    Why  does  he  give  St.  Paul  and  Titus  a  work  in  Crete  in
which  there  is  no  mention  in  the  Acts  ?    Why  does  he  make  the  apostle  ask  Titus
to  meet  him  in  Nicopolis,  a  place  never  named  in  connection  with  St.  Paul  t    Why
bracket  a  well-known  person,  like  ApoUos,  with  an  utterly  unknown  person,  such
as  Zenas  ?    It  is  not  easy  to  believe  in  this  imitator.    Yet  another  point  of  resem-
blance should  be  noted.     Here,  as  in  1  Timothy,  there  is  no  careful  arrangement
of  the  material.    The  subjects  are  not  put  together  in  a  studied  order,  as  in  a
treatise  with  a  distinct  theological  or  controversial  purpose.     They  follow  one
another  in  a  natural  manner,  just  as  they  occur  to  the  writer.     Persons  with  their
hearts  and  heads  full  of  things  which  they  wish  to  say  to  a  friend,  do  not  sit  down
with  an  analysis  before  them  to  secure  an  orderly  arrangement  of  what  they  wish
to  write.    They  start  with  one  of  the  main  topics,  and  then  the  treatment  of  this
suggests  something  else ;  and  they  are  not  distressed  if  they  repeat  themselves,
or  if  they  have  to  return  to  a  subject  which  has  been  touched  upon  before  and
then  dropped.    This  is  just  the  kind  of  writing  which  meets  us  once  more  in  the
letter  to  Titus.    It  is  thoroughly  natural.    It  is  difficult  to  believe  that  a  forger  in
the  second  century  could  have  thrown  himself  with  such  simplicity  into  the
attitude  which  the  letter  pre-supposes.    (A.  Plummer,  D.D.)

Time  and  Place  or  Composition. — It  is  not  possible  to  determine  whether  this
letter  was  written  before  or  after  the  First  to  Timothy.  But  it  was  certainly  written
before  the  Second  to  Timothy.  Therefore,  while  one  has  no  sufficient  reason  for
taking  it  before  the  one,  one  has  excellent  reason  for  taking  it  before  the  other.
The  precise  year  and  the  precise  place  in  which  it  was  written,  we  must  be  content
to  leave  unsettled.  It  may  be  doubted  whether  either  one  or  the  other  would  throw
much  light  on  the  contents  of  the  letter.  These  are  determined  by  what  the  apostle
remembers  and  expects  concerning  affairs  in  Crete,  and  not  by  bis  own  surround-
ings. {A.  Plummer,  D.D.)  The  striking  resemblance  of  this  Epistle  to  1  Tim.
JQstifles  OS  in  assigning  it  to  the  same  year  (say  67  a.d.).    It  may  have  been  written


8  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.

in  Asia  Minor  when  the  apostle  was  on  his  way  to  Nicopolis.    (/.  A.  IfcCIymont,
B.D.)

Obbtb  akd  tbb  Obetak  Cbitboh. — Orete  is  a  large  island  in  the  Oreek  seas,  with
a  range  of  high  hills  running  through  its  entire  length  from  east  to  west,  from
which  fertile  valleys  open  upon  a  continuous  strip  of  flat  shore  round  the  coast
line.  On  the  north  it  possesses  good  natural  harbours.  In  its  palmly  days  these
serred  as  outlets  for  the  abundant  crops  of  wheat,  wine,  and  oil  which  it  then
yielded  to  the  industry  of  a  dense  population.  Descended  from  an  ancient  Greek
stock,  its  early  inhabitants  were  employed  partly  as  cultivators  in  the  interior,
partly  as  seamen  on  the  coast.  They  were  a  somewhat  rude,  turbulent,  and  inde-
pendent race,  among  whom  the  usual  defects  of  the  Greek  character  in  its  less
cultured  condition  were  very  strongly  marked.  Of  these  defects,  falsehood,  both
in  the  form  of  over-reaching  and  in  that  of  treachery,  has  always  been  the  fore-
most. To  this  vice  there  were  joined,  in  St.  Paul's  time,  gross  forms  of  licentious-
ness and  a  readiness  to  swift,  insolent  brawling  such  as  has  never  been  quite  cured
among  the  maritime  Greeks  of  the  Archipelago.  {J.  Oswald  Dykes,  DJ).)  There
is  no  record  of  any  visit  of  St.  Paul  to  Crete,  except  in  Acts  xzvii.  7.  He  may
have  gone  there  from  Ephesus  or  Corinth  during  the  period  of  his  life  embraced
in  the  Acts ;  but  it  is  far  more  probable  that  the  visit  referred  to  here  took  place
after  his  first  imprisonment  at  Bome.  This  island,  although  famous  in  the  mytho-
logy of  early  Greece,  had  played  no  important  part  in  its  subsequent  history.  It
had  been  added  to  the  Boman  Empire  by  Metellus  (b.o.  67)i  and  was  united  in  one
province  with  Cyrenaica,  on  the  African  coast.  There  are  indications  of  consider-
able  Jewish  settlements  on  this  island.  Tacitus,  indeed,  mentions,  among  several
traditions  of  the  origin  of  the  Jews,  that  they  came  from  Crete ;  perhaps  from  a
confusion  between  them  and  the  Cherethites,  or  Cherethim,  who  are  supposed  to
Lave  been  Philistine  mercenaries.  The  Septuagint  translates  these  names  by
Cretans  in  Ezek.  xxv.  15 ;  Zeph.  ii.  15,  where,  too,  in  ver.  6,  for  "  sea-coast "  it
reads  "  Crete."  Jews  in  Gortyna,  a  city  of  Crete,  are  alluded  to  in  1  Mao.  xv.  28.
Josephus  mentions  the  Jews  in  Crete,  in  connection  with  Alexander,  the  pretended
son  of  Herod ;  and  Philo,  in  the  reign  of  Caligula,  speaks  of  Crete  as  being,  like
other  islands  of  the  Mediterranean,  full  of  Jews.  Cretes  were  among  the  devout
Jews  who  were  sojourning  at  Jerusalem  at  the  day  of  Pentecost  (Acts  iL  II).
When,  or  by  whom,  Christianity  was  planted  on  this  island,  is  quite  uncertain.  It
could  hardly  have  been  by  St.  Paul,  unless  we  suppose  some  visit  previous  to  his
first  imprisonment  to  which  no  allusion  is  made  in  the  Acts.  But  in  that  case  we
shall  rather  expect  to  find  some  mention  of  "  brethren  "  there,  when  the  apostle
touched  at  the  Fair  Havens  on  his  way  to  Bome  (Acts  xxvii.  8).  The  directions  In
this  Epistle  indicate  an  imperfectly  organised  Church,  but  one  which  had  been  in
existence  long  enough  to  admit  Irregularities,  and  to  be  endangered  hj  false  teaohex*.
{Bp.  Jackson.)

Thb  Falsb  Teaohbbs. — The  heretics  (chap.  i.  9)  belong  especially  to  Judaism
(chap.  i.  10).  While  boasting  of  their  special  knowledge  of  God,  they  lead  a  godless
life  (chap.  i.  16),  condemned  by  their  own  conscience  (chap.  iii.  11).  What  they
bring  forward  are  Jewish  myths  (chap.  i.  14),  genealogies,  points  of  oontroven^
about  the  law  (chap.  iii.  9),  and  mere  commands  of  men  (chap.  L  14).  They  are
idle  babblers  (chap.  i.  10),  who,  with  their  shameful  doctrine  (chap.  i.  11),  seduce
hearts  (chap.  i.  10),  cause  divisions  in  the  Church  (chap.  iii.  10),  and  draw  whole
famihes  into  destruction  (chap.  i.  11) ;  and  all  this — for  the  sake  of  shameful  gain
(chap.  i.  11).     {J.  E.  Huthtr,  Th.D.)  They  made  much  of  the  law  of  Moses.

Mot  of  its  moral  elements,  however ;  nor  even  of  its  religious  ritual ;  nor  of  its


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  9

observance  as  a  means  of  attaining  to  righteousness.  What  they  appear  to  have
chiefly  insisted  upon  was  the  distinction  it  drew  between  what  was  ceremonially
"clean  "  and  "unclean"  in  food,  and  the  like  external  matters — portions  of  Mosaic
legislation  which  many,  even  among  the  Hebrews,  had  come  to  regard  as  its  least
important  or  permanent  features.  On  such  points,  they  added  new  Babbinical  pro-
hibitions to  those  of  the  original  law.  They  had  even  introduced  doctrines  foreign
to  the  whole  spirit  of  Hebrew  thought  and  history.  For  example,  they  discouraged
marriage  and  extolled  celibacy,  as  well  as  denied  a  literal  resurrection  of  the  body.
It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  the  root  idea  which  underlay  their  speculations  and
practical  rules  was  the  same  belief  in  the  essential  evil  of  matter  which  for  some
years  had  been  operating  injuriously  (as  we  see  from  the  letter  to  Colosse)  upon
the  churches  of  Asia  Minor,  and  which,  after  St.  Paul's  decease,  was  destined  to
blossom  into  the  vast  and  many-headed  heresy  of  Gnosticism.  The  legitimate
offspring  of  all  speculations  of  this  complexion,  which  assign  moral  evil  as  a  pro-
perty to  matter,  not  to  the  spirit,  is,  first,  a  false  asceticism,  and,  at  the  next
remove,  immoral  indulgence.  To  this  last,  even,  it  had  already  come  with  certain
of  the  Jewish  teachers  at  Crete.  They  were  worming  their  way  into  Christian
families,  undermining  authority  in  the  household,  and  seeking  by  all  means  to  win
proselytes  to  their  views,  for  the  purpose  of  enriching  themselves ;  and,  under  a
garb  of  self-denial,  they  indemnified  themselves  for  ascetic  restraint  by  flagitious
laxity.  Such  are  the  charges  brought  against  them  by  St.  Paul.  It  was,  there-
fore, no  abstract  error  which  had  to  be  combated.  A  **  gangrene  "  of  immorality,
as  the  natural  product  of  fanciful  speculations  which  were  dangerous  as  well  as
false,  was  laying  waste  the  Church,  demoralising  the  behaviour  of  professed  believers,
and  endangering  the  very  existence  of  a  healthy  Christianity  in  the  island.  The
evil  was  by  no  means  peculiar  to  Crete,  although  it  had  there  acquired  anusual
development.  It  was  destined  to  overrun  all  churches.  It  was  the  same  evil  the
foresight  of  which,  in  its  finished  form,  darkened  the  last  days  of  Panl,  and  which
is  dealt  with  by  the  pens  of  St.  Peter  and  St.  Jude.  All  the  more  interesting  does
it  become  to  note  how  the  great  missionary  dealt  with  it  in  the  present  case.  No
sooner  was  he  on  the  spot,  than  he  felt  the  need  for  a  prompt  and  drastic  remedy.
The  mischief  had  gained  too  firm  a  footing  to  be  readily  expelled.  It  found  sup-
port in  the  low  morals  of  the  Cretan  population.  Before  it  could  be  counteracted,
it  would  therefore  require  courage,  plain  speaking,  a  vigorous  enforcement  of  dis-
cipline, and,  above  all,  a  faithful  exhibition  of  gospel  truth  in  its  essential  connec-
tion with  sound  morality.    (J.  Oswald  Dykes,  D.D.)

CoMTENTS. — ^After  a  somewhat  elaborate  preface,  Paul  reminds  Titas  that  he  had
left  him  behind  in  Crete  for  the  purpose  of  ordaining  presbyters  in  the  churches
there.  The  qualities  are  named  which  the  presbyter  ought  to  possess,  and  Paul
points  out  the  upholding  of  the  pure  gospel  as  the  most  important  requisite  of  all,
that  the  presbyter  may  be  able  to  withstand  the  continually  growing  influence  of
the  heretics.  The  mention  of  the  heretics  in  Crete  gives  the  apostle  an  opportunity
of  quoting  a  saying  of  Epimenides,  which  describes  the  character  of  the  Cretans,
while  at  the  same  time  he  sketches  the  heretics,  with  their  arbitrary  conmiands  and
their  hypocritical  life,  and  vindicates  against  them  the  principle  of  life  in  the
gospel  (chap.  i.  6-16).  Then  follow  rules  of  conduct  for  the  various  members  of
the  Church,  for  old  and  young,  men  and  women,  together  with  an  exhortation  to
Titus  to  show  a  good  example  in  work  and  doctrine,  and  especially  to  call  upon  the
slaves  to  be  faithful  to  their  masters.  These  exhortations  are  supported  by  point-
ing to  the  moral  character  of  God's  grace  (chap.  ii.  1-16).  Then  follows  the
injunction  that  Titus  is  to  nrge  the  Christians  to  obedience  towards  the  higher
powers,  and  to  a  peaceful  behaviour  towards  all  men.    The  latter  point  is  enforced


10  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.

by  pointing  to  the  undeserved  grace  of  God  which  has  been  bestowed  on  Christianf
(chap.  ill.  1-7).  To  this  are  added  warnings  against  heresy,  and  directions  hov
Titas  is  to  deal  with  a  heretic  (chap.  iii.  8-11).  The  Epistle  doses  with  an  injono*
tion  to  eome  to  the  apostle  at  Nioopolis,  some  oommissions,  greetings,  and  th«
b«n«dietion.    (/.  E.  Huther,  ThJ),)


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.

TITUS.

OHAPTEBL

V«B.  1.  Paul,  ft  servant  of  Cfod. — A  nervant  of  God.—**  Servant  of  God,"  "  servant
of  Jesos  Christ " — this  is  the  title  by  which  each  one  of  the  writers  of  the  Epistles
of  the  New  Testament  describes  himself  in  one  place  or  another.  The  title  indicates
their  work  in  life,  the  place  they  hold  in  the  world,  and  the  definite  object  to  which
all  their  powers  are  devoted.  For  them  God  had  tasks  as  mach  above  the  tasks  and
trials  of  Christians  generally  as  the  tasks  of  a  great  servant  of  State  are  above  the
responsibilities  of  those  whom  the  State  protects.  St.  Paul  had  parted  company
with  what  men  care  for  and  work  for  here,  as  the  enthusiast  for  distant  travel  parts
iompany  with  his  home.  I.  This  chabacteb  is  exclusive  ts  its  object  and
COMPLETE  in  its  SELF-DEDICATION.  St.  Paul  kuew  no  other  interest  here  bat  the
immense  one  of  his  Master's  purpose  in  the  world ;  this  scene  of  experience,  of  pain
and  pleasure,  of  life  and  death,  was  as  if  it  had  ceased  to  be,  except  as  the  field  on
which  he  was  to  "spend  and  be  spent"  in  persuading  men  of  what  his  Master
meant  for  them.  II.  It  contemplates  as  the  centre  of  all  interest  and  hope,  the
highest  object  of  human  thought  and  devotion,  a  presence  beyond  the  facts  of
experience,  the  pbbsenos  of  the  invisible  God.  What  St.  Paul  lived  for,  so
whole-hearted,  so  single-minded,  was  to  be  one  with  the  wDi  and  purpose  of  Him
who  had  chosen  him  from  the  millions  of  mankind  to  bear  His  name  before  the
world,  in.  It  accepts,  as  the  ueasube  of  its  laboub  and  its  bndttbance,  the
OBOss  OF  Jesus  Chbist.  For  such  a  life  a  price  had  to  be  paid,  and  St.  Paul's
price  was  the  acceptance  of  the  fellowship  of  the  cross  of  Christ.  The  likeness  of
the  cross  pervades  every  life  of  duty  and  earnestness — in  lifelong  trouble,  in  bereave-
ment, in  misunderstanding,  in  unjust  suffering,  in  weary  labour,  in  failure  and
defeat — God's  proof  and  test  of  strength  is  laid  upon  us  all.  But  we  must  not
confound  with  this  that  partnership  in  their  Master's  sufferings  which  >was  the
portion  of  servants  like  St.  Paul,  and  for  which  he  sought  expression  in  the  awful
language  recalling  the  Passion — "I  am  crucified  with  Christ";  '*!  fill  up  that
which  is  behind  of  the  afflictions  of  Christ,"  <Sc.  There  is  no  reason  why,  without
extravagance,  without  foolish  or  overstrained  enthusiasm,  we  should  not  still  believe
that  a  life  like  St.  Paul's  is  a  natural  one  for  a  Christian  to  choose.  We  still
reverence  his  words  ;  and  his  words  have  all  along  the  history  of  the  Church  found
echoes  in  many  hearts.  There  is  a  great  past  behind  us — a  past  which  is  not  dead,
but  lives — lives  in  every  thought  we  think  and  every  word  we  speak,  lives  in  our
hopes,  in  our  confidences  and  joy  in  life,  lives  in  those  high  feelings  which  thrill
and  soothe  us  at  the  grave.  May  we  not  be  unworthy  of  such  a  past  1  {Dean
Church.)  The  honour  of  being  a  servant  of  God  : — This  being  the  first  title

whereby  the  apostle  would  get  himself  authority,  teacheth  that  the  very  name  of  a
servant  of  God  is  full  of  honour  and  authority.  The  apostle,  comparing  the  glory
of  Christ  with  the  glory  of  the  angels  (Heb.  i.  14),  advanceth  them  as  far  as  possibly
he  can,  that  Christ's  glory,  being  so  much  more  excellent  than  theirs  there  described,
might  be  most  highly  exalted ;  and  yet  the  highest  ascent  of  their  honour  which  he
can  rise  unto  is  to  title  them  "ministering  spirits"  standing  about  God,  from
which  service  they  are  honoured  with  glorious  names,  of  thrones,  dominations,
powers,  rulers,  principalities ;  and  although  the  Scriptures  most  usually  under  this
title  express  the  low  and  humble  condition  of  Christ,  "  who  took  on  Him  the  form


12  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i.

of  a  servant,"  yet  also  thereby  the  Lord  wonld  sometimes  signify  His  great  glory,
as  Isa.  xlii.  1.  1.  This  serves  to  teach  ministers  their  duty,  that  seeing  the  Lord
hath  so  highly  honoured  them  as  to  draw  them  so  near  nnto  Himself,  as  it  were
admitting  them  into  His  presence-chamber — yea,  and  unto  His  council-table — they
are  in  a  way  of  thankfulness  more  straightly  bound  to  two  main  duties — (1)  Dili-
gence ;  (2)  thankfulness.  2.  This  doctrine  ministereth  comfort  unto  those  that  are
faithful  in  their  ministry,  whom,  howsoever  the  world  esteemeth  of  them,  their  Lord
highly  respecteth,  admitteth  them  into  His  privy  councils,  and  employeth  in  a
service  which  the  angels  themselves  desire  to  pry  into.  3.  Teacheth  people  how
to  esteem  of  their  ministers,  namely,  as  the  servants  of  God,  and  consequently  of
their  ministry  as  the  message  of  God,  whicli  if  it  be,  Moses  must  not  be  murmured
at  when  he  speaks  freely  and  roughly;  and  if  Micaiah  resolve  of  faithfulness,
saying,  "  As  the  Lord  liveth,  whatsoever  the  Lord  saith,  be  it  good  or  evil,  that  will
I  speak,"  why  should  he  be  hated  and  fed  with  "bread  and  water  of  affliction  "  ?
Is  it  not  a  reasonable  plea,  and  full  of  pacification  in  civil  messages — "  I  pray  yon
be  not  angry  with  me ;  I  am  but  a  servant "  ?  4.  Let  every  private  Christian
account  it  also  his  honour  that  the  Lord  vouchsafeth  him  to  become  His  servant ;
and  hereby  harden  thyself  against  the  scorns  and  derisions  of  mocking  Michals,
who  seek  to  disgrace  thy  sincerity.  If  the  ungodly  of  the  world  would  turn  thy
glory  into  shame,  even  as  thou  wouldest  have  the  Son  of  man  not  to  be  ashamed  of
thee  in  His  kingdom,  be  not  thou  ashamed  to  profess  thyself  His  servant,  which  is
thy  glory.  (T.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Willing  service : — Before  the  time  when  Abraham
Lincoln  emancipated  three  millions  of  coloured  people  in  the  Southern  States  of
America,  there  was  one  day  a  slave  auction  in  New  Orleans.  Amongst  the  number
was  a  beautiful  Mulatto  girl,  who  was  put  upon  the  "  block "  to  be  sold  to  the
highest  bidder,  like  a  cow  or  a  horse.  The  auctioneer,  dilating  on  the  graces  of  the
girl,  her  skill  in  working,  and  the  beauty  of  her  form,  asked  for  a  bid.  The  first
offer  was  five  hundred  dollars,  and  the  bids  quickly  rose  to  seven  hundred  dollars.
Then  a  voice  called  from  the  outside  of  the  crowd,  "  Seven  hundred  and  fifty
dollars  1 "  The  slave-owners  thereupon  advanced  their  bids  to  eight  hundred,  eight
hundred  and  fifty,  and  nine  hundred  dollars.  The  bids  continued  to  rise,  but
whenever  there  was  a  pause  the  unseen  bidder  offered  fifty  dollars  more,  and  at
last  the  girl  was  knocked  down  to  him  for  1,450  dollars.  He  then  came  forward,
and,  paying  the  money,  arranged  to  receive  delivery  of  the  lot  in  the  morning.  The
slave  girl  saw  that  her  purchaser  was  a  Northerner,  one  of  the  hated  "  Yankees,"
and  was  much  disgusted  to  become  his  slave.  The  next  morning  her  new  owner
called  at  the  house,  when  the  poor  girl  said  with  tears,  "  Sir,  I  am  ready  to  go  with
you."  He  gently  replied,  "  But  I  do  not  want  you  to  go  with  me  ;  please  look  over
this  paper  1 "  She  opened  the  paper,  and  found  that  it  was  the  gift  of  her  freedom.
The  Northerner  said,  "  I  bought  you  that  you  might  be  free  1  "  She  exclaimed,
"  You  bought  me  that  I  might  be  free  I  Am  I  free?  Free!  Can  I  do  as  I  like  with
myself  ?  "  He  answered,  "  Yes,  you  are  free  I  "  Then  she  fell  down  and  kissed  his
feet,  and  almost  choking  with  sobs  of  joy,  she  cried,  "Oh,  sir,  I  will  go  with  you,
and  be  your  servant  for  evermore  1 "  And  an  apostle  of  Jesus  C^^irlst. — High
office  means  chief  service  in  the  Church: — The  apostle,  by  joining  these  two  together,
a  servant  and  apostle,  teacheth  us  that  the  chiefest  offices  in  the  Church  are  for  the
service  of  it.  Was  there  any  office  above  the  apostles  in  the  Church  ?  And  yet
they  preached  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  themselves  servants  for  His  sake.  Nay,  our  Lord
Jesus  Himself,  although  He  was  the  Head  of  His  Church,  yet  He  came  not  into  the
world  to  be  served,  but  to  minister  and  serve.  1.  Ministers  must  never  conceive  of
their  calling,  but  also  of  this  service,  which  is  not  accomplished  but  by  service ;
thus  shall  they  be  answerable  to  Peter's  exhortation  (1  Pet.  iii.  3)  to  feed  the  flock
of  God  depending  upon  them,  not  by  constraint,  but  willingly ;  "  not  as  lords  over
God's  heritage,  but  as  examples  to  the  flock."  2.  Would'st  thou  know  what  ambition
Christ  hath  permitted  unto  His  ministers  ?  It  is  even  this,  that  he  that  would  be
chief  of  all  should  become  servant  of  all.  (T.  Taylor,  D.D.)  According  to  the
faith  of  God's  elect. — God's  elect : — I.  God  hath  some  who  abe  elect  and  chosen,
AND  OTHEBS  ABE  NOT.  Men  may  be  called  the  elect  of  God  three  ways.  1.  In
respect  of  some  temporal  function  or  ministry  to  which  the  Lord  hath  designed
them  (John  vi.  70).  2.  In  regard  of  that  actual  election  and  choice  of  some  people
and  nations  above  others,  unto  the  true  means  of  life  and  salvation,  so  to  become
the  people  of  God's  election.  8.  In  respect  of  that  eternal  election  of  God,  which  is
according  to  grace,  whereby  of  His  good  pleasure  He  chooseth  from  all  eternity,  out
•f  all  sorts  of  men,  some  to  the  certain  fruition  and  fellowship  of  life  eternal  and


CHAP.  1.]  TITUS.  IS

salvation  by  Christ.  These  elect  of  God  are  here  meant,  the  number  of  which  ia
comparatively  small ;  "  for  many  are  called,  but  few  chosen  " — a  little  flock,  and  a
few  that  have  found  the  narrow  way.  II.  These  elect  have  a  special  faith,
DISTINCT  BY  THEMSELVES.  1.  For  there  is  an  historical  faith,  standing  in  an  assent
and  acknowledgment  of  the  truth  of  things  written  and  taught.  2.  There  is  also  an
hypocritical  faith,  which  passeth  the  former  in  two  degrees.  First,  in  that  with
knowledge  and  assent  is  joined  such  a  profession  of  the  truth  as  shall  carry  a  great
show  and  form  of  godliness.  Secondly,  a  kind  of  gladness  and  glorying  in  that
knowledge ;  for  it  is  ascribed  to  some,  who  in  temptation  shall  fall  away,  "  to
receive  the  Word  with  joy."  To  both  which  may  be  joined  sometimes  a  gift  of
prophecy,  sometimes  of  working  miracles,  as  some  in  the  last  day  shall  say,  "  Lord,
have  we  not  pjophesied  and  cast  out  devils  in  Thy  name  ?  "  and  yet  they  shall  be
unknown  of  Christ.  Neither  of  these  is  the  faith  of  the  elect  here  mentioned,  but
a  third  kind,  called  saving  faith,  the  inheritance  of  which  is  the  property  of  the
elect ;  for  the  just  man  only  liveth  by  this  faith,  which  in  excellency  passeth  both
the  former  in  three  worthy  properties.  (1)  In  that  here,  with  the  act  of  under-
standing and  assent  unto  the  truth,  there  goeth  such  a  disposition  and  affection  of
the  beart  as  apprehendeth  and  applieth  unto  it  the  promise  of  grace  unto  salvation,
causing  a  man  to  rejoice  in  God,  framing  him  unto  the  fear  of  God  and  to  the
waiting  through  hope  for  the  accomplishment  of  the  promise  of  life.  (2)  In  that
whereas  both  the  former  are  dead,  and  not  raising  unto  a  new  life  in  Cbnst,  what
shows  soever  be  made  for  the  time,  the  sun  of  persecution  riseth,  and  such  moisture
is  dried  up.  This  is  a  Uvely  and  quickening  grace,  reaching  into  the  heart  Christ
and  His  merits,  who  is  the  life  of  the  soul  and  the  mover  of  it  to  all  godly  actions,
not  suffering  the  believer  to  be  either  idle  or  unfruitful  in  the  work  of  tbe  Lord.
(3)  Whereas  both  the  former  are  but  temporary,  this  is  perpetual  and  lasting.  The
other,  rising  upon  temporary  causes  and  reasons,  can  last  only  for  a  time,  as  when
men,  for  the  pleasure  of  knowledge  or  the  name  of  it,  by  industry  attain  a  great
measure  of  understanding  in  Divine  things,  or  when,  for  note  and  glory  or  com-
modity, true  or  apparent,  men  profess  the  gospel.  Let  but  these  grounds  fail  a
little,  or  persecution  approach,  they  lay  the  key  under  the  door,  give  up  tbe  house,
and  bid  farewell  to  all  profession.  Thus  many  of  Christ's  disciples,  who  thought
they  had  truly  believed  in  Him,  and  that  many  months,  when  they  heard  Him
speak  of  the  eating  of  His  flesh  and  drinking  His  blood,  went  back,  and  walked
with  Him  no  more.  But  the  matter  is  here  far  otherwise,  seeing  this  faith  of  the
elect  hath  the  promise  made  good  to  it  that  the  gates  of  hell  sball  never  prevail
against  it.  III.  This  pecdliab  faith  is  wbought  in  the  elect  by  the  ministbt
OF  THE  WoBD.  1.  If  this  be  the  principal  end  of  the  ministry,  let  ministers  herein
employ  their  first  and  principal  pains  to  bring  men  unto  the  faith.  2.  The  minister
ought  to  propound  before  him  God's  end  in  performance  of  every  ministerial  duty,
and  that  is  by  enhghtening,  converting,  confirming,  comforting,  to  bring  and  stablish
men  in  the  faith.  3.  The  Lord  having  set  out  the  ministry  for  this  use,  let  every
hearer  acknowledge  herein  God's  ordinance,  and  yield  themselves  with  all  submis-
sion unto  the  ministry  and  the  Word  there  preached,  that  thereby  they  may  have
faith  wrought  in  their  hearts.  4.  Every  man  may  hence  examine  himself,  whether
in  the  use  of  the  ministry  he  finds  saving  faith  begotten  and  wrought  in  his  heart ;
and  by  examination  some  may  find  their  understandings  more  enlightened,  their
judgments  more  settled,  their  practice  in  some  things  reformed;  but  a  very  few
shall  find  Christ  apprehended  and  rested  in  unto  salvation,  seeing  so  few  there  are
that  live  by  faith  in  the  Son  of  God,  for  of  all  the  sins  that  the  Spirit  may  and  shall
rebuke  the  world  of,  this  is  the  chief,  because  they  believe  not  in  Christ.  (Ibid.)
And  tlie  acknowledging  of  the  truth  wbich  Is  after  godliness. — On  the  gospel
being  the  truth  after  godliness : — Here  we  have  a  full  though  compendious  account
of  the  nature  of  the  gospel,  ennobled  by  two  excellent  qualities.  One,  the  end  of
all  philosophical  inquiries,  which  is  truth ;  the  other,  the  design  of  all  religious
institutions,  which  is  godliness ;  both  united,  and  as  it  were  blended  together  in  the
constitution  of  Christianity.  Those  who  discourse  metaphysically  of  the  nature  of
truth,  as  to  the  reality  of  the  thing,  affirm  a  perfect  coincidence  between  truth  and
goodness  ;  and  I  believe  it  might  be  easily  made  out  that  there  is  nothing  in  nature
perfectly  true  but  what  is  also  really  good.  It  would  be  endless  to  strike  forth  into
the  eulogies  of  truth ;  for,  as  we  know,  it  was  the  adored  prize  for  which  the
Bublimest  wits  in  the  world  have  always  run,  and  sacrificed  their  time,  their  health,
their  lives,  to  the  acquist  of ;  so  let  it  suffice  us  to  say  here  that  as  reason  is  the
great  rule  of  man's  nature,  so  truth  is  the  great  regulator  of  reason.     I.  Now  in


14  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [ohif.  I.

this  expression  of  the  gospel's  being  "  thb  tbuth  which  is  afteb  aoDUMESs,"
these  three  things  are  coached.  1.  It  is  a  truth,  and  upon  that  account  dares  look
its  most  inquisitive  adversaries  in  the  face.  The  most  intricate  and  mysterious
passages  in  it  are  vouched  by  an  infinite  veracity  :  and  truth  is  truth,  though
clothed  in  riddles  and  surrounded  with  darkness  and  obscurity ;  as  the  sun  has
still  the  same  native  inherent  brightness,  though  wrapped  up  in  a  cloud.  Now,
the  gospel  being  a  truth,  it  follows  yet  further  that  if  we  nm  through  the  whole
catalogue  of  its  principles,  nothing  can  be  drawn  from  thence,  by  legitimate  and
certain  consequence,  but  what  is  also  true.  It  is  impossible  for  truth  to  afford
anything  but  truth.  Every  such  principle  begets  a  consequence  after  its  own
likeness.  2.  The  next  advance  of  the  gospel's  excellency  is  tnat  it  is  such  a  truth
as  is  operative.  It  does  not  dwell  in  the  mind  like  furniture,  only  for  ornament,  but
for  use,  and  the  great  concernments  of  life.  The  knowledge  of  astronomy,  geometry,
arithmetic,  music,  and  the  like,  they  may  fill  the  mind,  and  yet  never  step  forth
into  one  experiment ;  but  the  knowledge  of  the  Divine  truths  of  Christianity  is
quick  and  restless,  like  an  imprisoned  flame,  which  will  be  sure  to  force  its  passage
and  to  display  its  brightness.  3.  The  third  and  highest  degree  of  its  perfection  is
that  it  is  not  only  operative,  but  also  operative  to  the  best  of  purposes,  which  is  to
godliness :  it  carries  on  a  design  for  heaven  and  eternity.  It  serves  the  two  greatest
interests  in  the  world,  which  are,  the  glory  of  the  Creator  and  the  salvation  of  the
creature;  and  this  the  gospel  does  by  being  "the  truth  which  is  after  godliness."
Which  words  may  admit  of  a  double  sense — (1)  That  the  gospel  is  so  called  because
it  actually  produces  'the  effects  of  godliness  in  those  that  embrace  and  profess  it.
(2)  That  it  is  directly  improvable  into  such  consequences  and  deductions  as  have  in
them  a  natural  fitness,  if  complied  with,  to  engage  the  practice  of  mankind  in  such
a  course.  II.  There  are  three  things  that  I  shall  deduce  from  this  desobiptiom
OF  THE  gospel.  1.  That  the  nature  and  prime  essential  design  of  religion  is  to  be
an  instrument  of  good  life,  by  administering  arguments  and  motives  inducing  to  it.
^1)  Religion  designs  the  service  of  God,  by  gaining  over  to  His  obedience  that  which

15  most  excellent  in  man,  and  that  is  the  actions  of  his  life  and  continual  converse.
That  these  are  the  most  considerable  is  clear  from  hence,  because  all  other  actions
naturally  proceed  in  a  subserviency  to  these.  (2)  The  design  of  religion  is  man's
salvation;  but  men  are  not  saved  as  they  are  more  knowing  or  assent  to  more
propositions,  but  as  they  are  more  pious  than  others.  Practice  is  the  thing  that
sanctifies  knowledge ;  and  faith  without  works  expires,  and  becomes  a  dead  thing,  a
carcase,  and  consequently  noisome  to  God,  who,  even  to  those  who  know  the  best
things,  pronounces  no  blessing  till  they  do  them.  (3)  The  discriminating  excellency
of  Christianity  consists  not  so  much  in  this,  that  it  discovers  more  sublime  truths,
or  indeed  more  excellent  precepts,  than  philosophy  (though  it  does  this  also),  as
that  it  suggests  more  efficacious  arguments  to  enforce  the  performance  of  tnose
precepts  than  any  other  religion  or  institution  whatsoever.  (4)  Notwithstanding
the  diversity  of  religions  in  the  world,  yet  men  hereafter  will  generally  be  con-
demned for  the  same  things ;  that  is,  for  their  breaches  of  morality.  2.  That  so
much  knowledge  of  truth  as  is  sufficient  to  engage  men's  lives  in  the  practice  of
godliness  serves  the  necessary  ends  of  religion ;  for  if  godliness  be  the  design,it
ought  also,  by  consequence,  to  be  the  measure  of  men's  knowledge  in  this  particular.
3.  That  whatsoever  does  in  itself  or  its  direct  consequences  undermine  the  motives
of  a  good  life  is  contrary  to,  and  destructive  of  Christian  religion.  (B.  South,  D.D.)
The  doctrine  of  the  gospel : — I.  The  doctrine  of  the  gospel  is  the  truth  itself. — 1.
Because  the  Author  of  it  is  truth  itself,  and  cannot  lie,  it  being  a  part  of  His  Word,
who  can  neither  deceive  nor  be  deceived.  2.  Because  the  penmen  of  it  were  inspired
by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  spake  and  wrote  as  they  were  moved  by  Him,  who  is  called
•'  the  Spirit  of  Truth  "  (John  xiv.  17).  3.  Because  it  is  a  doctrine  of  Christ,  and  aicieth
at  Him  who  is  the  Truth  principally,  as  well  as  the  Way  of  our  salvation.     II.  The

KNOWLEDGE  OF  THIS  TRUTH   IS   THE   GROUND   OF   FAITH.      1.    Then  slight  is  the  faith  Of

most,  whatsoever  men  profess.  2.  Waverers  in  religion  and  unsettled  persons  in
their  profession  may  hence  be  informed  to  judge  of  themselves  and  their  present
estate.  We  hear  more  than  a  few  uttering  such  voices  as  these  :  "  There  is  such
difference  of  opinion  among  teachers  that  I  know  not  what  to  hold  or  whom  to
believe ;  but  is  not  this  openly  to  proclaim  the  want  of  faith,  which  is  not  only
assuredly  persuaded  of,  but  certainly  knoweth  the  truth  of  that  it  apprehendeth  ?
3.  If  the  elect  are  brought  to  the  faith  by  the  acknowledging  of  the  truth,  then,  after
long  teaching  and  much  means,  to  be  still  blind  and  not  to  see  the  things  of  our
jpeace  is  a  most  heavy  judgment  of  God ;  for  here  is  a  forfeit  of  faith  and  salvation.


CHAP.  1.)  TITUS.  15

in.  Whosoeveb  in  tbuth  entebtaih  the  doctbins  op  the  gospel,  tee  hearts  of
BUCH  ABE  FKAMED  tJNTO  GODLiNEBS.  1.  If  this  be  the  pre-eminence  of  the  Word,  to
frame  the  soul  to  true  godliness,  then  it  is  a  matter  above  the  reach  of  all  human
learning ;  and  therefore  the  folly  of  those  men  is  hence  discovered  who  devote  and
bury  themselves  in  profane  studies,  of  what  kind  soever  they  be,  thinking  therein  to
obtain  more  wisdom  than  in  the  study  of  the  Scriptures.  2.  Every  hearer  of  the
truth  must  examine  whether  by  it  his  heart  be  thus  framed  unto  godhness,  for  else
it  is  not  rightly  learned  ;  for  as  this  grace  "  hath  appeared  to  this  purpose,  to  teach
men  to  deny  ungodliness  and  worldly  lusts,  and  to  live  soberly  and  justly  and  godly
in  this  present  world,"  so  it  is  not  then  learned  when  men  can  only  discourse  of  the
death  of  Christ,  of  His  resurrection,  of  His  ascension,  except  withal  there  be  some
experience  of  the  virtue  of  His  death  in  themselves.  {T.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Redemptive
truth : — I.  A  obamd  enterpbise.  1.  An  enterprise  devoted  to  the  highest  purpose.
(1)  The  promotion  of  the  faith  of  God's  elect ;  (2)  the  promotion  of  the  knowledge
"  of  the  truth  which  is  according  to  godliness."  2.  An  enterprise  employing  the
highest  human  agency.  II.  A  transcendent  promise.  1.  Transcendent  in  value.
2.  Incertitude.  3.  In  age.  III.  A  gradual  bevelation.  1.  It  was  manifested  at
a  proper  time.  2.  By  apostolic  preaching.  3.  By  the  Divine  command.  IV.  A
love-begetting  power.  "  Mine  own  son."  The  gospel  converter  becomes  the
father  in  the  highest  and  divinest  sense  of  the  converted.  (D.  TJiomag,  D.D.)
Lessons: — I.  An  honourable  designation.  1.  "Servant  of  God."  2.  Apostle  of
Christ."  II.  A  glorious  purpose — " According  to,"  or  rather,  perhaps,  "with
reference  to,"  the  faith  of  God's  people.  Sent  by  Jesus  Christ  in  order  to  promote
the  faith  of  "  God's  elect."  III.  The  reasonableness  of  religion — "  The  acknow-
ledging of  the  truth."  Faith  is  the  central  doctrine  of  Christianity,  but  is  to  be
distinguished  from  blind  credulity.  The  faith  of  the  Christian  is  based  on  know-
ledge, on  fact,  on  truth  (2  Pet.  i.  16 ;  1  John  i.  1-3).  IV.  The  practical  chabaoter
or  BELioiON — "  The  truth  which  is  after  godliness  "  ;  that  is,  piety.  Original  word
probably  derived  from  one  signifying  "good,  brave,  noble."  Paul  was  himself
emphatically  a  model  of  manliness  and  devout  courage.  {F.  Wagstaff.)  The
grandest  end  and  means  of  life : — In  this  verse  the  apostle  speaks  of  himself  as — 1.
Possessing  a  character  common  to  the  good  of  all  worlds — "  Servant  of  God."  All
creatures  are  servants  of  God — some  without  their  will,  some  according  to  their
will.  Paul  served  God  freely,  cordially,  devotedly.  2.  Sustaining  an  ofiQce  peculiar
to  a  few — "Apostle."  Peculiar  in  appointment,  number,  and  authority.  3.  Engaged
in  a  work  binding  on  all  Christians.  To  promote  "  the  faith  of  God's  elect" — that
is,  of  His  people — and  "  the  knowledge  of  the  truth  which  leads  to  godliness."  I.
Godliness  is  the  grandest  end  of  being.  In  the  Old  Testament  the  good  are
called  "godly"  (Psa.  iv.  3;  xii.  1 ;  xxxii.  6  ;  Mai.  ii.  15).  In  the  New  Testament
goodness  is  called  "  godliness  "  (1  Tim.  ii.  2  ;  iv.  7,  8  ;  vi.  3,  5,  6 ;  2  Tim.  iii.  5 ;
2  Pet.  L  3,  6,  7 ;  iii.  11).  Godliness  is  moral  likeness  to  God.  IL  Truth  is  the
gbandest  means  or  being.  All  truth  is  of  God,  natural  and  spiritual.  The  truth
here  referred  to  is  the  gospel  truth — "  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus  " — which,  while  it
illustrates,  vivifies  and  emphasises  all  other  truth,  goes  beyond  it,  opens  up  new
chapters  of  Divine  revelation.  It  is  not  only  moral  truth,  but  redemptive  truth,
and  redemptive  truth  not  in  mere  propositions,  but  in  a  Divine  life.  This  truth  is
the  power  of  God  unto  salvation;  it  delivers  from  depravity,  prejudice,  guilt;  it
raises  to  purity,  truth,  peace.  (Homilist.)  Truth  as  a  medium  of  godlinest : —
Suppose  that  a  person  wishing  to  send  a  message  from  London  to  Edinburgh  by
lightning  knows  how  to  construct  an  electric  battery  ;  but,  when  he  comes  to
consider  how  he  will  transmit  the  impulse  through  hundreds  of  miles,  he  looks  at
an  iron  wire  and  says,  "  This  is  dull,  senseless,  cold ;  has  no  sympathy  with  light :
it  is  unnatural,  in  fact  irrational,  to  imagine  that  this  dark  thing  can  convey  a
lightning-message  in  a  moment."  From  this  he  turns  and  looks  at  a  prism.  It
glows  with  the  many-coloured  sunbeam.  He  might  say, "  This  is  sympathetic  with
hght,"  and  in  its  flashing  imagine  that  he  saw  proof  that  his  message  would  speed
through  it ;  but  when  he  puts  it  to  the  experiment,  it  proves  that  the  shining  prism
will  convey  no  touch  of  his  silent  fire,  but  that  the  dull  iron  will  transmit  it  to
the  farthest  end  of  the  land.  And  so  with  God's  holy  truth.  It  alone  is  adapted
to  carry  into  the  soul  of  man  the  secret  fire,  which  writes  before  the  inner  eye  of  the
loal  a  message  from  the  Unseen  One  in  the  skies.     (T.  W.  Jenkyn,  D.D.)

Ver.  2.  In  hope  of  eternal  life. — Christianity  a  hope-inspiring  promise : — I.  It  is
AH  abbolvtklt  certain  pbouise.    It  is  God's  promise,  and  God  cannot  lie.    II.  It


16  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  \

IS  AN  nnriNiTELY  EicH  PROMISE.  "  Eternal  life,"  i.e.,  eternal  well-being.  HI.  It  is
A  YEBY  OLD  PBOMisE.  "Before  the  world  began."  (Homilist.)  Hope  reaching
beyond  the  revolution$  of  time : — I.  It  is  olobioob  in  its  object.  "  Eternal  life  " —
a  me  of  eternal  goodness.  II.  It  is  Divine  in  its  foundation.  1.  Inviolable.  2.
Eternal.  3.  Conditional.  {Ibid.)  Lesson*  : — I.  A  qlorious  pbospect — «'  Eternal
life."  II.  A TEUTH-sPEAJKiNO  GoD — •'  That  cannot  lie  "  (Num.  xxiii.  19  ;  Heb.  vi.  18).
in.  An  OliD-STANDiNO  PBOMISE— "Before  the  world  began."  (F.  Wagstaff.)  The
covenant — its  deathless  life  and  hope : — I.  The  geneeal  doctrine.  1.  God,  he  tells
as,  who  cannot  lie,  made  a  certain  promise  before  the  world  began.  Not,  observe,
formed  a  purpose  merely.  We  know  well,  indeed,  from  many  a  scripture,  that  Ha
formed  a  purpose.  But  the  apostle  sajs  that  He  did  more, — that  He  made  a  pro-
mise—  and  to  this  belongs  the  special  character  under  which  he  presents  the
adorable  God  here,  "  God  that  cannot  lie."  But  to  whom  was  the  promise  made  ?
It  could  only  be  to  the  Son  of  God,  our  Lord  Jesua  Christ.  2.  It  was  '•  eternal
life  "  of  which  God,  before  the  world  began,  made  promise.  The  Son  of  God  could
not  receive  such  a  promise  for  Himself.  He  oould  receive  it  only  as  the  predestined
Mediator — the  Head  and  Surety  of  a  people  "given  to  Him  by  the  Father,"  to  be
in  time  redeemed  by  Him,  and  eternally  saved.  3.  And  thus  does  there  arise  a
third  momentous  truth,  namely,  that  this  promise  could  be  made  to  Christ  only  on
a  certain  condition — only  on  supposition,  and  in  respect  of  His  whole  future
obedience  unto  death  in  behalf  of  His  people.  II.  A  hope  unspeakably  glorious  and
stable  in  its  character.  1.  Its  glory.  "  Hope  of  eternal  life."  I  cannot  tell  what
this  is.  "  It  doth  not  yet  appear,"  <fcc.  This,  at  least,  we  know,  that  the  "  eternal
life  "  shall  have  in  it  the  expansion  to  the  full  of  all  the  faculties  and  affections  of
the  renewed  nature ;  the  perfect  harmony  of  those  faculties  and  affections  both  among
themselves  and  with  the  will  of  the  adorable  God  ;  the  end  of  the  last  remnants  of
sin ;  all  tears  for  ever  dried  up ;  body  and  soul  reunited  in  a  holy,  deathless  com-
panionship, and  made  perfectly  blessed  in  the  full  enjoying  of  God  to  all  eternity  I
2.  Its  immovable  stability.  (1)  First,  the  apostle  says  that  it  is  built  on  the  "pro-
mise of  God  who  cannot  lie."  Ah,  if  that  is  not  security  enough,  then  farewell,  at
least,  to  all  possible  security  in  the  universe  I  (2)  Nor  is  this  a  promise  of  God
merely — one  among  many ;  it  is,  in  a  sort,  the  promise,  the  promise  pre-eminently,
of  Jehovah,  as  the  words  intimate,  "  eternal  life  which  God,  that  cannot  lie,  pro-
mised before  the  world  began."  So  we  read,  "  This  is  the  promise  that  He  hath
promised  us,  even  eternal  Hfe."  And  again  and  again  we  read  of  "  eternal  life,"  as
of  the  grand  central  blessing — "  I  give  unto  My  sheep  eternal  Ufe."  "  Thou  hast
given  Him  power  over  aU  flesh,  that  He  should  give  eternal  lite  to  as  many  as  Thou
hast  given  Him."  ""Whoso  eateth  My  flesh,  &c.,  hath  eternal  life."  (3)  Again,
the  promise  which  this  hope  is  built  on  was  made  by  God  "before  the  world  began."
See  the  immovable  stabiUty  which  lies  here.  For  this  world  is  one  of  ceaseless
fluctuations,  vicissitudes.  Had  the  promise  arisen  amidst  the  changes  and
emergencies  of  time,  then,  one  of  them  having  begotten  it,  another  might  perad-
venture  have  made  a  final  end  of  it.  But  it  was  anterior  to  them  all — made  in  full
foresight  of  them  all — made  an  eternity  before  them  all.  And  thus  none  of  them
can  in  any  wise  affect  its  stability.  (4)  The  promise  this  hope  is  built  on  is,  as  we
have  seen,  the  promise  of  a  covenant--a  promise  made  only  on  express  and  deter-
minate conditions.  And  own  that  these  have  been  to  the  uttermost  fulfilled,  it  has
become  matter  of  justice  no  less  than  truth — of  rectitude,  as  well  as  faithfulness.
Concluding  inferences : — 1.  See  the  absolute  security  of  the  ransomed  Church  of
God,  and  eaoh  living  member  of  it.  2.  Eemember  those  words  in  Romans,  "  There-
fore it  is  of  faith,  that  it  might  be  by  grace  ;  to  the  end  the  promise  might  be  sure
to  all  the  seed."  That  is  to  say,  there  is  an  open  entrance  for  all  of  us,  sinners,
into  the  whole  inviolable  security  of  this  covenant  of  promise,  by  faith  alone,  with-
out the  deeds  of  the  law — "  it  is  of  faith,  that  it  might  be  by  grace."  3.  I  end  with
the  "  hope  "  (daughter  of  the  faith) — the  undying  hope — the  "  hope  of  eternal
life,  which  God,  that  cannot  lie,  promised  before  the  world  began."  What  a  hope
this  for  storms  and  tempests — "anchor  of  the  soul  "  indeed,  "  sure  and  steadfast"  1
What  a  hope  for  afflictions,  to  sustain  under  them  ;  for  duties,  to  carry  through  them;
for  death  and  the  grave,  to  give  the  victory  over  them  I  (C.  J.  Brown,  DJ).)  The
grace  of  hope : — I.  Every  faithful  teacher  must  conceive  it  to  be  his  duty  to  draw

men's  HEABT8  FBOM  THINGS  BELOW  TO  THE  CONTEMPLATION  OF  THINOB  OF  AN  HIGHER  STRAIN,

and  from  seeking  the  things  tending  to  atemporal,  unto  such  as  belong  to  life  eternaU
1.  This  was  the  aim  of  all  the  men  of  God,  whose  faithfulness  the  Scriptures  hath  re-
oommended  unto  our  imitation.     All  that  pedagogy  during  the  law  was  only  to


OHAP.  t)  TITUS.  17

train  men  unto  Christ,  and  to  salvation  by  Him.  2.  All  other  professions  further
men  in  their  earthly  estates,  some  employed  about  the  health  of  the  body,  some
about  the  maintaining  of  men's  outward  rights,  some  about  the  framing  of  tender
minds  in  human  disciplines  and  sciences;  all  which  further  our  fellowship  and
society  among  men ;  only  this,  of  all  other  professions,  furthereth  men  in  their
heavenly  estate,  and  fitteth  them,  yea  maketh  up  for  them  their  fellowship  with
God  (Eph.  iv.  11, 12).  3.  Hereby  men  lay  a  sure  groundwork  of  profiting  men  in
godliness,  for  this  expectation  and  desire  of  life  eternal  once  wrought  in  the  heart,
it  easily  bringeth  men  to  the  denial  of  themselves,  both  in  bearing  the  cross  for
Christ,  as  Moses  esteemed  highly  of  the  rebuke  of  Christ — for  he  had  respect  unto
the  recompense  of  reward — as  also  in  stripping  themselves  of  profits,  pleasures,
advancements,  friends,  father,  wife,  children,  liberty,  yea,  of  life  itself.    II.  Tbuh

FAITH  NEVEB  GOES  ALONE,  BUT,  aS  a  queen,  IS  ATTENDED  WITH   MANT  OTHEB  GEACE8,  aS

knowledge,  love,  fear  of  God  ;  among  which  hope  here  mentioned  not  only  adorneth
and  beautifieth,  but  strengtheneth  and  fortifieth  the  believer,  and  as  a  helmet  of
salvation,  causeth  the  Christian  soldier  to  hold  out  in  repentance  and  obedience.

1.  The  original  of  it.  It  is  a  gift  of  God  and  obtained  by  prayer  as  faith  also  is,
whence  the  apostle  prayeth  that  the  God  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  would  give  the
Ephesians  to  know  what  the  hope  is  of  his  calling.  2.  The  subjects  in  whom  it  is.
The  saints,  for  as  the  practise  of  believers  before  Christ  to  wait  for  His  first  coming
in  hmnility,  as  we  read  of  Simeon,  Hannah,  and  many  others,  so  now  believers
as  constantly  wait  for  his  second  coming  and  the  comforts  of  it  (Bev.  xxii.  17).  3.
The  object  of  this  hope.  Things  to  come,  and,  namely,  after  the  resurrection,  life
eternal.  In  which  regard  the  apostle  caUeth  it  a  hope  laid  up  in  heaven,  which  ia
all  one  with  that  in  the  text,  hope  of  life  eternal,  unto  which  it  lifteth  up  the  heart
and  affections.  Where  the  excellency  of  the  grace  may  be  conceived  from  the  ex-
cellency of  the  object ;  it  is  not  conversant  about  momentary  and  fleeting  matters,
nor  insisteth  in  things  below,  but  about  durable  and  eternal  things  to  come ;  and
not  only  comforteth  the  soid  here  below  on  earth,  but  crowneth  it  hereafter  in
heaven.  4.  It  is  added  in  the  description  that  this  grace  of  hope  doth  firmly  and
not  waveringly  expect  this  eminent  object,  and  this  it  doth,  both  because  it  is
grounded  not  upon  man's  merit,  power,  or  promises,  but  upon  the  most  firm  pro-
mise of  God,  as  also  in  that  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  first  worketh  it,  doth  also  nourish
it,  yea,  and  so  sealeth  it  up  unto  the  heart  as  it  can  never  make  ashamed ;  it  may,
indeed,  be  tossed  and  shaken  with  many  kinds  of  temptations,  yet  in  the  patient
attending  upon  the  Lord  it  holdeth  out  and  faileth  not.  {T.  Taylor,  D.D.)
Eternal  life : — I.  What  is  that  etebnal  life  which  is  the  object  of  faith  and  ex-
pectation. Complete  deliverance  from  all  evil,  and  the  positive  and  perfect  enjoy-
ment of  all  good  for  ever.    II.  Wnr  do  we  believe  in  it?    1.  God  has  promised  it.

2.  Christ  has  actually  taken  possession  of  it.  3.  The  Holy  Spirit,  given  to  them
that  believe,  is  expressly  said  to  be  the  earnest  and  first-fruits  of  eternal  life.  4.  The
real  Christian  has  an  undoubted  and  undeceiving  foretaste  of  this  blessedness.  HI.
The  influence  which  oub  belief  of  this  gbeat  tbuth  should  have  upon  oub
bpibit  and  conduct.  1.  It  should  influence  us  to  a  due  consideration  of,  and  a
diligent  preparation  for,  the  eternity  to  which  we  are  destined.  2.  It  should  in-
fluence us  to  a  decided  consecration  of  ourselves  to  that  blessed  Master  whose  ser-
vice on  earth  is  connected  with  so  great  and  so  substantial  a  reward  in  heaven.  3.
It  should  induce  us  to  a  cheerful  renunciation  of  the  world  as  our  portion.  4.  It
should  influence  us  to  cheerful  and  patient  suffering  under  aU  the  ills  which  can
possibly  crowd  upon  us  in  the  present  state  of  existence.  6.  It  should  influence  us
to  indefatigable  diligence  in  seeking  the  salvation  of  the  human  soul.  6.  Lastly,
what  comfort  may  not  this  subject  inspire  in  the  prospect  of  our  departure  hence,
our  descent  into  the  cold  grave,  and  our  introduction  into  that  state,  of  which  we
have  feebly  enunciated  the  reality.  (Q.  Clayton,  M.A.)  The  inspiration  of  hope :
— "  Look  up  I "  thundered  the  captain  of  a  vessel,  as  his  boy  grew  giddy  while
gazing  from  the  topmast, — "  look  up  I "  The  boy  looked  up,  and  returned  in  safety.
Young  man,  look  up,  and  you  will  succeed.  Never  look  down  and  despair.  Leave
dangers  uncared  for,  and  push  on.  If  yon  falter,  you  lose.  Do  right,  and  trust  in
God.  God,  tliat  cannot  lie. — What  God  cannot  do : — Truth  once  reigned  supreme
upon  our  globe,  and  then  earth  was  Paradise.  Man  knew  no  sorrow  while  he  was
ignorant  of  falsehood.  Falsehood  is  everywhere;  it  is  entertained  both  by  the
lowest  and  the  highest ;  it  permeates  all  society.  In  the  so-called  religious  world,
which  should  be  as  the  Holy  of  HoUes,  here  too,  the  Ue  has  insinuated  itself.
We  have  everywhere  to  battle  with  falsehood,  and  if  we  are  to  bless  the  world*

2


18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  i.

we  xanet  confront  it  with  sturdy  face  and  zealons  spirit.  God's  purpose  is  to
drive  the  lie  out  of  the  world,  and  be  this  your  purpose  and  mine.  After  wandering
over  the  sandy  desert  of  deceit,  how  pleasant  is  it  to  reach  oar  text,  and  feel  that
one  spot  at  least  is  verdant  with  eternal  truth.  Blessed  be  Thou,  0  God,  for  Thou
canst  not  lie.  I.  The  tbuth  op  the  text.  1.  God  ia  not  subject  to  those  inBrmitiea
which  lead  ns  into  falsehood.  You  and  I  are  such  that  we  can  know  in  the  heart,
and  yet  with  the  tongue  deny ;  but  God  is  one  and  indivisible ;  God  is  light,  and  in
Him  is  no  darkness  at  all ;  with  Him  is  no  variableness,  neither  shadow  of  turning.
2.  The  scriptural  idea  of  God  forbids  that  He  should  lie.  The  very  word  "  God  "
oomprebendeth  everything  which  is  good  and  great.  Admit  the  lie,  and  to  us  at
once  there  would  be  nothing  but  the  black  darkness  of  atheism  for  ever.  I  could
neither  love,  worship,  nor  obey  a  lying  God.  3.  God  is  too  wise  to  lie.  Falsehood
is  the  expedient  of  a  fool.  4.  And  the  lie  is  the  method  of  the  little  and  the  mean.
Ton  know  that  a  great  man  does  not  lie ;  a  good  man  can  never  be  false.  Put  good-
ness and  greatness  together,  and  a  lie  is  altogether  incongruous  to  the  character.
Now  God  is  too  great  to  need  the  lie,  and  too  good  to  wish  to  do  such  a  thing ;  both
His  greatness  and  His  goodness  repel  the  thought.  5.  What  motive  could  God
have  for  lying  ?  When  a  man  lies  it  is  that  he  may  gain  something,  but  "  the  cattle
on  a  thousand  hills  "  are  God's,  and  all  the  beasts  of  the  forest,  and  all  the  flocks
of  the  meadows.  Mines  of  inexhaustible  riches  are  His,  and  treasures  of  infinite
power  and  wisdom.  He  cannot  gain  aught  by  untruth,  for  "  the  earth  is  the
Lord's,  and  the  fulness  thereof  "  ;  wherefore,  then,  should  He  lie?  6.  Moreover,
we  may  add  to  all  this  the  experience  of  men  with  regard  to  God.  It  has  been  evi-
dent enough  in  all  ages  that  God  cannot  lie.  II.  The  breadth  of  meaninq  ik  the
TEXT.  When  we  are  told  in  Scripture  that  God  cannot  lie,  there  is  usually  associ-
ated with  the  idea  the  thought  of  immutabihty.  As  for  instance — *'  He  is  not  a
man  that  He  should  lie,  nor  the  son  of  man  that  He  should  repent. "  We  under-
stand by  it,  not  only  that  He  cannot  say  what  is  untrue,  but  that  having  said
something  which  is  true  He  never  changes  from  it,  and  does  not  by  any  possibility
alter  His  purpose  or  retract  His  word.  This  is  very  consolatory  to  the  Christian,
that  whatever  God  has  said  in  the  Divine  purpose  is  never  changed.  The  decrees
of  God  were  not  written  upon  sand,  but  upon  the  eternal  brass  of  His  unchangeable
nature.  There  is  no  shadow  of  a  lie  upon  anything  which  God  thinks,  or  speaks,
or  does.  He  cannot  lie  in  His  prophecies.  How  solemnly  true  have  they  been  !
Ask  the  wastes  of  Nineveh ;  turn  to  the  mounds  of  Babylon  ;  let  the  traveller  speak
concerning  Idumea  and  Petra.  Has  God's  curse  been  an  idle  word?  No,  not
in  one  single  case.  As  God  is  true  in  His  prophecies,  so  is  He  faithful  to  His  pro-
mises. His  threatenings  are  true  also.  Ah  I  sinner,  thou  mayst  go  on  in  thy  ways
for  many  a  day,  but  thy  sin  shall  find  thee  out  at  the  last.    III.  How  we  ought  to

ACT  TOWAEDS  GoD  IF  IT  BE  TBUE  THAT   He   IS  A   "  GoD   THAT  CANNOT  LIE."      1.    If  it  be

60  that  God  cannot  lie,  then  it  must  be  the  natural  duty  of  all  His  creatures  to
believe  Him.  If  I  doubt  God,  as  far  as  I  am  able  I  rob  Him  of  His  honour ;  I  am,
in  fact,  living  an  open  traitor  and  a  sworn  rebel  against  God,  upon  whom  I  heap
the  daily  insult  of  daring  to  doubt  Him.  2.  If  we  were  absolutely  sure  that  there
lived  on  earth  a  person  who  could  not  lie,  how  would  you  treat  him  ?  Well,  I  think
you  would  cultivate  his  acquaintance.  3.  If  we  knew  a  man  who  could  not  lie,  we
should  believe  him,  methinks,  without  an  oath.  To  say  "  He  has  promised  and
will  perform ;  He  has  said  that  whosoever  believeth  in  Christ  is  not  condemned ;  I
do  believe  in  Christ,  and  therefore  I  am  not  condemned,"  this  is  genuine  faith.  4.
Again,  if  we  knew  a  man  who  could  not  lie,  we  should  believe  him  in  the  teeth  of
fifty  witnesses  the  other  way.  Why,  we  should  say,  "  they  may  say  what  they  will,
but  they  can  lie."  This  shows  us  that  we  ought  to  believe  God  in  the  teeth  of  every
contradiction.  Even  if  outward  providence  should  come  to  you,  and  say  that  God
has  forsaken  you,  that  is  only  one ;  and  even  if  fifty  trials  should  all  say  that  God
has  forsaken  you,  yet,  as  God  says,  "I  will  never  leave  thee,  nor  forsake  thee,"
which  will  you  take — the  one  promise  of  God  who  cannot  lie,  or  the  fifty  outward
providences  which  you  cannot  interpret  ?  6.  If  a  man  were  introduced  to  us,  and
we  were  certain  that  he  could  not  lie,  we  should  believe  everything  he  said,  how-
ever incredible  it  might  appear  to  us  at  first  sight  to  be.  It  does  seem  very  incredible
at  first  sight  that  God  should  take  a  sinner,  full  of  sin,  and  forgive  all  his  iniquities
in  one  moment,  simply  and  only  upon  the  ground  of  the  sinner  believing  in  Christ.
But  supposing  it  should  seem  too  good  to  be  true,  yet,  since  you  have  it  upon  the
testimony  of  One  who  '*  cannot  lie,"  I  pray  you  believe  it.  (C.  H.  Spirgeon.)
Lessons : — 1.  If  God  cannot  lie,  then  whatsoever  His  ministers  promise  or  threaten


OHAP.  I.}  TITUS.  19

from  Him,  and  out  of  Hia  Word,  is  above  all  exception ;  seeing  He  hath  spoken  it,
who  cannot  lie,  deceive,  or  be  deceived ;  which  should  stir  up  every  man  to  give
glory  unto  God  (as  Abraham  did)  by  sealing  to  His  truth — that  is,  by  believing  and
applying  unto  his  own  soul  every  word  that  proceedeth  out  of  the  mouth  of  God,
for  whosoever  thus  receiveth  His  testimony  hath  sealed  that  God  is  true,  than
which  no  greater  glory  can  be  given  unto  Him.  Whereas  not  to  believe  Him  on
His  Word  is  as  high  a  dishonour  as  any  man  can  cast  upon  Him,  for  it  is  to  give
God  the  Ue  ;  he  that  beUeveth  not  hath  made  Him  a  liar,  which  in  manners  and
civility  we  could  not  offer  to  our  equal,  and  which  even  a  mean  man  would  scorn  to
put  up  at  our  hands.  2.  Seeing  God  cannot  lie  let  every  one  of  us  labour  to  express
this  virtue  of  God — first,  and  especially  the  minister  in  his  place,  seeing  he  speaketh
from  God ;  nay,  God  speaketh  by  him,  he  must  therefore  deliver  true  sayings
worthy  of  all  men  to  be  received,  that  he  may  say  in  his  own  heart  that  which
Paul  spake  of  himself,  "  I  speak  the  truth  in  Christ,  I  lie  not,"  and  justify  that  of
His  doctrine  which  Paul  did  of  his  writings,  "  the  things  which  now  I  write  unto
you,  behold  I  witness  before  God  that  I  lie  not."  {T.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Ood  cannot
lie : — I.  Am  abqument  fob  tbust.  God,  in  all  views  of  His  character,  may  be  safely
trusted.  He  is  wise,  mighty,  good,  and  faithful.  H.  Ak  abouuknt  fob  tbuth.
Ood,  who  cannot  lie  Himself,  hates  lying  in  others.  Be  truthful,  for  God  cannot
be  deceived.  (J.  Edmond,  D.D.)  Promised  before  the  world  'begsJL—AU  tht
promiset,  promises  to  Christ : — St.  Paul  speaks  only  of  the  promise  of  "  eternal  life,"
but  you  will  admit  at  once  that  such  a  promise  must  be  regarded  as  including  every
other.  In  promising  '*  eternal  life,"  God  is  to  be  considered  as  promising  whatso-
ever is  required  for  the  attaining  eternal  life.  The  promise  of  eternal  life  is  a  sort
of  summary  of  all  the  promises  ;  for  every  other  promise  has  to  do  with  something
which  is  helpful  to  us  in  our  course ;  with  those  assistances  in  duty,  or  those
supports  under  trial,  without  which  eternal  life  can  never  be  reached.  To
whom,  then,  did  He  make  the  promise  T  If  He  promised  before  the  world
began,  He  must  have  promised  before  there  were  any  human  beings,  with  whom  to
enter  into  covenant.  If  the  promise  were  then  made,  the  two  contracting  parties
mast  have  been  then  in  existence  or  intercourse ;  whereas  there  was  then  certainly
no  Church,  no  man,  to  form  a  covenant  with  the  Almighty.  There  can  be  little
debate  that  it  must  have  been  to  Christ,  the  second  Person  in  the  ever-blessed
Trinity,  that  God  made  the  "  promise  of  eternal  life  before  the  world  began."
•'  Before  the  world  began  "  the  apostasy  of  our  race  was  contemplated  and  provided
for  in  the  councils  of  heaven.  A  solemn  covenant  was  entered  into  between  the
Persons  of  the  Trinity,  each  undertaking  an  amazing  part  in  the  plan  for  our  re-
demption ;  and  though  the  Mediator  had  not  then  assumed  human  form.  He  already
acted  as  the  Head  or  Bepresentative  of  the  Church,  engaging  to  offer  Himself  as  a
sacrifice  for  sin,  and  receiving  in  return  the  promise  that  the  sacrifice  should  be
accepted,  and  should  prevail  to  the  full  salvation  of  all  such  as  believe  on  His  name.
Eternal  life  was  promised  to  Christ,  on  behalf  of  the  Church ;  it  was  promised  to
the  Church  for  the  sake  of  Christ ;  or,  rather,  it  was  promised  to  Christ,  as  that  re-
sult of  His  obedience  and  endurance  in  the  flesh,  which  He  might  bestow  on  all
those  who  should  have  faith  in  the  propitiation.  But  whilst  this  seems  sufficient
to  explain  the  strangeness  of  our  text,  you  can  hardly  fail  to  observe  that  the  ex-
planation involves  a  great  general  doctrine  or  truth ;  even  the  same  doctrine  or
truth  which  is  elsewhere  announced  by  St.  Paul  when,  speaking  of  Christ,  he  says
that  "all  the  promises  of  God  are  in  Him  yea  and  amen";  in  other  words,  that
God  has  promised  nothing  to  man,  but  in  Christ  or  on  account  of  Christ,  and  that
all  that  He  hath  thus  promised  hath  on  His  account  been  fulfilled.  In  order  to
the  clearing  and  understanding  of  this,  you  are  to  observe  that  Adam,  as  the  father
of  all  men,  stood  federally  in  their  place.  And  when  the  whole  race  had  thus  fallen,
in  the  person  of  their  representative,  there  were  no  blessings  and  no  mercies  for
which  man  could  look.  Human  nature  had  become  so  necessarily  and  entirely
exposed  to  Divine  vengeance  that  there  was  no  room  whatsoever  for  promise.  There-
fore, if  He  promised  at  all,  it  could  only  have  been  in  virtue  of  His  having  covenanted
with  another  Head ;  with  Oue  who  had  put  the  race  which  He  represented  into
such  a  moral  position,  that  it  would  no  longer  be  at  variance  with  the  Divine
character,  to  extend  to  them  the  offices  of  friendship.  Because  it  was  His  own  Son
who  had  undertaken  to  be  this  Head  of  humanity,  and  because  it  was  therefore  cer-
tain that  the  required  ransom  would  be  paid  to  the  last  farthing,  God  could
immediately  open  to  man  the  fountain  of  His  benevolence,  and  deal  with  man  as  a
being  who  stood  within  the  possibilities  of  forgiveness  and  immortality.    But  if


so  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHA».  i.

this  be  the  true  account  why,  after  his  transgression,  man  could  still  be  the  object
of  the  promises  of  God,  it  follows  distinctly  that,  according  to  the  doctrine  of  our
text,  these  promises,  however  announced  to  the  sinner  at  or  after  the  time  of  his
Bin,  were  promises  originally  made  to  another;  and  that,  too,  "before  the  world
began."  There  could  have  been  no  promises,  it  appears,  had  not  "the  Word  which
was  in  the  beginning  with  God,  and  which  was  God,"  previously  engaged  to  become
the  Surety  for  the  beings  who  had  just  woven  death  and  woe  and  shame  into  their
inheritance.  Assuredly  it  follows  from  this  that  whatsoever  is  now  promised  to
man  is  not  promised  to  man  in  himself  but  to  man  in  Lis  representative.  It  must
have  been  promised  to  Christ  before  it  was  promised  to  man ;  or  rather,  the  pio-
mise  must  have  been  made  unto  Christ  though  the  thing  promised  should  be  given
to  man.  Fix  not,  then,  as  the  origin  of  a  promise,  the  occasion  when  the  promise
was  clothed  in  human  speech  ;  associate  not  the  making  of  that  promise  with  the
human  being  to  whom  it  was  first  uttered.  The  promise  was  made  before  man  was
created  ;  the  promise  was  given  to  a  higher  than  man,  to  a  higher  than  any  finite
being.  And  when  you  have  taken,  as  you  justly  may,  all  the  promises  of  God,  and
gathered  them  into  the  one  emphatic  summary,  the  "promise  of  eternal  life,"  yon
are  not  to  say,  •'  This  clause  of  the  promise  was  made  to  Adam,  this  to  Moses,  this
to  David,  this  to  Paul "  ;  you  are  to  say,  generally,  of  the  whole,  with  the  apostle
in  our  text,  that  "God,  which  cannot  lie,  promised  it" — and  to  whom  could  He
then  promise  but  to  Christ  ? — "  promised  it  before  the  world  began."  Now  we  have
been  so  occupied  with  the  great  doctrine  of  our  text,  with  the  fact  of  all  God's  pro-
mises being  promised  to  Christ,  and  to  us  only  for  the  sake  of  Christ,  and  in  virtue
of  His  merits,  that  we  have  made  no  reference  to  what  St.  Paul  here  says  of  God's
truthfulness — "  God,  that  cannot  lie."  He  uses  a  similar  expression  in  his  Epistle
to  the  Hebrews:  "  That  by  two  immutable  things,  in  which  it  was  impossible  for
God  to  lie,  we  might  have  a  strong  consolation."  It  is  one  of  Satan's  most  frequent
and  dangerous  devices,  to  put  before  you  your  unworthiness,  and  to  strive  to  make
this  hide  the  rich  provisions  of  grace.  It  looks  so  like  genuine  humility,  to  think
oneself  unworthy  to  have  a  promise  made  good,  that  the  Christian  will  almost  fancy
it  a  duty  to  encourage  the  suspicion  which  the  devil  has  injected.  But  you  are  to
remember  that  your  own  unworthiness  has  nothing  whatsoever  to  do  either  with  the
making  or  the  performing  the  promise.  God  did  not  originally  make  the  promise  to
you  ;  He  made  it  to  His  own  dear  Son,  even  to  Christ,  "  before  the  world  began  "  ;
and  the  performing  the  promise,  the  making  good  His  own  Word,  is  this  to  be  con-
tingent on  anything  excellent  in  yourselves  ?  Nay,  it  is  for  His  own  sake,  for  the
glory  of  His  own  great  name,  that  He  accomplishes  His  gracious  declaration.  He
18  faithful.  He  '*  cannot  lie  " ;  heaven  and  earth  may  pass  away,  but  not  one  jot
nor  one  tittle  can  fail  of  all  which  He  hath  covenanted  with  Christ,  and,  through
Christ,  with  the  meanest  of  His  followers.     (H.  Melvill,  B.D.)

Ver.  8.    But  hath  In  due  times  manifested  His  Word  through  preaoblng. —

A  timely  revelation : — I.  A  timely  revelation — the  purpose  of  salvation  through
Christ  Jesus.  H.  A  baceed  trust — to  preach  the  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ.
ni.  A  DrviNE  COMMISSION — to  preach  "  according  to  the  commandment  of  God."
{F.  Wagstaff.)  Salvation  revealed  : — I.  That  salvation  is  more  clearly  revealed
than  in  former  ages  appeareth  in  that  all  the  time  of  the  law  was  but  the
infancy  and  nonage  of  the  Church,  which  then  was  as  a  child  under  tutors
and  governors;  and  as  a  child  was  initiated  in  rudiments  and  elements  of
Christian  religion,  and  endued  with  a  small  mensure  of  knowledge  and  faith,
because  the  time  was  not  come  wherein  the  mysteries  of  Christ  were  unfolded.
n.  The  Lord  (who  doth  not  only  by  His  wisdom  order  His  greatest  works,
but  every  circumstance  of  them)  effecteth  all  His  promises  and  purposes  in  the
due  season  of  them.  HI.  The  manifestation  of  sulvation  is  to  be  sought  for  in
the  preaching  of  the  Word.  Which  point  is  plain,  in  that  the  preaching  of  the
Word  is  an  ordinance  of  God.  1.  To  make  Christ  known,  in  whose  naine  alone
salvation  is  to  be  had.  2.  To  beget  and  confirm  faith  in  the  heart,  by  which  alone,
as  by  an  hand,  we  appreh'  nd  and  apj)ly  Him  with  His  merits  to  our  salvation.
(T.  Taylor,  D.D.)  God's  Word  wanifested  throvf/h  preaching: — I.  The  mani-
festation OF  God's  Word.  This  was  gradually  made  to  men — to  all  nations,  both
Jews  and  Gentiles — in  general,  and  to  particular  places.  II.  The  instrumentality
EMPLOYED  TOR  THAT  MANIFESTATION.  We  should  imitate  the  simplicity,  zeal  and
affection  disjilayed  in  the  apostle's  preaching.  {W.  lAtcy.)  Preaching  in  God's
name  : — An  American  gentleman  once  went  to  hear  Whitefield  for  the  first  time,  ia


CHAP,  l]  TITUS.  81

consequence  of  the  report  he  heard  of  his  preaching  powers.     The  day  was  rainy,
the  congregation  comparatively  thin,  and  the  beginning  of  the  sermon  rather  heavy.
Our  American  friend  began  to  say  to  himself,  "  This  man  is  no  great  wonder,  after
all."    He  looked  round,  and  saw  the  congregation  as  little  interested  as  himself.
One  old  man  in  front  of  the  pulpit  had  fallen  asleep.    But  all  at  once  Whitefield
stopped  short     His  countenance  changed.     And  then  he  suddenly  broke  forth  in
an  altered  tone :  "If  I  had  come  to  speak  to  you  in  my  own  name,  you  might  well
rest  your  elbows  on  your  knees,  and  your  heads  on  your  hands,  and  sleep ;  and  once
in  a  while  look  up,  and  say.  What  is  this  babbler  talking  of  ?    But  I  have  not  come
to  you  in  my  own  name.     No  !    I  have  come  to  you  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  of
Hosts"  (here  he  brought  down  his  hand  and  foot  with  a  force  that  made  the
building  ring),  ••  and  I  must,  and  will  be  heard."     The  congregation  started.     The
old  man  woke  up  at  once.    "  Ay,  ay  I  "  cried  Whitefield,  fixing  his  eyes  on  him,  "  I
have  waked  you  up,  have  I?    I  meant  to  do  it.    I  am  not  come  here  to  preach  to
stocks  and  stones.    I  have  come  to  you  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  God  of  Hosts,  and
I  must,  and  will,  have  an  audience."    The  hearers  were  stripped  of  their  apathy  at
once.    Every  word  of  the  sermon  was  attended  to.    And  the  American  gentleman
never  forgot  it.     (J.  C.  Eyle.)         The  best  ally  in  Christian  work  : — Frederick  the
Great  was  once  in  company  with  a  number  of  French  wits,  and  there  was  a  brave
Scotchman  also  at  the  table,  who  was  the  ambassador  of  England.     Frederick  the
Great  was  then  contemplating  a  war,  in  which  he  would  be  dependent  upon  English
subsidies,  and  by  and  by  the  ambassador,  as  he  listened  to  the  king  and  these
French  wits  making  fun  of  religion,  and  speaking  of  its  certain  and  sudden  decay,
said,  "  By  the  help  of  God  England  will  stand  by  Prussia  in  the  war."    Frederick
turned  round  and  said,  rather  sneeringly,  "By  the  help  of  Godl    I  did  not  know
that  you  had  an  ally  of  that  name."    But  the  Scotchman  turned  round  to  the  king,
and  said,  "  May  it  please  your  majesty,  that  is  the  only  ally  England  has  to  whom
England  does  not  send  subsidies."    Now,  let  me  say,  that  we  as  a  Christian  Church
and  as  a  missionary  society  have  an  ally  of  that  name.    Our  ally  is  the  Lord  of
Hosts,  and  it  is  because  His  name  has  been  upon  our  banners  that  we  have
succeeded  in  the  past.    (T.  H.  Hunt.)        Which  is  committed  unto  me,  according
to  the  commandment  of  God  our  Saviour. — The  Christian  ministry : — I.  Every
minister  called  by  God  is  one  op  Chbist's  committees,  unto  whom  He  betrusteth
now  after  His  departure  the  care  and  oversight  of  His  spouse,  who  is  dearer  unto
Him  than  His  own  life,  appeareth  in  that  they  are  called  stewards  of  this  great
house,  having  received  the  keys  to  open  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  and  to  distribute
to  the  necessity  of  their  fellow  servants ;  chosen  vessels,  as  Paul,  not  to  contain,
but  to  carry  the  pearl  and  the  treasure  of  the  kingdom ;  feeders,  as  Peter,  husband-
men, to  whom  the  vineyard  is  let  out  till  His  return.     1.  The  honour  of  a  minister
is  faithfulness  in  the  diligent  and  careful  discharging  himself  of  that  trust  com-
mitted unto  him  ;  the  principal  part  of  which  repose  stand  eth  in  the  faithful  dis
pensing  of  Christ's  legacies  to  His  Church,  according  to  His  own  testament;  which
as  it  is  his  duty  enjoined  (1  Cor.  iv.  2),  so  is  it  his  crown,  his  joy,  his  glory,  that  by
his  faithful  pains  he  hath  procured  the  welfare  of  his  people,  and  bringeth  with  it
a  great  recompense  of  reward ;  for  if  he  that  showeth  himself  a  good  and  faithful
servant  in  little  things,  shall  be  ruler  over  much;  what  may  he  expect  that  is
faithful  in  the  greatest  ?    2.  The  ministry  is  no  calling  of  ease,  but  a  matter  of
great  charge  ;  nor  contemptible,  as  many  contemptuous  persons  think  it  too  base  a
calling  for  their  children ;  but  honourable,  near  unto  God,  a  calling  committing
nnto  men  great  matters,  which  not  only  the  angels  themselves  have  dispensed
sundry  times,  but  even  the  Lord  of  the  angels,  Jesus  Christ  Himself,  all  the  while
He  ministered  upon  earth  ;  the  honour  of  which  calling  is  such,  as  those  who  are
employed  in  the  duties  of  it,  are  called  not  only  angels,  but  co-workers  with  Christ
in  the  salvation  of  men.     II.  Whosoever  would  find  comfort  in  themselves,  or
clear  and  justify  their  callings  to  others,  or  do  good  in  that  place  of  the  body
wherein  they  are  set,  must  be  able  to  prove  that  they  are  not  intruders,  B0t
PRESSED  BY  THIS  CALLING  AND  COMMANDMENT  OF  GoD  :  that  as  Paul  performed  every
duty  in  the  Church  by  virtue  of  his  extraordinary  calling,  so  they  by  virtue  of  their
ordinary.    For  can  any  man  think  that  a  small  advantage  to  himself,  which  our
apostle  doth  so  dwell  upon  in  his  own  person,  and  that  in  every  epistle,  making  his
calling  known  to  be  committed  unto  him,  not  of  men,  nor  by  men,  but  by  Jesus
Christ  ?    (See  Gal.  i.  1,  ii.  7 ;  Eph.  iii.  2 ;  1  Thess.  ii.  4.)     1.  Let  no  man  presume
to  take  upon  him  any  office  in  the  Church  uncalled ;  no  man  taketh  this  honour  to
himself.     Christ  Himself  must  be  appointed  of  His  Father.     2.  Let  none  content


21  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [cha».  I,

himseli  with  the  oalling  of  man  separsted  from  God's  calling ;  for  this  was  the  guis«
of  the  false  apostles  against  whom  our  apostle  opposeth  himself  and  calling  almost
everywhere,  who  were  called  of  men,  but  not  of  God.  3.  In  all  other  callings  let  men
be  assured  they  have  God's  warrant,  both  in  the  lawfulness  of  the  callings  themselves,
and  in  their  holy  exercise  of  them  ;  passing  through  them  daily  in  the  exercise  of
faitii  and  repentance,  not  forgetting  daily  to  sanctify  them  by  the  Word  and  prayer.

in.    MlNIST£BS  UAY  AMD  OUOHI  TO  BE  MOBE   OB  LESS  IN  THE   COMUEKDATION  OF  THEIB

CALLING,  as  the  nature  and  necessity  of  the  people  to  whom  they  vrrite  or  speak  do
require.  1.  As  the  apostle  here  magnifieth  his  authority  in  that  he  is  a  servant  of
God.  2.  An  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ.  3.  That  he  received  his  apostleship  by
commission  and  commandment  of  Christ  Himself ;  and  4.  All  this  while  hath  by
sundry  other  arguments  amplified  the  excellency  of  his  calling :  the  reason  of  aU
which  is  not  so  much  to  persuade  Titus,  who  was  before  sufficiently  persuaded  of
it ;  but  partly  for  the  Cretians'  sake,  that  they  might  the  rather  entertain  this
doctrine  so  commended  in  the  person  of  the  bringer ;  and  partly  because  many  in
this  isle  lifted  up  themselves  against  him  and  Titus,  as  men  thrusting  in  their
sickles  into  other  men's  fields  too  busily ;  or  else  if  they  had  a  calling,  yet  taking
too  much  upon  them,  both  in  correcting  disorders  and  establishing  such  novelties
among  them  as  best  Uked  them ;  so  as  here  being  to  deal  against  false  apostles,
perverse  people,  and  erroneous  doctrines  he  is  more  prohx  and  lofty  in  his  tit^e ;
otherwise,  where  he  met  not  with  such  strong  opposition,  he  is  more  sparing  in  his
titles,  as  in  the  Epistles  to  the  Colossians,  Thessalonians,  <&c.    (T.  Taylor,  D.D.)

Yet.  4.  To  Titus,  mine  own  son  after  the  common  faith. — Lessons : — I.  A  spibitual
BELATiONSHiP  (Cf.  Acts  XV. ;  Gal.  ii.  2;  2  Cor.  ii.  13,  vii.  6,  &c.)  II.  A  thbeefold
BLESSING.  1.  ''Grace,"  the  source  of  om-  redemption.  2.  "  Mercy,"  displayed  in
our  redemption.  3.  "  Peace,"  the  result  of  our  redemption.  III.  The  boubce  and
UEDiUM  OF  THE  BLESsiNO.  God  the  Father  from  whom  it  comes,  and  Christ  the  Son
through  whom  it  comes.  {F.  Wagstaff.)  Spiritual  parentage  : — I.  That  ministebs
ABE  spibitual  FATHERS  TO  BEGET  CHiLDBEN  TO  GoD,  appearoth  in  that  the  Hebrew
phrase  not  only  styleth  them  by  the  name  of  fathers.  1.  Who  indeed  are  so
properly  by  the  way  of  blood  and  natural  generation  ?  2.  Neither,  only  those  who
are  in  a  right  descending  line,  though  never  so  far  off.  3.  Neither,  only  those  who
adopt  others  into  the  room  and  place  of  children.  4.  But  those  also  that  are  in  the
room  of  fathers,  either  generally,  as  all  superiors,  in  age,  place,  or  gifts ;  or  more
BpeciaUy  such  as  by  whose  counsel,  wisdom,  tenderness  and  care,  we  are  directed  as
by  fathers ;  who  in  these  offices  and  not  in  themselves  (for  sometimes  they  be  inferiors
otherwise)  become  fathers  unto  us.  Thus  was  Joseph  an  inferior,  called  a  father  of
Pharaoh ;  that  is,  a  counsellor.  Job,  for  his  tenderness  and  care,  called  a  father
of  the  poor.  Scholars  of  the  prophets,  called  sons  of  the  prophets.  Elisha,  saith
of  Elijah,  my  father,  my  father ;  and  Jubal  was  the  father  of  all  that  play  on
haurps.  But  much  more  properly  is  the  minister  caUed  the  father  of  such  as  he
converts  unto  the  faith,  because  they  beget  men  unto  God,  as  Paul  did  Onesimus  in
his  bonds,  in  which  regeneration  the  seed  is  that  heavenly  grace  whereby  a  Divine
nature  is  framed,  the  instrument  by  which  it  is  conveyed,  is  the  Word  of  God  in  the
ministry  of  it.  Now  if  any  be  desirous  to  carry  themselves  towards  their  ministers,
as  children  towards  their  parents,  they  must  perform  unto  them  these  duties.
1.  They  must  give  them  double  honour  (1  Tim.  v.  17),  reverencing  their  persons,
their  places.  2.  They  must  partake  in  all  their  goods,  as  the  Levites  in  the  law
did ;  yea,  if  need  be,  lay  down  their  necks  for  their  sakes  (Bom.  xvi,  4)  in  way  of
thankfulness.  3.  No  accusations  must  be  received  against  them  under  two  or  three
witnesses;  a  dutiful  child  will  not  hear,  much  less  believe,  evil  reports  of  his  father.
4.  In  doubtful  cases  of  conscience  resort  unto  them  for  counsel,  as  children  to  their
father.  6.  Obey  them  in  all  godly  precepts,  endure  their  severity,  be  guided  by
their  godly  directions,  as  those  who  have  the  oversight  of  souls  committed  unto
them,  even  as  the  child  ingeniously  imitateth  and  obeyeth  his  father.     II.  Faith  ib

ONE  AND  THE  SAME   IN  ALL  THE   ELECT,  AND   IS  THEBEFORE  CALLED   THE  COMMON  FAITH

(Eph.  iv,  5),  there  is  one  faith  which  is  true.  Which  grace  is  but  one,  and  common
to  all  the  elect,  notwithstanding  there  be  diverse  measures  and  degrees  of  it  peculiar
to  some.  Hence  the  apostle  Peter  calleth  it  the  like  precious  faith.  1.  In  respeot
of  the  kind  of  it  being  a  justifying  faith,  by  which  all  that  believe  have  power  to
be  the  song  of  God  (John  i.  12  ;  Gal.  iii.  26).  2.  Of  the  object  of  it,  which  is  on«
Christ,  the  same  yesterday,  and  to-day,  and  for  ever ;  who  dwelleth  in  the  hearts  of
•Tery  believer  (Eph.  iii.  17),  whom,  although  the  fathers  of  former  ages  beheld  Him


CBAi.  I.]  TITUS.  23

to  come,  and  the  latter  ages  already  come ;  yet  both  rejoice  in  seeing  His  day  with
the  same  eye  of  faith  :  the  difference  is,  that  one  seeth  it  somewhat  more  clearly
than  the  other.  3.  Of  the  same  end  of  it,  which  is  salvation,  common  to  all
believers;  called  therefore  by  Jude  the  common  salvation.  (T.  Taylor,  D.D.)
Spiritual  children: — Calvin's  three  children  all  died  in  infancy.  Of  the  last  he
wrote  to  a  friend  :  "  The  Lord  gave  me  another  son,  and  the  Lord  hath  taken  him
away ;  but  have  I  not  thousands  of  children  in  the  faith  of  Christ  ?  "  Grace,  mercy,
and  peace. — Grace  bringing  peace : — I.  The  grace  of  God  is  the  whole  sufticienct
OF  His  people.  The  first,  middle,  and  last  cause  of  every  good  thing  conveyed  unto
them,  or  issuing  from  them :  not  once  did  the  Lord  enforce  this  point  upon  His
own  people,  teaching  them  by  things  temporal,  their  spiritual  estate  and  condition
(Deut.  vii.  7).  II.  Only  they  that  abe  by  gkace  and  mercy  accepted  op  God  have
XHEiB  PORTION  IN  THIS  PEACE  HERE  MENTIONED.  1.  Peace,  that  is  all  kind  of
prospeiity,  is  promised  only  to  the  godly.  They  shall  prosper  in  everythiug ;  and
the  apostle  pronounceth  it,  only  upon  the  Israel  of  God.  2.  It  is  accordingly
bestowed  upon  those  only  that  are  justified  by  faith ;  seeing  they  only  have  peace
with  God,  which  is  the  principal  part  of  it.  3.  To  show  it  to  be  a  fruit  of  God's
grace,  sundry  phrases  in  Scripture  might  be  alleged ;  as  that  it  is  called  the  "peace
of  God,"  and  that  God  is  called  the  "  God  of  peace  " ;  as  also  that  difference  which  is
worthy  to  be  observed  between  the  salutations  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament.  In
the  Old  Testament,  grace  and  peace  are  never  joined.  The  ordinary  form  of
salutation  was,  "  peace  be  with  thee,"  "  peace  be  to  this  house,"  "  go  in  peace  " ;  but
the  apostles,  after  the  mystery  of  redemption  was  revealed  and  perfected  before  the
ordinary  salutation,  prefix  this  word — grace,  or  mercy,  or  both  ;  that  as  they  are
never  joined  in  the  Old  Testament,  so  are  they  never  separated  in  the  New,  to  show
that  we  cannot  look  to  have  one  of  them  alone,  or  separate  them,  no  more  than  we
can  safely  sunder  the  branch  from  the  root,  or  the  stream  from  the  fountain.  (T.
Taylor,  D.D.)  Peace  through  Christ: — ^A  minister  was  asked  to  visit  a  poor  dying
woman.  The  messenger  being  ignorant  could  give  no  account  of  her  state,  except
that  she  was  a  very  good  woman  and  very  happy,  and  was  now  at  the  end  of  a  well-
spent  hfe,  therefore  sure  of  going  to  heaven.  The  minister  went,  saw  that  she  was
very  ill,  and  after  a  few  kindly  inquiries  about  her  bodily  condition,  said :  *'  Well,
I  understand  you  are  in  a  very  peaceful  state  of  mind,  depending  upon  a  well-spent
life."  The  dying  woman  looked  hard  at  him,  and  said  :  "  Yes,  I  am  in  the  enjoy-
ment of  peace.  You  are  quite  right;  sweet  peace,  and  that  from  a  well- spent  life.
But  it  is  the  well-spent  life  of  Jesus  ;  not  my  doing,  but  His ;  not  my  merits,  but
His  blood."  Yes ;  only  one  man  has  spent  a  life  that  has  met  all  the  requirements
of  God's  holy  law,  and  on  which  we  rest  before  God.     {Preacher's  Lantern.)

Ver.  6.  Set  in  order  the  things  that  are  wanting — Church  order : — I.  In  eveby

ChBISTIAN  COMMUNITY  THEBE   SHOULD   BE   THE  MAINTENANCE  OF   ORDEB.      CoufusioU  in

a  Church  is  a  calumny  of  Christ,  and  obstructive  at  once  to  its  peace,  power,
prosperity,  and  usefulness.  II.  The  maintenance  of  Church  order  may  REguiRB
THB  MINISTRY  OP  SPECIAL  suPEBiNTENDENTS.  The  words  elder,  bishop,  pastor,  Ac,
all  refer  to  the  same  office — that  of  overseer.  Such  a  one  is  to  maintain  order,  not
by  legislating  but  by  loving  ;  not  by  the  assumption  of  authority,  but  by  a  humble
devotion  to  the  spiritual  interests  of  all.  HI.  The  supeeintendents  should  be  men  of
DISTINGUISHED  EXCELLENCE.  (D.  Thoma8,D.D.)  Perfecting  the  order  of  the  Church: —
1.  It  noteth  what  was  the  special  work  of  an  evangelist ;  namely,  that  being  the  com-
panions of  the  apostles,  they  were  to  bring  on  the  work  of  the  Lord  to  perfection,  both
by  estabhshing  that  foundation  they  had  laid,  and  building  on  further  by  their
direction  where  they  left  off.  The  office  was  middle  between  the  apostle  and  the
pastor ;  the  calling  was  immediate  from  the  apostles,  as  the  apostle  was  immediate
from  Christ.  2.  Notwithstanding  many  defects  and  wants  in  this  Church  and  those
great  ones,  and  that  in  constitution,  for  we  see  their  cities  were  destitute  of  eiders
and  Church  governors ;  yet  was  it  neither  neglected  by  Paul,  nor  separated  from  by
Titns  as  a  cage  of  unclean  birds ;  teaching  us  not  presently  to  condemn  a  number
and  society  of  men  (much  less  of  Churches)  for  want  of  some  laws  or  government
(for  no  Church  is  not  wanting  in  some),  if  they  join  together  in  the  profession  of
truth  of  doctrine  and  worship ;  for  so  many  of  the  Churches,  planted  by  the  apostles
themselves,  might  have  been  refused  for  wanting  some  offices  for  a  time,  although
they  were  after  supplied.  3.  We  learn  hence,  that  no  Church  is  hastily  brought  to
any  perfection.  The  apostles  themselves,  the  master  builders,  with  much  wisdom
and  labour,  and  often  in  long  time,  made  not  such  proceedings  ;  but  that,  had  they


24  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  I.

not  provided  labourers  to  follow  them  with  a  diligent  hand,  all  had  been  loet.
Mach  ado  had  they  to  lay  the  foundation,  and  prepare  matter  for  the  building;  and
yet  this  they  did,  by  converting  men  to  the  faith  aud  baptizing  them ;  but  after  this
to  join  them  into  a  public  profession  of  the  faith,  and  constitute  visible  faces  of
Churches  among  them,  required  more  help  and  labour,  and  for  most  part  was  left  to
the  evangelists.  So  as  the  building  of  God's  house  is  not  unlike  to  the  finishing
of  other  great  buildings,  with  what  labour  are  stones  digged  out  of  the  earth  ?  with
what  difiSculty  depart  they  from  their  natural  roughness?  what  sweat  and  strength
is  spent  ere  the  mason  can  smooth  them?  As  it  is  also  with  the  timber  ;  and  yet,
after  all  this,  they  lie  a  long  time  here  and  there  scattered  asunder  and  make  no
hoase,  till,  by  the  skill  of  some  cunning  builder,  they  be  aptly  laid,  and  fastened
together  in  their  frame.  So  every  man's  heart,  in  the  natural  roughness  of  it,  is  as
hard  as  a  stone;  his  will  and  affections,  like  the  crabbed  and  knotty  oaks,  in-
vincibly resisting  aU  the  pains  of  God's  masons  and  carpenters,  till  the  finger  of
God  in  the  ministry  come  and  make  plain,  and  smooth  way,  working  in  their  con-
version. (T.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Titus  left  in  Crete : — I.  The  power  left  to  Titos.
*•  I  left  thee  " — I,  Paul,  an  apostle  of  Christ.  II.  The  use  and  exebcise  or  this
POWER.  1.  To  set  in  order  things  that  are  wanting.  2.  To  ordain  elders  in  every
city.  III.  The  limitation  op  these  acts.  "  As  Ihad  appointed  thee."  Titus  must
do  nothing  but  according  to  commission,  and  by  special  direction.  (W.  Burkitt,
M.A .)  Ministers  at  moral  leaders : — I.  That  ministers  have  special  work  as  well
AS  general.  II,  That  the  work  of  the  best  of  its  needs  revision  by  others.  "  Set
in  order,"  ht.,  "revise,  make  straight."  III.  That  every  compant  of  Christians
should  have  a  leader  or  overseer.  ' '  Elders  in  every  city, "  is  suggestive  of  the  wide-
spread influence  of  the  gospel  in  Crete,  which  was  famous  for  its  cities.  Homer,  in
one  place  mentions,  that  the  island  had  a  hundred  cities,  and  in  another  ninety.
{F.  Wagstaff.)  Ordain  elders  In  every  city. — An  embertide  sermon : — Our  Lord
Himself  is  the  sole  source  and  origin  of  all  ministerial  power.  He  is  the  Head  of
the  Church — none  can  take  office  in  the  Church  except  with  His  authorisation  ;  He
is  our  great  High  Priest— none  can  serve  under  Him,  unless  by  His  appointment ;
He  is  our  ^ing — none  can  bear  rule  in  His  kingdom,  except  they  hold  His  com-
mission. This  ministerial  power  our  Lord  conferred  upon  His  apostles.  In  the
Acts  of  the  Apostles  and  other  parts  of  the  New  Testament,  we  learn  how  the
apostles  carried  out  this  commission.  Their  first  act  after  the  Ascension  was  to
admit  another  to  their  own  ranks.  St.  Matthias  was  co-opted  into  the  room  of  the
traitor  Judas.  After  a  time  the  needs  of  the  growing  Church  required  them  to
appoint  subordinate  officers,  they  themselves  still  retaining  the  supreme  controL
These  officers  were,  in  the  first  place,  deacons,  whose  special  duty  it  was  to  attend
to  the  due  distribution  of  the  Church's  alms,  but  who  also,  as  we  learn  from  the
subsequent  history  of  two  of  them,  SS.  Stephen  and  Philip,  received  authority  to
preach  and  to  baptize  ;  and  in  the  second  place,  elders  who  were  appointed  to  still
higher  functions,  to  be  pastors  of  congregations,  to  feed  the  flock  of  God  and  have
the  oversight  thereof.  We  read  of  the  elders  first  in  Acts  xi.  30.  The  word  "  elder,"
wherever  it  occur  in  the  New  Testament,  is  a  translation  of  the  Greek  word
" presbuteros,"  from  which  our  words  "presbyter"  and  "priest"  have  come,  the
latter  by  contraction.  If  the  word  had  been  left  untranslated,  as  the  word*
"bishop,"  "deacon,"  and  "apostle"  were,  and  appeared  as  "presbyter"  or
"  priest,"  the  English  reader  would  have  been  saved  from  much  perplexity,  and
much  danger  of  erroneous  inferences.  Thus  the  apostles,  in  order  to  keep  pace
with  the  requirements  of  the  Church,  shared,  by  degrees,  their  functions  with  others,
admitted  others  by  prayer  and  the  laying  on  of  hands  into  the  sacred  ministry.  But
one  prerogative  they  still  retained  in  their  own  keeping,  that  was,  the  power  of
ordaining  others.  Yet  if  the  Church  was  to  be  continued,  if  the  promise  of  Christ
was  to  be  fulfilled,  "Lo,  I  am  with  yon  alway,  even  unto  the  end  of  the  world,"  this
power  also  must  be  transmitted.  And  so  we  find  that  the  college  of  apostles  was
gradually  enlarged.  One  there  was,  St.  Paul,  who  had  received  the  apostolate,  with
all  its  prerogatives,  directly  from  heaven.  Others,  such  as  St.  Barnabas,  were  also
tidmitted  to  the  apostolic  ranks  and  placed  on  an  equal  footing  with  the  original
Twelve.  And,  finally,  in  the  Pastoral  Epistles  we  come  to  the  last  link  of  the  chain
which  connects  the  apostolic  rule  of  the  Church  with  the  episcopal  superintendence
which  followed.  As  the  apostles  travelled  through  the  whole  known  world,  and
established  Churches  and  ordained  clergy  in  every  city  to  which  they  came,  they
found  at  last  that  the  oversight  of  all  these  Christians  of  whom  they  were  the
spiritual  fathers  had  become  too  much  for  them.    It  was  felt  to  be  a  necessity  to


OHir.  I.]  TITUS.  25

place  over  each  Chnroh  a  local  Bnperintendent,  who,  within  a  fixed  district,  should
be  armed  with  fall  apostolical  authority — with  power  to  rule  the  Church,  to
administer  discipline,  to  ordain  clergy.  When  we  open  the  Pastoral  Epistles  we
find  that  it  was  to  just  such  an  office  that  SS.  Timothy  and  Titus  were  appointed.
And  history  informs  us  that  immediately  after  the  apostles'  times  the  Christian
Church  in  all  parts  of  the  world  was  governed  by  bishops,  who  claimed  to  be
successors  of  the  apostles,  and  who  alone  had  the  power  to  ordain,  with  priests  and
deacons  under  them.  Why  the  bishops  did  not  retain  for  themselves  the  name  of
apostles  we  know  not ;  but  probably  they  thought  themselves  unworthy  to  share  that
title  with  such  eminent  saints  as  those  who  had  been  called  by  Christ  to  be  His
original  apostles,  and  therefore  they  adopted  a  designation  which  had  less  august
associations  attached  to  it,  having  formerly  been  borne  by  clergy  of  the  second
order.  For  more  than  1,500  years  no  other  form  of  Church  government  was  known
in  any  part  of  Christendom.  Turn  where  we  will,  north  or  south,  east  or  west,  or
take  any  period  of  history  previous  to  the  Eeformation,  and  we  can  discover  no
portion  of  the  Church  which  was  not  governed  by  bishops,  or  where  there  were  not
these  three  orders  of  ministers.  By  the  good  providence  of  God,  in  the  great  crisis
of  the  sixteenth  century,  we  were  permitted  to  retain  the  ancient  organisation  of
the  Christian  Church.  The  Eeformation  in  these  islands  was  the  act  of  the  Church
itself,  which,  while  it  rejected  the  usurped  supremacy  of  the  Bishop  of  Eome,  and
returned  in  other  respects  to  the  purer  faith  of  primitive  times,  carefully  maintained
unimpaired  the  three  Orders  of  the  Ministry.  There  was  no  severing  of  the  link
which  bound  us  to  the  men  to  whom  the  Great  Head  of  the  Church  said,
"Ab  My  Father  hath  sent  Me,  even  bo  send  I  you."  What  abundant  reason
have  we,  clergy  and  people  alike,  to  be  thankful  to  God  for  this  1  We  clergy
can  go  about  oar  work  with  no  misgivings  as  to  whether  we  are  indeed
ambassadors  for  Christ  or  no.  We  know  that  in  all  our  ministerial  acts  He  is
with  us,  that  He  indeed  is  acting  through  us,  and  that  our  feeble,  unworthy
efforts  to  advance  His  kingdom  and  glory  are  backed  and  supported  by  an  infinite
Power  which  can  turn  our  weakness  into  strength.  And  the  people,  too,  should
bless  and  thank  God  that,  through  His  great  goodness  towards  them,  the  sixteenth
century  proved  in  these  islands  a  true  Eeformation  in  religion — not  a  Eevolution,
as  it  did  elsewhere ;  that  you  belong  to  the  very  Church  founded  by  the  apostles,
and  that  Church,  too,  released  from  mediaeval  corruption,  and  saved  from  those
debasing  modern  superstitions  into  which  Eoman  Christianity  has  fallen  ;  that  you
have  free  access  to  the  means  of  grace  which  Christ  appointed  for  His  people ;  that
the  Sacraments  which  are  generally  necessary  to  salvation  are  here  duly  ministered
according  to  God's  ordinance  in  all  those  things  that  of  necessity  are  requisite  for
the  same ;  that  you  have  a  ministry  which  can  speak  to  you  in  Christ's  name,  and
bear  to  you  His  message  of  reconcihation ;  for  they  have  been  set  apart  to  their  office
by  Himself — by  Him  to  whom  alone  all  power  has  been  committed  in  heaven  and  in
earth ;  that  you  are  "fellow-citizens  with  the  saints  and  of  the  household  of  God,
and  are  built  upon  the  foundation  of  the  apostles  and  prophets,  Jesus  Christ
Himself  being  the  chief  comer  stone."  On  a  valid  ministry  depends  the  very
existence  of  a  Church.  On  a  faithful  ministry  depends  the  well-being  of  a  Church.
And  how  largely  does  the  character  of  the  ministry  depends  upon  the  people  ?  How
largely  is  it  in  the  power  of  the  people  to  assist  the  bishop  in  making  a  choice  of  fit
persons  for  Holy  Orders  ?  I  am  not  now  alluding  to  the  direct  power  the  people
poBBesB  to  prevent  the  ordination  of  an  unworthy  man.  It  is  for  this  express  pur-
pose that  the  Si  quis,  as  it  is  called,  of  the  candidate  is  appointed  to  be  read  in  the
parish  church  previous  to  the  ordination.  The  name  of  the  candidate  is  published,
and  the  people  are  invited  to  object  if  they  can  allege  any  impediment.  And
another  opportunity  of  the  same  kind  is  given  at  the  ordination  itself.  I  am  now
allading  specially  to  your  prayers.  "  Brethren,  pray  for  us,"  was  the  earnest  request
of  St.  Paul  to  the  Christians  of  his  day,  and  surely  the  successors  of  the  apostles
now  need  no  less  the  prayers  and  sympathy  of  their  people.  (J.  G.  Carleton,  B.D.)
Directions  regarding  the  appointment  of  elders: — 1.  It  is  Titus  himself  who
is  to  appoint  these  elders  throughout  the  cities  in  which  congregations  exist.
It  is  not  the  congregations  that  are  to  elect  the  overseers,  subject  to  the
approval  of  the  apostle's  delegate ;  still  less  that  he  is  to  ordain  any  one  whom
they  may  elect.  The  full  responsibihty  of  each  appointment  rests  with  him.  Any-
thing like  popular  election  of  the  ministers  is  not  only  not  suggested,  it  is  by
impHcation  entirely  excluded.  2.  In  making  each  appointment  Titus  is  to  consider
ihe  congregation.     He  is  to  look  carefully  to  the  reputation  which  the  man  of  hia


26  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I.


choice  bears  among  his  fellow  Christians,  A  man  in  whom  the  congregation  hara
no  confidence,  because  of  the  bad  repute  which  attaches  to  himself  or  his  family,  is
not  to  be  appointed.  In  this  way  the  congregation  have  an  indirect  veto ;  for  the
man  to  whom  they  cannot  give  a  good  character  may  not  be  taken  to  be  set  over
them.  3.  The  appointment  of  Church  officers  is  regarded  as  imperative :  it  is  on
no  account  to  be  omitted.  And  it  is  not  merely  an  arrangement  that  is  as  a  rule
desirable  :  it  is  to  be  universal.  Titus  is  to  go  through  the  congregations  "  city  by
city,"  and  take  care  that  each  has  its  elders  or  body  of  elders.  4.  As  the  name  itself
indicates,  these  elders  are  to  be  taken  from  the  older  men  among  the  believers.  As
a  rule  they  are  to  be  heads  of  families,  who  have  had  experience  of  life  in  its  mani-
fold relations,  and  especially  who  have  had  experience  of  ruling  a  Christian  house-
hold. That  will  be  some  guarantee  for  their  capacity  for  ruling  a  Christian
congregation.  5.  It  must  be  remembered  that  they  are  not  merely  delegates,  either
of  Titus,  or  of  the  congregation.  The  essence  of  their  authority  is  not  that  they
are  the  representatives  of  the  body  of  Christian  men  and  women  over  whom
they  are  placed.  It  has  a  far  higher  origiii.  They  are  "  God's  stewards."  It  is
His  household  that  they  direct  and  administer,  and  it  is  from  Him  that  their
powers  are  derived.  As  God's  agents  they  have  a  work  to  do  among  their  fellow-
men,  through  themselves,  for  Him.  As  God's  ambassadors  they  have  a  message
to  deliver,  good  tidings  to  proclaim,  ever  the  same,  and  yet  ever  new.  As  "  God'a
stewards  "  they  have  treasures  to  guard  with  reverent  care,  treasures  to  augment  by
diligent  cultivation,  treasures  to  distribute  with  prudent  liberality.  {A.PlumTner,  D.D.)

Vet.  6.  If  any  be  blameless. — Lessons  : — I.  Chabacter,  thb  pbihabt  qttalifica-

TION  FOB  OFFICE  IN  THE  ChOBOH.  II.  DOMESTIC  AND  SOCIAL  RELATIONSHIPS,  CONDUCrVB,
RATHER  THAN  HINDRANCES,  TO  CHRISTIAN   SERVICE.       IH.   GoOD   FAMILT  OOTERNMENT,  A

GUARANTEE  FOR  Church  GOVERNMENT.  (F.  Wagstoff.)  A  man  of  scandalous  life  ii
unfit  to  be  a  minister  : — 1.  Our  apostle  here  first  insisteth  upon  the  life  of  him  that
is  to  be  chosen,  and  afterwards  requireth  his  fitness  for  doctrine  :  and  so  in  his
charge  to  Timothy  that  he  should  lay  hand  on  no  man  rashly,  addeth,  that  some
men's  sins  go  beforehand,  and  some  men's  sins  follow  after  judgment :  as  though  he
had  said  more  largely,  Use  all  the  circumspection  thou  canst,  yet  some  hypocrites  will
creep  into  the  ministry.  Some  are  inwardly  profane,  and  such  close  sinners  thou
canst  not  discern,  till  afterward  they  manifest  themselves.  Others  are  open  sinners,
of  which  tliou  mayest  judge  aright ;  these  latter  thou  art  to  hinder,  the  former
reclaim,  or  seasonably  remove,  and  so  salve  up  the  sore  again :  for  how  requisite  is
it  that  snch  a  sweet  and  favourite  doctrine  should  be  matched  with  a  sweet  and
savoury  Christian  conversation !  2.  That  such  an  high  calling  is  to  be  graced
with  an  unreprovable  hfe  was  typified  in  the  law  sundry  ways,  as  after  we  shall
more  clearly  see  in  the  positive  virtues  required,  especially  in  that  prohibition  that
none  of  Aaron's  sons,  or  seed,  that  had  any  blemish  in  him,  might  once  press  to
offer  before  the  Lord,  neither  come  near  the  vail,  nor  stand  by  the  altar.  3.  A
scandalous  and  obnoxious  person  shall  never  do  good  in  his  calling.  For  although
the  things  of  Christ,  as  the  Word,  sacraments,  and  doctrine,  depend  not  upon  the
person  of  the  minister,  but  on  the  ordinance  of  Christ,  neither  in  themselves  are
the  worse  in  bad  men's  hands,  no  more  than  a  true  man's  piece  of  gold  in  the
hands  of  a  thief ;  yet  by  our  weakness,  in  such  a  man's  hand,  they  are  weaker  to
us :  and  although  no  man  can  answer  or  warrant  the  refusing  of  pare  doctrine
(which  is  not  to  be  had  in  respect  of  persons)  for  the  spotted  life  of  the  minister,
who,  while  he  sitteth  in  Moses's  chair  (be  he  Pharisee,  be  he  hypocrite)  must  be
heard,  yet  can  it  not  be  but  that  the  wickedness  of  Eli's  sons  will  make  the  people
abhor  the  offerings  of  the  Lord,  which  what  a  grievous  sin  it  was  before  the  Lord
(see  1  Sam.  ii.  17).  Again,  how  can  he  benefit  his  people  whose  hands  are  bound,
whose  mouth  is  shut,  and  cannot  utter  the  truth  without  continual  galling  and
sentencing  of  himself  7  and  when  every  scoffer  shall  be  ready  to  say  to  him,  "  Art
thou  become  weak  like  one  of  us  ?  "  and  the  word  shall  be  still  returned  upon  him-
self, how  can  it  be  expected  that  he  should  do  good  amongst  them  ?  4.  It  is  a  most
dangerous  condition  to  himself  to  be  a  good  teacher  of  a  bad  life,  for  such  a  one  is
in  the  snare  of  the  devil,  that  is,  when  he  seeth  his  life  still  more  and  more  expro-
brated,  and  himself  more  despised  every  day  than  other  (for  it  is  just  with  God  that
with  the  wicked  should  be  reproach),  then  he  begins  to  grow  so  bold  and  impudent,
as  that  he  casts  off  all  shame  and  care,  and  as  one  desperate  and  hardened  in  sin,
prostituteth  himself  remorselessly  unto  all  lewdness  and  ungodly  conversation.  (T.
Taylor,  D.D.)    Rules  to  keep  a  vian  unreprovable: — 1.  Labour  with  thy  heart  to  set


«BA».  I.]  TITUS.  t7

itself  still  in  the  presence  of  Ood,  and  this  will  be  a  means  to  keep  it  in  order ;  wherea
otherwise  an  nnmly  heart  will  break  out  one  time  or  other.  2.  Have  a  care  of  a
good  name,  as  well  as  a  good  conscience ;  not  bo  much  for  thy  own  as  for  God's
glory :  neither  because  thyself,  but  others  stand  much  upon  it.  3.  Avoid  occasions
of  sins,  appearances  of  ctU,  seeing  thy  motes  become  beams.  4.  Study  to  do  thy
own  duty  diligently,  meddle  not  with  other  men's  matters.  5.  Curb  and  cover  thine
own  infirmities,  buffet  thy  body,  and  bring  it  in  subjection  (1  Cor.  ix.).  6.  Daily
pray  for  thyself,  with  a  desire  of  the  prayer  and  admonition  of  others.  (Ibid.)
Importance  of  good  ministerial  character: — Personal  character  is  of  the  utmost
moment  in  the  work  of  admonition.  We  must  not  try  to  remove  motes  from  the
eyes  of  others  while  we  have  beams  in  our  own.  Qnarles  reminds  us  that  "  He  who
cleanses  a  blot  with  blurred  fingers,  makes  a  greater  blot.  Even  the  candle-snuffers
of  the  sanctuary  were  of  pure  gold  "  (Exod.  xxxvii.  23).  We  may  not  urge  others  to
activity,  and  lie  still  like  logs  ourselves.  A  quaint  old  preacher  of  the  sixteenth
century  has  put  this  truth  into  homely,  pungent  words  :  "  Beloved  in  our  Lord  and
Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  it  is  a  very  monstrous  thing  that  any  man  should  have  more
tongues  than  hands.  For  God  hath  given  us  two  hands  and  but  one  tongue,  that
we  might  do  much  and  say  but  little.  Yet  many  say  so  much  and  do  so  little,  as
though  they  had  two  tongues  and  but  one  hand  ;  nay,  three  tongues  and  never  a
hand.  Such  as  these  (which  do  either  worse  than  they  teach,  or  else  less  than  they
teach,  teaching  others  to  do  well  and  to  do  much,  but  doing  no  whit  themselves)
may  be  resembled  to  divers  things.  To  a  whetstone,  which  being  blunt  itself,  makes
a  knife  sharp.  To  a  painter,  which  being  deformed  himself,  makes  a  fair  picture.
To  a  sign,  which  being  weather-beaten,  and  hanging  without  itself,  directs  pas-
sengers into  the  inn.  To  a  bell,  which  being  deaf  and  hearing  not  itself,  calls  the
people  into  the  church  to  hear.  To  a  goldsmith,  which  being  beggarly,  and  having
not  one  piece  of  plate  to  use  himself,  hath  stores  for  others  which  he  shows  and
sells  in  his  shop.  Lastly,  to  a  ridiculous  actor  in  the  city  of  Smyrna,  who  pro-
nouncing •  0  coelum,'  0  heaven,  pointed  with  his  finger  toward  the  ground.  Such
are  all  they  which  talk  one  thing  and  do  another ;  which  teach  well  and  do  ill."
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  secret  of  a  blameless  life  : — Archbishop  Benson,  speaking
after  Earl  Granville  had  unveiled  the  memorial  to  his  predecessor,  adorned  the  occa-
sion by  a  reference  to  the  secret  of  the  beautiful  life  of  the  late  Archbishop  Tate.  "  I
have  heard,"  he  said,  "  and  I  believe  it  is  true,  that  on  the  first  day  of  his  wedded  life
he  and  his  bride  pledged  themselves  to  each  other  that  they  would  never  quarrel  with
any  one,  and  I  beheve  that,  with  God's  blessing  and  help,  that  pledge  was  kept  to
the  end."  Husband  of  one  wife : — In  the  corrupt  facility  of  divorce  allowed  both
by  Greek  and  Boman  law,  it  was  very  common  for  man  and  wife  to  separate,  and
marry  other  parties  during  the  life  of  each  other.  Thus,  a  man  might  have  three
or  four  living  wives,  or  women  who  had  successively  been  his  wives.  An  example
of  this  may  be  found  in  the  English  colony  of  Mauritius,  where  the  French  revolu-
tionary law  of  divorce  had  been  left  unrepealed  by  the  English  Government ;  and  it
is  not  uncommon  to  meet  in  society  three  or  four  women  who  have  all  been  wives
of  one  man,  and  three  or  four  men  who  have  all  been  husbands  of  one  woman.
Thus,  successive  rather  than  simultaneous  polygamy  is  perhaps  forbidden  here.
(Conybeare  and  Howson.)  The  husband  of  one  wife : — The  family  arrangements
in  the  Isle  of  Crete  were  the  result  of  heathenism,  and,  of  course,  polygamy  had
prevailed.  Many  believers  had  several  wives,  as  is  often  the  case  in  heathenism  at
the  present  time,  and  one  of  the  most  difficult  questions  of  modem  missions  is  how
to  treat  such  cases.  When  a  man  and  his  two  wives,  for  example,  all  at  the  same
time  become  Christians,  and  demand  baptism  and  the  Lord's  supper,  what  am  I  to
do?  There  is  no  passage  that  I  know  of  in  the  Word  of  God  to  guide  me  in  the
matter ;  and  I  am  left  to  the  general  rules  of  Scripture,  to  the  dictates  of  wisdom
and  prudence,  and  to  the  leadings  of  Divine  Providence.  If,  however,  such  a  man
wished  to  become  an  elder,  I  would  say.  No,  for  a  bishop  must  be  blameless,  the
husband  of  one  wife,  and  not  of  two  wives,  according  to  the  decision  of  the  apostlo
Paul.    {W.  Graham,  D.D.)

Vers.  7-9.  For  a  bishop  must  be  blameless. — An  ideal  bishop : — 1  will  try  in
five  words  to  set  before  you  the  ideal  of  a  bishop  :  humility,  self-sacrifice,  simplicity
of  heart,  undaunted  courage,  moral  faithfulness.  Of  holiness  and  of  diligence  I
need  hardly  speak — no  bishop  could  ever  imagine  himself  to  be  a  true  bishop  with-
oat  these ;  bat  glance  for  a  moment  at  the  others,  for  they  go  to  the  very  root  of
the  matter.  1.  First,  atter  humility — "  not  lording  it  over  God's  heritage,"  Ao.  Pride


38  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  l

is  a  sin  foolish  and  hateful  enough  in  any  man,  but  it  seems  doubly  so  in  a  bishop.
How  instructive  is  that  story  of  Augustine,  the  first  Archbishop  of  Canterbury.
When  he  summoned  the  other  bishops  to  meet  him,  they  asked  a  holy  hermit  of
Bangor  how  they  might  know  whether  Augustine  was  or  was  not  a  man  of  God,  and
he  answered  that  they  might  follow  him  if  they  found  him  to  be  of  a  meek  and
humble  heart,  for  that  was  the  yoke  of  Christ ;  but  if  he  bore  himself  haughtily  they
should  not  regard  him,  for  then  he  was  certainly  not  of  God.  They  took  his  advice,
and  hastened  to  the  place  of  meeting,  and  when  Augustine  neither  rose  to  meet  them
nor  received  them  in  any  brotherly  sort,  but  sat  all  the  while  pontifical  in  the  chair,
they  would  not  acknowledge  him  or  denote  that  they  owed  him  any  obedience
but  that  of  love.  One  of  the  noblest  men  the  Church  has  ever  seen — St.  Thomas
Aquinas — was  also  one  of  the  most  truly  humble.  Once  a  celebrated  cardinal  was
seen  passing  to  the  high  altar  of  his  cathedral  in  scarlet  robes  and  jewelled  pectoral,
in  the  midst  of  magnificent  ecclesiastics  ;  but  one  who  knelt  behind  him,  seeing  a
little  stream  of  blood  trickling  where  he  knelt,  observed  that  under  the  sweeping
silken  robes  the  great  cardinal  had  been  walking  with  bare  feet  over  the  flinty  path,
that  his  heart  might  be  mortified  amid  the  splendour  of  his  state.  Deep  humility
within — a  violet  which  scarcely  ever  grows  except  at  the  foot  of  the  cross — should
be  the  mark  of  a  true  bishop.  2.  Nor  is  utter  self-sacrifice  less  necessary.  If  pride
•  is  detestable  in  a  bishop,  greed  is  no  less  so.  The  bishop  who  uses  the  revenues  of
his  church  to  enrich  his  family,  is  false  to  one  of  the  first  duties  of  his  post.  The
brother  of  the  Bishop  of  Lincoln,  in  the  twelfth  century,  complained  that  he  was
still  left  a  ploughman.  •'  Brother,"  said  the  great  bishop,  "  if  your  cow  dies,  I  will
give  you  another,  and  if  your  plough  wants  mending  I  will  have  it  mended ;  but  a
ploughman  I  found  you,  and  a  ploughman  I  mean  to  leave  you."  The  income  of
the  see  should  be  spent  upon  the  see.  Poverty  is  never  so  honourable  as  in  men
who  might  be  rich.  When  Archbishop  Warren,  Cranmer's  predecessor,  was  told  on
his  deathbed  that  he  had  only  thirty  pounds  in  the  world,  he  answered  with  a  smile,
"  Enough  to  pay  my  journey  to  heaven."  3.  Simplicity  of  heart.  None  but  small
and  unworthy  men  would  lose  by  it.  Neither  pomp,  nor  wealth,  nor  office — prizes
of  accident  as  oft  as  merit — ever  made  any  small  man  great.  Once  I  was  staying
as  a  boy  in  a  bishop's  house,  and  there  was  dug  up  the  brass  plate  from  the  tomb  of
one  of  his  predecessors,  and  I  have  never  forgotten  the  inscription  on  it :  "  Stay,
passer  by  1  See  and  smile  at  the  palace  of  a  bishop.  The  grave  is  the  palace  they
must  all  dwell  in  soon  1 "  4.  Unbounded  courage.  Scorn  of  mere  passing  popu>
larity  should  be  among  his  first  qualities.  When  that  persecuting  emperor,  Yalens,
sent  his  prefect  to  threaten  St.  Basil,  and  was  met  by  a  flat  refusal  of  his  demands,
the  prefect  started  from  his  seat  and  exclaimed,  "Do  you  not  fear  my  power?  "
"  Why  should  I  ?  "  answered  Basil.  "  What  cau  happen  to  me ?  "  •'  Confiscation,"
replied  the  prefect,  "  punishment,  torture,  death."  ••  Is  that  all  ?  "  said  Basil.  "  He
who  has  nothing  beyond  my  few  books  and  these  threadbare  robes  is  not  liable  to
confiscation.  Punishment  1  How  can  I  be  punished  when  God  is  everywhere  f
Torture ! — torture  can  only  harm  me  for  a  moment ;  and  death — death  is  a  bene-
factor, for  it  will  send  me  the  sooner  to  Him  whom  I  love  and  serve."  "  No  one  has
ever  addressed  me  so,"  said  the  prefect.  '*  Perhaps,"  answered  Basil,  "you  never
met  a  true  bishop  before."  You  may  think  that  bishops  in  these  days  have  no  need
for  such  courage.  They  will  not  have  to  face  kings  and  rulers,  I  dare  say ;  but  I
wish  all  had  the  bolder  and  rarer  courage  to  face  the  false  world;  to  tell  the  truth
to  lying  partisans,  religious  and  other ;  to  confront  the  wild  and  brutal  ignorance  of
publio  opinion ;  to  despise  the  soft  flatteries  of  an  easy  popularity ;  to  know  by
experience  that  Christ  meant  something  when  He  said,  "  Blessed  are  ye  when  aU
men  revile  you  for  My  name's  sake."  5.  Again,  I  ask,  are  bishops  never  called  upon
by  their  du^  to  exceptional  moral  faithfulness — to  be,  as  it  were,  the  embodied  con-
science of  the  Christian  Church  before  the  world  ?  That  was  the  splendid  example
set  by  St.  Ambrose.  Theodosius  was  a  great,  and  in  many  respects  a  good,
emperor ;  but  in  a  fierce  outburst  of  passion  he  had  led  his  soldiers  into  the  amphi-
theatre of  Thessalonica,  and  had  slain  some  five  or  six  thousand  human  beings,  the
innocent  no  less  than  the  guilty,  in  indiscriminate  massacre.  Courtiers  said  nothing ;
the  world  said  nothing  ;  civil  rulers  said  nothing ;  then  it  was  that  St.  Ambrose  stood
forth  like  the  incarnate  conscience  of  mankind.  For  eight  months  he  excluded  th«
emperor  from  the  cathedral,  and  wlien  he  came  at  Christmastide  to  the  Communion,
he  met  him  at  the  door,  and,  in  spite  of  purple  and  diadem  and  prsBtorian  guards,
forbad  him  to  enter  till  he  had  laid  aside  the  insignia  of  a  guilty  royalty,  and,  pros-
trate with  tears,  upon  the  pavement,  had  performed  a  penance  as  publio  as  his  erime.


CHIP.  1.)  TITUS.  29

{Archdeacon  Farrar.)  Qualifications  for  the  eldership  : — St,  Paul  had  never  shown
himself  indilferent  to  the  local  organisation  of  each  little  community  which  he
founded.  On  his  very  earliest  missionary  tour,  he  and  Barnabas  had  ordained  pres-
byters over  the  Gentile  Churches  at  Derbe,  at  Lystra,  at  Iconium,  and  at  Pisidian
^tioch.  It  seems  likely  that,  as  he  grew  older  and  realised  how  soon  both  he  and
the  other  temporary  chiefs  of  the  new  society  must  be  withdrawn,  he  only  came  to  feel
more  strongly  than  at  first  the  importance  of  providing  for  its  permanent  administra-
tion through  stationary  office-bearers  who  could  be  continually  replaced.  Such  a
case  as  this  which  had  come  to  his  knowledge  in  Crete  must  have  sharpened  that
conviction.  As  error  spread,  and  especially  such  error  as  led  to  lax  morals,  the
office  of  ruler  in  the  young  community  grew  to  be  of  the  higher  consequence,  and
it  became  more  important  to  secure  that  those  who  were  admitted  to  office
possessed  the  requisite  qualifications.  It  throws  a  good  deal  of  Ught  on  this
point  to  observe  where  the  stress  is  laid  in  Paul's  catalogue  of  these  qualifications.
Ability  on  the  elder's  part  to  argue  with  Jew  and  heathen,  or  even  to  edify
disciples,  is  not  put  in  the  foreground.  On  the  contrary,  the  qualification  insisted
upon  with  most  detail  is  one  of  character.  Among  the  little  companies  to  be
found  in  the  towns  of  Crete  few  men  would  probably  be  found  competent  to
disouBB  points  of  theology,  or  to  hold  their  own  on  subtle  questions  of  Mosaio
law  with  gUb  talkers  of  "the  circumcision."  Certainly  there  could  not  as  yet
exist  a  class  of  professional  divines,  expert  in  controversy  or  specially  educated
to  instruct  their  brethren.  What  was  to  be  had  was  just  a  few  men  of  some
years'  Christian  standing  and  of  grave  and  approved  Christian  character,  who,
knowing  from  experience  that  the  true  faith  of  the  Lord  Jesus  was  a  faith
"according  to  godliness,"  could  bring  new-fangled  doctrines  to  this  plain  test:
Did  they  contribute  to  promote  wholesome  manners,  or  did  they  betray  an  evil
origin  by  their  noxious  influence  upon  practice  ?  In  effect,  it  was  by  their  pure
example,  by  the  weight  of  their  character,  by  the  sober  and  balanced  judgment
which  Christian  experience  forms,  and,  above  all,  by  that  instinct  with  which
a  mature  Christian  mind,  however  untrained  in  theology,  recoils  from  morbid
views  of  duty,  dangerous  errors  of  mischievous  speculation :  it  was  by  the
possession  of  gifts  Uke  these  that  the  elders  were  fitted  to  form  a  salutary
force  within  the  Church ;  and  the  best  service  they  could  render  it  at  that  con-
juncture would  be  to  keep  the  fiock  in  old  safe  paths,  guarding  its  faith  from
poisonous  admixture,  that,  amid  the  restlessness  of  a  fermenting  period,  men's
minds  might  be  settled  in  quietness  upon  the  simple  teaching  of  the  gospel.
It  cannot  surprise  us  therefore  to  find,  when  we  come  to  look  at  the  qualifica-
tions Paul  desires  in  the  Cretan  elder,  that  the  condition  first  insisted  on  is,
not  simply  character,  but  reputed  character.  He  must  be  a  man  against  whom
public  rumour  lays  no  scandalous  charge,  either  within  or  without  the  Christian
society.  There  may  have  been  something  in  the  condition  of  the  Cretan
Church  which  rendered  it  specially  desirable  that  its  representatives  should
stand  well  in  the  esteem  of  their  neighbours.  But  it  is  plain  that  upon  this
qualification  must  always  depend  in  every  Church  the  real  value  and  influence
of  the  eldership.  It  matters  comparatively  little  how  active  or  zealous  or  even
devout  a  church-ruler  be,  if  men  caimot  respect  him  because  they  either  see,  or
imagine  that  they  see,  such  flaws  as  seriously  detract  from  the  total  impression
his  character  ought  to  make  upon  them.  However  useful  in  other  ways  a  man
of  blemished  estimation  may  prove,  he  is  not  likely  to  lend  dignity  to  sacred
office  or  attract  to  it  the  confidence  and  reverence  of  the  people.  The  general
conception  of  " blamelessness "  St.  Paul  breaks  up  into  eleven  particulars;  of
which  five  describe  what  the  elder  must  not  be,  and  six  what  he  ought  to  be.  Of
the  negative  requirements,  the  first  and  the  last  need  not  surprise  ua.  Many  a
good  man  exhibits  an  unconciliatory  and  unpliant  temper  ;  but  such  a  disposition
is  a  peculiarly  unfortunate  one  in  the  official  who  has  to  act  along  with  others  in
the  management  of  a  large  body  of  brethren,  and  to  preserve  that  peace  which  is
the  bond  or  girdle  of  perfection.  The  stubborn  man  who  insists  on  having  his  own
way  at  too  heavy  a  cost  makes  a  bad  elder.  So  of  tbe  fifth  negative.  The
instance  of  the  false  teachers  at  Crete  showed  how  readily  in  that  age  a  greedy
man  mipht  take  unworthy  advantage  of  the  confidence  of  the  Church,  not  to  say
by  dowmight  peculation,  but  at  all  events  by  making  a  good  thing  out  of  his
position.  Such  a  temptation  lay  near  to  a  trader  in  one  of  the  Greek  seaports,
as  many  among  these  new-made  presbyters  would  be.  But  the  spirit  of  covetous-
ness  is  hard  to  exorcise  from  the  ministry  at  all  times ;  the  harder  now,  because


30  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHIP.  i.

the  minietry  has  come  to  be  a  •'  profession."    Let  us  hope  that  the  modern  eccle-
eiastio  stands  in  less  danger  of  the  group  of  things  forbidden  which  lies  between
these  two :  "  not  soon  angry  ;  not  given  to  wine  "  (or  in  the  R.V.,  "  no  brawler" ;
literally  it  means  one  who  is  not  rude  over  his  cups),  "  no  striker."    All  three
expressions  picture  for  us  a  type  of  character  with  which  Paul  and  the  Church  at
Crete  were  possibly  too  familiar ;  a  hot-tempered  man,  apt  to  get  excited,  if  not  a
little  tipsy,  on  jovial  occasions  ;  and,  when  heated  with  wine,  only  too  loud  in  his
talk  and  too  prompt  with  his  fists.     The  seaboard  of  these  Greek  islands  must
have  offered  plenty  of  specimens  of  this  sort  of  fellow ;  but  we  should  scarcely
have  supposed  it  needful  to  warn  a  Christian  congregation  against  making  an
"  elder  "  of  him.   Although  the  temptation  to  drink  drags  too  often  even  presbyters
from  their  seats,  we  should  not  elevate  to  that  position  a  quarrelsome  tippler  if
we  knew  it.     I  suspect  that  the  surprise  we  feel  when  we  meet  such  items  in  a
list  of  disqualifications  for  oflBce,  serves  in  some  degree  to  measure  the  progress
in  social  manners  which,  thanks  to  the  gospel,  we  have  made  since  these  words
were  written.    Our  holy  religion  itself  has  so  raised  the  standard  of  reputable
behaviour,  at  least  among  professors  of  the  faith,  that  we  revolt  from  indulgences
as  unworthy  even  of  a  Christian  which  Cretan  converts  needed  to  be  told  were
unworthy  of  a  presbyter.    When  we  turn  to  the  positive  virtues  which  Paul  desired
to  see  in  candidates  for  sacred  office,  we  are  again  reminded  of  our  altered  circum-
stances.    No  modern  writer  would  think  of  placing  hospitality  at  the  top  of  the
list.    But  in  times  when  travelling  was  difficult,  and  the  inns  few  or  bad,  those
Christians,  whom  either  private  business  or  the  interests  of  the  gospel  compelled
to  visit  foreign  cities,  were  exceedingly  dependent  on  the  kindly  offices  of  the  few
who  in  each  chief  centre  owned  and  loved  the  same  Lord.      At  heathen  hands
they  could  count  on  little  friendship  ;  the  public  usages  of  society  were  saturated
with  the  associations  of  idolatry.    The  scattered  members  of  the  Christian  body
were  therefore  compelled  to  form  a  little  secret  guild  all  over  the  Mediterranean
lands,  of  which  the  branches  maintained  conmiunication  with  each  other,  furnish-
ing their  members  vdth  letters  of  introduction  whenever  they  had  occasion  to  pass
from  one  port  to  another.      To  receive  such  stranger  disciples  into  one's  house,
furnish  them  with  travelling  requisites,  further  their  private  affairs,  and  bid  them
God  speed  on  their  journey,  came  to  be  everywhere  esteemed  as  duties  of  primary
obligation,  especially  on  the  official  leaders  and  wealthier  members  in  each  little
band  of  brethren.    Hospitality  like  this  would  be  a  part  of  the  elder's  public  doty;
it  was  to  be  wished  that  it  should  spring  out  of  a  liberal  and  friendly  disposi-
tion.    Hence  to  the  word  "  hospitable  "  the  apostle  adds,  "  a  lover  of  good  men,"
or  of  all  noble  and  generous  acts.    The  main  emphasis,  however,  in  Paul's  sketch
of  the  good  "  bishop  "  rests  on  the  word  our  Authorised  Version  renders,  not  very
happily,  "sober."    This  favourite  word  of  the  apostle  throughout  the  Pastoral
Epistles  describes,  according  to  Bishop  EUicott,  "  the  well-balanced  state  of  mind
resulting  from  habitual  self-restraint."    As  he  grew  older  St.  Paul  appears  to  have
got  very  tired  of  intemperate  extravagance  both   in   thought  and  action,  even
among  people  who  called   themselves  Christians.      He   saw  that  mischief  was
threatened  to  the  Christian  cause  by  wild  fantastic  speculation  in  theology,  by
the  restless  love  of  novelty  in  matters  of  opinion,  by  morbid  one-sided  tendencies
in  ethics,  and  generally  by  a  high-flying  style  of  religiousness  which  could  minister
neither  to  rational  instruction  nor  to  growth  in  holiness.     Sick  of  all  this,  he
never  wearies  in  these  later  letters  of  insisting  that  a  man  should  above  all  things
be   sane — morally   and  intellectually ;   preserving,   amid   the  bewilderment   and
"  sensationaMsm  "  of  his  time,  a  sober  mind  and  a  healthy  moral  sense.      If  the
new  elders  to  be  ordained  in  Crete  did  not  possess  this  quality,  they  were  likely  to
effect  extremely  little  good.    The  unruly  Jewish  deceivers,  with  their  "endless
genealogies,"  legal  casuistry,  and  *'  old  wives'  fables,"  would  go  on  "  subverting
entire  households  "  just  as  before.     It  certainly  pertains  to  this  balanced  or  sober
condition  of  the  Christian  mind  that  it  rests  firmly  and  squarely  on  the  essential
truths  of  the  gospel,  holding  for  true  the  primitive  faith  of  Christ,  and  not  lending
a  ready  ear  to  every  new-fangled  doctrine.  This  is  the  requirement  in  the  presbyter
which  at  the  close  of  his  instructions  St.  Paul  insists  on  with  some  fulness  (ver.  9).
The  mature  and  judicious  believer  who  is   fit  for  office  must   adhere  to   that
faithful  (or  credible?)  doctrine  which  conforms  to  the  original  teaching  of   the
apostles  and  first  witnesses  of  our  holy  religion.     Otherwise,  how  can  he  discharge
his   twofold  function  of   "exhorting"   the  members   of    the   Church   in  sound
Christian  instruction,  and  of  "confuting"  the  opponents?     (J.  0.  Dyke$,  D.D.)


CHAP.  I.J  TlTUa.  81

As  the  steward  of  God. — Ministerial  ttewardship : — I.  First,  the  word  implieth
thus  mach,  that  God  is  a  great  Householder  (Matt.  xxi.  33) ;  that  His  housb  is
His  Ghdbch,  where  He  as  a  great  personage  keepeth  His  residence,  more  stately
and  honourable  than  the  court  or  standing  house  of  any  earthly  king  in  the  world,
in  that  herein  He  pleaseth  to  manifest  His  presence  by  His  Spirit  working  in  the
Word  and  ministry ;  and  as  it  is  with  other  great  houses,  so  the  Spirit  of  God
epeaketh  of  this  as  committed  not  to  one  but  many  stewards,  who  take  the  charge
of  it  to  order  and  govern  it  according  to  the  mind  of  the  Master  and  unto  His
greatest  honour  and  advantage.  And  these  stewards  are  the  ministers,  so  called
— 1.  Because  as  the  steward  in  a  house  is  to  dispense  all  necessaries  unto  the
whole  family  according  to  the  allowance  and  liking  of  his  lord,  even  so  the
minister  receiveth  from  God  power  to  administer  according  to  the  necessities  of
the  Church  all  the  things  of  GK)d,  as  Word,  sacraments,  prayer,  admonition,  &o.
2.  As  the  steward  receiveth  the  keys  of  the  house  to  open  and  shut,  to  lock  and
unlock,  to  admit  or  exclude  out  of  the  house,  for  so  is  it  said  of  Eliakim  (Isa.
zzii.  22),  even  so  every  minister  receiveth  the  keys  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  to
open  and  shut  heaven,  to  bind  and  loose,  to  remit  and  retain  sins,  as  Matt.  zvi.
19.  3.  As  the  steward  sitteth  not  in  his  own  as  an  owner  or  freeholder,  but  is  to
be  countable  and  to  give  up  his  bills  monthly  or  quarterly  when  the  master  shall
call  for  them,  so  every  minister  is  to  be  countable  of  his  talents  received,  and  of
his  expenses,  and  bow  he  hath  dispensed  his  Master's  goods  (Heb.  xiii.  17).
"  They  watch  for  their  souls  as  they  which  must  give  account."  11.  The  second
thing  in  this  similitude  to  be  considered  is  the  force  of  the  argument,  which  is

this:   THAT  BECAUSE  EVERY  HINISTBB  IS  CAIiliED  TO  A  PLACE  SO  KEAB  THE  LoBD  AS  TO  BE

His  STEWABD,  THBBEFOBE  HE  MT7ST  BE  uNBLAUEABLE.  Where  WO  havo  the  groimd  of
another  instruction.  Evei^  man  as  he  is  nearer  unto  God  in  place  must  be  so
much  the  more  careful  of  his  carriage :  that  he  may  both  resemble  Him  in  his
virtues,  dignify  his  place,  and  walk  more  worthy  of  Him  that  hath  drawn  him  so
near  Himself.  Besides  that,  every  master  looketh  to  be  graced  by  his  servant;
and  much  more  will  the  Lord  be  glorified  either  of  or  in  all  those  that  come  near
Him  (Lev.  x.).  For  as  the  master  quickly  tumeth  out  of  his  doors  such  disgraceful
persons  as  become  reproachful  to  the  family,  even  so  the  Lord,  knowing  that  the
infamous  courses  of  the  servant  reacheth  itself  even  to  the  master,  tumeth  such
out  of  His  service  which  are  the  just  subjects  of  reproach.  (T.  Taylor,  D.D.j
Stewards  of  God : — It  is  worthy  of  remembrance  that  Archbishop  TiUotson  ana
Burnet,  Bishop  of  Salisbury,  considered  their  large  revenues  as  trusts  committed
to  their  care.  Accordingly  they  set  aside  what  remained  after  their  maintenance
in  a  plain  way  for  bettering  the  condition  of  the  poor  clergy  and  repairs  in
churdies,  besides  using  hospitality  to  the  poor.  It  is  said  of  Burnet  that  when
his  secretary  informed  him  he  had  in  hand  about  £500,  he  remarked,  "  What  a
shame  for  a  Christian  to  have  so  much  money  unemployed  I  "  and  ordered  its
immediate  distribution  for  useful  purposes.  A  faithful  steward : — The  other
day  I  received  a  communication  &om  a  lawyer,  who  says  that  a  very  large
owner  has  discovered  that  a  very  small  piece  of  property  belongs  to  him  and  not
to  the  small  proprietor  in  whose  possession  it  has  for  a  very  long  time  remained.
The  matter  seemed  a  trifling  one.  We  had  a  conference,  and  there  came  the
steward  with  the  lawyers,  and  he  was  furnished  with  maps,  and,  putting  on  hia
spectacles,  examined  them  with  great  care.  Why?  It  was  a  small  matter  to
him,  but  because  he  was  a  steward  he  was  expected  to  be  faithful.  And  when  he
found  that  this  small  piece  of  ground  belonged  to  his  lord  he  was  determined  to
have  it.  So  let  me  say — as  stewards  of  the  gospel  of  God — never  give  up  one
verse,  one  doctrine,  one  word  of  the  truth  of  God.  Let  ns  be  faithful  to  that
committed  to  us,  it  is  not  ours  to  alter.  We  have  but  to  declare  that  which  we
have  received.  (S.  Cook,  D.D.)  Not  self- willed. — Frowardness  most  dangerous
in  a  minister : — 1.  It  is  the  mother  of  error  in  life  and  doctrine,  yea,  of  strange
opinions,  schisms,  and  heresies  themselves ;  and  it  cannot  be  otherwise,  seeing
the  ear  of  a  self-conceited  person  is  shut  against  all  counsel,  without  which
"thoughts  come  to  nought,  as  where  many  counsellors  are  is  steadfastness."
And  as  everywhere  almost  the  wicked  man  is  termed  a  froward  man,  and  a
wicked  and  ungodly  heart  a  froward  heart,  so  is  it  generally  true  which  the  wise
man  observed,  that  such  a  froward  heart  can  never  find  good,  but  evil  and  woe
cleaveth  unto  it :  and  therefore  David,  when  he  would  shut  the  door  of  his  soul
against  much  evil,  said,  "  A  froward  heart  shall  depart,  from  me :  I  will  not
know,"  that  is,  affect   and   act,  "  evil."      2.    Whereas   men  think  it  a  note  of


83  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i.

learning  and  wisdom  not  to  yield  an  inch  in  any  opinion  they  take  np,  the
Spirit  of  God  brandeth  it  with  a  note  of  folly :  and  it  is  no  other  than  the  way
of  the  fool  which  seemeth  good  in  his  own  eyes.  Indeed,  neither  minister  nor
ordinary  Christian  may  be  as  shaking  reeds,  tossed  hither  and  thither  with
every  blast  of  wind ;  but  yet  is  it  a  wise  man's  part  to  hear  and  try  and  not  stick
to  his  own  counsel  as  a  man  wiser  in  his  own  conceit  than  seven  men  that  can
give  a  reason  :  for  there  is  greater  hope  of  a  fool  than  of  such  a  one.  8.  There
are  many  necessitudes  and  occasions  between  the  minister  and  people :  he  must
admonish  the  inordinate,  raise  with  comforts  the  afflicted,  restore  those  that  are
fallen,  and  set  tbeir  bones  again  tenderly  by  the  spirit  of  meekness,  and  privately
encourage  those  that  do  well.  Again,  they  must  consult  with  him,  ask  him
sometimes  of  his  doctrine,  lay  open  unto  hun  their  grief  as  to  their  physician
under  Christ,  and  seek  for  particular  direction  in  special  cases  from  him :  in  all
which  and  many  more  mutual  duties  they  may  not  by  this  inordinate  humour  be
deterred  and  hindered,  but  rather  with  all  meekness  and  lenity  be  allured,
lovingly  entertained,  and  contentedly  dismissed  from  him.  Use — 1.  The  minister
must  learn  to  be  docUe  and  affable:  the  former  fitteth  him  to  leam  of
others,  the  latter  to  teach  others ;  for  none  can  be  apt  to  teach  others  who  is
not  apt  to  learn  of  others  ;  and  in  the  minister  especially  a  tractable  and  teach-
able disposition  is  a  singular  inviting  of  others  by  his  example  more  easily  to
admit  his  teaching,  whether  by  reprehension,  admonition,  or  howsoever.  2.  So
hearers  (seeing  frowardness  is  such  an  impediment  to  instruction)  must  leam  to
oast  it  from  them,  which  in  many  (otherwise  well  affected)  is  a  disposition  hard  to
please :  in  some  making  them  seldom  contented  with  the  pains,  matter,  or  manner
of  their  ministry ;  but  having  a  bed  in  their  brain  of  their  own  size,  whatsoever
is  longer  they  cut  off,  whatsoever  is  shorter  they  stretch  and  rack  it :  for  their
own  opinions  may  not  yield,  not  knowing  to  give  place  to  better.  Others  are
secare,  and  therein  grown  froward  against  the  Word.  (7.  Taylor,  D.D.)
Not  soon  angry. — Hastiness  to  anger  a  great  blot  in  a  minister : — For — 1.
Whereas  a  minister  ought  to  be  a  man  of  judgment,  knowledge,  and  under-
standing (for  these  are  most  essential  unto  his  calling),  yea,  a  man  of  such
wisdom  as  whereby  all  his  actions,  ministerial  and  common,  should  be  ordered ;
this  flashing  anger  overtumeth  for  the  present,  yea,  and  drowneth  all  his  judg-
ment, for  what  other  is  it  than  a  little  fury  and  a  short  madness?  2.  The
pestilent  effects  and  fruits  of  anger,  and  the  natural  daughters  resembling  the
mother  are  such,  as  in  a  minister  of  all  men  are  intolerable  :  as,  swelling  of  the
mind  so  high,  and  so  full  as  there  is  no  room  for  good  motions  and  meditations
(which  should  wholly  take  up  the  minister's  heart)  to  dwell  by  it:  the  often
arising  of  God's  enemies,  and  harming  and  wounding  of  His  friends,  for  anger  ia
cruel  and  wrath  is  raging  :  it  cares  not  for  any,  nor  spares  any  that  come  in  the
way  of  it ;  for  who  can  stand  before  envy?  And  from  this  indignation  of  heart
proceed  usually  impiety  against  God,  for  all  prayers  and  parts  of  His  worship  are
interrupted;  contumely  against  men,  for  the  bond  of  love  is  broken;  clamour  of
speech,  violence  of  hands,  temerity  of  actions,  late  repentance,  and  many  more
such  symptoms  of  this  desperate  disease :  for  he  hath  lost  all  the  bridle  and
moderation  of  himself.  Now  what  government  is  he  worthy  of,  especially  in
the  Church  of  God,  that  ordinarily  loseth  all  the  government  of  himself?  3.
rhe  minister  standing  in  the  room  and  stead  of  God  ought  to  be  a  mortified
aian,  for  tUl  he  have  put  off  this  filthy  fruit  of  the  flesh  can  he  never  lively
express  the  virtues  of  God,  who  is  a  God  of  patience,  meekness,  much  in  com-
passion, slow  to  wrath  ;  and  much  less  can  he  fitly  stamp  and  imprint  that  part
of  His  image  on  others,  yea,  or  teach  them  to  withstand  such  hot  and  hasty
affections  which  so  suddenly  surprise  and  inflame  himself.  4.  As  the  minister
ia  to  be  a  means  of  reconciling  God  unto  man,  so  likewise  of  man  unto  man ;
which  commendable  duty  a  hasty  man  can  never  to  purpose  perform  :  nay,  rather
he  stirreth  up  strife  and  marreth  all :  whereas  Solomon  observeth  that  only  he
"  that  is  slow  to  wrath  appeaseth  strife,"  for  this  unruly  passion  will  disable  a
man  to  hear  the  truth  of  both  parties  indifferently,  nor  abideth  to  hear  the
debate,  but  it  will  be  thundering  threats  before  time  serve  to  take  knowledge  of
the  matter.  5.  This  vice  prejudiceth  all  his  ministerial  actions.  (1)  In  his  own
heart.  For  the  minister  shall  often  meet  in  his  calling  with  those,  both  at  home
and  abroad,  who  in  many  things  are  far  different  from  him  both  in  judgment  and
practice;  yea,  some  of  weakness,  and  others  of  obstinacy,  loathing  even  his
wholesome  doctrine.    Now  his  calling  is,  and  consequently  his  care  should  be,  to


CHAP.  I J  TITUS.  ia

gain  these  to  the  love  and  liking  of  the  truth  :  to  which  end  he  is  not  presentlj
to  break  out  into  anger  :  for  thus  he  sets  them  further  off,  and  scandaliseth  such
as  otherwise  he  might  have  won,  no  more  than  the  physician  is  or  may  be  angry
though  the  weak  stomach  of  his  patient  loathe  and  cast  up  his  wholesome
physic,  for  that  would  set  the  patient  into  further  distemper  ;  but  such  must  be
restored  by  the  spirit  of  meekness.     (2)  In  his  people's  hearts,  by  ahenating  their
love  and  affection,  which  are  easily  worn  away  with  the  distasteful  fruits  of  this
hasty  anger  :  let  him  instruct,  admonish,  reprove,  every  one  findeth  this  evasion,
one  he  doth  in  anger,  another  not  in  love,  and  so  his  whole  work  is  lost  and
become  fruitless :  whereas  by  loving  usage  he  might  have  pierced  his  people  with
a  permanent  and  lasting  affection,  and  won  better  entertainment  to  all  his  pro-
ceedings.   \Ibid.)        Means  to  repress  rash  anger  : — The  means  to  bridle  and  stay
this  rash  and  unadvised  anger  stand  partly  in  meditations,  partly  in  practices.     1.
For  the  former — (1)  Meditate  on  the  providence  of  God,  without  which  not  the
least  grief  or  injury  could  befall  us,  for  even  the  least  is  a  portion  of  that  cup
which  God's  hand  reacheth  unto  us  to  drink  of.    (2)  On  the  patience  and  lenity
of  God,  who  with  much  mercy  suffereth  vessels  ordained  unto  destruction.    How
long  did  He  suffer  the  old  world  ?  how  loath  was  He  to  strike  if  in  a  hundred
and  twenty  years  He  could  have  reclaimed  them  !    And  add  hereunto  the  meek-
ness of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  hath  commanded  us  to  learn  it  of  Him  :  His
voice  was  not  heard  in  the  streets ;  a  bruised  reed  He  would  not  break  :  how  long
bare  He  with  Judas,  being  no  better  than  a  devil  within  His  family  1     (3)  On  the
unbounded  measure  of  God's  mercy,  whose  virtue  His  child  must  endeavour  to
express.     God  forgiveth  to  that  man  which  injureth  thee  much  more  than  thou
canst ;  He  forgiveth  him  infinite  sins,  and  canst  not  thou  pass  by  one  offence  ?
and  thou  hast  more  reason,  for  thou  knowest  not  his  heart  nor  his  intention  ;  it
may  be  he  meant  better  imto  thee :  neither  art  thou  acquainted  with  the  strength
of  his  temptation,  which  perhaps  was  such  as  would  have  overthrown  thyself,  nor
the  reason  why  the  Lord  suffereth  him  to  be  overcome  and  fall  by  it.      And  yet  if
all  this  cannot  bridle  the  headiness  of  this  vUe  lust,  apply  this  mercy  of  God  to
thyself :  thou  standest  in  need  of  a  sea  of  God's  mercy  for  the  washing  of  so
many  soul  offences;   and  wilt  not  thou  let  one  drop  fall  upon  thy  brother  to
forbear  and  forgive  in  trifling  wrongs.      (4)  Upon  the  danger  of  retaining  wrath,
which  is  an  high  degree  of  murder,  thou  prayest  to  be  forgiven  as  thou  forgivest :
the  promise  is,  forgive  and  it  shall  be  forgiven  you :  the  threatening  is,  "  that
judgment  merciless  shall  be  to  him  that  showeth  not  mercy  "  :  and  be  sure  that
what  measure  thou  metest  unto  others  shall  be  measured  to  thee  again  and
returned  into  thine  own  bosom.     2.  And  for  the  practices — (1)  In  thine  anger
make  some  delay  before  thou  speakest  or  doest  anything,  which  point  of  wisdon*
nature  hath  taught  her  clients  to  observe.     That  of  Socrates  to  his  servant  is
better  known  than  practised,  •'  I  had  smitten  thee  but  that  I  was  angry  "  :  and
memorable  is  that  answer  of  Athenodorus  to  Augustus,  desiring  him  to  leave  him
some  memorable  document  and  precept,  advised  him  that  when  he  was  angry  he
should  repeat  over  the  Greek  alphabet  Ijefore  he  attempted  any  speech  or  action.
But  although  this  be  a  good  means,  yet  will  it  be  to  no  purpose  without  the  heart
be  purged  of  disorder :  therefore  (2)   Apply  to  thy  heart  by  faith  the  death  of
Christ,  to  the  crucifying  of  this  lust  of  the  flesh :  nothing  else  can  cleanse  the
heart  but  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  who,  as  He  was  crucified,  so  they  that  are  His
have  also  crucified  the  flesh  and  the  lusts  of  it.     (3]  After  the  inward  disposition
use  outward  helps,  as — (a)  Avoid  occasions,  as  cmding,  contentions,  multiplying
of  words,  which,  though  they  be  wind,  yet  do  they  mightily  blow  up  this  fire.      {I)
Depart  from  the  company  of  the  contentious,  as  Jacob  from  Esau,  and  Jonathan
avoided  the  fury  of  his  father  by  rising  up  and  going  his  way.    (c)  Drive  away
with  an  angry  countenance  whisperers,  tale-bearers,  flatterers,  who  are  Satan's
seedsmen,  by  whom  he  soweth  his  tares  everywhere,  and  his  bellows  by  whom  he
bloweth  up  these  hellish  sparkles,  desirous  to  bring  all  things  into  combustion
and  confusion.      (4)  Pray  for  strength  and  grace  against  it,  especially  for  the
contrary  virtues  of  humility,  meekness,  love,  and  a  quiet  spirit  which  is  of  God
much  set  by :  and  having  obtained  strength  and  victory  against  the  assaults  of
it,  forget  not  to  be  thankful,  but  break  out  into  the  praises  of  God  as  David  (1  Sam.
zzy.  32,  33).     {Ibid.)        Not  given  to  wine. — Drunkenness  has  been  the  rain  of
moltitudes  of  the  most  learned  and  gifted  ministers  of  the  Church  of  God.    It  baa
slain  its  thousands  and  tens  of  thousands  in  aU  ages,  to  the  scandal  and  ruin  of  the
Church  of  God.     If  there  was  a  danger  in  the  wine  country  of  Crete,  what  mast

8


84  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTBAIOB,  [oiuf.  i.

be  the  danger  in  the  Bpirit  countries  of  the  north  ?  But  a  man  may  be  wapoivot
(yer.  7  ;  1  Tim.  iii.  8) — viz.,  by  wine,  sitting  long  by  his  wine — without  being  a
dmnkard ;  and  this,  also,  is  condemned  by  the  apostle.  A  man  onoe  said  to  me,
"  I  drink  wine  regularly ;  I  like  it,  and  require  a  bottle  or  two  daily,  but  I  never
drink  to  excess ;  I  am  no  drunkard,  and  in  all  my  life  I  have  never  been  rendered
incapable  of  doing  my  duties  by  wine."  Very  likely,  but  yet  yon  are  napoivof.
Yon  like  your  wine,  and  sit  long  by  it,  and  therefore  you  are  condemned  by  the
apostle.  Generally  speaking,  the  more  simply  and  abstemiously  we  live  the  better ;
and  bishops  especially  should  in  this,  as  in  all  others,  be  examples  to  the  flock.

iW,    Graham,   D.D.)  Why  a  minister  should  not   be  addicted  to    wine  : —

.  To  be  addicted  to  the  wine  or  strong  drink  "taketh  away  the  heart  "  (Hos.  iv.
11),  that  is,  troubleth  the  understanding,  confoundeth  the  senses,  and  equalleth  a
man  to  the  brute  beast  without  understanding :  and  thus  disableth  the  man  of
God  in  all  the  practice  of  his  calling.     As  the  wise  man  therefore  saith  (Pro v.
zxzi.  4),  so  much  less  is  it  for  the  minister  and  pastor  set  over  God's  people,  lest
he  forget  God's  decrees  and  change  His  judgments  as  Aaron's  sons  did.    2.  This
Bitting  at  wine  calleth  him  from  the  duties  and  means  of  his  fitness  unto  his
calling;  he  cannot  attend  to  reading,  exhortation,  doctrine,  which  is  straightly
enjoined  (1  Tim.  iv.  13).    3.  Such  a  man  is  so  far  from  performance  of  any
faithful  duty,  that  he  cannot  but  become  rather  an  enemy  to  those  that  do.    Thus
the  love  of  wine  makes  them  fail  in  vision  :  and  the  sitting  at  wine  lulleth  them
asleep,  "  even  on  the  top  of  the  mast "  (as  Solomon  speaketh  of  the  drunkard),  that
in  times  and  places  of  most  present  and  desperate  dangers,  they  see  none  nor  fear
any.    4.  It  cUsableth  all  the  duties  that  such  a  one  in  his  most  sobriety  can
perform  (suppose  them  never  so  commendable),  seeing  he  hath  made  himself  and
calling  so  contemptible :  for  what  authority  can  an  oracle  have  out  of  a  drunken
man's  mouth,  which  is  so  accustomed  to  speak  lewd  things  ?  and  one  who  hath
shaken  hands  with  the  most  base  and  wicked  companions  in  a  country,  which  is
another  inseparable  companion  of  this  sin   (Hos.  vii.  6).     {T.  Taylor,   D.D.)
No  striker. — "  No  striker  "  : — It  is  said  of  Bishop  Boimer,  of  infamous  memory,
that,  when  examining  the  poor   Protestants  whom  he   termed  heretics,  when
worsted  by  them  in  argument  he  was  used  to  smite  them  with  his  fists,  and  some*
times  scourge  and  whip  them.    But  though  he  was  a  most  ignorant  and  consum-
mate savage,  yet  from  such  a  Scripture  as  this  he  might  have  seen  the  necessity  of
surrendering  his  mitre.    (Adam  Clarke.)        Not  given  to  filthy  lucre. — Rules  for
the  subduing   of  covetous  desires  : — 1.   Meditate — (1)    On  God's  commandment
(Prov.  zxiii.  4 ;  Matt.  vi.  26).     And  reason  there  is,  that  seeing  distracting  and
solicitous  thoughts  are  the  ground  of  covetous  practices,  the  care  of  a  Christian
must  be  to  walk  diligently  in  his  calling,  but  leave  all  the  success  and  blessing  of
it  onto  God.     (2)  On  God's  promises  (Psa.  Iv.  24;   1  Pet.  v.  7).    Make  these
promises  thy  purchase  and  possess  them  by  belief,  and  they  shall  be  instead  of  a
bridle  unto  all  covetous  and  greedy  desires  of  gain.    And  thus  the  apostle  dis>
snadeth  it  (Heb.  xiii.  6).    Let  your  conversation  be  without  covetousness,  and  be
content  with  things  present.    They  might  ask,  but  how  shall  we  attain  hereunto :
have  we  not  cares  and  charges  upon  us  ?    True  ;  but  you  have  where  to  lay  them :
for  He  hath  said,  "  I  will  not  leave  thee  nor  forsake  thee."    (3)  On  thy  own
deserts :  whereby  Jacob  in  want  stayed  his  mind,  "  I  am  less  than  the  least  of
Thy  mercies."    (4)  On  the  inordinancy  of  thy  desire  :  for  how  little  is  nature  con-
tented with  I  and  a  very  little  above  a  little  choketh  it :  and  yet  grace  is  contented
with  much  less  :  it  oareth  not  how  little  it  see  about  it,  for  it  beUeveth  the  more,
hopeth  the  more,  trusteth  the  more,  prayeth  the  more,  and  loveth  the  more.    All
the  labour  of  a  man  (saitb  Solomon)  "  is  for  his  mouth  "  ;  the  mouth  is  but  little
and  strait,  soon  filled,  "  yet  the  desire  is  not  filled  "  :  noting  it  to  be  an  unnatoral
desire  in  many  men,  who  labour  not  as  men  who  were  to  feed  a  mouth  but  a  great
gulf  fit  to  swallow  whole  Jordan  at  a  draught,  or  such  a  mouth  as  the  Leviathan
which  receiveth  the  cart  and  drawers  of  it.     2.  Practise  these  rules  following —
(1)  Carry  an  equal  mind  to  poverty  and  riches,  and  aim  at  Paul's  resolution,  "  I
can  want  and  abound,"  I  can  be  full  and  hungry,  in  every  condition  I  can  be
content.    If  the  world  come  in  upon  thee,  use  it  as  not  using  it ;  if  it  do  not,  yet
account  the  present  condition  the  best  for  thee,  because  the  Lord  doth  so  account
it :  and  the  way  to  get  wealth  is  to  give  it  up  into  God's  disposition,  as  Abraham
by  offering  up  Isaac  to  the  Lord  kept  him  still.    (2)  Turn  the  stream  of  thy
desires  from  earthly  to  heavenly  things,  making,  with  David,  God  thy  portion ;
then  shalt  thou  be  better  without  these  than  ever  thou  wert  or  canst  be  witb


I.]  TITUS.  tS

them.  (3)  Thou  mast  go  one  step  farther,  daily  to  cross  the  affection  directly —
{a)  By  daily  seeking  the  assurance  of  the  pardon  of  sin.  {b)  By  daily  prayer
against  this  sin  especially,  (c)  By  daily  reading  the  Scriptures,  which  are  the
sword  of  the  Spirit  to  out  off  such  lusts,  wisely  observing  and  applying  such
places  as  most  cross  it.  (d)  By  being  ready  to  do  good,  and  distribute,  and
exercising  liberality  upon  all  good  motions  and  occasions.  (T.  Taylor,  D.D.)
A  lover  of  hospitality. — The  true  hospitality : — ^By  this  is  not  meant  what  is
called  keeping  a  good  open  table,  of  which  we  have,  and  have  ever  had,  many
examples  in  England,  and  much  money,  time,  and  health  have  been  speut  at
these  luxurious  and  hospitable  banquets.  The  apostle  does  not  mean  the  great
dinners  of  friendship,  such  as  we  have  now,  when  luxuries  are  drawn  together
from  the  ends  of  the  earth,  to  renew  the  sated  appetite,  and  anticipate  not  only  the
real  but  the  imaginary  wants  of  the  guests ;  he  refers  not  to  the  sparkling  of  the
wine,  or  the  brilliancy  of  wit  when  the  spirit  is  high,  or  those  postprandial  exhi-
bitions which  have  been  called  the  feast  of  reason  and  the  flow  of  soul.  No ;  this
is  not  his  meaning :  but  the  bishop  must  be  a  lover  of  hospitality  in  a  higher  and
far  nobler  sense  of  the  word ;  his  house  and  his  heart  ever  open  to  the  poor  and
needy  (Luke  xiv.  13) ;  if  he  has  two  coats,  the  first  naked  man  whom  he  meets
gets  one  of  them  ;  if  the  Lord  has  given  him  wealth,  he  actually  realises  tlie  25th
of  Matthew,  by  feeding  the  hungry,  clothing  the  naked,  and  visiting  those  that
are  in  prison.  He  loves  to  see  the  learned  and  the  good,  the  advanced  Christian
and  the  weak  believer,  assembled  round  his  table,  in  free  and  full  and  unrestrained
conversation ;  it  is  his  noble  privilege  to  meet  with  all  classes,  mix  with  all
classes,  and  still  be  a  blessing  to  tbem  all ;  he  can  fare  with  a  peasant  or  feast
with  a  prince,  and  be  equally  satisfied  vnth  either.  (IF.  Graham,  D.D.)
Hospitality  in  ministers : — I.  The  occasion  of  this  precept  was  the  distressed
ESTATE  AND  CONDITION  OF  THE  Church,  which  by  reasou  of  many  tyrants  and
persecutors  was  driven  into  many  straits,  partly  perceived  in  present  and  partly
foreseen  by  the  prophetical  spirit  of  the  apostle,  not  only  in  the  ten  persecutions
then  imminent,  but  also  in  the  several  afflictions  of  the  world,  in  which  they  were
to  find  tribulation  even  to  the  end  of  it.  For  as  it  is  in  this  aspectable  world,
which  is  subject  to  so  many  changes  and  mutations,  because  it  standeth  in  the
vicissitudes  of  years,  months,  days,  and  nights,  so  much  more  is  it  in  the  spiritual
world  of  the  Church,  which  in  the  earth  is  acquainted  with  her  winter  as  well  as
summer,  her  nights  as  well  as  days :  sometimes  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  most
comfortably  shining  and  imparting  His  heat  and  light  by  His  near  approach  unto
her ;  yea,  and  sometimes  there  be  two  suns  in  this  firmament,  for  together  with
the  sun  of  the  Church,  the  sun  of  the  world  affordeth  warm  and  comfortable  days
for  the  full  beauty,  liberty,  and  glory  of  the  Church.  But  sometimes,  again,  this
sun  departeth  in  displeasure  and  carrieth  the  sun  of  the  world  with  him,  then  is  a
black  winter  of  the  Church,  nothing  but  storms  and  tempests,  persecutions  and
trials,  one  in  the  neck  of  another,  and  scarce  one  fair  gleam  between.  Now  in
such  times  the  poor  Church  is  driven  to  travel  for  rest,  and  the  innocent  dove  of
Christ  cannot  find  in  her  own  land  any  rest  for  the  sole  of  her  foot ;  well  may  she
fly  abroad  to  seek  her  security.  In  all  which  times  every  Christian  is  bound  by  this
and  such  like  precepts  to  give  her  harbour  and  safe  conduct  till  the  dash  and  storm
be  over.  Besides,  suppose  the  Church  in  general  at  her  best  estate,  yet  the  parti-
cular members  of  the  Church  are  for  most  part  poor  and  needy,  and  even  then
subject  to  many  troubles  for  keeping  the  faith  and  good  consciences,  by  means
whereof  they  are  often  driven  from  house  and  home,  and  sometimes  are  in  banish-
ment and  exile,  sometimes  in  prison  and  bonds ;  all  whom  the  Lord  commendeth
to  the  charitable  and  Christian  devotion  of  Christian  men,  and  bindeth  them  to  the
cheerful  receiving  and  relieving  of  them  in  such  necessity ;  let  them  be  strangers
yet,  if  they  be  of  the  household  of  faith,  they  have  right  to  harbour  and  relieve,  and
in  the  practice  of  this  duty  the  apostle  requireth  that  the  minister  be  the  foreman.
II.  It  will  be  inquired  whether  every  minister  must  be  harbourous  and  hospitable,
and  if  he  must,  what  shall  become  of  them  whose  livings  are  scarce  able  to  harbour
themselves ;  and  much  more  of  the  swarms  of  our  ten-pound  men,  and  very  many  scarce
half  that  to  maintain  their  family  ?  it  seemeth  tbat  every  minister  ought  to  be  a  rich
man.  I  answer,  that  the  poorest  minister  may  not  exempt  himself  from  this  duty,
neither  is  altogether  disabled  from  it ;  a  poor  man  may  be  merciful  and  comfortable  to
tiie  distressed  some  way  or  other,  as  if  with  Peter  and  John  he  have  not  money  or  meat
to  give,  yet  such  as  he  hath  he  can  give — counsel,  prayers,  and  his  best  affections.

TTT-   Th>    seasons   KNFOBOINa  THIS   PRECEPT   UPON  THE  MINISTEB  ESPECIALLT.      1.   In


8S  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  u

regard  of  strangers  he  must  take  up  this  duty  whether  they  be  strangers  frona  the
faith,  that  hereby  he  might  win  them  to  the  love  of  true  religion  which  they  see  to
be  so  merciful  and  liberal,  or  else  if  they  be  converted  much  more  that  he  may  com-
fort and  confirm  such  as  are  banished,  or  otherwise  evil  entreated  for  the  confession
and  profession  of  the  truth,  for  if  every  Christian,  much  more  must  the  minister  be
affected  to  those  that  are  in  bonds,  as  though  himself  were  bound  with  them,  and
consequently  look  what  kindness  he  would  receive  if  he  were  in  their  condition,  the
same  to  his  power  he  is  to  bestow  upon  them.    2.  In  regard  of  his  own  people,  upon
whom  by  this  means  he  sealeth  his  doctrine  sundry  ways  ;  but  especially  ii  he  keep
open  house  for  the  poor  Christians  in  want  he  bindeth  the  souls  of  such  receivers  to
obey  the  "Word,  and  encourageth  them  by  his  entertainment  in  their  entertainment  of
the  gospel.  IV.  The  use.  1.  It  teacheth  that  it  were  to  be  wished  that  the  maintenance
of  every  minister  were  competent,  certain,  and  proper  unto  himself,  that  he  might  have
wherewith  to  perform  this  so  necessary  a  duty.     2.  In  regard  of  poor  strangers,  to
stir  up  ministers  and  people  to  a  liberal  heart  towards  them  aJl,  but  especially  if
they  be  such  as,  the  land  of  whose  own  possessions  being  unclean,  come  over  unto
the  land  of  the  possession  of  the  Lord,  wherein  the  Lord's  tabernacle  dwellcth.
How  few  children  hath  Abraham,  the  father  of  our  faith,  among  us,  who  sit  in  the
door  of  their  tent  to  watch  for  and  enforce  strangers  to  receive  their  best  entertain-
ment 1     Few  be  our  Lots,  who  will  undergo  any  loss,  any  indignity,  before  strangers
shall  sustain  any  harm  at  all ;  he  will  offer  his  own  daughters  to  their  violence,  he
will  use  reasons,  they  had  known  no  man,  and  that  which  would  have  persuaded
any  but  the  Sodomites  he  used  last,  that  they  were  strangers  and  were  come  under
his  roof.     Few  Jobs,  who  will  not  suffer  the  stranger  to  lodge  in  the  street,  but  open
their  doors  to  him  that  passeth  by  the  way.    (T.  Taylor,  D.D.)        A  lover  of  good
men. — The  lover  of  the  good : — 1.  A  good  man  is  always  deeply  sensible  of  the
opposite  of  goodness — of  moral  evil — in  himself  and  in  the  world  around  him.   The
inner  cry  of  his  heart  often  is,  ••  O  wretched  man  that  I  am,"  "  When  I  would  do
good,  evil  is  present  with  me  ! "    It  is  present,  but  not  allowed ;  hated  rather,
mourned  over,  repented  of,  put  away  in  purpose.     The  goodness  of  the  man  is
shown  in  this  internal  preference — a  preference  of  which,  in  the  first  instance,  only
the  man  himself  is  conscious,  but  which  is  certain  to  become  apparent  to  others.
For,  be  sure  of  this,  that  what  we  most  deeply  regard  in  our  own  hearts  cannot  be
permanently  hidden  from  others.    Exactly  so  it  is  with  regard  to  evil  in  the  world
around  him,  that  is,  the  evil  that  is  in  other  men.    A  good  man  cannot  look  upon
evil  with  favour  or  allowance ;  the  instinct  that  is  within  him  will  put  him  in  a
moment  in  moral  opposition  to  the  evil  that  is  in  the  world.     Conscience  says,  with
Luther,  "  Here  I  stand.     I  can  do  no  other.    So  help  me,  God !  "    The  world's
way  is  a  way  of  universal  conciliation  and  compliance  and  apology.    2.  A  good  man,
while  standing  in  direct  moral  opposition  to  evil  will,  at  the  same  time,  be  pitiful
and  compassionate  towards  the  subjects  of  it.    He  will  be  like  God  in  this.     God
hates  evU.     God  pities  those  who  are  caught  in  its  toils,  and  who  suffer  its  penalties
and  are  loaded  with  its  curse.     He  pities  them  and  comes  to  save  them.     3.  A  good
man  is  humble,  modest,  moderate  in  his  own  esteem.    He  has  the  sense  of  his
frailty,  of  his  sin,  and  all  the  limitations  of  his  nature,  and  the  sorrows  and  troubles
of  this  earthly  life  to  keep  him  humble.    A  proud  man  is  foolish,  in  the  deepest
sense,  and  ignorant.    4.  A  good  man  is  one  who  does  good.    As  the  righteous  man
is  one  who  doeth  righteousness  ;  as  the  merciful  man  is  one  who  ' '  sheweth  mercy,"
and  the  generous  man  one  who  gives  at  some  self-sacrifice ;  so  in  a  larger  sense  the
good  man  is  one  who  does  good,  as  he  has  opportunity,  at  his  own  cost,  with  some
intelligent  purpose  for  the  benefit  of  his  fellow-men  ;  who  does  good  from  a  grateful
sense  of  the  great  goodness  of  God  to  him  ;  does  good  from  a  real  love  of  the  action,
and  a  love  of  the  people  to  whom  he  does  it ; — who,  in  one  word,  is  like  God  Him-
sell,  who  giveth  to  all  men  liberally,  and  upbraideth  not — "  who  sends  His  rain  on
the  just  and  on  the  unjust."    A  good  man  is  one,  in  short,  who  has  the  active  and
passive  virtues  more  or  less  in  exercise.     They  are  not  in  perfect  exercise  :  some  of
them  may  be  scarcely  in  sight  at  all,  but  he  is  inclined  to  all  the  virtue  and  set,  in
the  temper  of  his  mind,  against  all  evil.     6.  There  is  on  the  whole  not  much  diffi-
culty in  distinguishing  such  a  man  from  a  man  who  is  not  good — who  is  not  true,
who  is  not  faithful ;  who  is  not  generous,  nor  humble,  nor  helpful ;  who  has  no
likeness  to  Christ,  who  is  not  morally  a  child  of  God.    The  diffioidty  is  greater  when
we  oome  to  compare  this  real  Christian  goodness  with  some  of  the  more  promising
types  of  natural  amiability.     Some  men  are  made  to  be  loved.    They  are  so  kind,
10  bright,  so  helpful,  so  full  of  sympathy,  and  they  carry  all  this  somehow  so  much


CHAP.  1.]  TITUS.  37

in  their  temper,  and  in  the  whole  habit  of  their  life,  and  even  often  on  their  very
countenances,  that  they  make  their  way  at  once  wherever  they  wish  to  be.  After
all  some  of  them  may  be  good  and  true  in  the  deepest  and  most  essential  sense ;
many  of  them  may  be  good  up  to  the  point  of  their  knowledge — "  He  that  doeth
righteousness  is  righteous."  He  that  doeth  good  is  good ;  and  without  any  fear  we*
may  be  "  lovers  of"  such  good  men.  6.  If  we  love  good  men,  we  shall  observe  them
thoughtfully,  we  shall  look  at  their  spirit  and  character,  their  aims  and  their  pur-
poses in  life.  Love  will  soon  die,  love  of  any  kind,  unless  it  be  fed  by  thought  and
kindled  anew  by  remembrance.  "  Therefore  will  I  remember  Thee  from  the  land  of
Jordan."  ."  'When  I  remember  these  things  " — the  privileges  and  joys  of  bygone
days — "I  pour  out  my  soul  in  me  " ;  in  distress  and  apprehension  lest  they  should
never  be  renewed,  and  yet  in  fervent  hope  that  they  may ;  that  I  shall  again  ascend
the  hill  of  Zion,  and  sing  at  her  feasts  among  the  bands  of  the  faithful  and  the
good.  7.  If  we  love  good  men  we  shall  associate  with  them.  They  will  be  our
hearts'  aristocracy,  the  very  uppermost  circle  of  life  to  us,  "  our  joy  and  crown."
By  such  association  we  shall  get  social  and  spiritual  advantages  that  could  not
otherwise  come  to  us.  {A.  Raleigh,  D.D.)  Good  companionship: — This  is  no
doubt  intended  to  rebuke  the  tendency  in  many  most  hospitable  men  to  surround
their  tables  not  with  the  good  but  the  bad ;  not  with  the  sober,  the  wise,  and  the
saintly,  but  the  vilest,  because  they  may  be  brilliant,  and  the  most  immoral,  because
they  may  be  attractive  and  refined.  The  Christian  bishop  should  be  a  lover  of  good
men :  his  house  should  be  a  magnet  to  attract  the  just,  the  generous,  and  the  holy
from  all  quarters ;  not  a  scene  of  luxurious  revelry  to  attract  the  riotous  and  tiie
profane.  Except  in  the  pulpit  the  apostolical  bishop  has  nowhere  so  great  axx
influence  as  in  his  ovm  house  and  at  his  own  table ;  and  his  example  in  privacy
being  noble  and  Christian  is  even  more  attractive  and  influential  than  in  his  publio
ministrations.  His  guests  have  generally  an  open  ear,  and  the  faithful  bishop  haa
a  word  in  season  for  them  all.  A  godly  bishop  (if  he  had  the  means),  in  the
neighbourhood  of  a  university  might  influence  in  this  way  the  minds  of  hundred?
of  young  men  who  are  to  be  the  future  lights  and  guides  of  the  nation.  {W.  Qraham^
D.2).)  Just,  holy,  temperate. — Good  ministerial  qualities : — 1.  Just  refers  to  ths
principles  of  equity  in  our  conduct  with  one  another.  In  the  entire  management  and
government  of  his  Church,  but  especially  in  discipline,  the  bishop  or  elder  requires
this  qualification.  He  must  look  upon  the  poor  and  the  rich,  the  ignorant  and  the
learned,  in  this  respect  with  an  equal  eye.  2.  Holy,  on  the  other  hand,  expresses
more  especially  our  relations  towards  God,  who  is  so  often  called  in  Scripture  •*  the
Holy  One  of  Israel."  He  is  a  saint,  and  rejoices  to  be  numbered  with  the  company  of
those  that  are  sanctified.  His  external  conduct,  which  is  altogether  just,  is  not  super*
ficial  but  real,  and  flows  from  holiness  of  heart ;  and  all  his  noble  actions  in  the
sight  of  man  are  based  on  the  new  heart,  the  new  nature,  and  the  new  hope  within
him.  He  is  holy  :  his  presence  rebukes  the  ungodly,  and  the  tongue  of  the  wicked
is  silent  before  him ;  the  atmosphere  around  him  is  pure,  salubrious,  and  serene ;
his  words  when  he  speaks  are  like  ointment  poured  forth ;  his  holy  exhortations  and
heavenly  prayers  are  full  of  the  blessing  of  the  Lord ;  and  his  whole  walk  in  the
midst  of  the  people  is  like  the  sun,  brighter  and  brighter  unto  the  perfect  day.  This
twofold  relation  of  man  to  his  neighbour  and  to  God  was  known  to  the  heathen,  for
Polybius  says  (xxiii.  10,  8),  "Just  in  respect  to  our  fellow-man,  and  holy  in  things
pertaining  to  God."  Botn  of  these  meet  in  the  Christian  bishop  and  form  the
greatest  perfection  of  his  character.  He  is  distinguished  by  justice  among  his
fellow-creatures  on  earth,  and  his  holiness  connects  him  with  his  Lord  and  Head
in  heaven.  3.  He  is  also  temperate,  iyKpariji,  {cf.  1  Cor.  vii.  9 ;  ix.  25) — powerful,
master  of  himself,  having  self-control,  and  hence  continent,  which  is  undoubtedly
the  meaning  of  it  here.  He  has  renounced  the  world,  the  devil,  and  the  flesh,  and
he  will  not  be  drawn  away  from  his  high  calling  by  sensual  pleasure.  (Ibid.)
Holding  fast  the  faithful  Word. — The  characteristics  of  a  successful  preacher : — L
Peesonal  conviction  of  the  truth.  II.  Aptness  to  teach  others.  III.  Powbb  of
PERSUASION  AND  CONVICTION.  (F.  Wag  Staff.)  The  faithful  Word  : — L  The  Word  o»
God  is  a  faithful  Word,  and  infallible.  1.  The  author  is  holy  and  true  (Rev.  iii.
7,  14).  2.  The  instruments  were  led  by  the  immediate  direction  of  the  Holy  Ghost
(2  Pet.  i.  21).  3.  The  matter  of  this  Word  is  an  everlasting  truth  ;  the  law  an  eternal
rule  of  righteousness  as  ancient  as  God  Himself ;  the  gospel  an  everlasting  gospel,
containing  promises  of  eternal  truth,  &c.  4.  The  form  of  it,  which  is  the  con-
formity of  it  with  God  Himself,  maketh  it  appear  that  if  God  be  faithful  this  His
Word  must  needs  also  be  so  :  in  that  it  resembleth  Him  in  His  omnipotency,  for


•8  TRE  BIBUCAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  i.

this  power  and  arm  of  God  never  retorneth  in  vain  bat  doth  all  the  work  of  it.  In
His  wisdom  giving  most  perfect  and  sore  directions,  resolving  all  donbtfol  cases,
and  making  wise  unto  salvation.  In  His  purity  and  perfection  being  an  undefiled
and  perfect  law.  In  His  omniscience  it  aearcheth  the  heart,  discovereth  the  thoughts,
divideth  between  the  marrow  and  bone  (Heb.  iv.  12).  In  His  judgment  acquitting
believers,  to  whom  it  is  a  sweet  savour  of  life  to  life ;  condemning  infidels  both  here
and  much  more  at  the  last  day  (John  xii.  48).  In  His  truth  and  verity  as  here,  and
Col.  i.  6,  it  is  called  the  word  of  truth.  5.  The  ends  show  the  certainty  and
faithfulness  of  it,  it  being  the  only  means  of  regeneration  (1  Pet.  i.  21),  of  begetting
faith,  (Bom.  x.),  and,  consequently,  both  of  freeing  men  from  hell  and  of  assuring
them  of  that  freedom ;  the  only  word  that  can  supply  sound  and  firm  consolation,
yea  settled  and  assured  comfort  unto  distressed  consciences,  none  of  which  ends
could  it  ever  attain  if  itself  were  unsound  and  uncertain.  II.  Now  as  it  cabbieth  with
IT  ALL  THESE  GROUNDS,  80  ABE  THERE  A  NHUBEB  wiTHODT  IT  HOBE  whereby  we  may  Con-
firm the  same  truth,  as — 1.  It  is  the  foundation  of  the  Church  ^Epb.  ii.  20),  against
which  if  hell  gates  could  ever  prevail  the  Church  were  utterly  sunk.  2.  Hereunto  hath
the  Lord  tied  His  Church,  as  to  an  infallible  direction,  to  the  law,  and  to  the  testi-
mony, without  which  there  is  nothing  but  error  and  wandering ;  ye  err  not  knowing
the  Scriptures.  3.  This  truth  hath  been  above  all  other  oppugned  by  Satan,
heretics,  tyrants,  yet  never  a  whit  of  it  was  ever  diminished ;  Solomon's  books  may
be  lost,  but  not  these  of  the  true  Solomon,  Jesus  Christ.  4.  This  Word  hath  been
80  certainly  sealed  in  the  hearts  of  the  elect  of  all  ages  that  where  it  once  was
harboured  in  truth  it  could  never  be  shaken  out  by  any  kind  of  most  exquisite
torture  and  torment.  (T.  Taylor,  D.D.)  The  faithful  Word  to  be  improved: —
Unto  hearers  this  doctrine  affordeth  special  use  of  instruction.  1.  If  it  be
so  faithful  a  Word  every  man  must  attend  unto  it  (2  Pet.  i.  19);  we  have
a  surer  word,  to  which  ye  do  well  that  ye  attend.  3.  To  lay  up  this  Word
surely,  as  being  the  sure  evidence  of  thy  salvation,  and  of  thy  heavenly  in-
heritance  among  the  saints.  Men  lock  up  their  evidences  or  conveyances
of  land  in  sure  and  safe  places,  delight  often  to  read  them,  suffer  no  man  to
eousen  them  of  them,  whatsoever  casualty  come  these  are  by  all  means  possible
safeguarded,  and  shall  any  man  carelessly  neglect  such  an  evidence  as  this  is,  with-
out which  he  hath  no  assurance  of  salvation,  nor  the  tenure  (out  of  his  idle  conceit)
of  one  foot  in  heaven ;  a  lame  man,  if  he  hold  not  his  staff,  f alleth  ;  and  whosoever
loseth  his  part  in  the  Word  loseth  his  part  in  heaven.  3.  Here  is  a  ground  of
thankfulness,  in  that  the  Lord  hath  not  only  vouchsafed  us  life  and  glory  and  im-
mortality when  we  were  dead,  and  when  nothing  could  be  added  to  our  misery ;  but
hath  also  given  us  such  a  constant  guide  and  direction  thereunto.  Now  what  can  we
do  less  than  in  way  of  thankfulness  (1)  Yield  up  ourselves  to  be  directed  by  this
faithful  Word.  (2)  Believe  it  in  whatsoever  it  commandeth,  threateneth,  or
promiseth,  in  that  it  is  such  a  faithful  Word  ;  and  hereby  we  set  also  our  seal  unto
it.  (3)  Constantly  cleave  unto  it  in  life  and  in  death,  and  not  to  be  so  foolish  as  to
be  soon  removed  to  another  gospel,  nor  so  fickle  as  children,  to  be  carried  about  with
every  wind  of  doctrine,  but  hold  fast  such  a  stable  truth,  so  full  of  direction  in  all  the
life,  and  so  full  of  comfort  at  the  time  of  death ;  for  it  is  as  a  fast  and  faithful  friend,
tried  in  time  of  adversity,  standing  closest  to  a  man  in  his  greatest  necessity.  (Ibid.)
The  Bible  iiijlexible  in  its  requirements : — When  I  was  a  boy  I  was  engaged  in  the
building  trade.  I  didn't  know  much  about  it,  and  I  was  set  to  do  any  odd  jobs,  any
work  in  a  dark  comer  that  could  not  be  mnch  seen.  I  worked  by  the  side  of  a  man
who  on  one  occasion  made  a  sarcastic  remark  that  I  shall  never  forget.  It  made  me
so  angry,  nearly  as  angry  as  you  are  when  you  are  hit  hard  from  the  pulpit.  He
said,  "  Tom,  when  I  go  home  I  will  call  at  the  saddler's  smd  order  a  leather  plumb-
rod  for  you."  He  meant  that  my  work  was  so  crooked  that  I  w.uited  a  bending  and
not  a  straight  plumb-rod.  Builders  use  a  wooden  plumb  that  will  not  bend  at  all.
The  Bible  is  not  a  leather  plun)b-rod  to  be  accommodated  to  us,  but  is  like  a  wooden
one,  inflexible  in  its  requirements,  and  to  which  we  must  accommodate  ourselves.
(T.  Champness.)  That  he  may  be  able  by  sound  doctrine  both  to  exhort  and  con-
vince.— Sound  doctrine  and  faithful  exhortation : — 1.  In  that  the  Word  is  called
doctrine,  and  no  doctrine  is  without  a  teacher ;  it  behoveth  every  man  to
repair  to  the  teachers  of  it.  2.  As  this  doctrine  implieth  teachers,  so  doth
it  also  learners  and  scholars.  Teaching  us  that  we  must  all  of  us  become
learners  of  this  Word  and  doctrine,  for  so  lon^  as  there  is  doctrine  and  teaching
on  God's  part  so  must  there  bo  an  hearkening  and  learning  on  ours,  and  the
rather,  both  because  that  which  is  said  of  all  knowledge,  that  it  is  infinite,  is  much


OHir.  I.]  TITUS.  89

more  true  of  thiB,  for  God's  commandments  are  exceeding  large,  as  also  seeing
in  this  school  we  are  to  become  not  only  more  learned  but  better  men.  8.  In  that
the  apostle  calleth  that  here  wholesome  doctrine,  which  in  the  words  before  he
called  a  faithful  Word,  and  fitted  for  doctrine.  Note  that  the  men  of  God,  when
they  fell  into  speech  of  the  Word  of  God,  they  spoke  not  slightly  of  it  and  away,  but
were  hardly  drawn  from  it  without  leaving  behind  them  some  notable  eulogy  or
other  upon  it  (Rom.  i.  16) :  the  gospel  the  power  of  God  to  salvation  (John  vi.  68).
Peter  saith  not,  Master,  Thou  hast  the  word  of  God,  but  Thou  hast  the  words  of
eternal  life ;  and  what  a  number  of  glorious  things  are  ascribed  unto  it  (Heb.  iv.  12).
Hence  according  to  their  several  occasions  are  ^  those  excellent  epithets  ascribed
unto  it  through  the  Scriptures,  some  of  the  penmen  looking  at  the  author,  some  at
the  matter,  some  to  the  qualities,  some  to  the  effects,  and  accordingly  invest  it  with
titles  well  beseeming  it.  4.  Whereas  the  apostle  is  not  contented  that  the  minister
should  teach  but  exhort  also ;  it  teacheth  ministers  to  labour  for  this  gift  whereby
an  edge  is  set  upon  their  doctrine,  and  wherewith  as  with  a  goad  they  prick  on  the
affections  of  those  that  are  under  the  yoke  of  Christ.  A  difficult  thing  it  is,  for  teach-
ing is  an  easy  task  in  comparison  of  it,  and  yet  so  necessary  as  that  all  the  ministerial
work  is  called  by  this  name  (Acts  xiii.  15).  5.  Whereas  the  apostle  addeth  that  ex-
hortation must  go  with  wholesome  doctrine,  we  note  that  then  is  exhortation  power-
ful and  profitable,  when  it  is  firmly  grounded  upon  sound  and  wholesome  doctrine.
IT.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Victory  through  preaching  sound  doctrine: — Seldom  has  a
letter  answer  been  rendered  to  the  enemies  of  Christ  than  that  given  by  Pastor
Holland  in  a  Catholic  canton,  where  the  gospel  has  but  recently  gained  a  footing.
The  incident  is  thus  described  :  Absolutely  discarding  controversy  he  preached  the
simple,  clear  gospel.  The  Capucine  monks  came  to  preach  a  mission  against  the
*'  heretical  invasion,"  the  "  Yaudois  venom  "  permeating  the  canton ;  and,  in  no
measured  language,  thundered  their  calumnies  and  anathemas.  People  came  to  the
pastor:  "You  surely  will  not  let  this  drop,  but  roundly  answer  them?"  "Only
you  come  next  Sunday,"  replied  he,  "  and  you  will  hear  how  I  will  serve  them  out  I "
The  church  was  filled,  and  the  pastor  preached  on  the  love  of  God  through  Christ
Jesas,  and  on  the  love  He  sheds  abroad  in  our  hearts  towards  all  men — not  an  allu-
sion throughout  to  the  bitter  words  which  had  been  spoken.  The  contrast  was  im-
mensely felt.  The  writer  goes  on  to  say  that  the  people  who  had  crowded  the  church
were  profoundly  touched,  and  a  grander  victory  was  won  than  by  any  amount  of
hard  words.  The  simple  story  of  the  love  of  God  in  Christ  moved  and  melted  the
hardest  hearts.  The  incident  is  worth  noticing  as  an  example  which  might  well
find  followers.

Vers.  10, 11.  For  there  are  many  unmly  and  vain  talkers  and  deceivers. — The
conjunction  "for"  showeth  that  the  words  following  contain  a  reason  of  the  matter
preceding,  viz.,  why  the  minister  should  be  a  man  so  qualified  with  able  parts,  both
to  maintain  the  truth  and  censure  the  falsehood.  The  reason  is  drawn  from  the
description — 1.  Of  teachers,  in  these  two  verses ;  and  2.  Of  hearers,  in  the  twelfth.
The  teachers  are  described  by  three  arguments.  1.  From  their  indefinite  number,
there  are  many,  not  two  or  three,  who  are  easily  set  down,  but  many.  2.  By  their
adjuncts,  which  are  two.  1.  They  are  disobedient  or  refractory,  such  as  will  not
submit  themselves  to  the  true  doctrine  and  disciplirse  of  the  Church.  2.  They  are
vain  talkers ;  that  is,  such  as  being  given  to  ostentation  and  vanity,  contemn  the
study  and  delivery  of  sound  and  profitable  doctrine,  and  search  out  words  and
matters  of  wit  and  applause,  both  of  them  of  more  sweetness  unto  the  flesh  than
soundness  unto  the  soul  and  spirit.  3.  By  their  most  dangerous  effects,  and  these
also  are  two.  1.  Their  deceiving  of  minds ;  for  which  ungodly  practice  he  especi-
ally brandeth  them  of  the  circumcision;  that  is,  either  by  metonymy,  the  Jews
themselves  circumcised,  or  else  Gentiles  Judaising,  embracing  .Jewish  opinions,
mixing  the  law  and  gospel,  Moses  and  Christ,  circumcision  and  baptism  together,
making  indeed  an  hotchpotch  of  religion  by  confounding  things  that  can  never
stand  together.  The  second  effect  of  them  is  their  subversion  of  whole  houses ;
that  is,  they  poison  and  infect  whole  houses,  yea,  and  where  the  grounds  and
foundation  of  religion  hath  been  laid  they  overturn  and  overthrow  all.  This  last
effect  is  declared  by  two  arguments.  1.  From  tlie  instrumental  cause  of  it,  and
that  is  by  their  false  doctrinp,  teaching  things  which  they  ought  not.  2.  Prom  the
final  canse  of  it,  that  is,  covetousness,  for  fillliy  lucre  sake.  Now  these  teachers
being  so  many,  so  dangerous  and  hurtful,  their  mouths  must  needs  be  stopped.
Which  is  a  common  cone;!'  sion  s-t  bi-^tveen  the  two  verses,  as  having  reference


40  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  1.

onto  them  both,  aB  a  common  remedy  against  all  the  mischief  which  anyway  may
be  let  in  by  them,  and  therefore  those  that  are  to  be  admitted  into  the  ministry
must  be  of  ability  to  stop  their  mouths.  (T.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Hindrances  to
religion : — I.  The  chief  hindra.noe8  to  beligion  abe  often  in  the  Church  itself.
The  persons  alluded  to  were  members  and  professed  teachers.  1.  Words  without
sincerity  are  "vain."  2.  Great  attention  may  be  paid  to  the  letter  of  the  law,
while  its  spirit  is  violated — "  they  of  the  circumcision."  3.  The  distinction
between  good  and  bad  preachers — the  former  live  to  preach,  while  the  latter  preach
to  live.  II.  Hindrances  in  thb  Church  must  be  removed.  "  Whose  mouths
must  be  stopped."  1.  Discipline  must  be  exercised  in  love.  2.  The  prosperity
of  the  Church  of  Ood  must  be  considered  before  that  of  individuals.  3.
Every  age  has  its  own  obstructions  to  the  truth  —  intemperance,  covetous-
ness,  selfishness,  the  chief  hindrances  of  the  present.  III.  Communities  arb
AFFECTED  BT  THE  CONDUCT  OF  INDIVIDUALS.  The  characters  of  men  are  trans-
ferred  to  their  country;  here  the  Cretians  became  a  bye-word.  So,  drunken
Englishmen  abroad,  compromise  the  character  of  their  fellow-countrymen.  Four
vices — 1.  Untruthfulness.  2.  Passion — "evil  beasts."  3.  Sensuality.  4.  Sloth-
fulness.  {F.  Wagstaff.)  The  characteristics  of  false  teachers : — 1.  In  that  the  first
thing  taxed  in  these  false  teachers  by  the  apostle  is  disobedience,  we  learn  that  dis-
obedience COMMONLV  IS  the  GROUND  OF  FALSE  DOCTRINE.    For — 1.  It  iS  jUSt  with  God  tO

give  up  those  to  errors  and  delusion  that  receive  not  the  truth  in  the  love  of  it,  for
wheresoever  it  is  received  in  love  obedience  cannot  but  be  yielded  unto  it.  2.  The
nature  of  sin  is  ever  to  be  excusing  itself,  and  is  loath  to  be  crossed,  although  never  so
justly,  but  studieth  how  to  defend  itself  as  long  as  it  can,  even  by  wresting  the  Scrip-
tures, and  by  taking  up  one  error  for  the  maintenance  of  another.  3.  The  tenor  of
Scripture  jometh  these  two  together  (2  Pet.  ii.  1, 10, 12;  Acta  xiii.  6,  10;  3  John  9).

II.    PrKAOHBBS   who   THEMSELVES  ARE   DISOBEDIENT   UNTO   THE  WOBD,  FOR   MOST   PART

BECOME  IN  THEIR  MiNiSTRT  NO  BETTER  THAN  VAIN  TALKERS.  1.  In  regard  of  them-
selves, being  vain-glorious  persons,  affect  applause  rather  than  godly  edifying,
which  is  a  most  vain  thing.  2.  In  respect  of  their  labour,  which  is  all  in  vain,
never  attaining  the  end  and  right  scope  of  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  unto  salva-
tion ;  for  he  that  soweth  vanity  what  else  can  he  look  to  reap  ?  3.  In  regard  of  the
hearers,  who  also  spend  their  pains  in  vain  :  they  hear  a  great  noise  and  pomp  of
words,  and  a  glorious  show  of  human  wisdom,  which  may  wrap  the  simple  into
admiration,  but  they  are  left  without  reformation ;  their  ear  is  perhaps  a  little
tickled,  but  their  hearts  remain  untouched  ;  neither  are  their  souls  soundly
Instructed  nor  fed  with  knowledge,  but  they^o  away  as  wise  as  they  came.  These
Paul  calleth  vain  talkers  and  vain  janglers  (1  Tim.  i.  6),  and  again,  profane  and
vain  babblers,  and  that  justly.  1.  Because  their  puffed  discourses  proceed  from  the
profanity  of  their  hearts.  2.  They  are  as  strange  fire  from  the  Lord's  altar,  opposed
to  that  which  the  Lord  h  ith  sanctified  to  the  salvation  of  His  people.  3.  They  are
so  far  from  the  edifying  of  the  Church  that  they  cause  men  to  increase  unto  more
ungodliness  and  profaneness.  III.  How  did  these  false  teachers  deceive  men's
MINDS  ?  1.  By  suppressing  the  truth;  for  by  their  vain  jangling  and  speaking,  liker
poets,  philosophers,  historians,  than  prophets,  apostles,  or  any  successors  of  theirs,
they  made  a  cleanly  conveyance  of  the  light  from  the  people,  and,  withholding  the
truth  and  light,  they  led  them  from  Christ,  from  the  right  knowledge  of  tho
Scriptures,  from  sound  godliness  and  religion  in  judgment  and  practice,  and  bo
they  remained  as  dark  in  their  understanding,  as  erroneous  in  their  judgments,  as
froward  in  their  affections,  and  as  wicked  in  their  lives  as  ever  before.  2.  By
flattery;  for  they  would  not  deal  directly  against  the  sins  of  the  age,  as  godly
ministers  do,  but  deceitfully,  that  they  might  not  displease ;  herein  imitating  Satan
himself,  who  was  wont  of  old  to  answer  in  riddles,  as  he  answered  Cresus,  that  if
he  would  transport  himself  over  the  river  Halys  he  should  overthrow  a  most  mighty
kingdom,  namely,  his  own.  But  Micaiah  will  not  deceive  nor  flatter  with  Ahab,
although  it  stand  upon  his  life.  3.  By  letting  men  see  their  estate  in  false  glasses,
BO  as  they  never  see  the  truth  of  it,  for  people  taught  by  fables  and  novelties  think,
and  are  borne  in  hand,  that  they  are  in  heaven's  highway ;  their  souls  are  brought
on  sleep,  and  coming  from  such  frothy  discourses,  they  sit  down  and  please  them-
selves in  that  they  have  done  their  task  required,  especially  if  they  can  bring  home
a  jest  or  some  witty  sentence,  when  perhaps  they  scarce  heard  a  word  of  Christ,  of
their  justification,  of  their  mortification,  or  of  their  glory.  4.  By  placing  religion
in  bodily  exercises,  not  in  matters  of  spirit  and  truth  (Col.  ii.  20) ;  thus  did  the
Pharisees  in  their  times,  the  Papists  in  these,  and  whosoever  urge  the  decrees  of


CHAP.  1.]  TITUS.  41

men  more  than  the  commandments  of  God.  lY.  But  whose  uinds  abs  decxitsd  ?
1.  First  their  own  and  then  others,  for  they  are  blind  leaders  of  the  blind,  deceiving,
and  being  deceived,  and  although  our  apostle  ezpresseth  not  here  who  they  be  that
are  deceived,  yet  elsewhere  he  doth,  as  Bom.  xvi.  18,  '•  they  deceive  the  hearts  of  the
Bimple,"  and  2  Tim.  iii  6,  "  they  lead  captive  simple  women,"  and  2  Pet.  ii.  14,
"  they  beguile  unstable  souls,"  whence  we  see  that  ignorant,  inconstant,  and  on-
settled  souls,  which  hand  over  head  receive  any  doctrine  without  examination  or
trial,  whose  simpUcity  disableth  them  to  judge  between  truth  and  falsehood,  and
whose  levity  ma^es  them  like  shaken  reeds,  these  are  the  carcases  on  which  fuch
vultures  do  seize.  (T.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Danger  from  false  teachers : — Herodotus
tells  of  a  Scythian  river  having  marvellous  sweetness  till  a  little  bitter  mingles  with
it,  and  gives  it  ever  after  an  uncommon  bitterness.  So  evil  counsel,  in  some  emer-
gencies of  the  soul,  will  poison  the  whole  current  of  its  existence.  You  may  poison
a  well  from  which  a  neighbourhood  drinks,  and  yet  be  less  guilty  than  to  contaminate
the  flow  of  eternal  thought.  There  are  times  when  the  greatest  trust  which  one
human  being  can  repose  in  another  is  the  confidence  of  wise  direction.  Confiding  in
the  integrity  of  others,  men  sometimes  commit  their  credit,  their  wives  and  children,
to  their  keeping,  and  are  guided  by  them  through  fiery  coursers  over  the  land,  or
by  steam- vessels  over  the  seas ;  but  when  a  man  goes  with  his  soul,  and  trusts  that
to  what  a  fellow-being  may  direct,  the  trust  is  as  momentous  as  eternity  itself.
Yet  this  is  done,  for  as  by  man  came  death,  so  by  man  comes  life.  Oh,  ye  who  watch
for  souls,  as  every  Christian  should,  see  to  it  that  yon  ask  of  Ck>d  that  which  is
profitable  to  direct,  before  you  point  out  the  way  for  a  deathless  mind  to  travel  in.
Example  is  said  to  speak  louder  than  words.  Whose  mouths  most  be  stopped. —
Faithful  teachers  must  oppose  seducers : — The  duty  of  every  faithful  minister  is,  when
occasion  is  offered,  timely  to  oppose  himself  against  seducers,  and  stop  the  mouths  of
false  teachers,  wherein  also  the  Church  ought  to  back  and  strengthen  him.  For — 1.
The  example  of  Christ  must  be  our  precedent,  who  most  bodily  and  freely  vindicated
the  law  from  the  corrupt  glosses  and  expositions  of  the  Pharisees,  and  that  in  His  first
sermon.  2.  In  regard  of  the  particular  members  of  the  Church,  that  they  may  be
preserved  in  soundness  from  starting  away  and  forsaking  of  the  truth.  And  this  is
made  one  end  of  the  precept ;  the  madness  of  the  false  apostles  must  be  made
manifest,  that  they  may  prevail  no  longer.  3.  In  regard  of  the  false  teachers
themselves ;  fools,  saith  Solomon,  must  be  answered,  lest  they  be  wise  in  their  own
conceit ;  neither  shall  the  labour  be  wholly  lost  upon  them,  for  it  shall  be  a  means
either  to  convert  them  and  bring  them  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth,  or  else  so  to
convince  them  as  they  shall  be  made  excuseless.  And  further,  the  Church  must
strengthen  every  minister's  hands  in  this  contending  for  the  faith,  and  so
manifest  herself  to  be  the  ground  and  pillar  of  truth,  which  is  committed  to  her
trust  and  safe-keeping,  against  all  gainsayers.  This  ministerial  duty  requireth  a
great  measure  of  faiowledge,  and  a  man  furnished  with  gifts  of  variety  of  reading
and  soundness  of  judgment.  (1)  He  must  be  well  read  and  skilful  in  the  Scriptures,
that  by  them  in  the  first  place  he  may  be  able  to  shut  the  mouth  of  the  adversary.
(2)  To  all  this  knowledge  is  required  a  sound  judgment,  that  he  may  be  able  to
infer  good  and  necessary  consequence  upon  the  granting  of  the  truth  he  standeth
for,  and  on  the  contrary,  the  absurdities  and  inconveniences  which  necessarily
follow  his  adversaries'  false  positions.  {Ibid.)  The  silencing  of  evil  talkers : —
Whose  mouths  must  be  stopped,  does  not  mean  that  you  are  to  throw  them
into  an  inquisition  and  gag  their  mouths,  as  was,  and  is,  the  practice  of  the
Papacy.  The  heathen  persecutors  adopted  the  same  method  of  dealing  with  the
faithful  martyrs  of  the  Lord  ;  for,  in  order  to  prevent  them  speaking  of  His  grace,
they  cut  out  their  tongues.  The  Moslems  have  the  same  bloody  principle  from
their  Koran ;  so  that  the  Pope,  the  heathen,  the  grand  Turk,  are,  on  principle,
persecutors.  This  is  neither  taught  in  our  text,  nor  in  any  other  part  of  the  New
Testament.  On  the  contrary,  the  saints  are  persecuted,  but  they  never  persecute ;
they  are  to  follow  their  Lord  and  Master  to  the  cross,  not  the  example  of  those  who
crucified  Him.  But  their  mouths  must  be  stopped  in  a  quite  different  manner
from  gagging ;  they  must  be  opposed  by  reason,  faithfulness,  and  love  ;  their  influ-
ence must  be  destroyed  by  the  faithful  preaching  of  the  gospel ;  and  if  they  be
members  of  the  Church,  they  must  be  silenced  by  discipline,  and  if  still  refractory,
cast  out  of  the  communion  of  the  faithful.  {W.  Graham,  D.D.)  Stopping  foolish
speech  : — The  heights  and  recesses  of  Mount  Taurus  are  said  to  be  much  infested
with  eagles,  who  are  never  better  pleased  than  when  they  pick  the  bones  of  a  crane.
Cranes  are  prone  to  cackle  and  make  a  noise  (Isa.  xxxviii.  14),  and  particularly  so


43  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  i.

while  they  are  flying.  The  Boand  of  their  voices  aroases  the  eagles,  who  spring  ap
at  the  signal  and  often  make  the  talkative  travellers  pay  dearly  for  their  impadent
chattering.  The  older  and  more  experienced  cranes,  sensible  of  their  besetting
foible  and  the  peril  to  which  it  exposes  them,  take  care  before  venturing  od  the
wing  to  pick  np  a  stone  large  enough  to  fill  the  cavity  of  their  mouths,  and  conse-
qaently  to  impose  unavoidable  silence  on  their  tongues,  and  thus  they  escape  the
danger.  Persons  troubled  with  unruly  tongues  may  learn  a  lesson  from  the  elder
cranes.  All  Christians  ought  to  bridle  their  tongues  by  watchfulness  and  prayer.
The  Psalmist  formed  a  noble  resolution :  '*  I  said,  I  will  take  heed  to  my  way,  uiat
I  sin  not  with  my  tongue."

Vers.  12, 13.  The  Cretians  are  always  Uars. — A  classical  quotation : — ^It  is  not
often  that  St.  Paul  quoted  from  the  treasuries  of  classic  literature,  and  when  he  did
BO  he  did  not  draw  upon  the  most  celebrated  of  the  Greek  poets.  The  Hymn  of
Cleanthes  gave  him  a  text  in  his  speech  on  Mars'  Hill ;  the  treatise  of  Epimenidea
"  concerning  oracles  "  furnished  him  with  another.  Epimenides  was  a  Cretian  poet
of  religious  character  and  prophetic  claims,  who  visited  Athens  599  B.C.,  and  who
shortly  afterwards  died,  at  the  advanced  age  of  a  hundred  and  fifty.  He  appears  to
have  uttered  a  terse  drastic  proverb,  a  bitter  epigrammatic  characterisation  of  hia
fellow-countrymen,  a  portion  of  which,  "  The  Cretians  are  always  liars,"  was  quoted
by  CalUmachns  in  his  hymn  to  Zeus.  Theodoret  attributes  the  whole  quotation  to
Callimachus.  Jerome,  Chrysostom,  and  Epiphanius,  agree  to  refer  this  severe
indictment  against  the  Cretians  to  Epimenides,  the  semi-mythical  and  prophetic
minstrel  and  priest.  The  severity  of  the  condemnation  did  not  interfere  witii  the
tradition  preserved  by  Diogenes  Laertius,  that  the  Cretians  did  sacrificial  honour  to
him  as  a  god.  According  to  Diogenes,  stories  manifestly  fabulous  are  told  of  Epi-
menides, and  he  is  credited  with  having  written  numerous  treatises  and  poems.
{H.  R.  Reynolds,  D.D.)  The  character  of  the  Cretians  : — The  charge  of  falsehood
is  repeated  undoubtedly  by  Callimachus,  and  this  characteristic  must  have  been
deserved,  if  we  are  to  trust  the  host  of  testimonies  to  the  same  effect  from  other
sources.  The  very  word  "  Cretize  "  was  invented,  meaning,  "  to  play  the  part  of  a
Cretian,"  and  was  identical  with  "  to  deceive,  or  to  utter  and  circulate  a  lie."  "  Evil
beasts  "  is  a  phrase  expressive  of  untamed  ferocity,  truculent  selfishness,  and  greed;
while  **  idle  bellies,"  or  "  do  nothing  gluttons,"  completes  a  picture  of  most  revolt-
ing national  character.  (Ibid.)  Falsehood: — I.  Falsehood  and  deceit  in  word
and  deed  is  condemned,  not  only  by  the  light  of  the  Scriptures,  but  by  the  IjI9ht  of
NATURE  ITSELF.  Which  appeaieth  expressly  not  only  by  the  testimony  of  this  Pagan
poet,  but  by  other  lights  iu  nature ;  for  the  natural  conscience  of  man  accuseth  and
ohecketh  for  it ;  yea,  in  children  themselves,  it  maketh  them  blush  at  the  report  of
a  lie.  Besides,  the  most  graceless  of  men  account  it  the  highest  disgrace  to  have
the  lie  given  them,  the  infamy  of  which  vice  is  such  as  none  will  take  to  it,  none
will  confess  it.  And  on  the  contrary,  the  heathen  so  extolled  truth,  in  word,  in
practice,  as  of  all  other  virtues  it  was  said  to  be  the  only  daughter  of  Jupiter,  as
whom  most  nearly  it  resembled.  II.  How  should  we  who  would  be  reputed  God's
CHILDREN  ABHOR  THAT  PRACTICE,  which  cvcu  the  SOUS  of  men  are  ashamed  of?  Shall
the  sparkles  of  natural  light  make  the  natural  conscience  of  a  heathen,  and  grace-
less man  accuse  him  of  this  sin ;  and  shall  not  the  clear  light  of  grace  force  the
conscience  of  professed  Christians  to  reprove  them  ?  Is  it  justly  reputed  a  disgrace
to  common  men,  to  be  taken  with  a  lie,  how  disgraceful  should  it  be  to  Chriitian
men  ?  Shall  the  heathen  profess  truth  to  resemble  God  so  expressly,  as  that  it  is
Hie  dear  and  only  daughter,  and  shall  Christians  who  find  in  the  Scriptures  the
whole  image  of  God,  styled  by  the  title,  and  comprehtmded  under  the  name  of  truth,
in  their  practice  scarce  express  it  as  a  part  of  that  image  ?  1.  Every  lie  is  hurtful
whether  in  jest  or  earnest,  for  evil  or  for  good,  because  it  is  an  enemy  to  truth,  and
against  the  ninth  commandmeut.  2.  For  jesting  or  sporting  lies,  the  threatening
is  general  (Psa.  v.  6),  untruths  may  not  be  spoken  although  they  be  not  thought.
And  many  of  the  heathen  themselves  saw  the  silliness  and  folly  of  this  shift ;  we
read  of  the  Lacedemonians,  that  they  would  not  suffer  their  laws  to  be  gainsaid  in
jest,  and  yet  the  law  of  the  Lord  may  be  controlled,  and  gainsaid  in  jest  of  Chris-
tians. When  Thespis,  the  first  stage-player,  was  asked  if  he  were  not  ashamed  to
utter  so  many  lies  in  such  a  worthy  audience,  he  answered,  he  did  it  in  sport.  But
wise  Solon  replied,  If  we  approve  and  commend  this  sport  we  shall  find  it  in  earnest
in  our  contracts  and  affairs ;  and  even  so  by  God's  just  judgment  it  befalls  Chris-
tians, who,  using  to  lie  in  sport,  got  an  habit  of  lying  in  earnest,  and  by  his  jesting


OBAF.  l]  TITUS.  13

lies,  raiseth  a  anspicion  of  his  words,  that  he  cannot  be  believed,  be  he  never  in
gach  earnest.  8.  For  officious  lies,  so  called,  there  can  be  no  such,  because  in  every
lie  some  office  or  duty  is  violated.  But  they  hurt  no  man ;  yes,  if  they  hurt  not
another,  they  hurt  a  man's  self  many  ways ;  again,  if  they  hurt  not  the  parties  foi
whom,  yet  they  hurt  the  parties  to  whom  they  are  told,  who  are  abused,  and  urged
to  believe  a  lie,  and  were  not  this,  yet  they  hurt  and  prejudice  the  truth  which
ought  to  prevail.  But  the  end  of  them  is  good,  Yea,  but  that  which  is  evil  in  the
nature  and  constitution  ma^  never  be  admitted!,  let  the  end  be  never  so  good  which
is  pretended.  The  least  evil  may  not  be  committed  for  the  greatest  good ;  to  help
man  we  may  not  hurt  God.  Nay,  we  may  not  tell  the  least  lie  for  God's  greatest
glory,  and  much  less  for  man's  good  (Job  xiii.  9,  10).  But  they  be  not  against
charity.  Yes,  for  charity  rejoiceth  in  truth,  and  if  they  were  not,  yet  are  they
directly  against  piety,  which  two  loving  friends  may  admit  no  divorce.    IIL  Akd  to

HELP  OUSSELVEB  IN  THIS  DUTY  UEDITAIE  ON  THESE  BEASONB.    1.  All  falsohood  and  UCS

are  directly  against  God  Himself,  who  is  truth  itself ;  so  as  by  them  a  man  becometh
most  unlike  unto  God,  and  most  like  to  the  devil,  who  is  the  father  and  first  founder
of  them.  2.  That  therefore  the  liar  oasteth  himself  into  the  gulf  of  God's  dis-
pleasure, seeing  as  He  hateth  all  the  works  of  the  devil,  so  hath  He  testified  special
hatred  against  this.  A  lying  tongue  is  one  of  the  six  things  which  the  Lord  hateth,
and  is  abomination  unto  Him  (Prov.  xii.  22),  and  therefore  doth  with  them  as  we
do  with  the  things  we  abhor ;  either  removeth  them  out  of  sight  by  barring  them
out  of  heaven,  or  destroyeth  them  (Psa.  y.  6).  3.  That  although  that  be  the
greatest  plague  to  have  the  face  of  God  set  against  them  here,  and  to  be  cast  from
out  of  His  face  and  blessed  presence  of  joy  hereafter,  yet  there  are  other  inferior
evils  not  to  be  contemned  which  wait  at  the  heels  of  this  sin.  (1)  That  it  mt^eth
the  sinners  of  this  suit  justly  hateful  even  unto  men,  as  those  who  are  the  main
enemies  unto  human  society,  which  is  upheld  by  truth  and  faithfulness.  (2)  Such
deceitful  and  fraudulent  persons  are  occasions  of  the  multiplication  of  oaths  and
perjuries  among  men,  for  which  the  land  mourneth.  (3)  In  themselves  it  argueth
the  want  of  God's  Spirit  in  their  hearts,  who,  being  the  Spirit  of  truth  and  Hght,
cannot  abide  to  dwell  in  a  heart  that  is  pleased  and  delighted  with  nothing  more
than  darkness  and  falsehood.  (4)  They  lose  justly  their  own  voice  and  credit,
and  are  worthy  not  to  be  beUeved  when  they  speak  truth ;  and  men  must  deal  with
them  as  with  their  father  the  devil,  whose  works  they  accustom  themselves  unto,
suspect  even  the  truth  from  them,  and  not  receive  any  as  from  them.  {T.  Taylor,
D.D.)  The  punishment  of  liars : — When  Aristotle,  a  Grecian  philosopher  and
tutor  of  Alexander  the  Great,  was  asked  what  a  man  could  gain  by  uttering  false-
hoods, he  replied,  "  Not  to  be  credited  when  he  shall  tell  the  truth."  On  the  con-
trary, it  is  related  that  when  Petrarch,  an  Italian  poet,  a  man  of  strict  integrity,
was  summoned  as  a  witness,  and  offered  in  the  usual  manner  to  take  an  oath  before
a  court  of  justice,  the  judge  closed  the  book,  saying,  **  As  to  you,  Petrarch,  your
word  is  sufficient."  From  the  story  of  Petrarch  we  may  learn  how  great  respect  is
paid  to  those  whose  character  for  truth  is  established ;  and  from  the  reply  of
Aristotle  the  folly  as  well  as  the  wickedness  of  lying.  In  the  country  of  Siam,  a
kingdom  of  Asia,  he  who  tells  a  lie  is  punished,  according  to  law,  by  having  his
mouth  sewed  up.  This  may  appear  dreadful ;  but  no  severity  is  too  great  against
one  who  commits  so  great  a  sin.  We  read  likewise  that  God  Almighty  struck
Ananias  and  Sapphira  dead  for  not  speaking  the  truth.  The  gospel  offered  to  the
wor$t : — This  is  indeed  a  fearful  character,  which  the  apostle  says  is  perfectly  true.
The  island  must  have  been  in  a  fearful  condition,  for  the  apostle  is  always  in  the
habit  of  speaking  mildly  even  of  those  who  are  blameworthy.  If  their  guilt  had
not  been  enormous,  he  would  never  have  rebuked  them  so  severely,  nor  given  such
stringent  commands  to  Titus  to  rebuke  them  sharply,  that  they  might  be  sound  in
the  faith.  And  here  we  should  remark  how  wonderful  the  love  of  God  is,  which
reaches  down  to  the  lowest  of  the  species,  and  elevates  such  brutish  natures  into
the  likeness  of  the  Son  of  God,  and  lifts  them  up  to  the  throne  of  His  glory  I  In
the  midst  of  that  pandemonian  isle  is  the  Church  of  God  planted,  like  an  oasis  in
the  desert  waste,  Uke  a  lighthouse  in  the  raging  seas,  to  give  rest  and  direction  to
all  who  will  Usten  to  the  calls  of  Divine  mercy.  Oh,  how  admirable,  how  glorious,
is  that  God,  who,  like  the  father  of  the  lost  son,  opens  His  house  and  His  bosom  to
a  vile,  wretched,  prodigal  world  I  Art  thou  a  Cretian  ?  art  thou  a  liar,  a  glutton,
and  a  brute  ?  then  the  message  of  the  love  of  God  is  to  you — even  to  you ;  and  if
you  receive  it  you  shall  shine  among  the  saints  in  light  for  ever  I  The  world
Bays  perhaps  of  you,  as  the  proverb  did  of  old,  "  The  three  worst  C's  in  the  world


44  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  I.

are  Cappadocia,  Crete,  and  Cilicia  " ;  yet  unto  these  habitations  of  iniquity  and
dens  of  devils  the  grace  of  God  penetrated,  and  multitudes  were  drawn  to  the  Lord.
The  gospel  is  for  thee,  brother,  in  all  thy  vileness  and  guilt ;  and  Jesus,  who  loved
thee,  is  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever.  Come  to  Him,  and  be  saved.
{W.  Graham,  D.D.)  Evil  beasts. — Bestiality  in  men: — 1.  In  becoming  without
understanding,  and  in  all  the  things  of  God  by  nature  as  ignorant  as  the  brute
beasts  (Psa.  Ixxiii.  22 ;  Jer.  x.  14 ;  Prov.  xx.  24).  2.  By  giving  up  themselves  to  be
led  with  sensuality  as  brute  beasts  (2  Pet.  ii.  12).  This  naturally  arises  out  of  the
former ;  for  when  men  are  deprived  of  understanding,  judgment,  reason,  as  every
natural  man  is  in  the  things  of  God,  they  must  needs  be  led  by  other  guides,  of
lusts,  appetite,  sense,  and  sight,  even  as  the  beasts  are.  3.  By  the  practice  of
many  beastly  and  brutish  properties.  For  what  properties  have  unregenerate  meOj
which  are  not  more  beseeming  evil  and  hurtful  beasts  than  men?  (1)  If  we  con-
sider the  respect  between  God  and  him  his  heart  knoweth  no  subjection ;  but  as
was  said  once  of  Israel,  he  is  as  an  unruly  heifer,  he  knoweth  no  yoke,  acknow-
ledgeth  no  master,  Ufteth  up  his  heel  against  his  feeder,  and  careth  not  for  the
owner  of  his  fat  pasture.  (2)  If  we  consider  natural  men  in  themselves,  no  beast
is  so  unclean  and  foul  as  they  whose  filthy  hearts  are  fit  for  nothing,  but  to  be
stinking  cages  and  dens  for  filthy  birds  and  beasts,  wholly  bespotted  as  the  leopards
(Jer.  xiii.  23),  swinish  men,  wallowing  in  the  dirt  and  mire  of  sinful  pleasures,
and  revolting  from  every  good  way  as  dogs  to  their  vomits ;  for  so  the  apostle
termed  such  Jews  as  revolted  from  Christianity  to  circumcision,  beware  of  dogs.
(3)  Consider  them  in  respect  of  their  neighbour,  no  evil  beast  is  so  omel  and
venomous  as  they ;  in  regard  of  the  former  the  Scriptures  ascribe  the  property  of
the  devil  himself  unto  them,  calling  them  ramping  and  roaring  lions,  such  as  David
and  Christ  Hunoelf  had  to  do  withal  (Psa.  xxii.  13)  such  a  one  was  Nero  whom
Paul  had  to  do  withal  (2  Tim,  iv.  17).  And  for  their  savageness  and  greediness
they  are  called  dogs  and  wolves  (Zeph.  iii.  8).  And  for  subtlety  and  craft  to  hurt
they  are  termed  foxes  (Luke  xiii.  32).  In  regard  of  the  latter,  namely,  their  poison
and  venom,  Christ  calleth  them  serpents  and  generation  of  vipers ;  their  tongues
are  like  stings,  sharpened  against  good  men,  and  the  poison  of  adders  and  asps  is
under  their  lips  (Psa.  cxl.  3),  hence  doth  the  Lord  threaten  most  cruel  and  inevit-
able enemies  under  such  speeches  (Jer.  viii.  17).  Whereby  he  would  describe  and
signify  the  implacable  and  virulent  malice  and  rage  of  the  Chaldeans.  Now  man
being  above  aU  other  bom  a  sociable  creature,  and  to  live  in  society  with  God  and
men  in  the  family.  Church,  and  commonwealth,  hath  by  his  hostility  against  God,
and  enmity  against  man,  after  a  sort  put  off  the  nature  of  man,  and  by  such
degenerating  of  good  right  hath  lost  even  the  name  of  man  also.  {T.  Taylor,  D.D.)
Like  a  beast : — We  have  a  common  saying  when  we  see  ourselves  overseen  or  over-
taken in  any  temporal  and  outward  thing,  Oh,  what  a  beast  was  I !  but  well  were
it  if  we  would  seriously  thus  accuse  ourselves  when  we  have  failed  in  our  godly
course,  and  to  say,  Oh,  what  a  beast  was  I  to  leave  the  direction  of  the  Word,  and
suffer  myself  to  be  led  by  my  appetite,  or  by  the  lust  of  my  heart,  or  the  sight  of
mine  eyes  to  this  or  that  sin  ?  Alas,  that  I  to  whom  God  hath  given  reason,  judg-
ment, election,  deliberation,  yea.  His  Word  and  Spirit,  should  live  all  this  while  as
one  destitute  of  all  these.  I  understand  not  what  the  good  and  acceptable  will  of
God  is,  but  am  yet  like  the  horse  and  mule  without  understanding.  I  have  stopped
my  ears  at  the  Word  like  the  deaf  adder,  and  have  refused  the  things  of  my  peace  ;
I  have  barked  against  God  and  godliness ;  I  have  wallowed  in  my  uncleanness  like
a  swine  in  his  own  filth  ;  I  have  been  unmerciful  and  cruel  as  any  lion  or  wolf ;  I
have  spared  no  prey,  and  as  subtle  as  any  fox  to  deceive  my  brethren.  I  have  spit
out  my  venom  both  to  the  face  and  behind  the  backs  of  my  neighbours,  and  especially
against  the  household  of  faith,  the  professors  of  religion.  Oh,  what  a  beast  was
I  in  all  this  1  But  now  seeing  my  understanding  is  restored  unto  me  again,  I
will  never  hereafter  carry  myself  but  like  a  man,  not  making  my  lusts  my  law  any
longer,  but  reason  shall  be  my  guide  ;  nay,  nor  that  only,  but,  like  a  Christian  man,
I  wiU  by  God's  grace  suffer  myself  to  be  guided  henceforth  by  renewed  reason,  yea,
by  the  Word  and  Spirit  of  God.  If  I  must  needs  in  anything  resemble  the  beasts  it
shall  be  the  ox  and  ass,  in  knowing  my  Lord  and  Master ;  the  stork,  and  crane,
and  swallow,  in  acknowledging  the  seasonable  time  of  my  repentance,  the  ser-
pent in  Christian  wisdom,  the  laiub  and  dove  in  Christian  meekness  and
innocence,  and  thus  resembling  them,  I  neither  shall  be  nor  accounted  a
beast,  nor  yet  be  condemned  by  any  of  them.  But  if  any,  loath  to  leave
his  brutish  properties,   will  be  a  beast  still  and  follow   his  lust,  it  is  fit  ha


OHA».  J.]  TITUS.  45

Bhonld  Bee  the  end  of  his  way  in  one  of  his  predecessors  (Prov.  vii.  22).  {Ihid.)
This  testimony  la  true. — Ministers  must  not  be  discouraged  from  their  duty,  though
they  have  to  deal  with  a  brutish  and  wretched  people : — This  testimony  being  true,
Titus  might  have  been  discouraged,  and  occasioned  hereby  to  meditate  his
departure  from  thf m  as  a  hopeless  people,  or  to  repine  that  the  apostle  should
place  him  among  such  a  company  of  beasts  rather  than  men.  But  yet  Titus  must
and  does  with  courage  go  on  in  his  work  among  them,  and  plough  up  to  the  Lord
even  this  stiff  ground.  It  is  the  lot  of  many  gracious  ministers  to  be  called  and
planted  among  rude,  barbarous,  and  beastly  people,  such  as  these  Cretians  were,  yea,
among  viperous  broods  who  will  reward  their  faithful  pains  and  travail  in  begetting
them  to  God  with  extremity  of  wrong  and  violence  (Jer.  xxvi.  8).  And  little
comfort  find  they,  unless  the  Lord  give  them  a  breathing  time  by  the  means  of
some  Ahikam  or  other  (v.  24.)  Now  what  must  the  minister  do  in  this  case  ?
Surely,  as  he  came  not  of  his  own  head,  so  now  is  he  not  at  his  own  hand  to
remove  himself  at  his  pleasure.  And  if  he  should  depart  upon  this  ground,  he
should  perhaps  meet  with  less  comfort  in  leaving  an  uncomfortable  people  than
in  staying  amongst  them.  If  God  bid  Jonah  arise  and  go  to  Nineveh,  but  he  will
betake  himself  to  a  ministry  of  more  credit  and  less  labour,  the  Lord  will  teach  him,
before  he  get  to  Tarshish,  that  he  is  not  his  own  man,  and  that  no  creature  shall
shelter  him  from  trouble  whilst  he  flieth  it  as  fast  as  he  can.  If  Moses  be  called  to
speak  to  Pharaoh,  he  must  not  excuse  the  matter,  saying,  "  But  they  will  not
believe  me."  The  Lord  is  said  to  hold  the  ministers  in  His  hand,  and  Christ  the  "  seven
stars  in  His  right  hand  "  (Rev.  i.).  First,  in  regard  of  His  disposition  of  them  here
and  there  at  His  pleasure.  Secondly,  of  His  protection  of  them  in  their  labours.
And  some  He  sendeth,  and  all  the  heartening  they  have  of  Him  beforehand  is,
"But  they  will  not  receive  thee,"  as  Moses  and  some  of  the  prophets;  and  that
is  not  all,  but  they  must  prepare  brows  of  brass,  their  shoulders  to  bear  reproaches
and  wrongs,  their  backs  for  stripes,  their  feet  for  fetters  and  stocks,  yea,  their
necks  for  the  very  block  itself.  In  like  manner  Christ,  sending  out  His  disciples,
forbids  them  to  possess  gold  and  silver,  and  wisheth  them  to  possess  patience,  for
they  should  stand  more  in  need  of  that  than  the  other ;  and  telle th  them,  that  if
Himself,  the  green  tree,  could  not  be  spared,  much  less  should  they  the  dry  branches ;
and  that  if  the  master  be  called  Beelzebub,  the  servant  must  not  look  to  escape
Bcot  free.  And  therefore  ministers  called  to  such  an  uncomfortable  condition  must
imitate  Paul  who,  although  he  knew  that  bonds  and  imprisonment  did  abide  him
in  every  city,  yet  forward  he  must,  and  provoketh  his  own  readiness  and  cheerful
ness  not  only  to  be  bound,  but  to  suffer  also  the  pains  of  death,  for  the  testimony
he  beareth :  considering  weU — 1.  That  the  disciples  themselves,  sent  from  the  side
of  Christ,  must  make  account  to  be  hated  of  aU  men  for  His  name's  sake.  2.  That
although  they  see  no  great  comfort  or  fruit  of  their  works  with  men,  yet  their  work
is  with  the  Lord.  3.  That  the  Lord  Jesus,  foretelling  His  death  at  Jerusalem,  yet
went  forward,  and  would  not  pity  Himself  for  all  Peter's  friendly  counsel,  but  pitied
His  flock.  His  body,  His  Church,  more  than  Himself:  a  worthy  example  for
the    practice    of    ail    His    ministers.      {Ibid.)  Rebuke    them    sbarply. —

Sharply : — Here  we  have  another  adoption  of  the  phraseology  of  health  or
••  soundness  "  in  relation  to  the  faith.  Probably  it  was  suggested  to  the  apostle
by  the  previous  adoption  of  phrases  indicative  of  disease,  and  of  severe  remedies.
A  sharp  knife,  instruments  of  cautery,  firm  handling,  free  incisions,  are  needed  for
some  poisonous  and  putrefying  sores ;  and  as  in  former  days  Titus  had  to  show  the
Corinthians  how  to  purge  out  the  old  leaven,  to  deliver  wicked  persons  to  Satan,  to
rebuke  pretentious  sciolism  and  proclaim  "no  quarter"  to  certain  kinds  of  vice,
80  once  more  he  had  to  lift  up  his  voice  like  a  trumpet,  and  out  of  sheer  kindness
was  commanded  not  to  spare  them.  {H.  R.  Reynolds,  D.D.)  Different  modes  of
dealing  with  different  sins : — According  to  the  nature  of  sins  and  sinners  we  must
set  an  edge  upon  our  reproofs  and  sharpen  them ;  for  all  sins  are  not  of  one  size,
nor  all  sinners  of  one  strain ;  but  some  sins  are  more  enormous  than  others,  and
some  sinners  are  more  obstinate  than  others.  Some  sins  are  of  ignorance,  some  of
malice  ;  some  secret,  some  open  ;  some  sinners  are  as  wax  to  work  on ;  some  are
stony  and  stiff-necked ;  some  have  here  and  there  their  freckles  and  frailties
on  tbem :  others  are  spotted  all  over  like  leopards,  or,  like  the  Ethiopian,  they
never  change  their  hue ;  no  washing  doeth  them  good.  Now,  we  must  wisely  put
a  difference  between  both.  Compassion  must  be  ^owed  upon  some ;  and  others,
irhom  love  cannot  allure,  fear  must  force.  Some  must  be  saved  by  love,  and
•ome  be  pulled  out  of  the  fire.     Some  sores  need  but  a  gentle  lenitive,  soma


46  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB,  [OHA».  i.

a  Bharper  drawer ;  some  require  bat  the  prick  of  a  needle  to  open  them,  others
a  more  painfal  lancing  and  catting ;  and  some  a  catting  off.  (T.  Taylor,  D.D.)
ChrUtian  rejproof: — I.  Chbistiam  bepboof  should  always  be  based  on  a  oebtain
OONTICTIOB.  Mere  hearsay  insufficient ;  general  ramoar  unreliable.  Inquisi-
torial curiosity  different  from  faithful  watchfulness.  II.  Chbistiam  bspboof
SHOULD  be  THOBonoH  AND  EP7ECTIVB.  A  Cutting  rebuke  need  not  be  unkind.
Sarcasm,  satire,  scom — these  are  unbecoming  a  Christian  teacher.  Soft  words
break  hard  hearts  ;  warmth  melts,  while  coldness  freezes.  III.  Chbistian  bepboov
BHOULD  BS  FOB  THE  sinnee's  GOOD. — "That  they  may  be  sound  in  the  faith."
Wrong  motives: — 1.  To  save  appearances.  2.  To  maintain  dignity.  3.  To  gratify
revenge.  Eight  motives: — 1.  To  save  the  purity  of  the  Church.  2.  To  prevent
the  spread  of  contagion.  3.  To  restore  to  spiritual  life  and  privilege.  {F.  Wagstaff.)
The  object  of  rebukes : — The  sharpest  rebiies  in  the  Church  ought  to  aim  at  this
end,  the  recovery  of  diseased  Christians  to  soundness  in  religion  both  in  judgment
and  practice ;  which  appeareth  in  that  the  greatest  ordinary  censure  in  the  Church
is  not  mortal  but  medicinal.  For  as  a  surgeon  cuts  off  arms  and  legs  that  the
body  and  heart  may  be  saved,  so  in  this  body,  parts  and  members  are  cut  off  that
themselves  may  be  saved  as  well  as  their  whole  body.  Paul  ezoommunicateth  the
incestuous  person  that  his  spirit  might  be  saved.  Eymineus  and  Philetus  were
cast  out  to  Satan  that  they  might  learn  not  to  blaspheme.  Those  whom  Jude
wisheth  to  be  pulled  out  of  the  fire  by  violence,  must  be  saved  thereby.  If  any
object  against  this  that  in  1  Cor.  xvi.  21,  "  If  any  man  love  not  the  Lord  Jesus,  lei
him  be  had  in  execration  to  the  death. "  And  therefore  edification  and  salvation
is  not  the  end  of  this  censure.  I  answer,  "  It  is  one  thing  for  the  Church  to
excommunicate,  another  to  curse  and  execrate ;  the  one  is  an  ordinary  censure,
the  other  very  extraordinary  and  rare ;  the  one  against  those  who  may  be  friends
of  the  Church,  the  other  only  against  desperate  enemies,  and  open  and  obstinate  apos-
tates, even  such  as  Julian,  whom  the  Church  judgeth  to  have  sinned  the  sin  against
the  Holy  Ghost,  and  therefore  execrateth  and  accurseth.  (T.  Taylor,  D.  D. )  Sharp
rebukes  sometimes  needed : — The  words  is  a  metaphor  taken  from  surgeons,  who  cut
out  dead  fiesh  to  the  quick,  but  it  is  in  order  to  healing.  Cutting  words  have  done
great  cures  :  many  a  diseased,  festered  soul  has  been  made  sound,  both  in  faith  and
manners,  by  severe  reprehension.  Leam  hence,  that  although,  generally  speaking,
we  ought  to  temper  our  reproofs  with  much  gentleness  and  meekness,  yet  there
is  a  time  when  we  must  reprove  sharply,  that  men  may  be  "  sound  in  the  faith."  We
may,  we  must  speak  cutting  words  when  kind  words  will  not  do.  IW.  R.  Burkitt,
M.A.)  A  sharp  rebuke : — ^A  young  clergyman  came  to  the  house  of  his  sister,  and
found  quite  a  company  round  the  table — among  them  a  talkative  military  gentle-
man, who  rather  freely  flavoured  his  wit  with  perverted  Bible  quotations  and  anti-
,  Christian  inuendos.  A  bantering  remark  about  God  that  amounted  to  no  less  than
a  parade  of  his  atheism  aroused  the  hostess  at  last.  "  You  seem  to  forget  that  my
brother  here  is  a  minister  of  the  gospel,"  she  said.  "  Oh  1 "  quoth  the  unabashed
officer,  "my  clerical  friend  and  I  understand  each  other";  and  turning  to  the
young  man,  with  patronising  impudence  he  asked,  "  Is  it  not  so,  sir  ?  Your
office  requires  you  to  tell  the  old  story,  which  for  the  ignorant  may  do  very  well  to
beheve,  but  as  a  man  of  culture  yoa  yourself  cannot  put  faith  in  these  worn-oat
doctrines."  The  clergyman  eyed  his  questioner  a  minute,  and  then  said,  •'  Sir,
before  answering  your  question,  I  must  ask  you  three.  You  are  an  atheist.  Such
people  have  always  been  in  the  world.  One  class  of  these  are  thinkers  who  have
speculated  and  groped  till  they  have  fallen  into  despair,  and  said, '  There  is  no
God.'  Do  you  belong  to  that  class?"  "No,"  laughed  the  officer;  "thmking
IB  not  to  my  taste.  I  am  no  philosopher."  "  Another  class  are  those  who  speak
frivolously  of  God  merely  because  they  learned  to  do  it  where  such  talk  was  the
fashion.  Are  you  one  of  them ?  "  *' No,  sir,"  said  the  officer,  slightly  reddening;
•*I  am  not  a  blind  follower  of  others."  '•  There  is  but  one  more  class  of  atheists,"
quietly  continued  the  minister — "  those  who  have  wallowed  in  sin  till  they  must
either  expect  the  horrors  of  remorse  or  kill  their  conscience ;  and,  as  the  shortest
way  to  get  rid  of  it,  they  declare  that  there  is  no  God. "  This  time  the  clergyman
did  not  utter  his  question ;  but  the  eyes  of  the  whole  company,  turned  on  the  con-
fased  scoffer,  made  both  question  and  answer  needless.  Fidelity  in  administering
reproof : — The  Rev.  Joseph  Alleine  was  very  faithful  and  impartial  in  administering
reproof.  Once,  when  employed  in  a  work  of  this  kind,  he  said  to  a  Christian
friend,  "  I  am  now  going  about  that  which  is  likely  to  make  a  very  dear  and
obliging  friend  become  an  enemy.    Bat,  however,  it  oannot  be  omitted ;  it  is


ciup.  I.]  TITUS.  47

better  to  lose  man's  favour  than  God's."  Bat,  so  far  from  becoming  his  enemy
for  his  conscientious  faithfulness  to  him,  he  rather  loved  him  the  more  after,  aa
long  as  he  Hved.  The  reprooj  of  a  good  man : — The  reproof  of  a  good  man

resembles  fuller's  earth ;  it  not  only  removes  the  spots  from  our  character,  but  it
rubs  off  when  it  is  dry.

Yer.  14.  Not  giving  heed  to  Jewish  fables. — The  perverting  power  of  trivialitiee :
— Trivialities,  and  mere  human  conceptions,  exert  a  perverting  power — (1)  by
distracting  attention  from  the  essentials  of  religion ;  (2)  by  dissipating  the  strength
of  the  mind ;  (3)  by  attributing  to  the  human  an  authority  belonging  only  to  the
Divine.  Truth,  in  its  esuence,  always  of  more  importance  than  the  form  in  which
it  is  clothed.  The  "  spirit "  is  greater  than  the  "  letter."  {F.  Wagstaff.)  Jewish
fables  to  be  rejected : — I.  Althouoh  all  fables  in  matteb  of  bslioiom  abb  to  bb

BEJECTBD,  YET  ESPECIALLY   HE   UBNTIONETH   THESE  OF   THE  JeWS,  BBCAUSB  THBT  WBBE

most  danqebous  of  ALL.  1.  Becausc  they  directly  opposed  themselves  as  the  over-
throwers  of  the  whole  doctrine  of  the  gospel  and  the  merit  of  Christ.  2.  They
were  persuaded  under  most  strong  pretences,  for  they  came  as  from  God's  own
mouth,  and  from  His  own  people,  from  such  as  were  born  under  the  law,  so  as  they
were  urged  as  things  of  surest  ground  and  strongest  authority  from  God  Himself
and  His  greatest  prophet  Moses.  II.  But  what  webe  these  fables  ?  1.  Under  this
head  may  be  comprehended  all  the  false  glosses  and  false  interpretations  of  the  law
of  Moses,  urging  the  external  and  hteral,  but  not  the  internal  and  spiritual  meaning
of  the  law;  for  which  corruption  Christ  challengeth  the  Jewish  teachers  (Matt,
v.,  vi.,  vii.).  2.  All  their  fabulous  invention  in  their  Talmud,  such  as  that
concerning  the  coming  of  the  Messiah,  and  the  great  feast  at  His  coming ;  and
of  the  fruitfulness  of  the  earth,  which  at  that  time  shall  bring  forth  instead  of
ears  of  com,  loaves  of  bread ;  and  a  number  such,  of  which  St.  Paul  saith,  they
are  for  number  infinite,  and  for  use  unprofitable.  3.  But  the  context  in  the
verse  following  pointeth  us  to  expound  them  of  some  other  than  these,  namely,
of  all  those  doctrines  of  the  Jews  which  conceived  the  legal  and  ceremonial
observation  of  days,  meats,  drinks,  garments,  washings,  persons  and  peoples  :  for
the  Jews  taught  that  the  same  difference  remained  to  be  obtained  still,  as  Moses
from  the  Lord  commanded  it ;  so  as  yet  some  meats  were  common  and  some  clean ;
some  days  were  more  holy  than  others ;  so  garments  and  persons  much  more  lay
open  to  legal  pollution  by  issues,  touchings,  &o.,  whereas  the  appearing  of  Christ
procured  final  freedom  from  all  such  impurity,  so  as,  according  to  Peter's  vision
(Acts  z.),  no  man,  no  thing  is  to  be  called  polluted  or  unclean.  lU.  But  why  doth
the  apostle  call  such  doctbines  fables  seeing — 1.  They  were  from  God.  2.
Necessarily  imposed  upon  God's  own  people  in  pain  of  death  and  cutting  off  from
His  people  in  case  of  contempt,  yea  or  omission.  3.  They  included  in  them  that
evangelical  truth  whereby  both  they  and  we  are  saved.  Tet  for  all  this  he  termetti
them  so.  1.  Because  even  these  legal  constitutions  of  God  Himself,  when  they  were
at  the  best,  were  but  actual  apologies,  or  shadows  of  things  to  come,  carrying
a  show  or  figure  of  truth,  but  not  the  body,  nor  the  truth  itself :  to  the  same  effect,
saith  Paul  (Gal.  iv.  24),  that  they  were  allegories;  that  is,  being  the  things  that
they  were,  signified  the  things  that  they  were  not.  2.  Because  those  constitutions,
although  they  had  their  times  and  seasons,  yet  now  were  they  dated  :  and  now  to
teach  or  urge  them  was  as  vain,  as  void  of  ground  out  of  Scripture,  as  void  of  profit,
as  void  of  truth,  as  if  they  had  taught  the  most  vain,  fictious,  and  unprofitable
falsehoods  that  men  could  possibly  devise.  (T.  Taylor,  D.D.)  That  turn  from
the  truth. — Rules  to  preserve  us  from  being  turned  from  the  truth : — 1.  Entertain  it
not  for  outward  respects ;  neither  for  the  laws  of  the  land,  nor  the  encouragement
it  hath,  &o.,  as  very  many  do,  but  for  the  love  of  itself :  for  that  we  affect,  we
easily  turn  not  from  it,  no,  nor  are  driven  from  it ;  and  if  we  love  it  for  outward
respects,  as  those  outward  respects  change,  so  will  our  affections.  For  example,  if
we  love  it  for  the  prosperity  of  it,  times  of  persecution  will  make  us  faJl  off,  with
Demas.  If  we  hold  it  because  we  would  hold  our  temporalities,  the  loss  of  it  virill
be  light  in  comparison  of  loss  of  goods,  dignities,  country,  world,  liberty  and  life,
the  least  of  these  will  the  heart  fasten  upon,  although  with  the  loss  of  the  truth,  and
with  it  of  salvation  also.  2.  Practise  so  much  of  it  as  thou  knowest,  and  the  more
thoa  practise,  the  more  thou  knowest,  and  the  more  thou  knowest  thus,
the  more  thou  lovest,  and  the  surer  dost  thou  bind  it  upon  thyself;  and  this
18  the  surest  hold  (John  vii.  17),  when  as  in  religion,  faith  and  good  oonsoience
are  joined  together,  for  such  as  thy  conscience  is,  such  shalt  thou  be  found  in


48  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohat.  I.

religion  ;  without  which,  hear  every  hour  a  sermon,  read  over  the  Bible  as  often  as
he  did,  who  gloried  that  he  had  read  the  text  and  gloss  also  fourteen  times  over,
all  this  knowledge  will  not  lift  thee  up  to  heaven.  8.  Call  no  ground  of  this  Divine
truth  into  question,  suspect  not  that  which  thou  canst  not  reach,  but  accuse  thine
own  weakness  and  ignorance :  oar  first  parents  yielding  at  the  first  onset  of  Satan
to  call  into  question  the  truth  of  God,  were  turned  away  from  all  that  image
of  God  which  stood  in  truth  and  holiness.  4.  Beware  of  indifference  in  God's
matters ;  many  think  it  good  wisdom  and  policy  to  be  on  the  yielding  hand,  and  as
wax  fit  to  take  all  forms  and  the  print  of  any  religion ;  but  the  truth  is,  that  such
persons  as  are  not  rooted  and  stablished  in  the  truth,  when  winds  and  storms  arise,
or  the  evil  day  approach,  they  shall  not  be  able  to  stand ;  but  as  they  have  been
long  tottering,  so  their  fall  shall  be  great.     (Ibid.)

Yer.  16.  Unto  the  pure  all  things  are  pure. — The  $upreme  importance  of  moral
character : — 1.  There  is  an  essential  difference  in  the  moral  characters  of  men.
2.  The  outward  world  is  to  men  according  to  this  difference.     I.  The  morally  pubb
in  relation  to  all  things.    1.  In  relation  to  appearance.     A  good  man  is  neither
given  to  suspicion  nor  censoriouBness ;  he  sees  some  good  in  all  men.    2.  In  rela-
tion to  influence.    A  good  man,  like  the  bee,  can  extract  honey  from  the  bitterest
plant ;  or,  like  the  ^olian  harp,  can  turn  the  shrieking  wind  into  music.    3.  In
relation  to  appropriation.    A  corrupt  soul  appropriates,  even  from   the  most
strengthening  and  refreshing  means  of  spiritual  improvement,  that  which  weakens
and  destroys.    II.  The  morally  viatuja>  in  relation  to  all  things.     1.  The  sphere  of
the  defilement.     2.  The  cauee  of  the  defilement.     8.  The  hideousness  of  the
defilement.    (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)        Purity  : — For  the  evils  of  this  world  there  are
two  classes  of  remedies — one  is  the  world's,  the  other  is  God's.    The  world
proposes  to  remedy  evil  by  adjusting  the  circumstances  of  this  Ufe  to  man's  desires.
The  world  says,  give  us  a  perfect  set  of  circumstances,  and  then  we  shall  have  a
set  of  perfect  men.     This  principle  lies  at  the  root  of  the  system  called  socialism.
Socialism  proceeds  on  the  principle  that  all  moral  and  even  physical  evil  arises
from  unjust  laws.    If  the  cause  be  remedied,  the  effect  will  be    good.     But
Christianity  throws  aside  all  that  as  merely  chimerical.    It  proves  that  the  fault  is
not  in  outward  circumstances,  but  in  ourselves.    Like  the  wise  physician,  who,
instead  of  busying  himself  with  transcendental  theories  to  improve  the  climate,  and
the  outward  circumstances  of  man,  endeavours  to  relieve  and  get  rid  of  the  tendencies
of  disease  which  are  from  within,  Christianity,  leaving  all  outward  circumstances
to  ameliorate  themselves,  fastens  its  attention  on  the  spirit  which  has  to  deal  with
them.    I.  The  principle  that  St.  Paul  has  here  laid  down  is,  that  each  man  is  th&
OBEATOB  OF  HIS  OWN  woBU) ;  he  walks  in  a  universe  of  his  own  creation.    As  the  free
air  is  to  one  out  of  health  the  cause  of  cold  and  diseased  lungs,  so  to  the  healthy
man  it  is  a  source  of  greater  vigour.     The  rotten  fruit  is  sweet  to  the  worm,  but
nauseous  to  the  palate  of  man.    It  is  the  same  air  and  the  same  fruit  acting
differently  upon  dUfferent  beings.     To  different  men  a  different  world — to  one  all
pollution — to  another  all  purity.    To  the  noble  all  things  are  noble,  to  the  mean
all  things  are  contemptible.  In  its  strictest  sense,  the  creation  of  a  new  man  is  the
creation  of  a  new  universe.    Conceive  an  eye  so  constructed  as  that  the  planets
and  all  within  them  should  be  minutely  seen,  and  all  that  is  near  should  be  dim
and  invisible  like  things  seen  through  a  telescope,  or  as  we  see  through  a  magnify-
ing glass  the  plumage  of  the  butterfly,  and  the  bloom  upon  the  peach ;  then  it  is
manifestly  clear  that  we  have  called  into  existence  actually  a  new  creation,  and  not
new  objects.    The  mind's  eye  creates  a  world  for  itself.    Again,  the  visible  world
presents  a  different  aspect  to  each  individual  man.     One  man  sees  in  that  noble
river  an  emblem  of  eternity ;  he  closes  his  hps  and  feels  that  God  is  there.  Another
sees  nothing  in  it  but  a  very  convenient  road  for  transporting  his  spices,  silks,  and
merchandise.    To  one  this  world  appears  useful,  to  another  beautiful.     Whence
eomes  the  difference  ?    From  the  soul  within  us.    It  can  make  of  this  world  a  vast
ohaos — "  a  mighty  maze  without  a  plan  "  ;  or  a  mere  machine — a  collection  of
lifeless  forces ;  or  it  can  make  it  the  living  vesture  of  God,  the  tissue  through
which  He  can  become  visible  to  us.     In  the  spirit  in  which  we  look  on  it  the  world
U  an  arena  for  mere  self-advancement,  or  a  place  for  noble  deeds,  in  which  self  iM
forgotten,  and  God  is  aU.     Observe,  this  effect  is  traceable  even  in  that  produced
by  our  different  and  changeful  moods.     We  make  and  unmake  a  world  more  Hhaa
once  in  the  space  of  a  single  day.    In  trifling  moods  all  seems  trivial.    In  seriooa
moods  all  seems  solemn.   U.  Thbbs  ark  two  ways  in  which  this  PBtMOxniB  u  tkub.


CHAP.  1.]  TITUS.  49

1.  To  the  pore,  all  things  and  all  persons  are  pure,  because  their  parity  makes  all
seem  pure.  There  are  some  who  go  through  life  complaining  of  this  world  ;  they
say  they  have  found  nothing  but  treachery  and  deceit ;  the  poor  are  ungrateful,
and  the  rich  are  selfish,  yet  we  do  not  find  such  the  best  men.  Experience  tells  us
that  each  man  most  keenly  and  unerringly  detects  in  others  the  vice  with  which  he
is  most  familiar  himself.  Persons  iseem  to  each  man  what  he  is  himself.  One
who  suspects  hypocrisy  in  the  world  is  rarely  transparent ;  the  man  constantly  on
the  watch  for  cheating  is  generally  dishonest ;  he  who  suspects  impurity  is  prurient.
This  is  the  principle  to  which  Christ  alludes  when  He  says,  "Give  alms  of  such
things  as  ye  have  ;  and  behold  all  things  are  clean  unto  you."  Once  more,  to  the
pure  all  things  are  pure,  as  well  as  aU  persons.  That  which  is  natural  lies  not  in
things,  but  in  the  minds  of  men.  There  is  a  difference  between  prudery  and  modesty.
Prudery  detects  wrong  where  no  wrong  is ;  the  wrong  lies  in  the  thoughts,  and  not  in
the  objects.  There  is  something  of  over-sensitiveness  and  over-delicacy  which  shows
not  innocence,  but  an  inflammable  imagination.  And  men  of  the  world  cannot
understand  that  those  subjects  and  thoughts  which  to  them  are  full  of  torture,  can
be  harmless,  suggesting  nothing  evil  to  the  pure  in  heart.  Here,  however,  beware  I
No  sentence  of  Scripture  is  more  frequently  in  the  lips  of  persons  who  permit  them-
selves much  license,  than  the  text,  ••  To  the  pure,  all  things  are  pure."  Yes,  all
things  natural,  but  not  artificial — scenes  which  pamper  the  tastes,  which  excite  the
senses.  Innocence  feels  healthily.  To  it  all  nature  is  pure.  But,  just  as  the
dbve  trembles  at  the  approach  of  the  hawk,  and  the  young  calf  shudders  at  the  lion
never  seen  before,  so  innocence  shrinks  instinctively  from  what  is  wrong  by  the
same  Divine  instinct.  If  that  which  is  wrong  seems  pure,  then  the  heart  is  not
pure  but  vitiated.  To  the  right  minded  all  that  is  right  in  the  course  of  this  world
seems  pure.  2.  Again,  to  the  pure,  all  things  not  only  seem  pure,  but  are  really  so
because  they  are  made  such.  (1)  As  regards  persons.  It  is  a  marvellous  thing  to
see  how  a  pure  and  innocent  heart  purifies  all  that  it  approaches.  The  most
ferocious  natures  are  soothed  and  tamed  by  iimocence.  And  so  with  human  beings,
there  is  a  delicacy  so  pure,  that  vicious  men  in  its  presence  become  almost  pure ;  all
of  parity  which  is  in  them  is  brought  out ;  like  attaches  itself  to  like.  The  pure
heart  becomes  a  centre  of  attraction,  round  which  similar  atoms  gather,  and  from
which  dissimilar  ones  are  repelled.  A  corrupt  heart  elicits  in  an  hour  all  that  is
bad  in  us ;  a  spiritual  one  brings  out  and  draws  to  itself  all  that  is  best  and  purest.
Such  was  Chrst.  (2)  Lastly,  all  situations  are  pure  to  the  pure.  According  to
the  world,  some  professions  are  reckoned  honourable,  and  some  dishonourable.
Men  judge  according  to  a  standard  merely  conventional,  and  not  by  that  of  moral
rectitude.  Yet  it  was  in  truth,  the  men  who  were  in  these  situations  which  made
them  such.  In  the  days  of  the  Redeemer,  the  publican's  occupation  was  a  degraded
one,  merely  because  low  base  men  filled  that  place.  But  since  He  was  born  into
the  world  a  poor,  labouring  man,  poverty  is  noble  and  dignified,  and  toil  is  honour-
able. To  the  man  who  feels  that  "  the  king's  daughter  is  all  glorious  within,"  no
outward  situation  can  seem  inglorious  or  impure.  {F.  W.  Robertson,  M.A.)
Purity : — I.  Who  are  meant  by  pure  persons.  The  persons  here  called  pure
are  such  as  by  faith  are  set  into  Christ,  by  whose  blood  they  are  justified,  and  by
whose  Spirit,  through  the  means  of  the  Word,  that  immortal  seed  of  regeneration,
they  are  sanctified  and  reserved  unto  life  everlasting.  And  hence  to  both  these  is
the  purifying  and  cleansing  of  sinners  ascribed  in  the  Scriptures.  1.  Because  by
faith  every  member  of  the  Church  layeth  hold  upon  Christ's  most  absolute  purity.
3.  The  spirit  of  regeneration  hath  washed  every  part,  although  in  part  only,  nor
so  clean  as  it  shall  be,  yet  so  as  that  perfect  purity  is  sealed  and  assured  to  the
soul  by  it.  3.  The  Lord  doth  account  every  such  believer  pure  even  for  the  present,
and  imputeth  never  a  spot  unto  them,  but  reputeth  in  His  Christ  all  fair.  4.
Hath  promised  them  that  for  time  to  come  they  shall  become  so  absolutely  clean
as  though  thpy  had  never  been  defiled.  11.  How  all  things  are  pure  or  impure.
1.  Seeing  all  things  were  pure  in  their  creation,  we  may  herein,  as  in  a  glass,
behold  the  purity  of  God  in  all  His  creatures,  admiring  that  goodness  of  His  which
bewrayed  itself  even  in  the  meanest  of  them  ;  yea,  provoking  ourselves  to  love,
reverence  and  fear  before  Him,  the  image  of  whose  goodness  shineth  out  not  only
in  angels  and  men,  but  even  in  the  silly  worm  and  fly,  yea  in  the  lifeless
creatures  themselves.  And  further,  hence  we  may  gather  our  own  duty  towards
the  creatures,  namely— (1)  Reverently  meditate  and  speak  of  them.  (2)  Purely  to
use  them.  (3)  Mercifully  to  deal  with  them.  All  which  we  shall  the  easier  do  if  we
can  spy  out  some  part  of  God's  image  in  them.    2.  Consider  our  misery,  and  the

4


50  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (oha».  i.

woeful  fruit  of  onr  sin,  which  hath  debarred  ai  from  all  comfort  in  heaven  and

earth,  from  God  or  any  of  His  creatnres.    The  sweetest  sins  would  carry  a  bitter

taste,  if  we  wonld  but  remember  what  sweet  comfort  of  the  creatures  we  hav*

forfeited  for  them.    8.  The  restitution  of  us  to  our  former  right  is  only  from  our

Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  onr  first  right  is  recovered  to  us  in  this  manner.    First,  as

we  were  at  odds  with  the  Creator,  and  consequently  with  the  creature,  even  so  first

we  are  reconciled  unto  God  through  Christ,  and  then  to  the  creatures;  for  when

Christ  (who  is  our  peace)  hath  wrought  our  peace  with  God,  He  bringeth  back  our

peace,  both  the  inward  peace  of  our  own  consciences,  which  before  could  do

nothing  but  accuse  and  terrify,  as  also  peace  with  others,  friends  and  enemies,  yea

even  with  the  beast  of  the  field,  and  stone  in  the  wall,  and  everything  striketh  »

covenant  of  peace  with  him  who  hath  entered  into  league  with  the  Creator  of  it.

If  any  man,  then,  would  have  any  right  in  any  creature  he  useth,  he  must  not  hold

it  by  the  broken  title  in  the  first  Adam,  but  by  a  recovered  and  new  purchase  in  the

second  Adam,  who  is  the  Lord  of  glory,  blessed  for  ever.    HI.  How  all  thino3

ABB  PTJBK  TO  THE  PUBB.     That  WO  may  rightly  and  properly  conceive  the  apostle's

meaning,  we  must  know — 1.  That  the  universal  particle  ' '  all  things  "  admitteth

restraint,  and  may  not  be  extended  beyond  the  apostle's  intendment,  who  speaketh

only  of  such  things  as  are  not  forbidden  by  the  law  of  God,  or  nature ;  or  rather

only  of  things  of  an  indifferent  nature,  which  in  themselves  are  neither  commanded

nor  forbidden,  and  neither  good  nor  evil  in  their  substance  and  nature,  but  are  to

be  used  or  not  used  according  to  the  circumstances  and  occasions  of  them ;  such

things  as  these  are  meat,  drink,  apparel,  recreation,  sleep,  marriage,  single  life,

riches,  poverty,  bondage,  freedom,  &c.    And  it  may  not  seem  strange  thus  to

restrain  this  general  proposition,  seeing  we  have  it  thus  limited  in  sundry  other

places  (1  Cor.  vi.  4).     "All  things  are  lawful,  but  not  profitable"  (1  Cor.  x.  23).

"All  things  are  lawful  for  me,  but  not  expedient"  (Eom.  xiv.  20).  "All  things  indeed

are  pure,  but  destroy  not  for  meats,"  Ac.    2.  By  pure  is  meant  nothing  else  but

that  all  such  things  are  free  now  to  be  used  in  good  conscience,  without  scruple,

by  means  of  our  Christian  liberty.    3.  In  that  he  addeth  "to  the  pure,"  he  showeth

how  we  come  to  have  title  in  this  liberty,  even  by  becoming  believers  and  getting

our  hearts  purified  by  faith.    In  one  word,  all  indifferent  things  are  pure,  and  free

to  be  used  of  the  pure  and  believing  person,  with  this  one  condition  ;  so  they  be  purely

and  rightly  used.    (T.  Taylor,  D.D. )     Purity  of  mind  indispensable : — I.  The  impobt

of  the  terms.  By  "  the  pure  "  is  not  meant  sinless.  Evangelical  purity  is  connected

with  faith  (1  Pet.  i.  22 ;   Acts  xv.  9).    The  mind  and  conscience  are  governing

powers ;  if  they  be  polluted,  all  the  man  is  so.     IL  Illustbate  the  sentiment.

1.  On  a  believing  mind  the  doctrines  of  Christ  will  have  a  sanctifying  effect,  and  the

contrary  on  an  unbelieving  mind.     2.  On  a  believing  mind  precepts  and  even

threatenings  produce  a  salutary  effect.    3.  Mercies  and  judgments  humble,  melt,  and

soften  some,  but  harden  others.  4.  The  evils  which  occur  amongst  men,  differently

influence  different  characters.    5.  The  treatment  received  from  men  brings  out  the

state  of  the  heart.     {A.  Fuller.)        Purity : — A  pure  lake  is  beautiful  as  it  reflects

the  loveliness  of  the  heavens,  but  a  pure  heart  is  more  beautiful  as  it  reflects  the

loveliness  of  God.    (W.  M.  Statham,  M.A.)         Even  their  mind  and  conscience

is  defiled. — The  faithlessness  of  conscience : — That  the  conscience  is  so  perverted  in

our  present  condition,  that  no  confidence  can  be  placed  in  its  decision,  is  evident.

I.  From  the  fact  that  these  decisions  can  be  correct  in  no  other  cases  but  those  in

which  Divine  truth  is  fully  understood.    11.  That  the  decisions  of  conscience  are

not  always  in  accordance  with  the  truth  is  evident  from  the  fact  that  sinners  are

not  always  convinced  of  sin.     IH.  This  position  is  also  sustained  by  the  fact  that

the  agency  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  requisite  to  convince  the  world  of  sin.     IV.  The

faithlessness  of  conscience  is  apparent  in  the  fact  that  hypocrites  have  not  always

an  appalling  sense  of  their  hypocrisy.    V.  This  view  of  the  subject  is  strengthened

by  the  fact  that  even  Christians  do  not  always  detect  their  own  sins.     VL  This

doctrine  is  evident  from  the  fact  that  there  is  no  command  in  the  Scriptures  to

follow  the  dictates  of  conscience.    VII.  And  while  there  is  no  direction  to  follow

the  dictates  of  conscience,  it  is  true  that   the    Scriptures  designate  different

consciences,  and  perhaps  different  states  of  the  same  conscience,  by  different  and

dirrctly  opposite  terms.      VIII.  This  view  of  the  subject  is  confirmed  by_  the  fact

that  the  way  to  ruin  seems  to  be  the  way  of  peace  and  eternal  life.    This  is  a  very

common  and  perhaps  a  general  trait  of  the  human  family.     The  light  that  is  in

them  by  nature  is  darkness.     They  discern  not  the  way  in  which  they  should  go.

Lessons: — From  this  subject  I  infer— I.  That  God  has  placed  no  rale  of  duty  within


L]  TITUS.  51

oareelveB.  Om  reason  was  never  designed  to  be  onr  guide  in  spiritual  things.  Its
only  office  is  to  understand  the  things  which  God  has  revealed  in  His  Word,  and  in
all  cases  reverently  to  bAw  to  His  authority.  So  long  as  its  eyes  are  not  opened  by
the  power  of  the  Holy  iSpirit,  the  understanding  is  in  deplorable  darkness.  Ana
even  if  it  were  capable  of  discerning  all  the  principles  of  duty,  its  office  is  to  gather
them  from  the  Word  of  God.  U.  The  subject  teaches  us  that  to  live  conscien-
tiously is  not  in  all  cases  to  live  godly.  Conscience  in  its  decisions  has  respect  to
some  principles  of  life.  These  principles  may  be  the  fruit  of  our  own  reason.  In
this  case,  the  decision  will  approach  (no  nearer  to  truth  than  the  principles  are
according  to  which  the  decision  is  made.  Or  it  may  decide  according  to  the
maxims  of  duty  which  it  has  learned  from  others.  In  this  instance,  as  in  the
former,  its  decisions  can  claim  no  higher  authority  or  greater  correctness  than  the
maxims  according  to  which  they  are  made.  Or,  ii  even  the  Scriptures  be  the  rule
according  to  which  the  decisions  are  made,  then  it  will  follow  that  the  decisions
themselves  must  be  affected  by  the  blindness  of  the  understanding  and  by  the
weakness  of  conscience  itself.  And  hence,  to  live  conscientiously  may  vary  widely
from  living  accordingly  to  the  commands  of  God.  UI.  The  subject  teaches  what
estimate  to  set  on  professions  of  acting  conscientiously.  lY.  The  subject  suggests
the  importance  of  praying  for  the  purification  of  our  conscience.  V.  The  subject
suggests  that  our  condition  is  very  deplorable.  We  are  exceedingly  inclined  to
rely  on  our  understandings  to  discover  the  way  of  life,  and  on  the  testimony  of  our
consciences  that  we  are  walking  in  it.  But  not  only  are  our  natural  understandings
too  blind  to  discover  it,  but  our  consciences  are  exceedingly  apt  falsely  to  decide
that  we  are  walking  in  it,  even  while  we  are  wandering  in  darkness.  Thus  we  are
liable  to  think  we  are  something  when  we  are  nothing.  The  way  which  we  take
may  seem  right  unto  us,  but  the  end  thereof  are  the  ways  of  death.  {J.  Foot,  D.D.)
Pollution  of  mind  and  conscience : — By  the  mind  is  meant  the  whole  understanding
part  of  the  soul,  which,  being  the  eye  of  the  soul,  carrieth  with  it  reason,  judg-
ment, and  election.  The  pollution  of  which  is,  to  be  taken  np  with  darkness
and  blindness  (1  Cor.  ii.  14) ;  to  be  fiUed  with  vanity  (Eph.  iv.  17) ;  with
fieshhness  (Col.  ii.  18) ;  in  so  much  as  all  the  natural  wisdom  of  man  is  fleshly
and  devihsh.  By  conscience  la  meant  that  faculty  of  the  soul  which,  by  applying
particular  things  judged  of  and  done,  doth  determine  them  either  with  or  against
them ;  which,  depending  upon  the  former,  must  necessarily  be  led  into  the  errors
of  it,  no  otherwise  than  one  blind  man  is  led  by  another  into  a  ditch.  The
pollution  of  it  is  when  it  is  either  idle  or  ill  occupied ;  the  former,  when  it  is
sleepy,  senseless,  or  seared,  doing  nothing  at  all,  neither  accusing,  nor  excusing ;
the  latter,  when  it  doth  both  these,  but  neither  of  them  as  it  ought,  but  accuseth
where  it  should  excuse,  and  excuse  where  it  ought  to  accuse.  I.  We  have  here  a
GOOD  AKQUMENT  OF  THE  DIVINITY  OT  ScRiPTURE,  in  that  it  cau,  and  doth  (as  God
Himself)  enter  upon,  and  judge  the  thoughts  of  men;  and  of  men  themselves
(not  as  men)  from  things  without,  but  from  things  within,  even  according  to  their
cleanness  or  uncleanness  before  God.  From  this  argument  the  apostle  proveth  the
same  thing  (Heb.  iv.  12).  II.  We  learn  further,  what  is  the  estate  of  a  man
CNBEOEMEBATE,  whom  the  apostlc  setteth  out  thus.  1.  He  is  one  that  is  unclean.  2.  An
unbeliever.  3.  One  to  whom  nothing  is  pure.  4.  His  mind.  5.  His  conscience  is
polluted.  In  all  which  respects  he  is  a  most  odious  person,  in  whom  is  nothing
bat  filthiness  of  flesh  and  spirit,  the  which  the  pure  eyes  of  the  Lord  cannot  abide.

III.  BeFOBB  this  natural  UNCLEANNESS  BE  PURGED  EVERTTHING 13  UNCLEAN  UNTO  A  MAN  ;

the  unbehever  tainteth  everything  that  he  toucheth  ;  nothing  within  him,  nothing
without  him,  which  is  not  polluted,  although  not  in  his  own  nature,  yet  nnto  him
and  in  his  use.  Let  a  natural  man  turn  him  to  any  action,  word,  or  thought,  all
of  them,  not  excepting  the  best,  are  against  God,  because  they  proceed  from  unclean
minds  and  consciences.  1.  His  actions  spiritual,  even  his  best  services,  as  praying,
hearing,  reading,  receiving  the  sacraments,  alms,  all  these  being  the  sacrifices  of
the  wicked,  are  abomination  unto  the  Lord,  who  first  looketh  to  the  person,  and
then  to  the  gift,  who  if  he  turn  his  ear  from  hearing  the  law,  even  his  prayer  ia
abominable ;  if  he  choose  his  own  ways,  let  him  kill  a  bullock  for  sacrifice,  it  is  all
one  as  if  he  slew  a  man  ;  if  he  be  a  polluted  person  that  toucheth  any  of  these  holy
things,  shall  they  not  be  unclean?  Yes,  surely,  the  most  Divine  ordinances  are
tamed  to  him  to  sin ;  for  the  Lord  first  requireth  pure  parts,  and  then  pure  actions
(Eiek.  xxxvi.  26).  2.  His  civil  actions,  his  honest  dealing  in  the  world,  his
baying,  selling,  giving,  lending,  his  labour,  care,  yea,  all  the  duties  of  his  calling,
are  in  and  to  him  no  better  than  sins.    3.  His  natural  actions,  as  eating,  drinking,


69  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTEATOB.  £oha*.  i.

sleeping,  recreation,  physic,  all  are  unclean  unto  him.  4.  All  God's  creatures  and
human  ordiuauces,  as  meat,  drink,  clothes,  goods,  lands,  buildings,  marriage,  single
estate;  in  a  word,  "the  whole  way  of  the  wicked  is  abomination  to  the  Lord"
(Prov.  XV.  9).  All  these  are  witnesses  of  his  sin  and  fillhiness,  all  of  them  are
enlargers  of  his  woe  and  damnation,  because  he  wanteth  faith  to  lay  hold  on  the
Lord  Jesus,  whereby  the  just  do  live,  have  their  heart  purified,  and  so  are  made
lords  over  the  creatures.  (T.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Defilement  of  mind  and  conscience  : —
The  "  mind  "  is  more  than  the  mere  intellective  faculty,  and  includes  the  activity
of  the  will ;  and  "  conscience "  is  the  moral  self-consciousuess  which  brings  self,
and  the  fact,  and  the  entire  behaviour  of  the  soul  and  spirit,  into  judgment.  Thia
conscience  may  be  "  good  "in  the  sense  of  being  approving,  or  in  the  sense  of  being
active  ;  it  may  be  "  evil  "  in  that  it  is  torpid,  seared  or  dead,  and  also  in  respect  of
its  being  accusing  or  condemnatory.  Defilement  of  "  mind "  must  mean  that
thoughts,  ideas,  desires,  purposes,  activities,  are  all  corrupted  and  debased.
Defilement  of  "  conscience  "  would  mean  that  the  sentinel  sent  to  watch  was  bribed
to  hold  his  peace,  or  that  the  guide  to  loftier  standard  was  eagerly  applying  some
base-bom  man-made  perilous  rule  as  all-sufficient.  {H.  R.  Reynolds,  D.D.)  A
pure  conscience  cast  aside  : — In  the  majority  of  cases  conscience  is  an  elastic  and
very  flexible  article,  which  wiU  bear  a  deal  of  stretching,  and  adapt  itself  to  a  great
Tariety  of  circumstances.  Some  people  by  prudent  management,  and  leaving  it  off
piece  by  piece,  like  a  flannel  waistcoat  in  warm  weather,  even  contrive  in  time  to
dispense  with  it  altogether  ;  but  there  be  others  who  can  assume  the  garment  and
throw  it  off  at  pleasure  ;  and  this,  being  the  greatest  and  most  convenient  improve-
ment,  is  the  one  most  in  vogue.    (Old  Curiosity  Shop.)

Ver.  16.  They  profess  that  they  know  God. — Conventional  Christian* : — I.  Con-
ventional Christians  are  pbofessionai,  atheists.  II.  Conventional  Christians  are
PBACTiCAi,  ATHEISTS.  1.  They  deny  God's  authority  in  every-daj  life ;  ignore  the
claims  He  has  upon  their  existence,  powers,  possessions.  2.  They  deny  Hia
teaching.  He  teaches  that  spiritual  interests  are  supreme.  They  declare  in  their
daily  life  that  temporal  interest  are  paramount  He  teaches  that  no  man  should
live  to  himself,  but  should  be  inspired  by  that  benevolence  that  will  promote  the
common  weal.  But  they  practically  declare  that  self-interests  are  supreme,  that
every  man  should  work  for  himself,  regardless  of  the  common  good.  He  teaches  to
honour  all  men  on  account  of  what  they  are.  They  declare  that  those  only  are  to
be  honoured  who  are  endowed  with  wealth,  and  move  in  the  pageantry  of  worldly
pomp  and  power.  (Homilist.)  The  judgment  of  hypocrisy  : — I.  Hypocrisy  thb
OCCASION  OF  ATHEISM.  Falsc  and  inconsistent  professors  cause  more  scepticism  than
the  active  propagandism  of  infidels.  II.  Hypocrisy  is  offensivb  even  to  thb
UNGODLY.  III.  Hypocrisy  is  practical  disobedience.  The  law  is  first  for  the  spirit,
then  the  letter :  for  the  life  through  the  heart.  IV.  Hypocrisy  univebsally
CONDEMNED.  Though  in  appearance  full  of  "  good  works,"  the  hypocrite  is  con-
demned as  destitute  of  any.  (F.  Wagstaff.)  Hypocrites  in  the  Church: —
I.  There  will  always  be  hypocrites  in  the  Church.  Although  the  Lord  could
easily  and  at  once  purge  His  floor  of  them,  yet  in  great  wisdom  He  suffereth  them.
1.  In  regard  of  His  own  glory,  that  His  holiness  might  appear  in  the  daily  discover-
ing of  them  and  purging  His  Church ;  for  he  cannot  abide  that  hypocrites  should
go  in  the  tale  and  account  of  His  children.  But  one  time  or  other,  one  way  or
other,  will  be  sanctified  in  all  them  that  oome  near  Him ;  at  which  time  His
glory  also  shineth  out  unto  others  in  their  just  judgment.  2.  In  regard  of
the  wicked,  that  they  should  the  more  stumble  at  the  truth  by  reason  of  some
hypocrites  among  professors.  3.  In  regard  of  the  godly,  that -they  should  partly  be
exercised  by  this  means,  and  partly  driven  to  examine  what  truth  is  in  them.
4.  In  respect  of  the  truth  itself,  which  getteth  some  testimony  hence,  as  Christ  on
the  cross  by  the  very  title  of  His  enemies,  affirming  that  He  was  the  King  of  the
Jews.  II.  The  character  of  the  hypocrite.  1.  The  hypocrite  is  a  great  pro-
fessor of  religion,  and  hence  cometh  to  be  answerable  to  his  name,  in  seeming  to
be,  and  sustaining  the  person  that  he  is  not.  As  a  clown  or  knave  on  a  stage  playeth
the  part  of  a  noble,  or  king,  but  is  well  known  to  be  the  next  remove  from  a  rogue,
so  these  fellows  whom  the  apostle  noteth  have  often  in  their  mouths  the  name  of
God  and  of  Christ,  the  title  of  the  Church,  and  pretend  great  knowledge  of  God
and  cunning  in  the  Scriptures,  and  other  ecclesiastical  writings;  yea  further,  make
»  great  show  of  faith  and  pity,  and  if  bare  profession  would  lead  to  heaven,  these
•oold  not  be  the  least  or  last  there.    And  to  make  this  a  little  more  plain,  an


OBAP.  I.]  TITUS.  68

hypocrite  can  carry  himself  so  level  and  even  in  his  oouiBe,  as  no  man  shall' be  abl*
outwardly  to  accuse  him,  or  impute  anything  unto  him,  no  more  than  the  disciples
could  accuse  Judas,  when  every  man  said,  "Master,  is  it  I?  "  but  none  of  them
said,  Master,  is  it  Judas  ?  2.  The  second  note  is  in  these  words,  But  indeed  they  deny
him.  That  is,  aU  the  religion  of  an  hypocrite  is  only  in  outward  profession,
separated  from  the  inward  sincerity  of  the  heart.  All  that  we  have  spoken  of  him
is  but  a  lifeless  form  of  godliness,  in  which  the  power  of  it  is  denied  (2  Tim.  iii.  5).
Men  may  be  said  to  deny  a  thing  three  ways.  1.  With  the  tongue.  2.  With  th«
heart;  thus  the  atheist  denieth  God  (Psa.  xxiv.  1).  3.  With  the  Ufe  or  actionSi
which  is  here  properly  meant.  For  ask  the  tongues  and  words  of  these  men  con«
cerning  their  courses,  all  will  appear  to  be  fish  whole,  but  ask  their  hves,  and  yoa
shall  hear  their  works  (which  are  far  more  evident  witnesses  with  or  against  a
man,  than  his  words)  speak  otherwise.  Or,  grant  they  do  many  glorious  works  to
iiie  eye,  yet  even  herein  after  a  sort  God  is  denied,  in  that  mey  are  lame,  and,
indeed,  carcases  of  good  actions,  without  any  soul  to  quicken  them ;  all  is  external,
and  in  such  works  they  may  be  very  busy,  but  spiritually  they  perform  nothing.
3.  The  third  note  or  character,  is  in  a  further  degree  of  the  sin,  in  that  they  are
said,  rebellious  to  God's  commandment,  and  disobedient  to  the  doctrine  of  God.
The  Word  giveth  us  to  discover  two  vices  in  these  titular  Christians.  (1)  InfideUty.
(2)  Bebellion,  or  in  one  word,  the  want  of  the  obedience  of  faith.  True  it  is  they
make  a  great  show  of  faith,  but  the  apostle  distinguiBheth  of  faith ;  one  kind  is
feigned,  another  is  unfeigned :  the  former  may  be  joined  with  much  knowledge,  much
tal]^  of  piety,  but  never  with  a  pure  heart  and  good  conscience,  as  the  latter.  Now
this  unfeigned  faith,  being  the  mother  and  mistress  of  unfained  obedience,  and  the
only  root  whence  this  fruit  can  bud  and  blossom,  whosoever  are  destitute  of  the
former  cannot  but  be  barren  of  the  latter.  What  are  the  fruits  of  unbelief,
see  Acts  xvii.  5  ;^  Thess.  iii.  2 ;  Heb.  iii.  12.  4.  The  fourth  note  is  yet  in  a  further
degree  of  the  sin,  and  goeth  near  the  detection  of  him ;  when  after  long  custom  in
sin,  and  cracking  his  conscience  checking  him,  he  becomes  as  a  crazy  pitcher
which  is  unfit  to  hold  water ;  so  is  he  reprobate  to  every  good  duty ;  now  can  he
do  nothing  but  rush  into  sin  thick  and  threefold,  and  dowse  himself  over  head  and
ears  in  impiety.  III.  The  hiserablb  condition  of  the  htpocbitb.  They  are
abominable  to  God,  which  appeareth  both — 1.  In  their  persons.  2.  Their  actions.
3.  Their  punishment.  For  their  persons,  they  are  but  half  Christians,  neither  hot
nor  cold,  and  therefore  the  Lord  cannot  digest  them,  compared  to  cakes  but  half
baked  (Hos.  vii.  10),  and  not  turned  on  the  other  side.  Seeing,  therefore,  they  are
such  as  withdraw  their  best  part  from  God,  the  soul  of  God  can  take  no  pleasure  in
them.  Their  actions,  although  never  so  good  in  themselves,  never  so  specious  unto
others,  yet  are  abominable  unto  God.  Yea,  in  their  most  devout  services,  they  do
nothing  but  (as  Ephraim)  compass  the  Lord  with  lies,  and  deceit  (Hos.  xi.  12).
Their  punishment  showeth  them  to  be  every  way  abhorred  of  God ;  for  as  men  deal
with  things  they  hate,  so  the  Lord — 1.  Casteth  them  out  of  His  sight  (Job.  xiii.  16).
The  hypocrite  shall  not  come  before  Him  ;  the  workers  of  lies  shall  not  enter  with-
in tbe  walls  of  that  holy  city.  Tea,  sometimes  they  are  cast  out  of  His  presence,  as
Cain  was,  even  out  of  the  visible  Church,  as  they  are  ever  out  of  the  invisible,  to  show
that  they  shall  never  be  endured  hereafter.  2.  Destroyeth  them ;  for  their  destruction
from  the  Lord  sleepeth  not,  but  sbaU  surprise  them ;  perhaps  while  they  are  in  the
body,  as  Ananias  and  Sapphira,  but  certainly  hereafter.  (T.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Pro-
Jetting  God,  hut  denying  Him ; — Here  learn — 1.  That  hypocrites  are  generally  great
professors  :  they  profess  great  knowledge  of  God,  and  great  zeal  for  Him.  2.  That
to  deny  God  is  a  very  heinous  sin,  and  an  abominable  wickedness  :  there  is  a  two-
fold denial  of  God ;  first  in  words,  expressly  and  openly ;  secondly,  in  practice,
closely  and  consequentially  ;  "  They  profess  that  they  know  God ;  but  in  words  they
deny  Him. "  There  may  be  at  once  a  professing  of  God,  and  a  denial  of  Hjin ;
many  a  man's  practice  speaks  loud,  that  there  is  no  God,  when  he  makes  a  fair
confession  and  profession  of  Him  with  his  mouth  and  tongue.  3.  That  no  sorts  of
persons  are  so  odious  to  God,  and  abominable  in  His  sight  as  those  who  make  a
profession  of  His  holy  name  and  truth,  but  walk  contrary  in  their  lives  to  that
profession.  (W.  BurJdtt,  M.A.)  A  tarnished  Christian: — "I  laid  aside  a  coin
one  day  but  did  not  remember  just  where  I  had  put  it,  till  one  day  I  found  it  in  a
comer,  encrusted  with  rust.  At  first,  I  thought  it  was  copper,  but  careful  examina>
tion  proved  it  to  be  silver.  It  had  lain  tliere  so  long  that  it  was  tarnished  and
unrecognisable.  Jnst  as  many  Christian?,  alas  !  are  so  covered  with  the  grime  and
filth  of  this  world  that  it  is  no  wonder  that  the  unconverted  and  Christians  look


M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n.

npon  them  as  copper  instead  of  being  good  silver."  Inconsistencies  ofChristiant : —
In  trae  kindness  of  heart,  sweetness  of  temper,  open-handed  generositj,  the  common
charities  of  life,  many  mere  men  of  the  world  lose  nothing  by  comparison  with  such
professors ;  and  how  are  you  to  keep  the  world  from  saymg,  "  Ah  !  your  man  of
religion  is  no  better  thaji  others ;  nay,  he  is  sometimes  worse  1 "  With  what  fright-
ful prominence  does  this  stand  out  in  the  answer — never-to-be-forgotten  answer — of
an  Indian  chief  to  the  missionary  who  urged  him  to  become  a  Christian.  The
plumed  and  painted  savage  drew  himself  up  in  the  consciousness  of  superior
rectitude ;  and  with  indignation  quivering  on  his  lip  and  flashing  in  his  eagle  eye,
he  replied,  "Christian  Uel  Christian  cheat  1  Christian  steall— drink  1 — murder!
Christian  has  robbed  me  of  my  lands,  and  slain  my  tribe !  "  adding,  as  he  turned
haughtily  away,  "The  devil,  Christian  I  I  will  be  no  Christian."  Many  such
reflections  teach  us  to  be  careful  how  we  make  a  religious  profession  I  And  having
made  the  profession,  cost  what  it  may,  by  the  grace  of  God  let  us  live  up  to  it ;  and
•ct  it  out.  It  is  better  not  to  vow,  than,  having  vowed,  not  to  pay.  (T.  Guthrie,
D.D.)  Religion  not  to  be  rejected  because  of  hypocrites : — Many  people  are  offended
with  the  profession  of  religion,  because  all  are  not  religious  who  make  a  profession.
A  little  consideration  will  correct  this  error.  Does  the  sheep  despise  its  fleece
because  the  wolf  has  worn  it  ?  Who  blames  a  crystal  river  because  some
melancholy  men  have  drowned  themselves  in  its  streams  ?  The  best  drugs  have
their  adulterants.  And  will  you  refuse  an  opiate,  because  some  have  wantonly
poisoned  themselves  with  it  ?  Though  you  have  been  cozened  with  false  colours,
yet  you  should  not  dis-esteem  that  which  is  dyed  in  grain.  He  is  a  bad  economist
who,  having  a  spot  in  his  garment,  outs  off  the  cloth,  instead  of  labbing  ofl  the  dirt>
Ood  rejects  a^  religion  but  His  own.    (T.  Seeker.)


OHAPTEB  n.


Ybb.  1.  Bnt  speak  thou  the  things  which  become  sonnd  doctrine. — Connexion
with  previous  chapter :  on  the  true  pastor  in  contrast  with  the  false  : — Titus'  duty
is  laid  down  by  way  of  opposition,  and  knit  to  the  former  matter  and  chapter  by  the
conjunction,  But  teach  thou.  As  if  he  had  said.  Although  the  false  teachers  whom
I  have  described  dote  upon  dreams,  and  feed  their  hearers  with  fancies  and  doctrines
of  men,  to  the  corrupting  and  poisoning  of  souls,  and  turning  men  away  from  the
truth,  thou  must  be  utterly  unlike  them  in  thy  preaching ;  they  speak  pleasing
thingt,  but  thou  must  speak  profitable ;  they,  by  despising  the  siinplicity  of  the
gospel,  fall  not  only  into  dangerous  errors  which  they  broach,  but  into  loose  and
idle  discourses  which  bring  diseases  upon  the  soul ;  but  thou,  on  the  contrary,  must
plainly  and  familiarly  discover  unto  all  estates  of  men  and  women  their  estates  and
duties,  that  thereby  they  may  be  brought  to  soundness ;  they  cannot  but  speak  and
teach  as  they  are ;  but  let  tbem  trifle  as  they  will,  and  live  as  they  list,  thou  hast
betaken  thee  to  another  service  than  that  of  man,  and  must  carry  thy  ministry  as
becometh  a  sound  teacher  of  the  truth,  which  is  according  to  godliness.  {T.  Taylor,
D.D.)        Lessons  for  ministers:—!.  No  Cheistian  minister  nob  man  must  be  so

SHAKEN    AT   THE   UNGODLY   COURSES   OF  OTHERS   IN    THEIB    BANK    aS    that    they   either

give  over  or  give  back  from  their  uprightness  in  their  duties,  for  Titus,  although  he
might  seem  to  be  cried  down  by  the  general  voice  of  false  and  pompous  teachers,
yet  must  he  not  be  silent ;  and  though  he  might  be  troubled  and  opposed,  yet  must
he  not  be  timorous  or  sluggish;  and  though  his  doctrine  was  not  received  nor
obeyed,  yet  he  must  not  be  weary  of  tendering  and  teaching  it ;  yea,  be  it  that  the
world  would  rather  applaud  mockers  and  time  servers,  yet  must  not  he  discon-
tentedly with  Jonas  turn  another  way,  but  look  unto  his  own  duty  in  serving  God,
his  Church,  and  men's  salvations.  Let  others  stand  or  fall  to  their  own  masters.  It
is  safe  for  every  man  so  to  lay  his  counters  as  that  his  Master  may  find  him  doing,
yea,  well-doing.  II.  The  scope  of  evert  jonisteb  in  his  teaohino  must  bx  to
FEED  the  feoflb  OF  GoD  WITH  WHOLESOME  DOCTRINE,  such  as  may  bring  the  souls
of  men  to  health  and  soundness.  For— 1.  If  the  common  talk  of  Christians  must
be  edifying,  ministering  grace,  bring  sweetness  to  the  soul,  and  health  to  the  bones;
if  it  be  reiiuired  of  every  righteous  man  that  his  lips  should  feed  many ;  nay,  more,


OBAT.  u.]  TITUS.  65

if  the  law  of  grace  mast  sit  ander  the  lips  of  every  virtuous  woman,  much  more
must  the  minister's,  whose  office  in  peculiar  bindeth  him  to  be  a  pastor  or  feeder,
and  that  according  to  God's  own  heart,  he  having  for  this  purpose  received  his
calling,  gifts,  and  approbation  of  God.  2.  Otherwise  he  perverteth  the  whole  course
of  his  life  and  calling,  and  is  no  better  than  those  false  apostles  who,  turning
themselves  from  sound  teaching  to  unfruitful  discourses,  called  vain  jangling,  are
Bald  to  rove  and  err  from  the  right  aim,  like  unskilful  darters  or  shooters.  [Ibid.)
Sound  doctrine : — I.  We  have  only  to  look  at  the  remaining  part  of  this  chapter
to  learn  what  Pattl  means  by  "  sound  doctbine."  In  this  first  verse  he  states  the
subject  generally,  and  then  branches  it  out  into  its  various  parts.  Through  the
subsequent  verses  he  directs  Titus  to  explain  to  his  flock  the  duties  of  their  several
stations,  and  to  enforce  these  duties  from  motives  suggested  by  the  gospeL  He  was
to  exhort  the  aged  and  the  young,  masters  and  servants,  male  and  female,  to  acquit
themselves  of  every  obligation  which  their  situations  imposed,  and  thus  adorn  the
doctrines  of  God  their  Saviour.  The  performance  of  all  their  duties  as  Christiana
forms  the  perfection  of  holiness.  1.  The  apostle  Paul  says  (chap.  iii.  8),  "  This  is
a  faithful  saying,  and  these  things  I  will  that  thou  affirm  constantly,  that  they
which  have  believed  in  God  might  be  careful  to  maintain  good  works."  The  same
apostle  in  another  place,  distinguishing  between  true  and  false  professors,  says,
••  For  many  walk  of  whom  I  have  told  you  often,  and  now  tell  you  even  weeping,
that  they  are  the  enemies  of  the  cross  of  Christ,  whose  end  is  destruction,  whose
God  is  their  belly,  and  whose  glory  is  in  their  shame,  who  mind  earthly  things ;
but  our  conversation  is  in  heaven,  from  whence,  also,  we  look  for  the  Saviour,  the
Lord  Jesus  Christ."  "  We  are  His  workmanship,  created  in  Christ  unto  good
works,  which  God  hath  before  ordained,  that  we  should  walk  in  them."  The
whole  of  the  sixth  chapter  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Eomans  is  written  to  show  that  the
true  end  of  the  doctrine  of  grace  is  to  sanctify  men.  But  to  mention  particularly
all  the  passages  which  oblige  us  to  holiness  would  be  to  recapitulate  almost  all  the
Bible ;  the  whole  book  enforces  obedience  to  the  precepts  of  our  Divine  Master.
It  is  sufficient  to  recollect  His  own  words,  "Let  your  hght  so  shine  before  men,
that  they  may  see  your  good  works,  and  glorify  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven."
'•  Herein  is  My  Father  glorified,  that  ye  bear  much  fruit."  The  religion  of  Christ,
which  is  intended  to  bring  us  into  communion  with  God,  brings  us  first  to  holiness,
without  which  this  communion  is  not  to  be  attained.  Believers  are  temples  of  the
Holy  Ghost ;  but,  while  we  live  in  sin,  can  the  Spirit  of  God  dwell  in  us  ?  Can  He
dwell  in  a  man  without  producing  the  effects  of  His  power  and  of  His  grace  ?  Can
He  possess  the  heart,  and  yet  leave  the  affections  enslaved  to  sin  ?  2.  From  the
tendency  of  its  doctrines,  considered  as  motives  to  action,  the  same  thing  is  evident.
There  is  no  discrepancy  betwixt  the  various  parts  of  the  gospel.  While  it  inculcates
purity  and  holiness  of  life,  it  affords  us  the  most  powerful  motives  to  live  soberly,
righteously,  and  godly.  Do  we  examine  its  precepts  and  rules  of  conduct  ?  These
give  us  an  idea  of  holiness  in  a  manner  at  once  hvely  and  impressive.  Do  we  con-
sider the  manner  in  which  the  nature  of  vice  is  represented?  Its  miseries  are
described  so  fully  and  so  well  that  we  cannot  but  hold  it  in  abhorrence ;  everywhere
the  Bible  abounds  with  reasons  most  powerfully  enforcing  the  necessary  practice  of
a  good  life  ;  all  its  mysteries  point  to  this  ;  all  its  doctrines  are  as  strong  bonds  to
bind  our  hearts  to  the  obedience  of  faith — they  are  so  many  weapons  of  war,
mighty  through  God  to  cast  down  imaginations  and  every  high  thing — ^to  bring
into  captivity  every  thought  to  the  obedience  of  Christ.  The  gospel  consecrates  to
holy  uses  even  what  the  light  of  nature  teaches  us,  as,  that  God  is  our  Creator,  who,
at  the  beginning,  called  us  into  existence ;  that  He  is  our  Preserver,  who,  by  a
perpetual  influence,  supports  us — that  it  is  His  providence  that  watches  over  the
whole  universe — particularly  guards  us,  and  furnishes  us  with  whatever  His  good-
ness and  wisdom  judge  needful  for  us.  What  can  more  forcibly  incline  us  to  the
practice  of  obedience  than  these  important  truths,  if  well  considered  ?  Since  God
is  our  Creator,  who  gave  us  life,  ought  we  not  to  devote  that  life  to  Him  ?  Be  it
ours  to  view  the  mercies  of  God  aright,  and  acknowledge  that  they  all  demand
holiness  unto  the  Lord.  But  these  motives  to  holiness,  however  great  and  power-
fnl,  are  as  nothing  compared  with  those  which  the  gospel  does  not  take  from  th«
light  of  reason,  but  from  revelation.  These  latter  motives,  comprehended  in
Christ  and  His  economy,  are  such  as  must  affect  every  soul  which  is  not  dead  ia
sin  and  insensible  to  every  right  impression.  That  the  Almighty,  after  all  our
crimes,  should  be  reconciled  to  us  ;  that  He  should  give  His  Son — give  Him  to  b«
made  man — to  be  oar  brother — our  example ;  that  He  should  give  Him  to  die  foe


S5  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n.

UB  the  most  ignominiouB  and  cruel  death ;  is  not  this  love  and  mercy  worthy  of
eternal  praise  7  Are  not  these  the  strongest  inducements  to  be  holy  in  all  maimer
of  conversation  ?  Who  shall  be  found  so  ungrateful  as  to  be  capable  of  sinning
against  a  God  so  merciful — of  counting  the  blood  of  such  a  covenant  an  unholy
tMng  ?  II.  Let  us  next  consider  thx  iianmeb  in  which  bound  doctbins  is  to  bi
SPOKEN.  The  view  of  the  Christian  revelation  already  giren  is  a  sufficient  reply  to
allegations  against  the  two  common  modes  of  preaching.  Some  complain  that  tho
explanation  and  enforcement  of  precepts  is  not  preaching  Jesus  Christ,  while  others
complain  that  doctrines  are  stated  and  enlarged  upon  which  have  no  relation  to
practice.  While  we  preach  Christ  crucified,  or  exhort  to  virtuous  conduct,  let  none
say  that  we  overlook  the  end  of  revelation,  for  each  part,  properly  stated,  does,  in
the  most  explicit  manner,  promote  the  end  of  the  gospel — the  sanctification  of
believers.  Let  it  be  remembered,  then,  that  whether  a  minister  enforces  a  precept
or  explains  a  doctrine,  he  is  bringing  that  precept  or  that  doctrine  to  take  its  share
in  the  grand  design  of  the  whole — the  salvation  of  mankind ;  and  that,  in  choosing
either  as  the  subject  of  discourse,  he  does  not  lose  sight  of  what  the  gospel  con«
stantly  keeps  in  view — that  men  who  would  inherit  the  kingdom  which  cannot  be
moved  must  "  serve  God  acceptably  with  reverence  and  godly  fear."  III.  We  next
consider  with  what  mind  and  in  what  hanneb  this  "  bound  doctbine  is  to  aa
HBABD."  Though  the  preacher  speak  "  never  so  wisely,"  if  the  hearers  neglect  the
means  of  instruction,  his  labour  must  be  vain.  Give  attendance  to  reading,  to
exhortation,  to  doctrine,  to  prayer.  You  ought  to  hear  with  serious  attention,
having  repaired  to  the  house  of  God  with  holy  awe,  having  composed  your  spirits
by  prayer,  lay  aside  each  low  and  earthly  thought,  and  earnestly  devote  your  minds
to  learn  the  tilings  that  are  profitable  unto  salvation.  Tou  must  hear  with  meek-
ness. Come  to  the  house  of  God  with  modest  and  tractable  dispouitions,  bring
along  with  you  the  persuasion  that  you  need  frequently  to  be  reminded  of  your
duty.  They  only,  who  in  good  and  honest  hearts  receive  the  Word,  keep  it,  and
bring  forth  fruit.  You  must  hear  with  particular  application.  When  yon  hear  a
vice  reproved  of  which  your  conscience  accuses  you,  apply  the  reproof  to  yourselves,
"  0  my  soul,  thou  art  the  man."  Let  the  instructions  which  you  hear  be  carefullj
laid  up  in  your  hearts,  and  reduced  to  practice  in  your  lives.  You  must  be  *'  doers
of  the  Word  and  not  hearers  only."  Religion  is  not  an  empty  amusement  or  aa
airy  speculation ;  it  is  the  science  of  holiness,  a  practical  art,  a  guide  and  director
of  human  life.  Make  your  prayer  before  the  Lord  your  God,  that  you  may  under-
stand His  truth ;  God  alone  can  seal  the  instructions  you  may  receive.  Whoever
may  plant,  it  is  God  that  giveth  the  increase.  Ask,  in  faith,  wisdom  from  above,
and  "  God,  who  giveth  to  all  men  liberally  and  upbraideth  not,  will  give  it  you."
(L.  Adamton,  D.D.)  The  minister's  directory : — I.  He  should  be  a  pbeaohxb.
"Speak."  n.  He  should  be  himseu.  "Thou."  HI.  He  should  be  a  student.
"  Sound  doctrine,"  IV.  He  should  bb  practical.  "The  things  which  become."
{F.  Wag$taff.)  Lessons  for  hearers: — Hearers  are  hence  taught  sundry  duties.
As — 1.  To  desire  only  this  wholesome  food  that  their  souls  may  be  well  liking,
laying  aside  their  itchmg  ears,  which  hunt  after  novelties,  for  the  ministry  is  not
appointed  to  beat  the  ear  as  music,  but  to  sink  into  the  soul  as  the  food  and
medicine  of  it,  by  becoming  the  means  and  rule  of  life.  Athenian  hearing  is  the
cause  of  Athenian  preaching,  and  the  diseases  running  upon  such  hearers  showeth
the  curse  of  God  on  them,  who  with  contempt  of  the  manna  from  heaven,  with
the  onions,  garlic,  and  flesh  of  Egypt ;  these  things  they  have  upon  their  desire,
and  with  them  more  than  they  desire,  for  they  rot  even  between  their  teeth.  2.  To
receive  the  wholesome  doctrine,  as  for  the  body  we  receive  wholesome  food  what-
soever it  be,  or  from  whomsoever;  let  it  be  bitter  sometimes,  or  seem  too  salt,  yet
if  it  be  wholesome  hunger  findeth  it  savoury ;  no  man  but  will  strive  to  receive  a
bitter  potion  to  restore  his  body  out  of  any  weakness  to  soundness ;  and  yet  who  is
it  that  will  suffer  a  wholesome  reproof  to  the  recovery  of  soundness  to  the  soul  ?
and  others  stand  so  much  upon  toothsomeness  of  their  meat,  and  must  know
their  cooks  bo  well,  that  before  they  can  be  resolved  in  these  two,  the  plausibleness
of  the  doctrine  and  the  friendliness  of  the  person,  their  souls  are  well  nigh  starved
to  death.  Hence  is  it  that  we  hear  so  many  complaints.  Oh,  saith  one,  ha
seeketh  not  the  goodwill  of  his  hearers,  nor  casteth  to  please  them ;  he  is  of  a
tart  and  bitter  spirit ;  he  seeketh  to  wound  and  gall,  but  he  healeth  nor  suppleth
not.  But  what  preacheth  he,  whether  any  errors  or  the  pure  doctrine  of  God  ?  No,
•ay  they,  we  cannot  except  against  his  doctrine.  True,  for  they  never  trouble
themselves  so  far  as  to  examine  it  by  the  Word  or  themselves  by  it.    But  then,  eaj


CBAP.  n.]  TITUS,  67

I,  is  it  the  Word  of  God  thou  hearest,  and  the  truth  by  thine  own  confession  ?
Why  dost  thou  then  not  tremble  at  that  Word  ?  3.  Hearers  must  hold  wholesome
doctrine  when  they  have  received  it  (2  Tim.  iii.  14).  Continue  in  the  things  thou
hast  received;  buy  the  truth,  but  sell  it  not,  and  bind  it  fast  upon  their  hearts.
And  good  reason,  for  if  the  meat  be  never  so  wholesome,  if  the  stomach  of  the
soul  keep  it  not,  but  it  slip  the  memory,  and  is  not  by  meditation  digested,  the  soul
is  as  surely  diseased  as  is  the  body  when  no  sustenance  will  stay  to  strengthen  it.
4.  Hearers  must  so  desire,  receive,  and  hold  this  wholesome  food,  as  they  may
grow  by  it,  showing  by  their  thriving  in  grace  that  they  have  wholesome  meat
(Psa.  cix.  4),  for  as  in  the  body,  if  meat,  when  it  is  digested,  send  not  virtue  where-
by the  operation  of  it  appeareth  in  all  the  parts,  the  body  is  diseased,  some
obstruction  or  epilation  hindereth  the  work  of  it,  so  is  the  soul  obstructed  with
the  itching  ear,  covetous  thoughts,  hardness  of  heart,  formal  worship,  all  which
keep  the  soul  barren  and  empty  of  grace,  yea,  lean  and  ill-looking  in  the  eyes  of
God.  Seeing,  therefore,  the  Lord  hath  spread  His  table  for  us,  and  liberally  furnished
it  with  store  of  this  wholesome  food,  let  it  appear  in  our  souls,  by  our  strength  to
labour  in  Christian  duties  to  which  we  are  c^ed,  to  overcoin^  £he  temptations  unto
sin,  to  carry  our  victory  in  our  strife  against  our  own  lusts,  (T.  Taylor,  D.D.)
Genuine  morality : — I.  Genuine  morality  legislates  alike  fob  all  mankikd.  1.
Age.  2.  Sex.  3.  Relationship.  U.  Genuine  morality  beaches  to  the  bpbinos
of  the  heabt.  in.  Genuine  morality  is  the  grand  purpose  of  gospel  teach-
ing. (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Healthy  teaching: — Sound  teaching,  according  to
Paul,  is  not  teaching  that  has  the  conventional  ring,  not  teaching  that  is  divested
of  all  freshness,  originality,  and  stimulating  force,  but  whatever  goes  to  make  moral
fibre,  whatever  tends  to  build  up  strong  men  and  women,  whatever  brings  a  healthy
colour  to  the  cheek,  and  gives  life  a  true  zest.  I.  It  is  the  healthy  uind  alone
that  can  impabt  healtbty  teaching,  a  healthy  mind  is  a  free  and  untrammeled
mind ;  a  mind  that  plays  freely  around  all  questions,  and  forms  its  own  unbiassed
conclusions.  A  mind  that  has  the  clear  vision  of  health,  a  mind  that  has  the  keen
appetite  of  health,  a  mind  that  has  the  unvitiated  palate  of  health,  a  mind  that  has
the  hardy  courage  of  health,  a  mind  that  takes  the  world  as  it  finds  it.  An  inde-
pendent mind,  a  mind  that  makes  its  own  observations,  draws  its  own  inferences,
18  not  a  mere  servile  echo  of  other  minds.  II.  Healthy  teaching  is  that  which
IB  HEALTHFUL  IN  ITS  EFFECTS.  Bad  food  cBJinot  build  up  a  robust  frame.  I  will
imagine  that  a  mother  has  a  puling,  pining  infant  to  rear.  There  is  a  question
between  divers  kinds  of  diet.  One  authority  says:  "Tou  ought  to  use  mine,
because  it  has  the  correct  label  on  it,  and  is  done  up  in  the  proper  regulation  tins."
Bat  the  mother  says :  "  I  have  tried  it,  and  the  child  starved  upon  it."  "  But  it  has
all  the  requisite  chemical  constituents  in  their  due  proportions.  It  must  have  been
the  native  perversity  of  the  child  which  prevented  its  thriving.  It  is  the  recognised
thing,  endorsed  and  recommended  by  the  entire  faculty."  "  I  cannot  help  that,"
Bays  the  mother;  "labels  or  no  labels,  tins  or  no  tins,  faculty  or  no  faculty,  all  I
know  is  that  I  have  tried  that  food,  and  that  if  I  had  gone  on  with  it,  my  child
wonld  have  been  dead  by  this  time."  And  then  she  is  induced,  by  some  old  wife,
perhaps,  to  tiy  another  preparation,  natural  and  simple,  nobody's  patent,  with  no
label  or  endorsement  whatever.  But,  lo,  and  behold  I  the  child  grows  fat  and
plump,  the  hue  of  health  comes  gradually  to  its  cheeks,  and  it  weighs  heavier  every
day  1  "  But  this  is  not  an  accredited  compound.  The  great  authorities  on  diet
have  not  prescribed  it.  It  cannot  be  wholesome."  Once  more  the  mother  retorts :
"  No  matter.  My  child  is  alive  and  well."  Now,  that  is  the  true  test  to  apply  to
religious  teaching.  What  sort  of  men  and  women  does  it  make  ?  "  Sound
doctrine  "  is  that  which  produces  a  healthy,  spiritual  life,  which  builds  up  character.
{J.  HaUey.)  Wholefome  doctrine  must  be  applied  to  the  several  ages  and  con-
ditions of  men : — ^Every  faithful  minister  must  fit  and  apply  his  doctrine  to  the
several  ages,  conditions,  and  occasions  of  his  people,  that  every  man  and  woman,
young  and  old,  superior  and  inferior,  may  know  not  only  what  is  lawful,  but  what
is  most  expedient  and  beseeming  our  age,  place,  and  condition  of  life.  It  is  true
that  all  virtues  in  general  are  commanded,  as  all  vices  in  general  are  forbidden,
to  all  persons,  of  what  sex  or  estate  soever ;  yet  there  be  some  special  virtues  which
are  more  shining  ornaments  in  some  age  and  condition  than  others,  as  in  young
men  staidness  and  discretion  are  special  beauties,  but  are  not  (if  wanting)  such
blemishes  in  their  years,  as  in  old  men,  because  of  their  observation  and  experience.
So  there  be  some  special  vices  (though  all  are  to  strive  against  all)  which  are  fouler
■pots  and  stains  to  some  ages  than  to  others,  and  some  to  which  men  and  women


68  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  n.

are  mora  subject  by  reason  of  their  age  or  sex,  as  youth  to  headiness  and  rashness;
old  age  to  testiness,  frowardness,  covetousness,  &o. ;  women  to  cariosity,  loquacity,
&c.,  against  all  which  the  man  of  God  must  in  special  furnish  and  arm  his  people,
instantly  striving  to  root  out  such  noisome  weeds  as  of  their  own  accord  appear  out
of  the  earthy  hearts  of  men,  as  also  to  plant  the  contrary  graces  in  their  stead.
Examples  of  this  practice  we  meet  withal  everywhere  in  the  Epistles.  Paul,  in
divers  of  his  Epistles,  as  to  the  Colossians,  but  especially  to  the  Epbesians*
describeth  in  particular  the  duties  of  wives,  husbands,  children,  fathers,  servants,
masters  (see  chap.  v.  6).  Peter,  in  the  second  and  third  chapters,  is  as  large  in  the
distinct  offices  of  subjects,  wives,  husbands,  servants.  And  from  this  practice  the
apostle  John  dissenteth  not  (1  John  ii.  12),  where  he  giveth  his  reasons  why  he
writeth  to  fathers,  to  babes,  to  old  men,  and  to  young  men.  Besides  these
examples  are  sundry  weighty  reasons  to  enforce  the  doctrine.  1.  As  first,  the
faithfulness  of  a  wise  steward  herein  appeareth,  namely,  in  distributing  to  every
one  of  his  master's  family  their  own  portion  of  meat  in  due  season  (Luke  xii.  42).
2.  To  this  purpose  is  the  Word  fitted,  to  make  every  man  ready  and  absolute  to
every  good  work ;  and  thus  the  wisdom  of  God  is  made  to  shine  to  all  eyes,  who
can  behold  such  a  perfect  rule  of  direction  in  faith  and  manners.  3.  Well  knew
our  apostle,  with  the  other  men  of  God,  that  general  doctrines  (though  never  so
wholesome)  Lttle  prevail,  are  but  cold,  and  touch  not  men  to  the  quick,  without
particular  application  to  their  several  necessities ;  till  Peter  come  to  say,  "Ton  have
crucified  the  Lord  of  glory,"  we  read  of  no  pricking  of  their  hearts.  (T.  Taylor,
D.D.)  Dealing  with  individuals: — ^Richard  Baxter  adopted  the  method  of
individual  dealing  with  the  parishioners  of  Kidderminster,  bringing  them  to  his
house  and  taking  them  apart  one  by  one.  He  tells  us  that,  because  of  it,  he  had
reason  to  believe  that  more  than  a  third  of  the  grown-up  inhabitants  of  tiie  place
were  converted  to  God.  The  late  Mr.  Grant  of  Arndilly  was  so  intent  upon  this
habit  of  individual  intercourse  that  in  three  months  he  had  dealt  with  fifteen
hundred  souls,  while  the  refrain  of  all  his  letters,  as  Mrs.  Gordon  says,  was  always
this,  *'  Speak  a  word  for  Jesus."

Yer.  2.  That  the  aged  men  he  sober. — The  temptations  and  duties  of  old  men:—
I.  Sins  to  be  avoided.  1.  Indulgence  in  wine.  2.  Irreverence.  3.  Folly.
♦•  lemperate"  here  is  really  prudent,  sound-minded.  XL  Vibtues  to  be  cherished.
1.  Stability.  2.  Love.  3.  Patience.  {F.  Wagstaff.)  The  duty  of  old  men : —
Our  apostle  exempteth  not  old  men  from  being  subject  to  the  doctrine  of  God  because
of  their  age,  but  rather  sendeth  them  first  to  school,  notwithstanding  all  that  know-
ledge and  experience  which  they  might  pretend  (1  John  ii.  13).  For  God's  school
is  as  well  for  old  as  for  young,  in  which  men  are  not  only  to  be  initiated  in  the
principles  of  religion,  but  also  to  be  led  forward  unto  perfection  of  wisdom  ;  and
seeing  no  man  can  attain  in  this  life  unto  perfection,  therefore  every  man  is  still
to  press  forward,  and  to  wax  old  daily  learning  something.  And  there  is  great
reason  that  as  old  men  must  first  be  instructed  by  Titus,  so  they  should  be  the  first
in  learning  their  duty.  1.  First,  in  regard  of  example,  for  their  presidence  pre-
vaileth  much,  and  would  be  a  great  inducement  to  the  yonnger,  who  need  all
encouragements  in  the  ways  of  God,  which  example  not  being  generally  given  by
our  elder  men,  besides  that  they  entangle  themselves  in  the  sins  of  the  younger,  we
cannot  marvel  at  the  licentiousness  of  our  youth.  2.  The  honour  of  their  age,  yea,
the  ornament  and  crown  of  their  years,  is  to  be  sound  in  the  ways  of  righteousness,
that  is,  in  a  life  led  holily  and  justly,  which  two  can  never  be  found  but  in  a  heart
submitted  to  the  Word  of  God,  the  rule  of  both.  3.  Whereas  old  men  are  delighted
with  relations  of  idle  antiquities,  and  things  formerly  passed  as  long  as  they  can
recall,  the  Holy  Ghost  recalleth  them  from  such  unfruitful  spending  of  their  time,
and  showeth  them  that  Christ  and  His  doctrine,  both  of  them  being  from  the
beginning,  are  most  ancient,  and  consequently  the  knowledge  and  remembrance  of
Him  is  a  matter  best  beseeming  them ;  to  have  their  senses  and  tongues  exercised
herein  should  be  the  delight  of  their  age ;  to  be  conversant  in  the  holy  exercises
which  witness  of  Him  should  be  their  chief  business,  as  old  Hannah  went  not  ont
of  the  Temple,  and  old  Simeon  waited  there  to  see  his  salvation.  4.  Their  time
by  the  course  of  nature  cannot  be  long  to  fit  themselves  to  heaven,  and  therefore
they  had  not  need  slack  any  opportunity  which  might  hasten  them  thither.  (T.
Taylor,  D.D.)  Suitable  characteristics  for  the  aged  .-—Sobriety  in  all  things  is
the  peculiar  character  befitting  age.  Hastv,  impulsive,  intemperate  speech,
frlToioas  gaiety,  thoughtless  indulgence,  are  hateful  in  the  old.    The  Ohristian


«HA».  n.J  TITUS.  69

elders  shonld  at  least  aim  to  possess  the  virtne  without  which  hoary  hair  would  be
a  disgrace  rather  than  a  crown  of  glory.  They  are  not  only  to  be  «» sober,"  but
"  grave  and  discreet,"  terms  which  nobly  pourtray  and  illustrate  the  highest
eharaoteristics  and  the  truest  consecration  of  age.

Age  should  fly  concourse,  cover  in  retreat
Defects  of  judgment,  and  the  will  subdue ;
Walk  thoughtful  on  the  silent,  solemn  shore
Of  the  vast  ocean  it  must  sail  so  soon.

*•  Healthy,"  or  sound,  must  they  be  "  in  respect  to  their  faith,  lov«,  and  patient
endurance."  The  apostle,  in  his  earliest  Epistle  (1  Thess.  i.  3),  congratulated  that
Church  on  "  work"  of  theirs  which  originated  in  "faith,"  on  "labour  unto  weari-
ness" which  was  dictated  by  "love,"  and  on  "patient  endurance"  which  was
born  of  Christian  "  hope."  In  writing  to  the  Corinthians  (1  Cor.  xiii.  13),  he  says,
"  Now  abideth  faith,  hope,  love."  The  Lord,  from  His  throne  of  glory,  addressed
the  Ephesian  Church  (Eev.  ii.  2)  thus :  •'  I  know  thy  works,  thy  labour  unto
weariness,  and  thy  patient  endurance."  The  passages  throw  light  upon  each  other.
Occasionally  "  hope,"  the  child  of  faith,  the  source  of  patience,  the  secret  of  peace,
and  the  well-spring  of  joy,  is  substituted  by  the  apostle  for  one  or  other  of  the
emotions  with  which  it  is  so  closely  associated,  either  as  antecedent  or  consequent.
But,  making  allowance  for  this  characteristic  touch,  it  is  profoundly  interesting  to
trace  in  this — one  of  the  latest  of  the  Pauline  Epistles — the  vibration  of  a  note
struck  by  him  in  his  earliest ;  an  argument  of  no  small  weight  in  determining  the
authenticity  of  the  Pastoral  Epistles.  Paul  would  have  Titus  cultivate  among  the
aged  men  of  Crete  the  root-principles  out  of  which  all  holy  living  proceeds.  The
peculiarity  of  the  Pastoral  Epistles — reference,  i.e.,  to  the  beiug  "sound"  or
"  healthy  "  in  these  respects — suggests  the  possibility  that  "  faith  "  may  be  under-
mined or  perverted ;  that  "  love  "  may  become  irregular,  sentimental,  partisan,  or
hysterical;  and  that  "patience"  may  degenerate  into  listlessness,  obstinacy,  or
stoicism,  if  it  be  not  fed  at  the  fountains  of  Christian  "hope."  Does  not  the
reference  here  to  the  causes  and  sources  of  holy  living,  rather  than  to  those  effects
of  them  on  which  he  had  enlarged  when  writing  to  the  Thessalonians  (1  Thess.  i.  3),
suggest  to  us  that  the  longer  St.  Paul  lived,  he  more  and  more  acquired  the  habit
of  putting  confidence  in  Christian  principles  and  "sound"  motives?  {H.  R.
Reynoldg,  D.D.)  Behaviour  suitable  for  the  aged : — He  that  hath  received  much
must  bring  forth  much  fruit,  as  the  servant  that  had  five  talents  committed  unto
him  gained  five  other  talents.  So  old  men  must  be  grave  and  sober,  and  carry  a
majesty  in  their  countenance,  that  they  may  after  a  sort  resemble  the  majesty  of
God,  As  gravity  and  sobriety  agreeth  to  every  age,  so  most  especially  to  the  elder
age,  contrary  to  which  is  lightness,  lasciviousness,  and  waywardness,  which  make
them  not  honourable,  but  odious,  not  to  be  reverenced,  but  to  be  despised  in  the
eyes  of  the  younger  sort.  Let  them  adorn  their  years  with  those  virtues  which  the
apostle  nameth.  If  they  be  careful  to  express  these  things  which  become  whole-
some doctrine,  they  shall  manifestly  show  that  their  living  so  in  the  world  hath
not  been  in  vain ;  but  honour  is  not  seemly  for  a  fool.  The  wise  man  saith,  "  The
beauty  of  the  young  men  is  their  strength,  and  the  glory  of  the  aged  is  the  grey-
headed," that  is,  wisdom,  counsel,  experience,  whereby  they  are  more  adorned
than  the  young  man  is  beautified  by  his  bodily  strength.  For  the  ornaments  of  the
mind  are  to  be  preferred  before  the  properties  of  the  body.  Again,  they  must  be
examples  of  a  godly  life  and  holy  conversation,  that  youth  may  stand  in  fear  to
commit  any  indecent  and  unseemly  thing  in  their  presence.  Thus  Job  saith  of
himself  (chap  xxix.),  "  When  I  went  out  of  the  gate,  the  young  men  saw  me,  and
hid  themselves."  j3ut  when  the  elder  sort  are  ringleaders  and  examples  of  an  evil
and  corrupt  life,  there  is  more  gravity  on  their  heads  than  piety  in  their  hearts ;  in
their  white  hairs  than  in  their  behaviour ;  and  so  the  crown  of  honour  is  taken
from  them,  and  they  are  justly  condemned,  despised,  and  reproached  of  those  of
whom  they  should  be  honoured.  For  we  may  see  old  men  so  hardened  in  wicked-
ness, thet  if  a  man  would  find  whole  heaps  of  wickedness,  he  need  seek  no  farther
but  to  them.  We  are  all  to  honour  the  grey  head  and  to  magnify  old  age,  for  (as
Solomon  saith)  "  Age  is  a  crown  of  glory  when  it  is  found  in  the  way  of  righteous-
ness," whereby  he  meaneth  that  old  age,  seasoned  with  a  godly  life  and  upright,
bringeth  with  it  as  great  glory  as  a  crown  on  the  head  and  a  sceptre  in  the  hand
doth  unto  a  king,  and  therefore  such  old  men  are  greatly  to  be  reverenced  and


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [amr.  u.

highly  to  be  esteemed.  But  many,  except  they  should  be  honoured  for  their
ignorance,  superstition,  frowardness,  maliciousness,  waywardness,  covetousness,
drunkenness,  licentiousness,  and  self-will,  there  is  nothing  else  to  be  found  in  them,
to  be  learned  of  them,  to  be  gathered  from  them.  By  these  foul  enormities  they
bring  themselves  into  contempt,  and  bring  shame  and  reproach  upon  their  own
heads,  so  that  no  man  defameth  and  dishonoureth  them  so  much  as  themselves.
Surely,  if  young  men  misbehave  and  misgovern  themselves,  they  are  not  to  be
excused,  but  to  be  reproved,  because  they  ought  to  order  their  lives  aright,  and
remember  their  Creator  in  the  days  of  their  youth,  and  not  deserve  to  be  evil
spoken  or  reported  of  ;  but  old  folks  are  doubly  worthy  of  the  shame  that  men  do
them,  if  they  be  not  honoured  for  their  virtues.  They  should  learn  by  their  long
life  and  old  age  to  grow  in  the  knowledge  of  God  and  His  Son  Jesus  Christ,  to  hate
sin,  to  delight  in  righteousness,  and  daily  to  die  unto  the  world.  {W.  Attersoll.)
The  theological  use  of  old  age:— One  of  ihe  uses  of  the  aged  is  to  keep  our  theology
sweet.  I  should  be  very  much  afraid  for  evangelical  doctrine  if  there  were  none
but  young  men  in  the  Church.  Youth  loves  to  speculate.  Old  age  loves  to  rest  in
ascertained  realities.  Youth  is  destructive.  You  have  seen  a  boy  when  he  has  got
a  gun.  He  goes  popping  at  everything — sparrows,  cats,  barn-doors.  He  can
hardly  resist  levelling  even  at  his  own  father.  So,  when  a  young  man  becomes
conscious  of  the  possession  of  reason,  he  is  for  exercising  it  upon  everything.
Nothing  is  so  sacred  as  to  be  beyond  the  reach  of  this  destructive  weapon,  and
truths  are  often  in  danger  of  being  swept  away  along  with  the  falsities.  But,  on
the  other  hand,  old  age  is  proverbially  conservative,  and  so  the  needful  counteractive
is  Bupphed.  A  man  may  have  gone  very  wide  in  his  young  days,  but,  as  a  rule,  he
comes  round  again  to  the  old  starting-point — comes  home  to  the  old  centre  when
he  is  verging  npon  threescore  years  and  ten.  A  soul  that  is  consciously  on  the
brink  of  eternity  cannot  do  with  the  shallow  fallacies  that  once  passed  muster  as
excellent  substitutes  for  the  old  faith.  It  finds  that,  after  all,  the  old  gospel  is  the
thing  it  wants.  The  late  learned  Dr.  Duncan  said  to  a  student,  "I  do  not  forbid
you  to  speculate.  I  like  speculation.  I  have  speculated  a  great  deal  during  my
life,  but  now  that  I  am  turning  an  old  man,  I  am  in  love  with  the  facts."  Then  he
added  in  a  quasi-humorous  tone,  "  Now  that  I'm  an  auld  man,  I  have  just  come
back  to  the  theology  of  the  old  wives  and  the  bairns.  I  like  that."  This  is  a
useful  element  in  the  Church.  Thank  God  for  the  aged  and  for  their  tenaciouB
grasp  of  the  essential  verities  of  the  gospel.  {J.  Halsey.)  If  age  be  blended
with  naughtiness,  the  older  the  worse: — An  old  river  without  water  quencheth
not  our  thirst.  An  old  friend  that  hath  lost  his  honesty  is  worse  than  an  old
picture  that  hath  lost  its  colour.  Old  wine  no  man  commends;  when  it  is
turned  to  vinegar,  let  them  take  it  that  like  it.  An  old  house  is  no  safe  harbour
when  it  is  ready  to  fall  on  the  inhabiter's  head.  An  old  man  that  hath  lost
his  experience  is  like  a  boulter ;  much  good  flour  hath  gone  through  it,  but
there  is  nothing  left  in  it  but  bran.  (T.  Adams.)  Temperate.— TAe  limit
of  law  and  reason : — Notice  the  frequent  occurrence  of  a  single  epithet  which
may  almost  be  said  to  characterise  Christian  behaviour,  as  St.  Paul,  in  his  later
days,  came  to  conceive  of  it.  The  repetition  of  the  word  I  mean  is  veiled  from
readers  of  the  Authorised  Version  by  variations  in  the  rendering  of  it.  In  one
form  or  another  it  really  occurs  in  these  verses  four  times.  First,  old  men  are  to
be  "  temperate"  :  that  is  its  first  occurrence.  Then,  elderly  females  are  to  teach
the  young  wives  to  be  "  sober,"  another  use  of  the  same  word.  Next,  the  younger
women  are  to  be  "  discreet,"  the  same  word.  Finally,  it  is  the  solitary  require-
ment for  young  men  that  they  be  "  sober-minded,"  where  once  more  the  same  word
is  retained.  What  is  this  moral  quality  which  Paul  felt  it  to  be  so  necessary  to  enforce
upon  every  age  and  on  both  sexes  ?  It  denotes  that  moral  health  which  results
from  a  complete  mastery  over  the  passions  and  desires,  "  so  that,"  in  Archbishop
Trench's  words,  "they  receive  no  further  allowance  than  that  which  the  law  and
the  right  reason  admit  and  approve."  Self-control  would  probably  come  as  near
the  idea  as  any  single  word  we  can  employ.  But  it  includes  such  moral  sanity  or
wisdom  of  character  as  is  only  to  be  attained  through  the  habitual  control  of  the
reason  over  loose,  illicit,  or  excessive  desires  of  every  kind.  It  is  by  no  means  to
be  wondered  at  that  St.  Paul  should  hj>  ve  laid  much  emphasis  on  this  virtue.  Heathen
society  in  its  later  periods  was  remarkable  for  the  weakening  of  aelf-controL  Self-
indulgence  became  at  once  its  danger  and  its  disgrace.  When  religion  came  to  be
thoroughly  divorced  from  ethics,  no  curb  remained  strong  enough  to  restrain  th«
bulk  of  men  either  from  angry  passion  or  from  sensual  gratification.    Against  this


CHAP,  n.]  TITUS.  61

tendency  of  the  later  classical  period  philosophers  and  moralists  were  never  weary
of  inveighing.  The  very  word  which  St.  Paul  here  uses  was  with  them  the
technical  name  for  a  cardinal  virtue,  the  praises  of  which,  as  "  the  fairest  of  the
gifts  of  the  gods,"  they  were  always  sounding.  But  the  fooUsh  excess  which
heathen  reUgion  had  failed  to  check  defied  heathen  philosophy  too.  The  time
had  come  for  Christianity  to  try  its  hand.  The  task  was  a  hard  one.  I  have  no
doubt  Paul  beheld  with  anxiety  the  growing  inroads  which,  before  his  death,  the
loose  and  reckless  habits  of  his  age  had  begun  to  make  even  upon  those  little
sheltered  companies  that  had  sought  a  new  refuge  beneath  the  Gross.  In  these
latest  writings  he  reiterates  the  warning  to  be  sober-minded  with  no  less  urgency
than  Plato  or  Aristotle.  We  may  well  thank  God  that  he  based  the  admonition
on  more  prevailing  pleas.  It  took  a  long  time  for  Christianity  to  lay  the  founda-
tions of  a  manlier  and  purer  society ;  but  it  did  so  in  the  end.  The  old  civilisation
was  past  remedy  and  perished.  Into  the  new,  which  should  take  its  place,  the
gospel  inspired  a  nobler  temper.  The  restored  authority  of  Divine  law  and  the
awful  sense  of  the  evil  of  sin,  which  were  the  Church's  inheritance  from  Judaism,
the  value  of  personal  purity  which  it  learned  at  the  Cross,  the  new  conce2:)tion  of
sanctity  which  Christ  created,  the  hopes  and  dreads  of  the  hereafter :  these  things
trained  our  modem  nations  in  their  youth  to  a  reverential  sobriety  of  character,  an
awe  for  what  is  holy,  and  a  temperate  enjoyment  of  sensual  delights,  such  as  had
utterly  disappeared  from  the  Greco-Boman  world.  It  is  for  us  to  take  heed,  lest,
amid  the  growth  of  wealth,  the  cheapening  of  luxuries,  and  the  revolt  against
restraining  authority  which  distinguish  our  own  age,  we  should  forfeit,  before  we
are  aware  of  it,  some  of  that  chastened  decorous  simpHcity  and  manly  self-control
which  hes  so  near  the  base  of  a  noble  Christian  character,  and  which  has  been  one
of  the  gospel's  choicest  gifts  to  human  society.    {J.  0.  Dykes,  D.D.)

"Vers.  8-6.  The  aged  women. — The  dangers  and  duties  of  women: — I.  Women  have
PECuiiiAB  DAi^OEBS  AccoBDiNO  TO  THEiB  AGE.  The  older  oues  are  tempted  to  seek  the
excitement  of  stimulants,  or  of  slander ;  the  younger  ones  to  instabiUty  of  affection,
to  impurity  of  life,  or  other  inconsistency  of  conduct.  II.  Women  have  duties
PECOUAB  TO  THEIB  AOB.  The  youngci  have  duties  of  obedience ;  the  middle-aged  have
the  cares  of  home  life ;  the  aged  have  the  instruction  of  the  younger.  {F.  Wagstaff.)
Religious  home  life : — I.  Tbue  beliqion  is  the  foundation  of  home  happiness.  II.
Tbue  beliqion  is  the  secbet  of  domestic  pbospebitt.    III.  Tbue  belioion  at  home

CAN  ALONE  INBUBE  THE  ESTEEM  AND  BESPECT  OF   THOSE  ABROAD.        {Ibid.)  ApOStoUc

advice  to  the  aged  women: — The  gospel  revealed  the  lofty  destiny  of  woman,
and  it  is  not  surprising  that  St.  Paul  should  continue  his  advice  to  Titus  thus :
•'  Enjoin  that  the  aged  women  in  like  manner,  should  preserve  in  their  demeanour
holy  propriety."  As  Jerome  has  it,  "  Their  gait  and  motion,  their  countenance,
their  speech,  and  their  silence,  should  exhibit  a  certain  dignity  of  sacred  decorum."
The  very  word  seems  to  convey  the  fine  thought  that  there  is  a  consecration,  a
sacerdotal  eminence  and  sanctity,  possible  and  even  normal,  in  the  life  of  woman.
The  aged  woman  should  have  in  her  looks  and  ways  something  better  than  the
garment  of  the  priest  or  the  aureole  of  the  saint.  It  is  fitting  and  seemly  that  she
should.  The  apostle  adds  a  grim  touch  after  this  hint  of  saintly  sacerdotal  beauty.  He
knew  the  temptation  of  "  old  women  "  of  both  sexes  to  be  censorious,  blundering,
and  self-indulgent,  and  so  he  adds,  "  Let  them  not  be  slanderous,  nor  enslaved  by
much  wine."  They  are,  moreover,  to  be  "  mistresses  of  honour,"  capable  of
"  beautifully  instructing  "  by  their  word  and  example  those  who  look  up  to  them
for  counsel.  {H.  R.  Reynolds,  D.D.)  Holiness  consists  of  little  duties : — Did  a
holy  life  consist  of  one  or  two  noble  deeds — st>me  signal  specimens  of  doing,  or
enduring,  or  suffering — we  might  account  for  the  failure,  or  reckon  it  small  dishonour
to  turn  back  in  such  a  conflict.  But  a  holy  life  is  made  up  of  small  things  of  the
hour,  and  not  the  great  things  of  the  age,  that  fill  up  a  life  like  that  of  Paul  or  John,
like  that  of  Eutherford,  or  Brainerd,  or  Martyn.  The  avoidance  of  little  evils,
little  sins,  little  inconsistencies,  little  weaknesses,  little  follies,  little  indiscretions
and  imprudences,  little  foibles,  little  indulgences  of  self,  little  bits  of  ooveteousnesi
and  penuriousness,  little  exhibitions  of  worldliness  and  gaiety,  little  indifferences
to  the  feelings  or  wishes  of  others  :  the  avoidance  of  such  little  things  as  these  goes
far  to  make  up  at  least  the  negative  beauty  of  holy  life.  And  then  attention  to
little  duties  of  the  day  and  hour  in  public  transactions,  or  private  dealings,  or
family  arrangements ;  to  Uttle  words,  and  looks,  and  tones ;  little  self-denials  and
self -regtrainta  and  self -forgetf ulness :  these  are  tiie  active  developments  of  holy  life,


6 J  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLV8TRAT0B.  [oiu».  a>

the  rich  and  Divine  mosaics  o!  which  it  is  composed.  What  makes  yon  green  hill
so  beantifnl?  Not  the  outstanding  peak  or  stately  ehn,  but  the  bright  sward
which  clothes  its  slopes,  composed  of  innumerable  blades  of  slender  grass.  It
is  of  small  things  that  a  great  life  is  made  op ;  and  he  who  will  acknowledge  no
life  as  great,  save  that  which  is  built  np  of  great  things,  will  &id  little  in  Bible
character  to  admire  or  copy.  The  bloom  of  the  aged : — A  good  woman  never
grows  old.  Years  may  pass  over  her  head,  but  if  benevolence  and  virtue  dwell
in  her  heart,  she  is  as  cheerful  as  when  the  spring  of  life  first  opened  to  her  view.
When  we  look  upon  a  good  woman  we  never  think  of  her  age ;  she  looks  ss
charming  as  when  the  rose  of  youth  first  bloomed  on  her  cheek.  That  rose  has
not  faded  yet ;  it  will  never  fade.  In  her  neighbourhood  she  is  the  friend  and
benefactor.  Who  does  not  respect  and  love  the  woman  who  has  passed  her  days  in
acts  of  kindness  and  mercy — who  has  been  the  friend  of  man  and  God — whose
whole  life  has  been  a  scene  of  kindness  and  love  and  devotion  to  truth?  We
repeat,  such  a  woman  cannot  grow  old.  She  will  always  be  fresh  and  buoyant  in
spirit  and  active  in  humble  deeds  of  mercy  and  benevolence.  If  the  young  lady
desires  to  retain  the  bloom  and  beauty  of  youth,  let  her  not  yield  to  the  sway  of
fashion  and  folly ;  let  her  love  truth  and  virtue,  and  to  the  close  of  life  she  will
retain  those  feelings  which  now  make  life  appear  a  garden  of  sweets,  ever  fresh  and
ever  new.  (Great  Thoxights.)  Not  false  accusers.  —Rules  to  avoid  false  accusing :
— 1.  Look  to  thine  own  calling  and  the  necessary  duties  of  it,  that  so  following  thine
own  plough,  thou  mayest  have  no  leisure  to  intermeddle  in  other  men's  affairs :  busy-
bodies  and  prattlers  are  joined  by  the  apostle.  2.  Beware  of  envy,  which  is  still
hatching  and  inventing  evil :  the  saying  is  true,  "  Malice  never  spake  well,"  but  is
suspicious,  and  depraving  the  best  persons  and  practices,  and  is  one  of  the  greatest
enemies  of  truth,  in  which  God's  image  chiefly  oonsisteth.  3.  Learn  to  esteem  the
good  name  of  thy  brother,  the  next  thing  to  his  life,  considering  the  truth  of  that
homely  speech,  that  he  that  wanteth  a  good  name  is  half  hanged ;  and  there  is
great  reason  that  those  who  would  have  their  names  tendered  by  others  should
tender  the  good  name  of  others,  doing  as  they  would  be  done  unto,  which  is  the
golden  rule  of  all  equity.  4.  In  receiving  reports  excuse  parties  absent  as  far  as
well  we  can,  as  also  facts  done,  so  far  as  they  may  be  well  interpreted ;  and
where  we  cannot  do  so  to  advise  the  reporter  to  look  well  unto  and  consider  himself .
(T.  Taylor,  D.D.)  False  accusation : — Often  are  the  most  painful  wrongs  inflicted
through  the  medium  of  covert  inuendoes  and  malignant  insinuations.  Half  of  a
fact  is  a  whole  falsehood.  He  who  gives  the  truth  a  false  colouring  by  a  false
manner  of  telling  it  is  the  worst  of  Uars.  Such  was  Doeg  in  his  testimony  against
the  priests.  He  stated  the  facts  in  the  case,  but  gave  them  such  an  artful  inter-
pretation as  to  impart  to  them  the  aspect  and  influence  of  the  most  flagrant
falsehoods.  It  was  through  the  same  mode  of  procedure  that  our  Lord  was
condemned.  A  perverse  misconstruction  was  given  to  His  words,  so  that  what  was
spoken  in  loyalty  to  the  highest  truth,  was  transformed  into  treason  worthy  of
death.  {E.  L.  Magoon.)  That  they  may  teach  the  young  women. — The  education
of  young  women : — The  young  women  are  mentioned  here  as  under  the  teaching  and
authority  of  the  aged.  What  now  are  some  of  the  first  elements  which  Paul  insists
on  in  the  education  of  a  Christian  family  ?  He  omits  many  things  which  one  would
have  supposed  to  stand  high  in  the  list  of  young  ladies'  accomplishments ;  for
example,  music,  dancing,  and  the  art  of  binding  themselves  into  the  shape  of
land-glasses.  Perhaps  the  apostle  thought  them  sufficiently  advanced  in  suoh
acquirements,  and  that  therefore  he  might  pass  them  over  in  silence.  He  insists,
however,  that  these  aged  governesses  shall  teach  the  following  great  elementary
principles.  1.  That  the  young  woman  be  sober,  wise,  of  a  sound  mind,
prudent  and  discreet  members  of  the  Church  of  Christ.  The  first  element,
then,  in  the  education  of  your  daughters  is  wisdom  or  prudence ;  and  if  yoa
begin  anywhere  else  with  them,  you  begin  at  the  wrong  end.  "This  wisdom
or  prudence  is  not  easily  defined,  but  it  will  appear  in  the  entire  character
and  conduct  of  their  future  life ;  it  will  enable  them  to  avoid  the  snares  which
the  angodlj  lay  for  them,  and  conduct  themselves  in  a  manner  worthy  of  the
same  and  the  religion  of  their  Redeemer.  This  prudence  is  opposed  to  rashness,
enthusiasm,  and  impulsive  resolutions,  to  which  the  young  mind,  and  especially
the  young  female  mind,  is  naturally  inclined.  2.  Then  secondly,  they  are  to  love
their  husbands,  for  without  this  the  house  will  become  a  pandemonium,  and
profligacy  and  impurity  fill  the  land.  Their  love  to  their  husbands  should  be
ardent  and  onchangeable,  yielding  neither  to  the  seduction  of  strangers  nor  to  the


CHAF.  a.]  TITUS.  6S

husband's  coldness  and  neglect  at  home.  S.  To  love  their  children.  It  may  be  asked,
Is  not  this  love  natural?  and  if  so,  where  is  the  necessity  for  teaching  it?  I
answer,  bad  habits  in  society  can  eradicate  many  of  the  principles  of  our  nature,
and  make  us  more  degraded  and  unfeehng  than  the  brutes.  Edmund  Burke  relates
that  J.  J.  Bousseau  would  not  keep  his  children  in  bis  house,  but  sent  tbem  to  be
brought  up  in  an  hospital;  and  then  remarks,  "that  bears  love  their  yonng,  and
lick  them  into  shape,  but  bears  are  not  philosophers."  In  India  the  natural  love
of  our  offspring  was  conquered  by  the  tyranny  of  a  terrible  custom,  and  millions  of
female  infants  were  destroyed  in  infancy  by  the  mother's  hands  1  Is  the  murder  of
infants  altogether  unheard  of  among  us  ?  Are  there  no  Foundling  hospitals  within
the  bounds  of  Christendom  ?  Then  remember  that  the  Isle  of  Crete  was  one  of  &«
wickedest  places  in  the  world,  and  the  inhabitants  mere  heathen,  and  you  shall  see
the  force  of  the  exhortation  to  "  love  their  children."  It  is  an  awful  fact,  which  I
first  heard  of  in  Hamburgh,  that  in  the  continental  cities  there  is  a  class  of  old
wives,  real  old  devils,  who  are  called  "  child-murderesses,"  and  whose  ofiQce  it  is  to
save  the  mother  and  destroy  the  child  I  In  this  way  myriads  of  innocent  infants
are  sacrificed,  and  no  eye  but  the  eye  of  God,  the  mother,  and  the  murderess,  ever
knows  anything  about  it  I  4.  They  are  to  be  discreet,  which  is  the  same  as  sober,
mentioned  in  the  fourth  verse ;  chaste,  viz.,  placing  all  their  happiness  in  their
husbands  and  families  alone ;  keepers  at  home,  that  they  may  attend  to  the  affairs
of  the  household,  and  be  an  example  to  their  children.  It  is  not  the  duty  of  a
married  woman  with  a  family  to  engage  much  in  public  business,  even  though  it
should  be  of  the  most  important  kind.  Her  place  is  the  family  circle,  and  her  duty  is
to  stay  at  home.  We  may  say  the  same  of  much  visiting.  It  is  impossible  to  gad
about  and  take  care  of  the  family  at  the  same  time ;  and  as  to  the  mother  handing
over  her  children  to  the  care  of  servants,  and  then  giving  herself  little  or  no  concern
about  them,  I  say  with  Edmund  Burke  that  such  conduct  would  be  a  slander  on  the
instinct  of  the  brutes  !  5.  Good  ;  they  are  to  be  good  wives,  faithful  and  diligent  in
their  household  duties.  Good  is  a  very  expressive  word,  and  is  used  to  denote  the
highest  excellence  (Acts  xi.  24).  Good  (from  which  our  word  God  comes,  the  Good
One)  I  take  in  its  most  general  acceptation  to  signify  the  disposition  to  bless ;  it  is
the  fountain  of  kindness  within,  from  which  love,  mercy,  and  all  gentle  and  kind
actions  flow ;  "  obedient  to  their  own  husbands,  that  the  Word  of  G^d  be  not  blas-
phemed." The  great  duty  of  the  wife  is  obedience,  and  in  this  she  is  a  type  of  the
Church's  obedience  and  submission  to  Christ.  Love  is  common  to  both,  though
the  natural  order  is  that  his  should  go  before  and  hers  follow  after,  as  in  the  case
of  Christ  and  the  Church  ;  then  obedience  is  her  special  duty,  even  as  protection
and  defence  are  his.  The  command,  probably,  has  a  special  reference  to  wives  who
were  united  to  unbelieving  or  heathen  husbands,  and  teaches  that  grace  never
delivers  ns  from  the  obligations  of  nature — they  are,  though  believing,  to  be
obedient  to  their  husbands  though  unbelieving,  and  the  husband,  though  un-
believing, is  bound  to  love,  support,  and  protect  his  wife,  though  she  is  a  believer  in
the  gospeL  (W.  Graham,  D.D.)  Pastoral  dealings  with  young  women: — A
delicate  tact  may  be  observed  in  St.  Paul's  management  of  the  younger  women.  To
them  he  does  not  bid  Titus  address  himself  at  all.  Although  he  thinks  of  them  as
already  married,  yet  the  admonitions  of  the  pastor  are  to  pass,  as  it  were,  through
the  lips  of  the  senior  matrons.  Some  of  these  may  have  been  official  "  deaconesses  "
(like  Phoebe  at  Cenchrsea),  but  this  is  by  no  means  essential  to  the  spirit  of  his
instructions.  Whether  officially  set  apart  to  minister  among  her  own  sex,  as  was
the  salutary  habit  of  the  early  Church,  or  not,  it  is  in  the  privacy  of  the  home,  or
the  retired  gathering  for  prayer  and  female  industry,  that  the  wholesome  influence
of  a  Christian  matron  of  experience  and  weight  of  character  may  most  advantageously
be  exerted.  And  it  is  through  the  familiar  intercourse  of  such  "  mothers  in  Israel "
with  their  younger  sisters  that  a  Christian  minister  can  most  suitably  and  safely
reach  the  maidens  and  young  housewives  of  his  flock.  So  at  least  St.  Paul  judged.
The  homely  housewifely  virtues  which  are  here  specified  do  seem  to  be  best  taught
by  female  lips.  In  seven  particulars  has  this  unmarried  old  man  succeeded  in  covering
the  circle  of  a  young  wife's  duties.  Her  devotion  to  husband  and  babes,  her  discipline
of  herself  into  suitable  decorum,  her  womanly  purity,  her  household  industry,  her
benign  sweetness  of  temper,  her  due  deference  to  her  husband :  such  are  the  graces
by  which  within  her  gracious  realm  of  home  the  youthful  matron  is  to  glori]^  her
Saviour  and  her  God.  What  a  surprising  elevation  did  the  gospel  confer  on  woman
at  its  first  promulgation  1  The  sudden  discovery  that  "  in  Christ  Jesus  there
ia  neither  mde  nor  female  "  might  have  a  tendency  at  the  first  to  relax  somewhat


64  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  a.

those  restraints  which  sex  and  marriage  impose  on  woman  ;  but,  if  the  wholesome
influence  Paul  desired  could  be  exerted  by  matrons  of  maturer  cliaracter,  it  is  plain
that  60  far  from  the  Christian  wife  giving  her  husband  ^heathen  though  he  might
still  be)  any  cause  to  speak  ill  of  her  new  faith — her  cnastity,  her  meekness,  her
dilligence,  her  obedience,  would  be  certain  to  recommend  the  gospel  in  which  her
soul  had  found  the  secret  of  a  behaviour  so  gracious  and  so  beautiful.  {J.  0.
Dykes,  D.D.)  A  husband  endeared: — "I  am  thankful  to  the  Nihilists  for  one
thing,"  says  the  Czarina.  "  They  have  made  me  love  my  husband  dearly.  Our
home-life  has  become  so  different  since  I  began  to  look  on  him  as  though  he  were
under  sentence  of  death.  You  can't  think  how  deeply  his  menaced  state  attaches
me  to  him."  A  heartless  viother  reproved  by  a  sparrow  : — Down  in  a  London  slum
there  lived  a  working  man,  his  wife,  and  four  children,  all  wretched  and  miserable
through  drink.  The  drunken  wife  one  evening,  wandering  about  in  misery,  saw  a
sparrow  pick  up  a  crumb  and  carry  it  to  her  young  in  her  nest.  The  poor  woman
turned  pale,  trembled  for  a  moment,  and  burst  into  tears.  The  day  of  repentance
had  come  to  her.  •'  Ohl  "  she  exclaimed,  '*  that  sparrow  feeds  her  young  birds,
and  I  neglect  my  young  children.  And  what  for  ?  Drink.  Nothing  but  drink  1 "
And  she  wrung  her  hands  and  wept.  Then  she  arose  and  went  home  to  pray.  She
cried  unto  God  in  her  distress  and  He  sent  His  message  of  forgiveness  to  her  soul.
Then  her  face  wore  a  new  beauty,  and  her  husband  and  family  looked  wonderingly
upon  her.  She  kissed  them  all,  one  by  one,  and  told  them  how  she  had  become
changed.  The  husband,  under  his  wife's  teaching,  became  a  Christian,  and  a
happy  home,  with  comfort,  peace,  and  plenty,  soon  followed.  (G.  W.  McCree.)
A  faithful  wife : — There  is  nothing  upon  this  earth  that  can  compare  with  the
faithful  attachment  of  a  wife ;  no  creature  who  for  the  object  of  her  love  is  so
indomitable,  so  persevering,  so  ready  to  suffer  and  to  die.  Under  the  most
depressing  circumstances,  a  woman's  weakness  becomes  mighty  power ;  her  timidity
becomes  fearless  courage ;  all  her  shrinking  and  sinking  passes  away ;  and  her
spirit  acquires  the  firmness  of  marble — adamantine  firmness — when  circumstances
drive  her  to  put  forth  all  her  energies  under  the  inspiration  of  her  affections.
(D.  Webster.)  Influence  of  a  good  wife : — Oftentimes  I  have  seen  a  tall  ship  glide
by  against  the  tide  as  if  drawn  by  some  invisible  bow-line,  with  a  hundred  strong
arms  pulling  it.  Her  sails  unfilled,  her  streamers  were  drooping,  she  had  neither
eide-wheel  nor  stem-wheel ;  still  she  moved  on,  stately,  in  serene  triumph,  as  with
her  own  life.  But  I  knew  that  on  the  other  side  of  the  ship,  hidden  beneath  the
great  bulk  that  swam  so  majestically,  there  was  a  little  toilsome  steam-tug,  with  a
heart  of  fire  and  arms  of  iron,  that  was  tugging  it  bravely  on ;  and  I  knew  that  if
the  little  steam-tug  untwined  her  arms,  and  left  the  ship,  it  would  wallow,  and  roll
about,  and  drift  hither  and  thither,  and  go  off  with  the  refluent  tide,  no  man  knows
whither.  And  so  I  have  known  more  than  one  genius,  high -decked,  full-freighted,
idle-sailed,  gay-pennoned,  who,  but  for  the  bare,  toiling  arms  and  brave,  warm-
beating  heart  of  the  faithful  little  wife  that  nestles  close  to  him,  so  that  no  wind  or
wave  could  part  them,  would  have  gone  down  with  the  stream,  and  have  been  heard
of  no  more.  Early  Christian  women : — "  What  women  these  Christians  have  I "
exclaimed  the  heathen  rhetorician  Libanius,  on  hearing  aboqt  Anthusa,  the  mother
of  John  Chrysostom,  the  famous  "  golden-mouthed  "  preacher  of  the  gospel  at
Constantinople  in  the  fourth  century.  Anthusa,  at  the  early  age  of  twenty,  lost  her
husband,  and  thenceforward  devoted  herself  wholly  to  the  education  of  her  son,
refusing  all  offers  of  further  marriage.  Her  intelligence  and  piety  moulded  the
boy's  character  and  shaped  the  destiny  of  the  man,  who,  in  his  subsequent  position
of  eminence,  never  forgot  what  he  owed  to  maternal  influence.  Hence,  it  would  be
no  overstrained  assertion  tn  say  that  we  owe  those  rich  homilies  of  Chrysostom,  of
which  interpretprs  of  Scriptures  still  make  great  use,  to  the  mind  and  heart  of  An  •
thusa.  A  mother's  love  : — The  intensity  of  maternal  affection  was  illustrated  in  the
observation  of  a  little  boy,  who,  after  reading  Bunyan's  "Pilgrim's  Progress,"
asked  his  mother  which  of  the  characters  she  liked  best.  She  replied,  "  Christian,
of  course  :  he  is  the  hero  of  the  story."  The  dear  child  responded,  "  Mother,  I  like
Christiana  best,  because,  when  Christian  set  out  on  his  pilgrimage,  he  went  alone  ;
but,  when  Christiana  started,  she  took  the  children  with  her."  Christianity  at
Iwme  : — I  have  no  faith  in  that  woman  who  talks  of  grace  and  glory  abroad,  and
uses  no  soap  at  home.  Let  the  buttons  be  on  the  shirts,  let  the  children's  socks  be
mended,  let  the  roast  mutton  be  done  to  a  turn,  let  the  house  be  as  neat  as  a  new
pin,  and  the  home  be  as  happy  as  home  can  be ;  and  then,  when  the  cannon-balls,
and  the  marbles,  and  the  shots,  aud  even  the  grains  of  sand,  art  all  in  the  box.


CHAP.  n.J  TITUS.  «5

«ven  then  there  will  be  room  for  those  little  deeds  of  love  and  faith  which,  in  mj
Master's  name,  I  seek  of  you  who  love  His  appearing.  Serve  God  by  doing  common
actions  in  a  heavenly  spirit,  and  then,  if  your  daily  calling  only  leaves  you  cracks
and  orevices  of  time,  Ml  them  up  with  holy  service.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  True
marriage : — Husband,  in  our  old  Saxon  speech  meant  Jiouseband — the  stay  of  the
house ;  and  a  wife  should  be  a  "  help-meet "  for  the  husband.  She  should  be  a
"  keeper  at  home."  Phidias,  when  he  depicted  a  woman,  made  her  to  sit  under  a
snail  shell,  this  signifying,  that  like  the  snail  she  should  never  be  far  away  from
her  home.  {J.  G,  Pilkington.)  Discreet. — Discretion: — ^A  virtue  before  required
both  in  the  minister  (chap.  i.  8, ),  and  in  elder  men  (chap.  ii.  2.),  and  now  in  younger
women,  being  a  grace  requisite  for  all  estates,  ages,  sexes,  and  conditions  of  life ;
requiring  that  the  reins  of  affections  be  subjected  unto  reason,  and  moderated  by
judgment,  not  suffering  a  thought  to  be  entertained  and  settled  in  the  mind  which
is  not  first  warranted  in  the  Word,  without  which,  if  the  reins  be  slacked  but  a  little,
the  mind  is  suddenly  vanquished,  taken,  and  lead  captive  of  manifold  lusts.  This
grace,  then,  is  the  watchman  and  moderator  of  the  mind,  keeping  and  guarding  it
from  pleasures  altogether  unlawful,  and  in  lawful  curbing  and  cutting  off  excess  and
abuse.  It  watcheth  also  over  the  affections  of  the  heart  and  actions  of  the  life,
resisting  all  light  behaviour,  all  childish  carriage,  all  unquiet  and  troublesome
passions,  such  as  are  suspicions,  jealousies,  which  are  the  fuels  and  firebrands  of
much  mischief;  and  the  distempers  of  flashing  anger,  rage,  and  unjust  vexation.  II
Buffereth  not  undutifulness  to  the  husbaild,  unnaturalness  towards  the  children,
anmercifnlness  towards  servants,  untowardness  in  her  own  duties,  unthankful
meddling  with  other  folks'  affairs.  It  is  a  procurer  and  preservative  of  many  graces,
a  bond  of  her  own  and  others'  peace,  a  settler  of  the  comfort  of  her  life,  an  ornament
of  her  head,  and  of  her  house ;  which  once  let  her  to  be  disrobed  of,  she  may  bid
farewell  to  her  family's  welfare ;  for  let  any  vile  affection  bear  sway  but  for  a  little
while,  as  of  anger,  impatience,  excessive  grief,  intemperance,  or  any  such,  how  is
the  whole  house  in  a  kind  of  tumult  1  which  as  a  commonwealth  in  the  commotion
and  rising  of  some  one  rebel,  cannot  be  composed  and  settled  till  the  rebel  be
subdued;  which  they  find  too  true  who  in  their  match  were  left  unto  them-
selves, to  make  choice  of  such  as  wanted  then,  and  yet  have  not  attained
with  the  fear  of  God  the  practice  of  this  virtue.  (T.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Keepers
at  home. — Home  the  place  for  women  : — Not  that  a  woman  is  never  to  be
found  without  her  house  over  her  head,  for  many  necessary  and  just  occasions
call  her  often  abroad,  namely — 1.  As  a  Christian,  the  pubUo  duties  of  piety
and  God's  worship ;  as  also  more  private  duties  of  love,  and  works  of  mercy
in  visiting  and  helping  the  sick  and  poor.  2.  As  a  wife,  both  with  her  husband
when  he  shall  require  her,  and  without  him  for  the  necessary  provision  of
the  household — and  such  hke.  Sut  the  thing  here  condemned  is  the  affection
of  gadding  at  any  or  all  hours,  with  disposition  of  hearing  or  telling  news,
or  affecting  merriments,  company,  expense  or  excess,  accounting  the  house
rather  a  prison  than  a  home,  and  so  easUy  forsaking  it  without  all  just  occasion.
And  justly  is  this  course  condemned,  for — 1.  This  is  a  forsaking  and  flying
for  the  time  out  of  the  calling  wherein  they  ought  to  abide,  for  their  calling
is  commonly  within  doors  to  keep  the  household  in  good  order,  and  there-
fore for  them  to  wander  from  their  own  place,  is  as  if  a  bird  should  wander
from  her  own  nest.  2.  This  were  the  highway  to  become  busybodies,  for  what
other  more  weighty  matters  call  them  out  of  their  calling,  but  to  prattle  of  persons
and  actions  which  concern  them  not  ?  Whence  the  apostle  (1  Tim.  v.  13)  coupleth
these  two  together,  they  are  idle,  and  busybodies ;  which  if  any  wonder  how  they
can  be  reconciled,  thus  they  are  easily :  those  that  are  idle  in  their  own  duties  are
busy  bodies  in  other  men's ;  and  these  busybodies  have  two  special  marks  to  be
known  by  to  themselves  and  others,  namely,  their  open  ears,  and  their  loose  tongues.

3.  The  Holy  Ghost  maketh  this  a  note  of  an  whorish  woman,  she  is  everywhere
but  where  she  should  be,  sometimes  gadding  in  the  streets  with  Thamar,  some-
times in  the  fields  with  Dinah,  sometimes  without  at  her  door,  sometimes  at  her
stall,  but  her  feet  cannot  abide  in  her  house :  and  if  against  her  will  her  body  be
within  doors,  her  heart  and  senses  will  be  without.  Jezebel  must  be  gazing  out  of
the  window :  whereas  if  the  angel  ask  where  Sarah  is,  answer  will  be  made,  she  is  in
her  tent ;  and  the  daughters  of  Sarah  will  be  in  their  tents,  not  in  the  taverns,  nor
straggling  so  far  abroad  but  that  their  husbands  can  readily  answer  where  they  be.

4.  What  desperate  and  unavoidable  evils  do  they  (and  justly)  lay  themselves  open
unto,  who  make  no  bones  of  violating  the  commandment  of  God  t  how  doth  SiUan

6


08  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (chap.  n.

watch  all  advantages  to  take  them  when  they  are  oat  of  their  ways?  and  how
easily  doth  he  prevail  against  them  when  they  have  plaoked  themselves  from  under
Ood's  protection  ?  Dinah  was  no  sooner  assaulted  than  overcome  in  her  wandering ;
and  Eve  no  sooner  absent  from  Adam  than  set  upon,  and  no  sooner  set  upon,
than  vanquished.  (Ibid.)  A  worker  at  home  : — Here  is  a  note  written  by
Mrs.  Garfield  to  her  husband  some  years  ago,  and  originally  designed  for  no  eye
but  his.  It  may  be  helpful  to  many  others  whose  lot  is  hard  work  : — "  I  am  glad
to  tell  that,  out  of  all  the  toil  and  disappointments  of  the  summer  just  ended,  I
have  risen  up  to  a  victory ;  that  silence  of  thought  since  you  have  been  away  has
won  for  my  spirit  a  triumph.  I  read  something  like  this  the  other  day :  '  There  is
no  healthy  thought  without  labour,  and  thought  makes  the  labour  happy.'  Per-
haps this  is  the  way  I  have  been  able  to  climb  up  higher.  It  came  to  me  one  morning
when  I  was  making  bread.  I  said  to  myself,  '  Here  I  am,  compelled  by  inevitable
necessity  to  make  our  bread  this  sunamer.  Why  not  consider  it  a  pleasant  occupa-
tion, and  make  it  so  by  trying  to  see  what  perfect  bread  I  can  make  ? '  It  seemed
like  an  inspiration — and  the  whole  of  Ufe  grew  brighter.  The  \erj  sunshine  seemed
flowing  down  through  my  spirit  into  the  white  loaves  ;  and  now  I  believe  my  table
is  furnished  with  better  bread  than  ever  before  ;  and  this  truth — old  as  creation —
seems  just  now  to  have  become  fully  mine,  that  I  need  not  to  be  the  shirking  slave
of  toil,  bat  its  regal  master,  making  whatever  I  do  yield  its  best  fruits."  (Chrittian
Age.)  Christian  home  life  : — Home  is  specially  Teutonic,  word  and  thing.
Teotonic  sentiment,  we  know,  from  veVy  early  times,  was  proud,  elevated,  even
austere,  in  regard  to  the  family  and  the  relations  of  the  sexes.  This  nobleness  of
heathenism  Christianity  consecrated  and  transformed  into  all  the  beautiful  shapes
of  household  piety,  household  affection,  household  parity.  The  life  of  home  has
become  the  great  possession,  the  great  delight,  the  great  social  achievement  of  our
race.  The  absence  of  this  taste  for  the  quiet  and  anexcited  life  of  home  is  a
formidable  symptom- in  portions  of  our  race  across  the  Atlantic.  And  when  home
life  with  its  sanctities,  its  simplicity,  its  calm  and  deep  joys  and  sorrows,  ceases  to
have  its  charm  for  us  in  England,  the  greatest  break-up  and  catastrophe  in  English
history  wUl  not  be  far  off.  [Dean  Church.)  Obedient  to  their  own  husbands. —
A  sermon  to  young  wives : — I.  Take  an  intebest  is  all  that  conoebms  youb
BUSBAND.  When  he  speaks,  listen.  When  he  is  depressed  try  to  cheer  him.
When  he  is  exultant  share  in  his  rejoicing.  When  he  is  overwhelmed  with  work  see
if  yoa  can  assist  him ;  and  certainly  never,  at  such  troubled  and  anxious  times^
increase  his  burden  by  any  domestic  disorder.  Luther  had  such  a  wife.  She
entered  into  his  enthusiasm.  She  read  and  prized  his  books.  She  surrounded
him  with  the  invigorating  atmosphere  of  true  love.  She  helped  him  in
his  labours.  Lord  William  Bussell  had  such  a  wife.  She  shared  with  him  in  all
his  efforts.  Stood  by  his  side  in  the  time  of  his  misfortone.  Acted  as  his
secretary  when  on  his  trial.  Visited  him  in  the  Tower  of  London,  and  did  her  best
to  console  him  before  he  was  beheaded.  Then  went  back  home  to  train  her  family
to  be  worthy  of  the  name  of  so  courageous  a  father.  Flaxman,  the  eminent  sculptor,
had  such  a  wife.  When  he  ventured  on  matrimony  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  declared
him  to  be  a  ruined  man.  But  the  future  proved  the  opposite.  For  thirty-eight
years  his  wife  did  her  utmost  to  aid  him  in  his  calling.  Her  admiration  of  his
work,  and  her  devotion  to  his  comfort,  assisted  to  make  him  what  Byron  pronounced,
"the  best  translator  of  Dante."  Hood  had  such  a  wife.  Though  a  woman  of
nnusual  cultivation  and  literary  taste,  yet  she  yielded  gracefully  to  the  wliiras  and
fancies  of  her  husband.  She  good  humouredly  accepted  his  practical  jokes,  and
became  indispensable  to  his  happiness.  So  much  so  that  Hood  could  not  endure
her  absence  from  home.  Without  her  he  was  restless  and  impatient.  Bishop
Wilberforce  had  such  a  wife.  She  entered  into  his  clerical  duties  and  respon-
sibilities. When,  after  thirteen  years  of  unalloyed  comfort,  she  died,  the  life  of  the
bishop  became  tinged  with  sadness.  Hence,  referring  to  his  wife,  he  once  wrote,
"  It  is  most  sad  going  home.  If  I  went  home  to  her  it  were  beyond  all  words."
The  late  Earl  of  Beaconsfield  had  such  a  wife.  When,  as  Benjamin  Disraeli,  ha
published  "  Sybil,"  and  dedicated  it  "  to  the  most  severe  of  critics — but  a  perfect
wife,"  he  let  in  a  food  of  light  upon  the  character  of  the  future  countess.  And
nothing  could  be  a  stronger  proof  of  her  thorough  devotion  to  her  husband's
interests,  than  that  afforded  by  her  conduct  on  one  occasion  when  driving  with  him
to  the  House  of  Commons.  By  accident  her  finger  was  crushed  in  closing  the
earriage  door.  Thinking  that  any  cry  of  pain  would  disturb  the  mind  of  Benjamin,
who  was  deep  in  the  great  speech  he  was  that  night  to  deliver,  the  faithful.


OHAT.  n.]  TITUS.  6T

Bympaihetio  wife  nobly  endured  the  agony  without  a  single  word,  till  her  husband
was  in  his  place  in  the  House.  II.  Let  it  be  manifest  that  houb  has  th»
PBECEDENCB  IN  TOUB  THOTJQHTS  AND  AiTEOTioNS.  Hume  tells  US,  in  his  historj,  that
in  the  reign  of  Henry  VIII.  a  proclamation  was  issued  forbidding  women  to  meet
together  for  babble  and  talk,  and  directing  husbands  to  keep  their  wives  in  their
housea  Such  a  proclamation  gives  us  a  sorry  insight  into  the  domestic  life  of  our
ancestors.  Society  has  improved  since  then.  Still,  there  are  now  not  wanting  very
strong  temptations  to  gadding  about.  Never  were  there  more  numerous  or  more
attractive  exhibitions  on  view,  never  were  there  more  frequent  or  more  important

{inblic  meetings  for  benevolent  and  religious  purposes,  and  never  were  there  greater
acilities  for  transition  from  spot  to  spot.  And,  alas  I  there  are  some  young  wives
who  seem  to  feel  it  incumbent  on  them  to  be  present  and  assist  at  every  gathering
designed  to  promote  some  useful  enterprise.  The  result  is  that  home  is  often
neglected,  the  children  run  riot,  the  domestics  grow  careless,  and  the  husband
returns,  after  a  day's  activities  and  annoyances,  to  find,  what  should  be  a  quiet
refuge  from  the  world's  turmoil,  a  deserted,  disorderly,  cheerless  spot.  I  ask  you
to  remember,  young  woman,  that  a  wife's  true  orbit  is  home.  In  ancient  Bome  a
high  compliment  was  paid  a  queen  by  the  epitaph,  "  She  staid  at  home  and  spun."
The  ancient  Greeks  suggested  the  same  feminine  duty  by  carving  Venus  on  a
tortoise.  In  ancient  Boeotia,  when  a  bride  was  conveyed  to  her  husband's  house
the  wheels  of  the  vehicle  in  which  she  travelled  thither  were  burned  at  the  doors,
as  an  intimation  that  they  would  not  be  needed  again.  So  to-day  in  Turkey,  in
India,  in  Spanish  America,  and  elsewhere  seclusion  is  the  true  sign  of  respect-
ability. To  be  high-bred  is  to  be  invisible.  Whilst,  in  our  own  land,  though
women  enjoy  freedom  to  think,  and  act,  and  speak,  and  are  denied  no  rights  of  real
and  enduring  value,  yet  they  are  most  trusted  and  loved  by  their  husbands  and
families  who  are  good  keepers  of  home,  who  make  their  first  and  foremost  study
the  temporal  and  spiritual  welfare  of  those  nearest  at  hand  and  dearest  at  heart.
There  is  something  quaint,  however  questionable,  in  the  observation  of  a  clergyman
who  ventured  to  preach  upon  the  subject  of  women's  sphere.  He  chose  for  his  text
"  Where  is  thy  wife  ?  Behold,  she  is  in  the  tent."  He  started  his  discourse  by  the
remark :  '« There  she  ought  to  be,  and  the  less  she  is  heard  outside  the  better."  I
would  qualify  that  preacher's  words  and  say :  "  By  all  means  let  her  be  heard  and
seen  outside  the  tent  if  she  have  fully  and  faithfully  discharged  her  duty  inside  the
tent  But  if  to  be  seen  and  heard  outside  she  must  neglect  her  own  household,
then  let  her  keep  at  home."  III.  Do  yoxtr  utmost  to  retain  the  confidence  and
AFFECTION  OF  ToxjB  HUSBAND.  As  you  examine  the  magnificent  monument  in  Hyde
Park,  erected  in  memory  of  the  late  Prince  Consort,  you  observe  that  the  only
figure  that  is  represented  twice  is  that  of  the  celebrated  Michael  Angelo.  Among
the  painters  he  leans  upon  the  chair  of  Raphael.  Among  architects  and  sculptors,
he  is  the  middle  of  a  far-famed  group.  And  justly  is  he  thus  honoured,  for  his
genius  was  exceptionally  great.  But  far  above  his  fresco  in  the  Sistine  Chapel,  far
above  his  '*  Last  Judgment,"  far  above  his  cupola  of  St.  Peter's,  far  above  his
"  Sleeping  Cupid,"  which  Raphael  pronounced  worthy  of  Phidias  or  Praxiteles,
stands  the  sonnet  to  his  wife.  Angelo  profoundly  loved  and  adored  Vittoria  Colonna.
When  she  died  he  Ungered  by  her  corpse,  and  kissed  affectionately  the  clay-cold
hand ;  his  only  regret  afterwards  being  that  he  had  not  kissed  her  cheeks.  And
why  such  deep  and  enduring  affection?  Because  the  wife  eUoited  it,  and  by
constant  care  retained  it.  She  impressed  him  with  the  preciousness  of  virtue.
She  elevated  his  thought  and  inspired  him  to  write : —

•'  For  oh  I  how  good,  how  beautiful,  must  be
The  God  that  made  so  good  a  thing  as  thee."

Macanlay  describes  the  painful  scene  at  the  death  of  Mary,  wife  of  WiUlam  of
Orange.  The  king's  agony  was  intense.  Amid  scalding  tears  he  testified  to  the
exceUenoy  of  the  departed  Queen,  saying  to  Bishop  Burnet,  "  I  was  the  happiest
man  on  earth,  and  I  am  the  most  miserable.  She  had  no  fault — none  ;  you  knew
her  weU  but  you  could  not  know,  nobody  but  myself  could  know,  her  goodness."
Not  unworthy  of  notice  is  the  homely  advice  given  by  an  old  lady  to  her  newly-
married  daughter,  *'  Never  worry  your  husband.  A  man  is  Uke  an  egg,  kept  in  hot
water  a  Uttle  while  he  may  boil  soft,  but  keep  him  there  too  long  and  he  hardens."
IV.  Be  ooverned  in  aijL  youb  BEiiATioNSHips  BY  TBUE  reijIoion.  Let  the  sound,  safe,
significant  principles  of  godliness  guide  you.  Let  the  love  of  Christ  constrain  yoa  in  aB


•8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHA».  n.

yoar  household  and  family  engagements.  Do  what  you  are  called  to  do  heartily  as
onto  the  Lord.  Remember  that  there  is  One  greater,  better,  wiser,  and  more  loving  ajid
loveable  than  your  earthly  husband — One  who  claims  and  deserves  all  the  affection
of  your  heart,  all  the  homage  of  your  mind,  all  the  service  of  your  life.  "  Thy
Maker  is  thy  husband."  The  Lord  Jesus  is  the  bridegroom  of  your  soul.  As  a  wife
renounces  old  familiar  scenes,  customary  engagements,  and  long-known  associates
for  her  husband,  so  you  are  asked  to  be  ready  to  renounce  all  for  Jesus.  As  a  wife
•urrenders  all  her  time,  influence,  and  possessions  to  her  husband,  so  you  are  asked
to  make  a  voluntary  and  joyful  surrender  of  yourself  atid  all  your  belongings  to
Christ.  As  a  wife  consents  to  share  with  her  husband  in  all  vicissitudes,  in  adver-
sity as  well  as  prosperity,  so  you  are  asked  to  follow  the  Lord  whithersoever  He  may
lead,  through  evil  and  through  good  report,  counting  it  an  honour  to  be  partaker  of
His  Bufferings.  As  a  good  wife  cultivates  love  for  her  husband  so  that  every  day
augments  the  volume  of  her  affection,  so  you  are  asked  to  foster  and  evince  love  for
Christ.  We  have  read  in  history  how,  when  Edward  I,  was  wounded  by  a
poisoned  dagger,  his  wife  Eleanor,  from  the  deep  love  she  bare  her  husband,  sucked
the  poisoned  wound,  and  so  ventured  her  own  life  to  save  his.  Such  love  you  are
asked  to  cultivate  for  Christ.  If  He  be  wounded  by  the  poisonous  tongues  of  the
ungodly,  by  reproaches,  blasphemies,  and  persecutions,  do  you  learn  to  say,  '•  Let
the  reproach  of  Christ  fall  upon  me" — "Let  me  suffer  rather  than  Jesus  smd  His
truth  I  "  (J.  H.  Hitchens,  D.D.)  That  the  Word  of  God  be  not  blasphemed.—
The  highest  motive  to  duty : — Here  the  great  law  of  the  family  is  put  on  the  highest
Christian  ground.  If  those  who  profess  the  gospel  of  Christ  fail  in  any  of  these
respects,  it  is  more  than  possible  that  the  blame  vnU  be  thrown  upon  God's  Word
(c/.  1.  Tim.  vi.  1).  If  Christians  profess  to  be  influenced  by  a  Bupematurally  strong
and  sacred  motive,  and  then  fail  to  do  what  lower  and  ordinary  motives  often
succeed  in  effecting,  the  world  charges  the  failure  on  the  lofty  motive  itself,  and
Christ  bears  once  again  the  sins  of  His  people :  He  is  crucified  afresh  and  put  to
open  shame.     {H.  R.  Reynolds,  D.D.)

Ver.  6.  Young  men  likewise  exhort  to  be  sober-minded. — Sober-mindedness : — I.
What  it  is.  1.  You  must  be  considerate  and  thoughtful,  not  rash  and  heedless.
Take  time  to  think  ;  learn  to  think  freely — to  think  for  yourselves,  of  yourselves.

2.  You  must  be  cautious  and  prudent,  not  wilful  and  heady.  Fix  rules  of  wisdom.
Use  reason  and  conscience.  Be  difl5dent  of  your  own  judgment.  Study  Scripture.
9.  You  must  be  humble  and  modest,  not  proud  and  conceited.  Be  not  above  your
business,  above  reproof,  above  religion.  4.  You  must  be  temperate  and  self-denying,
not  indulgent  of  your  appetites.  5.  You  must  be  mild  and  gentle,  not  indulgent  of
your  passions.  6.  You  must  be  chaste  and  reserved,  not  wanton  or  impure.  7.
You  must  be  staid  and  composed,  not  giddy  and  unsettled.  8.  You  must  be  con-
tent and  easy,  not  ambitious  and  aspiring.  9.  You  must  be  grave  and  serious,  not
Tain  and  frothy.  II.  Considebations  to  enforce  this  exhobtation.  1.  You  are
reasonable  creatures.  2.  You  are  sinners  before  God.  3.  You  are  setting  out  in  a
world  of  sorrows  and  snares.  4.  Multitudes  of  the  young  are  ruined  for  want  of
this  sobriety  of  mind.  5.  You  are  here  upon  trial  for  heaven.  6.  You  must  shortly
go  to  judgment.    IH.  Application  :  1.  Examine  yourselves.    2.  Exhort  one  another.

3.  Contemplate  the  advantages  of  sober-mindedness.  You  will — (1)  Escape  vanity
of  childhood  and  youth  ;  (2)  Recommend  yourselves  to  the  favour  of  God  and  all
wise  men ;  (3)  Prepare  for  a  useful  and  comfortable  life,  and  a  happy  death.  4.
Directions  to  make  you  sober-minded.  (1)  Espouse  sober  principles.  (2)  Medi-
tate on  serious  things.  (3)  Choose  sober  companions.  (4)  Read  sober  books.  (5)
Abound  in  sober  work.  (Matthew  Henry,  D.D.)  Sober-mindedness : — I.  The  spirit
AND  CONDUCT  TO  WHICH  THIS  EXHORTATION  IS  OPPOSED.  Sobei-mindedness,  if  we  are
to  take  the  primary  meaning  of  the  word,  is  to  be  "safe"  or  •'  sound-minded."  But
perhaps  the  best  English  equivalent  for  the  word  would  be  "  discreet"  or  "  self-
restramed."  We  have  to  restrain  and  keep  ourselves  in  check  as  much  as  needful ;
and  yet,  at  the  same  time,  to  cultivate  such  habits  of  thought  that  much  check  will
not  be  required.  1.  This  exhortation  is  opposed  to  undue  self-esteem  (see  Rom.  xi.
20,  xii.  3-6  ;  Phil.  ii.  3).  There  ought  to  be  a  certain  amount  of  self-esteem  or  self-
respect.  Where  that  is  wholly  wanting,  there  will  be  little  or  no  force  of  character,
Where  there  is  no  self-respect,  one  of  the  strongest  arguments  against  evil  will  bo
lost.  If  we  do  not  respect  ourselves,  we  shall  not  act  so  as  to  gain  the  respect  of
others.  But  the  excess  of  this  self-respect  is  as  injurious  as  its  want ;  and  it  is  to
this  excess  that  youth  is  naturally  prone.    When  we  enter  upon  life  it  is  with  an


CHAP,  n.)  TITV8.  6t

exalted  idea  of  onr  own  attainments  and  importance.  We  are  soon  led  to  smart  in
eonseqaence  of  titis ;  we  soon  find  our  own  level.  But  0  1  how  mnch  pain,  how
much  humiliation  should  we  be  spared,  if  we  did  but  learn  at  the  onset  to  esteem
others  better  than  ourselves  I  And  0 1  young  men,  when  we  look  into  our  own
hearts,  how  much  there  is  there  to  humble  us.  2.  This  exhortation  is  opposed
to  idl  rash  speculations  upon  spiritual  things.  The  forms  of  pride  are  very
various;  but  in  whatever  form  pride  presents  itself,  it  ia  still  an  evil  against
which  we  should  be  on  our  guard.  There  are  some  forms  of  pride  which  are  simply
despicable  and  ridiculous.  For  instance,  the  pride  of  dress,  the  pride  of  persontJ
appearance,  the  pride  of  life,  or  the  pride  of  birth.  But  there  is  another  form  of
pride  which  does  not  appear  so  offensive  as  these — I  mean,  the  pride  of  intellect —
of  those  faculties  which  God  has  given  us,  by  which  we  are  distinguished  above  the
lower  orders  of  creation,  and  by  which  when  cultivated  we  are  raised  in  the  social
scale.  But  still,  this  form  of  pride,  like  every  other  form  is  inexcusable.  Why
should  we  boast  of  those  faculties  which  have  been  given  us  by  God,  and  of  which
at  any  moment  He  could  deprive  us  ?  And  if  under  no  circumstances  it  is  excusable,
it  is  more  especially  offensive  if  it  lead  as  to  cavil  at  the  statements  of  this  holy
book,  respecting  the  character,  and  the  will,  and  the  dealings  of  the  Most  High.
3.  This  exhortation  is  opposed  to  all  ambitious  efforts  to  amass  wealth,  and  to  rise
unduly  in  the  social  scale.  Do  not  suppose  that  I  would  object  to  any  amount  of
progress,  either  intellectually  or  socially.  To  the  young  I  would  sav.  Do  all  the  good
yon  can,  get  all  the  good  you  can,  and  enjoy  to  the  utmost  all  uiose  good  things
which  God  has  placed  within  your  reach.  But,  at  the  same  time,  remember  this,
that  anything,  however  good  it  may  be  in  itself,  ceases  to  be  good  as  soon  as  it  is
nsed  in  excess,  or  when  it  interferes  with  your  highest  interests.  Now,  keeping  that
statement  in  view,  just  consider  the  result  of  the  ceaseless  striving  of  men  in  the
present  day,  not  only  to  accumulate  wealth,  but  to  imitate  the  habits,  the  customs,
and  the  dress  of  the  station  above  them.  Shun — shun  as  a  plague  all  those  books
which  would  render  you  dissatisfied  with  the  position  in  which  God  has  placed  you.
Best  assured  that  that  position  is  the  best  possible  position  for  yon.  Bemember
that  this  is  but  the  first  stage  of  your  existence.  Learn  to  look  npon  this  as  a
training  school — as  a  state  of  discipline  in  which  you  must  bear  much  that  yon  do
not  like,  in  which  you  must  do  much  that  you  would  rather  not  do,  but  in  daring
to  do  which  you  will  be  enabled  to  conform  to  God's  will  and  to  rise  to  a  higher
state  of  being.  4.  This  exhortation  is  opposed  to  all  impatience  and  unwillingness
to  listen  to  the  counsels  and  cautions  of  those  who  are  older  than  oorselves.  Yon
know  that  one  of  oar  poets  has  observed : —

**  At  thirty  man  suspects  himself  a  fool—
Knows  it  at  forty — and  reforms  his  plan.**

And  oh!  how  much  misery  would  be  saved,  if  when  we  were  young  w«  were  content
to  receive  the  experience  of  others,  rather  than  gain  that  experience  for  ourselvei
by  a  very  painful  process.  11.  Some  consedebations  bt  which  this  exhobtatiom
CAN  BB  KNFOBCED.  Be  sober-mindod,  and  this  vrill  elevate  your  character.  '•  Ho
that  humbleth  himself  shall  be  exalted."  Be  sober-minded,  and  this  will  greatly
increase  your  influence  for  good  here  below.  Be  sober-minded,  and  you  will  escapo
many  a  snare  in  which  others  have  fallen,  and  been  destroyed.  There  is  a  passage
which  I  would  commend  to  the  attention  of  young  men ;  describing  the  death-bed
of  an  ungodly  youth — "  Lest  thou  mourn  at  the  last,  when  thy  flesh  and  thy  body
are  consumed  " — the  flesh  of  thy  body  consumed  by  indulgence  in  evil  practices —
"  and  thou  say,  How  have  I  hated  instruction,  and  my  heart  despiseth  reproof ;  and
have  not  obeyed  the  voice  of  my  teachers,  nor  inclined  mine  ear  to  them  that
instructed  me.  I  was  almost  in  all  evil  in  the  midst  of  the  congregation  and
assembly."  That  is  the  result  of  the  spirit  and  conduct  opposed  to  sobriety  of
mind.  Cultivate  this  in  the  last  place,  because  it  will  prove  that  your  religion  is  a
reality,  and  not  a  name,  {R.  C.  Pritchett.)  Sober-viindednets  as  opposed  to  excite-
ment : — The  word  sober-minded  has  many  meanings,  or  at  least  many  applications ;
but  I  think  that  we  should  approach  most  nearly  to  a  comprehension  of  them  all,
if  we  explained  it  as  the  opposite  of  excitement,  and  regarded  the  charge  in  tho
text,  to  exhort  young  men  to  be  soLer-minded,  as  practically  equivalent  to  a  charge
to  exhort  them  to  avoid  excitement.  1.  There  is  the  excitement  of  intemperanco
and  of  all  approaches  to  it,  of  sensuality  in  all  its  forms;  an  excitement  so  strong,
and  for  the  moment  so  pleasurable,  that  he  who  has  once  yielded  to  it  soon  forms


70  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  h.

the  habit  of  sach  indulgence,  and  he  who  has  once  formed  the  habit,  ahnoat  alwayi
peraiBts  in  it  till  his  Bin  is  his  min ;  no  persnasions  and  no  convictions,  no  expeti-
•nee  of  misery  and  no  resolutions  of  amendment,  are  of  any  avail ;  the  man  who
has  allowed  the  body  to  become  his  master  is  in  this  sense,  as  in  all  others,
indeed  a  slave,  that  he  cannot  escape  from  his  bondage,  he  must  live  on  in  it,  and
die  in  it  too.  The  word  intemperance  may  be  too  strong  to  express  anything
which  yon  are  at  present  in  danger  of,  or  anything  indeed  which  the  present
fashions  of  society  make  periloas  (speaUng  generally)  for  any  one  in  yonr  rank
of  life :  but  none  the  less  would  I  caution  you  with  the  most  anxious  earnestness,
against  bodily  excitement  of  a  sinful  kind :  no  change  in  national  customs  will  ever
make  the  body  cease  to  be  the  chief  enemy  of  the  soul :  other  enemies  come  and
go,  temptations  from  companions,  from  occupations,  from  circumstances  of  life  :
this  one  alone  is  always  with  us,  an  enemy  in  the  very  camp,  and  able  too  to  mask
his  assaults  under  the  show  of  friendlinesa  and  good  will.  2.  As  sinful  excitement,
so  excessive  excitement,  even  in  forms  not  sinful,  is  here  plainly  forbidden .  God
has  established  a  certain  order  and  gradation  amongst  the  parts  of  our  nature.  He
bids  as  think  of  this  intricate  framework  of  human  life  as  composed  of  three  parts,
which  to  our  present  comprehension  we  may  best  explain  under  the  names  of  body,
mind,  and  soul.  Every  one  of  these  is  most  important :  in  each  one  a  great  work
has  to  be  done  within  a  limited  time :  each  one  is  destined  to  immortality,  and  has
to  be  prepared  for  it  by  us.  But,  though  each  of  these  three  parts  is  valuable,
•aoh  immortal,  each  worthy  of  thought  and  care  and  culture,  each  the  object  (for
•or  Bakes)  of  God's  special  regard ;  yet  they  are  not  equally  valuable :  the  soul
■tands  first,  far  first,  in  this  respect :  that  part  of  us  which  is  capable  of  knowing
and  loving  God,  of  resembling  Him,  of  being  His  own  dwelling-place,  ought  always
to  be  the  first  also  in  our  own  regard :  we  ought  to  think  far  more  seriously  of  its
hanger,  or  its  disease,  than  we  all  do  of  that  of  the  body  :  we  ought  to  be  far  more
▼exed  when  oar  soul  loses  one  of  its  meals,  which  are  opportunities  of  prayer,

Eablio  and  private,  opportunities  of  reading  or  hearing  God's  Word,  or  of  joining
1  the  Holy  Communion,  than  when  we  are  debarred  by  accident  or  want  of  appetite
from  a  bodily  meal :  all  these  things  are  necessary  consequences  of  the  most  elemen-
tary faith  in  God,  and  Christ,  and  eternity.  Next  to  it  comes  the  mind ;  that  part
•f  man  which  understands  and  judges,  thinks  and  knows ;  that  part  which  has  to
be  stored  and  practised  in  youth,  for  the  service  of  God  and  our  generation  in  mature
Ufe.  Young  men  likewise  exhort  to  be  sober-minded.  Bid  them,  if  yoa  be  a  faithful
minister  of  Christ,  bid  them,  whether  they  will  hear  or  whether  they  will  forbear,
but  with  all  earnestness  of  entreaty  that  they  will  listen,  to  think  first  of  their  souls,
and  next  of  their  minds,  and  last  of  that  which  is  bodily  :  teU  them  that,  though
Ood  wills  that  their  bodies  should  be  active,  hardy,  and  skilful.  He  does  not  will
tiiat  every  other  part  of  them  should  be  backward,  awkward  and  stunted ;  that,
because  He  loves  them,  because  He  desires  their  happiness,  because  He  desires  to
bless  them  and  to  do  them  good,  because  He  would  have  them  with  Him  hereafter,
and  in  order  to  do  this  must  first  fit  them  for  His  presence,  therefore  He  exhorts
them  to  be  not  excited  but  sober-minded  in  things  which  are  transitory  and  temporal ;
bids  them  set  Him  before  them  even  in  their  amusements ;  bids  them  ask  His  bles-
sing every  day,  as  before  they  work,  so  also  before  they  play ;  bids  them  accept  their
bodily  pleasures,  like  all  other,  from  Him,  remember  Him  in  them,  moderate  them
for  His  sake,  and  above  all  use  for  His  glory  alone,  in  self-control,  in  temperance,
in  purity,  those  bodies  upon  which  they  bestow  so  much  labour.  3.  To  be  sober-
minded  is,  in  other  words,  to  have  a  sound  mind ;  a  mind  neither  trifling,  nor  giddy,
nor  inconstant,  nor  morbid ;  a  mind  just  in  its  views,  wise  in  its  aims,  moderate  in
its  expectations,  inflexible  in  its  principles,  authoritative  in  its  self-control,  right
with  God.  It  implies  that  we  have  a  just  view  of  life ;  that  we  not  only  profess  but
feel  its  true  object,  as  a  preparation  for  eternity,  as  an  opportunity  of  doing  the  will
•f  God  and  promoting  His  purposes  towards  us  and  towards  all  men.  It  implies
that  we  neither  expect  to  be  able,  nor  feel  it  to  be  desirable,  in  all  things  to  please
•urselves,  or  to  have  our  own  way.  It  implies  that  we  are  thankful  for  whatever
Ood  gives,  and  patient  under  His  withholding,  controlling  and  even  chastening  hand.
That  we  are  willing  to  be  what  He  would  have  us  to  be,  even  when  our  own  inclina-
tion might  point  to  a  very  different  lot.  All  this  it  is,  but  more  also.  A  sound
mind,  in  the  highest  sense  of  the  word,  cannot  be  where  the  Holy  Spirit  is  not ;
where  God  Himself  is  not  present  in  the  soul,  through  Jesus  Christ,  by  His  Spirit,
as  the  Guide  and  Lord  and  Comforter,  wisdom  and  quietness  and  strength,  the  life
•f  oar  life  and  the  hope  of  glory.    Little  can  they  who  have  not  this  be  depended


CHAT,  n.]  TITUS.  71

npon :  nataial  cleverness  and  good  sense  may  do  much  for  ns ;  it  may  cover  np
many  faults,  it  may  enable  us  to  originate  many  good  counsels  ;  but  it  breaks  down
in  the  time  of  trial,  when  it  is  most  of  all  important  to  be  right,  most  of  all  fatal
to  be  wrong.  A  sound  mind,  a  sober  mind,  in  the  true  sense,  can  only  be  where  the
soul  of  man  has  been  changed  (to  use  the  Scriptural  figure)  into  the  spirit  of  man
by  the  indwelling  of  the  holy  and  blessed  Spirit  of  God.  (Bfan  Vaughan.)  Sober-
mindedness  : — I.  To  BE  BOBEB-MiNDED  IS  TO  BE — 1.  Thoughtf ul  and  considerate,  in
opposition  to  giddiness  and  levity  of  disposition.  2.  Humble  and  diffident  in  oppo*
sition  to  an  assuming  and  self-sufficient  spirit.  3.  Temperate  and  self-denied,  in
opposition  to  the  unrestrained  indulgence  of  the  passions,  4.  To  give  an  habitual
preference  to  eternal  over  temporal  things.  5.  That  we  never  put  off  to  a  future
period  that  which  ought  to  be  done  now.  11.  Eeasonb  fob  urginq  to  sobeb-minded-
MESS.  1.  You  are  reasonable  creatures,  and  it  is  the  office  of  reason  to  govern  the
passions,  &o.  2.  Tou  are  guilty  creatures,  but  the  means  of  salvation  are  placed
within  your  reach.  3.  You  are  dying  and  accountable  creatures,  but  the  means  of
eternal  happiness  are  enjoyed  only  in  this  world.  (W.  Peddie.)  Exhortation
to  young  persons : — I.  As  for  the  reasons  why  bobbiett  of  mind  should  in  par-
ticuLab  be  beooiiimended  to  youth,  among  others,  we  may  assign  these  which
follow.  1.  It  will  be  acknowledged  that  it  is  impossible  for  a  person,  with  any
constant  tenor,  to  act  well  that  does  not  think  wisely,  or  to  think  wisely  that  doea
not  think  soberly.  But  what  is  of  constant  necessity  in  every  stage  of  life  must  be
of  special  importance  in  that  upon  which  the  rest  depend ;  and,  by  consequence,
he  that  sets  out  with  this  advantage,  is  in  the  most  probable  method  to  go  on  and
prosper.  2.  The  morning  of  our  life,  our  early  and  flourishing  years,  ought
especially  to  be  armed  with  this  precaution,  because  it  is  then  we  are  exposed  to  the
greatest  dangers ;  when  the  passions  are  the  strongest,  and  so  the  most  apt  to
transport  us  with  their  violence ;  when  the  pleasures  and  entertainments  of  sense
have  their  full  taste  and  relish,  and  are  therefore  the  more  capable  of  betraying  us
into  excess ;  when  we  are  the  most  easy,  credulous,  and  complying,  and  so  the  most
open  to  the  attempts  of  others,  the  likeliest  to  be  insulted  and  overborne  by  the
confident,  or  ensnared  by  the  designing,  or  perverted  by  those  that  go  astray.
Wherefore,  experience  coming  so  late  should,  if  possible,  be  supplied  by  more  early
consideration,  and  reason  should  invite  us  before  affliction  constrains  us  to  be  serious,
8.  As  most  ornaments,  whether  of  mind  or  body,  sit  best  upon  the  young,  flourish
in  the  spring  of  life,  and  look  with  peculiar  gracefulness  in  the  bloom  and  beauty
of  Nature,  so  this  excellent  temper  of  which  we  speak,  which  is  the  chief  attire  of
the  soul,  and  to  which  most  other  good  qualities  that  it  can  put  on  are  but  appen.
dages,  is  then  in  the  exactest  manner  fit  and  becoming ;  and  if  it  be  real  and  not
counterfeit,  natural  and  not  affected,  easy  and  not  precise,  it  has  indeed  the  finest
lustre,  and  renders  those  who  wear  it  the  most  amiable  and  charming.  4.  As  youth
has  many  natural  gifts  and  endowments  that  speak  in  its  behalf,  and  entitle  it  to
favour,  so  it  has  one  natural  disadvantage,  in  respect  of  time,  which  it  would  be
glad,  if  possible,  to  balance  or  compensate.  In  this  regard  it  has  been  excellently
well  observed  of  birth  or  quality,  that  it  gives  a  person  at  eighteen  or  twenty  the
same  esteem  and  deference  which  another  of  inferior  rank  acquires  at  fifty ;  so  that
the  former  has  thirty  years  gained  at  once.  Now,  the  privilege  which  custom  and
civility  allow  to  the  noble,  reason  and  justice  demand,  and  generally  obtain,  for  the
sober  and  discreet ;  and  they  are  the  happiest  who  possess  it  by  a  double  title.  II.
This  may  the  better  suffice  as  to  the  offering  some  reasons  why  sobriety  of  mind
should  particularly  be  recommended  to  youth  ;  since,  by  representing  the  benefits
AND  advantages  it  then  specially  affords,  we  are  to  show  the  effect  of  those  reasons,
and  of  that  particular  application.  1.  Sobriety  of  mind  confirms  and  settles  the
principles  of  religion.  Great  has  been  the  happiness  of  your  birth,  and  the  advan-
tage of  your  education,  but  that  either  of  these  should  be  lasting  and  effectual
depends  upon  yourselves.  What  admonitions  and  advices  you  have  heard,  what
cautions  yon  have  received  from  parents  or  fi  lends,  books  or  conversation,  are  a
ready  stock  committed  to  your  management  and  improvement :  a  treasure  in  which
you  cannot  make  too  much  haste  to  be  rich,  an  inheritance  which  indeed  renders
them  the  happiest  to  whom  it  comes  the  soonest.  You  are  left  to  make  your  first
steps  in  the  world,  which  being  so  rough  and  uneven  ground,  and  so  plentiful  in
occasions  of  falling,  it  imports  you  the  more  to  have  regard  to  Solomon's  rule  (Prov,
iv.  15,  16).  To  which  you  will  give  me  leave  to  add  that  great  and  excellent  lesson
which  he  received  from  his  father,  and  which  some  of  you,  I  presume,  have  received
from  yours  (1  Chron.  xxiii.  9).    2.  As  sobriety  of  mind  has  such  a  power  in  keeping


79  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  n.

the  principles  of  religion  firm  and  stable,  it  has  no  less  in  rendering  the  praotice
of  religion  easy.  We  say  all  things  are  easy  to  a  willing  mind;  bat  a  sober
mind  is  as  willing  as  it  is  wise.  For  that  which  brings  in  most  of  the
difficulties  of  a  good  life  is  our  too  late  consideration,  when  having  gone  so  far
withoat  thought,  we  cannot  retire  without  pain.  8.  It  is  a  strong  defence  against
temptations.  "  I  have  written  to  you  young  men  because  ye  are  strong,"  says  St.
John  ;  "  Or  what  imports  the  same,"  says  an  eloquent  divine,  "  because  you  are
vigorous ;  that  is,  you  are  now  in  such  a  state  of  body  and  soul  and  aSeotions  as
is  most  subservient  to  piety — ^most  quick  and  governable,  and  most  successfully
applied  to  the  offices  of  duty.  Govern,  therefore,  your  appetites  before  the  evil  days
come.  Now  you  may  gird  them,  and  carry  them  whither  you  will,  but  if  you
neglect  the  season,  they  will  hereafter  gird  you,  and  carry  you  whither  you  would
not."  4.  It  affords  the  greater  opportunities  of  eminent  piety  and  virtue.  For  he
that  is  thus  armed  is,  we  see,  the  fittest  and  most  expedite  not  for  defence  only  but
for  action ;  so  that  when  occasions  present  themselves,  he  is  ready  to  meet  them
with  delight,  and  improve  them  to  advantage.  {B.  Kennet,  D.D.)  Sobriety  of
mind  urged  on  young  men : — The  word  in  our  text,  strictly  translated,  means  "  sound-
minded,"  or  healthy-minded,  and  implies  the  conviction  that  there  is  a  certain
standard  of  character,  or  condition  of  the  mind  which  bears  an  analogy  to  health
of  body,  a  condition  in  which  all  the  functions  of  tho  mind  are  in  their  right  state,
in  which  sound  or  healthy  views  of  things  are  taken,  in  which  no  part  of  human
nature  is  either  inoperative  or  unduly  developed.  In  this  large  sense,  soundness  of
mind  may  serve  as  a  description  of  the  harmony  or  regular  action  implied  in  virtue ;
but  inasmuch  as  the  passions  and  desires,  excited  by  objects  which  have  strong
influence  over  us  in  our  present  state  of  being,  more  than  anything  else  destroy
sanity  of  mind,  the  term  is  usually  confined  to  the  control  over  woridly  desires,  and
to  views  of  life  which  commend  themselves  to  right  reason.  Thus,  soundness  of
mind  includes  self-restraint  and  temperance,  the  former  of  which  is  the  power  of
governing  the  passions,  and  the  other  the  habit  of  using  all  pleasures  without  going
to  excess.  But  soundness  or  sobriety  of  mind  is  more  radical  than  either  of  these,
for  it  includes  those  just  views  of  life,  that  appreciation  of  the  Talue  of  enjoyment
and  of  the  world  compared  with  duty  and  the  higher  life  of  the  soul,  without  the
sway  of  which  in  the  soul  it  can  neither  exercise  continence,  nor  self-control,  nor
temperance.  Soundness  or  sobriety  of  mind,  also,  is  far  from  stopping  at  the
boundaries  of  the  passions,  especially  the  sensual ;  aU  the  desires,  even  those  which
have  little  to  do  with  the  body,  as  the  desire  of  fame,  of  power,  of  superiority,  and
the  desire  of  wealth — the  means  of  gratifying  all  other  desires — are  placed  under
its  control.    I.  As  thus  undbbbtood,  sobbiett  of  mind  is  to  be  distinouished  tbom

A  NATIVX    BLUOOISHNESS   OB   OAUTIOUSNESS  WHICH    MAT   CONSFIBB   WITH  IT  TO  PBEVKNT

EXCESS.  If  a  man,  for  instance,  can  never  become  angry,  he  may  be  saved  from
many  foolish  and  sinful  acts,  but  it  is  many  times  better  to  have  a  power  of  subduing
anger,  which  you  have  acquired  by  exertions  which  have  cost  you  something,  than  to
be  a|stone.  Moreover,  if  such  native  sobriety  of  mind  exists,  it  is  rare.  There  is  generally
some  weak  spot,  where  passion  can  with  success  approach  men  who  seem  like  icicles.
What  class  of  persons  is  more  thoroughly  worldly  than  many  who  are  proof  against
the  allurements  of  vice,  but  speculate  with  the  gambler's  intense  excitement,  or  bum
with  a  devouring  lust  for  power.  Perhaps  the  greatest  insobriety  of  mind  belongs
to  those  who,  in  most  respects,  have  an  entire  mastery  over  themselves — who  view
the  world  on  many  of  its  sides  as  it  is,  but  concentrate  all  their  forces  on  one  object,
with  an  untiring  restless  fever  of  soul  which  the  votary  of  pleasure  seldom  knows.

II.  ThB  apostle's  SOBEB-MINDEDNESS  is  MOT  TO  BE  OOMFOUMDBD  WITH  THAT  BBLT-
COMTBOL  WHICH  SPBIMQ8  FBOM  WORLDLY  PBUDENCB  AMD  SHBEWS  CALCULATIONS  OF  SUOOSSfl

IN  LiFB.  There  are  men  who  live  exclusively  for  earthly  enjoyment,  who  yet  have
attained  to  a  mastery  over  their  own  lusts.  They  know  what  the  laws  of  health
will  allow,  what  the  body  will  bear,  how  far  they  may  go  in  pleasure  consistently
with  prudence  and  economy,  what  degree  of  restraint  is  demanded  to  preserve  their
reputation.  They  will,  therefore,  keep  themselves  sober  while  their  less  discreet,
and  perhaps  less  corrupt,  companions  are  intoxicated  at  their  side ;  they  live  a  long
healthy  life,  while  others  die  of  the  effects  of  vicious  indulgence,  and  retain  their
good  name  while  others  ruin  themselves  in  the  opinion  of  society.  Verily,  they
have  their  reward  ;  but  their  sober-mindedness  is  certainly  no  such  virtue  that  even
a  philosopher  could  commend  it.     III.  Sobriety  of  mind,  bsino  soMETHiNa  kobm

THAN  A  TEMPEBAMENT  AVERSE  TO  EXCESS,  SOUETHINO  MORE  THAN  SELF-CONTROL  OM
BBLTUB  rUNOIPLBB    MAT  BB  LOOKED  AT  AS  A  PHILOSOPHICAL,  OB  AS  A  ChBISTIAN  VIBIOS.


CHA?.  II.]  TITUS.  73

In  both  cases,  it  is  a  snbordination  of  the  desires  and  passions  to  the  higher  prin-
eiples  of  the  soul ;  in  both,  it  is  a  spontaneous  self-government  according  to  the
rmes  of  right  living,  not  according  to  calculations  of  temporal  advancement.  When
we  speak  of  Christian  sobriety  of  mind,  we  mean  nothing  generically  different  from
the  notion  which  philosophy  had  already  foi-med.  But  we  mean  sobriety  of  mind
Bastained  by  Christian  principles,  enforced  by  Christian  motives,  and  dwelling  amid
other  manifestations  of  a  Christian  or  purified  character.  Let  us  consider  it  when
thoB  broadly  understood,  in  some  of  its  most  prominent  characteristics.  1.  It
involves  an  estimate  of  earthly  pleasure  and  good  formed  under  the  power  of  faith.
With  Christ's  advent  into  the  world,  a  new  idea  of  life  began,  and  the  victory  of  the
spirit  over  the  flesh  is  rendered  possible.  2.  But  it  is  not  enough  to  have  a  standard
of  character ;  the  young  man,  if  he  would  be  sober-minded,  must  have  rules  of  living
calculated  beforehand  to  resist  the  allurements  of  the  world  when  they  arise  It  is
the  part  of  Christian  ethics  to  make  known  what  rules  are  needed  for  our  moral
guidance,  and  to  enforce  them  by  the  appropriate  motives.  In  this  place,  no  such
thing  can  be  attempted,  and  yet  I  cannot  pass  on  without  calling  your  attention  to
one  or  two  parts  of  conduct,  where  it  is  peculiarly  important  to  have  well  settled
principles  of  action.  (1)  In  regard  to  the  bodily  appetites,  Christian  sobriety  begins
to  be  lost  as  soon  as  tbey  are  made  ends  in  themselves,  without  regard  to  something
higher.  (2)  In  regard  to  amusements  and  diversions,  sobriety  consists  in  keeping
them  in  their  place,  as  recreations  after  bodily  and  mental  toil.  They  must  not
then  usurp  the  rights  of  labour,  unless  we  are  resolved  to  destroy  the  earnestness
and  seriousness  of  character,  which  grows  out  of  a  conviction  that  life  is  full  of
meaning.  8.  Need  I  add  that  rules  must  be  followed  by  a  settled  purpose,  by  a
resolution  formed  in  the  view  of  spiritual  and  divine  truth  to  adopt  such  a  course
of  life  as  sobriety  of  mind  requires.  (T.  D.  Woolsey.)  Exhortation  to  toher-
tnindednesi : — I.  The  NECEssrry  of  this  ezhobtation.  This  arises  from — 1.  The
ignorance  and  inexperience  of  youth.  2.  Those  constitutional  inclinations  which
predominate  in  some  more  than  in  others.  3.  The  temptations  by  which  youth  is
surrounded.     4.  The  vast  importance  of  commencing  well  a  course  of  life.    IL  The

OHABACTEB  OT  THAT  SOBEB-MINBEDNESS   WHICH  THE    TEXT    BECOMHEMDS.      1.   ItS   basiS.

Beverence  for  Ood,  contrition  for  sin,  &o.  2.  Its  contrasts.  Pride,  rashness,
obstinacy,  petulance,  sullenness,  presumption,  Ac.  3.  Its  objects.  It  should  make
yoa  moderate  in  all  things,  <ftc.  III.  The  abvahtages  which  besult  fbom  the
POSSESSION  AND  DISPLAY  OF  THIS  soBEB-MiNDEDNESs.  1.  It  wlll  qualify  you  for  your
relations  to  society.  2.  It  will  greatly  contribute  to  y^ur  usefulness  wherever
you  are  placed.  3.  It  will  greatly  increase  your  comfort.  {J.  Clayton.)  Dis-
cretion the  safeguard  of  youth : — This  concise  statement  as  to  the  exhortation  to
be  addressed  to  young  men  may  be  regarded  as  a  summary  of  all  youthful  virtues.
The  sins  and  follies  of  youth  largely  arise  from  want  of  thought.  This  fact,  while
it  is  no  excuse  for  the  sins  committed,  is  an  indication  of  the  remedy  to  be  sought.
Let  youths  be  trained  to  cultivate  discretion,  and,  humanly  speaking,  they  will  be
kept  safe  from  the  follies  so  common  to  their  age.  In  a  sermon  to  young  men,  dis-
cretion may  be  commended  thus : — I.  As  the  cultivation  of  the  uental  and  mobal

POWBBS  WITH  WHICH  GOD  HAS  ENDOWED  THEM.  H.  As  THE  FULFILMENT  OF  THE  DESTINT
WHICH  THEY  ARE  TO  FULFIL  IN  LII«;.      III.   AS  THE  FITIINO  PREPARATION  FOB  A  HIGHEB

liiFE  HEREAFTER.  (F.  Wagstaff.)  SobeT-tninded  youth : — I.  Some  characteristics
OF  THIS  SOBER  MIND.  1.  A  habit  of  moral  thoughtfulness.  2.  Practical  prudence  and
circumspection.  3.  A  modest  and  humble  deportment.  II.  Some  pabticulars  in
WHICH  THIS  OBACE  OF  CHAB4CTEB  SHOULD  BE  DISPLAYED.  1.  In  all  your  plaus  and
schemes  for  worldly  happiness.  2.  In  all  parts  of  your  social  intercourse^lress,
discourse,  choice  of  recreations,  &o.  III.  A  valuable  agency  by  which  this
80BBB-MINDEDNBSS  MAY  BE  PROMOTED.  (D.  Moore,  M.A.)  On  sohev-mindedness : —
What  is  it  that  may  properly  be  called  "  sober-mindedness"?  This  is  to  ask,  in
other  words,  What  is  it  that  we  are  all  charging  the  want  of  upon  our  fellow-mortals,
while  we  are  all,  on  all  hands,  censuring,  reproaching,  or  ridiculing  them,  for  foUy,
absurdity,  extravagance,  for  running  into  all  extremes,  for  being  the  sport  of  fancies,
tempers,  and  passions  ?  Plainly,  the  effectual  predominance  of  sound  reason.  That
then  is  the  general  description  of  sober-mindedness — that  there  be  in  habitual  exer-
cise a  just  judgment  of  things,  and  that  this  judgment  be  in  real  effective  authority.
But  a  little  more  particularly.  There  cannot  be  the  required  state  of  mind,  unless
there  be  some  great  master  principles,  decidedly  fixed  in  the  very  habit  of  thinking
and  feeling — principles  applicable  to  almost  all  things  in  our  interests  and  practice
— principles  so  general  that  many  special  ones  will  grow  out  of  them  for  particular


74  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  a.

application.  One  is — that  in  all  things  and  at  all  events,  God  is  to  be  obeyed.
Mother — that  there  is  the  essential  distinction  of  holiness  and  sin  in  aU  conduct,
both  within  the  mind,  and  in  external  action,  and  that  sin  is  absolutely  a  dreadful
evil.  Another — that  that  cannot  be  right  long  in  which  there  is  no  self-denial.
Another — that  must  not  be  done  which  must  be  repented  of.  Another — the  future
should  predominate  over  the  present.  Such  things,  we  said,  must  be  established
firmly  and  operatively  in  the  tnind.  But  then  how  can  this  be  without  much  and
frequent  exercise  of  serious  thought  ?  Do  such  principles  grow  and  establish  them-
selves  spontaneously  ?  Alas !  let  any  young  person  look  into  his  own  mind  and  see !
Without  much  of  serious  thought,  therefore,  there  cannot  be  "  sober-mindedness."
And  therefore,  again,  there  cannot  be  this  required  state  of  mind,  if  principles  are
admitted,  or  practical  determinations  adopted,  from  mere  impressions  of  fancy  and
feeling,  perhaps  from  some  casual  situation  into  which  a  person  is  thrown  ;  perhaps
from  the  pleasing  impression  made  by  some  new  acquaintance,  or  a  friend,  while
no  accoimt  is  taken  of  the  whole  comprehensive  view  of  the  matter ;  nay,  perhaps,
the  judgment  actually  withheld  from  attempting  this.  Again,  no  principles  can
BufiSce  for  the  true  "  sober-mindedness  "  in  young  persons  or  any  others,  unless  as
consciously  held  as  under  the  sanction  and  as  having  the  authority  of  the  Supreme
Power.  For  the  term  must  imply  a  steady  tenor  of  feeling  and  proceeding,  not
fluctuating,  confused,  alternating.  And  it  implies  a  calm  independence  of  spirit
and  conduct,  not  at  the  mercy  of  the  winds  and  circumstances — the  opinions  and
wills— of  the  surrounding  world ;  which  holds  one  certain  plan  and  aim,  right
onward  through  all  the  causes  of  interference  and  perversion.  But  how  can  this  be
but  by  the  vital  connection  of  our  governing  principles  with  the  unchangeable
Spirit?  Again,  there  cannot  be  a  high  degree  of  that  well-ordered  state,  "  sober-
mindedness,"  without  the  person's  forming  a  sound  judgment  of  his  own  mind.  If
there  be  an  insensibility  to  the  general  corruption  of  the  soul,  throughout  its  very
nature,  how  little  to  the  purpose  will  any  scheme  of  self-government  be !  And  then
there  are  the  special  and  peculiar  circumstances  and  tendencies;  the  particular
weaknesses  or  wrong  propensities ;  the  liability  to  some  one  evil  in  a  strong  and
dangerous  degree.  Without  an  attentive  and  deep  cognizance  of  things  so  impor-
tant, the  person  enjoined  to  maintain  sober-mindedness  will  not  at  all  know  what
he  has  to  do  ;  not  know  against  what  he  has  to  maintain  it.  We  may  add  a  most
self  evident  thing;  that  it  is  of  the  essence  of  sober-mindedness  to  maintain  a
systematic  strong  restraint  on  the  passions,  fancy,  temper,  appetites.  And  this  was
probably  the  most  direct  object  of  the  apostle's  exhortation  to  young  men.  In  these
respects,  it  is  the  very  first  point  of  sober-mindedness  for  youth  to  be  aware  how
perilous  their  condition  is.  Let  young  persons  observe  what  is  actually  becoming
of  those  who  surrender  themselves  to  their  passions  and  wild  propensities.  What
numbersi  Then,  in  themselves,  observe  seriously  whither  these  inward  traitors
and  tempters  really  tend  ;  and  then  think  whether  soberness  of  mind  be  not  a  pearl
of  great  price,  and  whether  there  can  be  any  such  thing  without  a  systematic  self-
government.  Young  persons  of  any  hopefulness  will  often  have  serious  thoughts
about  what  is  to  be  the  main  grand  purpose  of  their  life.  Immense  interests  are
exhibited  before  them,  as  immortal  natures.  It  is  for  them  to  consider,  whether
they  will  be  consigned  down  just  merely  to  this,  to  be  gay  and  joyous  creatures  for
a  few  years,  and  busy  ones  the  rest?  Or,  whether  they  shall  early  in  life  have  a
greater  purpose  and  concern,  rising  above  the  world,  and  extending  beyond  time.
Now  here  is  to  be  the  application  of  those  principles  we  were  endeavouring  to  illus-
trate; and  without  them  we  have  ample  and  deplorable  manifestation  what  the
notion  and  purpose  of  life  in  young  persons  will  be.  But  again,  this  sober-minded-
ness is  quite  necessary  for  the  subordinate  schemes  and  pursuits  of  life.  In  the  want
of  it,  a  young  person  may  form  schemes  ill  adapted  to  his  character,  his  qualifica-
tions, and  abilities—  or  his  circumstances.  For  want  of  it,  many  have  rushed  into
wild  ill-concerted  projects,  which  have  ended  disastrously,  or  frustrated  the  most
laudable  designs.  Companionship  and  friendly  connections  are  among  the  most
favourite  interests  of  young  persons.  Sober-mindedness  is  eminently  important
here.  This  would  keep  them  clearly  aware  that  the  mere  pleasure  of  friendly
association  is  a  trifle  as  compared  with  the  influence  and  effect.  Soberness  of  mind,
again,  would  be  of  high  value  to  young  people,  as  to  the  terms  on  which  they  shall
stand  with  what  is  called  the  world.  This  is  the  denomination  for  a  sort  of  system
of  maxims,  customs,  modes,  and  fashions.  And  it  takes  upon  itself  a  high  and
tyrannic  authority,  if  we  may  judge  from  the  number  of  submissive  slaves.  The
£rmly  sober-minded  young  person  would,  in  numerous  instances  and  considerable


CHAT,  n.]  TITUS.  7S

degrees,  Bet  at  noaght  the  presoriptions  of  the  despot ;  would  act  just  as  he  thoaght
proper;  and  would  have  his  reason  to  assign ;  "  I  really  have  something  else  to  do
with  my  time  and  thonghts,  than  to  study  and  follow  your  caprioes,  modes,  and
vanities."  So  mnch  for  the  situation  of  young  persons  in  the  world ;  it  is  almost  too
obvious  to  be  added  that  for  what  concerns  their  preparation  to  go  out  of  it,  there
is  the  utmost  necessity  for  everything  implied  in  sober-mindedness.  We  conclude
with  a  consideration  or  two  for  the  enforcement  of  the  exhortation.  And  let  it  not
be  forgotten  that  youth  will  soon  be  passed  away.  In  the  case  of  not  a  few  young
persons,  their  youth  is  appointed  to  be  the  whole  of  their  life.  Now  supposing  that
in  any  particular  instance  this  were  certain  and  known :  in  that  instance,  all
opinions  would  agree  as  to  the  propriety  and  necessity  of  sober-mindedness :  yes,
the  vainest,  the  giddiest,  unless  totally  ignorant  or  unbelievlDg  of  the  hereafter,  say,
"  Yes,  certainly  he  or  she  should  be  sober-minded."  But  now  judge  soberly  whether
the  propriety  is  reversed  by  the  circumstance  of  uncertainty ;  that  a  young  person
may  oiUy  have  his  youth  for  the  whole  of  his  life.  When  this  may  be  the  case,
were  it  not  infatuation  to  live  as  if  it  most  certainly  would  not  ?  But  assuming  that
life  will  be  prolonged  into  the  more  advanced  stages,  consider  that  then  a  great
change  of  feeling  from  that  of  youth  will  certainly  take  place.  Experience,  dis-
appointment, difficulty,  will  have  begun  their  process.  Now  consider ;  is  it  not  a
most  ungracious  thing  that  the  altered  state  of  feeling  in  more  advanced  life  should
come  just  wholly  as  ^sappointment,  as  mortifying  experience,  as  sober  sense  forced
upon  reluctant  folly  ?  Whereas,  sober-mindedness  in  youth  might  have  anticipated
a  great  deal ;  might,  through  wisdom,  have  made  the  change  much  more  smooth ;
might  have  caused  it  to  be  mnch  less,  and  less  mortifying,  and  made  it  less  re-
proachful in  reflection  on  the  sanguine  delusion  of  early  life.  We  would  enforce  one
more  consideration ;  namely,  that  things  will  have  their  consequences.  If  there  be
a  vain,  giddy,  thoughtless,  ill-improved  youth,  the  effects  of  it  will  infallibly  come
in  after  life.  If  there  be  a  neglected  understanding,  a  conscience  feebly  and  rudely
constituted,  good  principles  but  slightly  fixed  or  even  apprehended,  a  habitual  levity
of  spirit,  a  chase  of  frivolities,  a  surrender  to  the  passions ;  the  natural  consequences
of  tiiese  will  follow.  And  what  will  they  be  when  a  man  is  advanced  into  the  field
of  important  and  difficult  duties  ?  when  he  shall  himself  be  required  to  be  a  coun-
sellor of  youth  ?  when  he  shall  be  put  upon  strong  trials  of  both  his  judgment  and
conscience ;  when  he  shall  have  to  sustain  afflictions ;  when  advancing  age  shall
force  him  to  see  that  he  shall  ere  long  have  to  leave  life  itself  behind  f  We  add  but
one  consideration  more,  which  we  could  wish  to  press  on  young  minds  with  peculiar
force.  They  love  cheerfulness,  spiritedness,  vivacity;  and  they  are  right.  But
then !  on  the  supposition  of  life  being  prolonged,  would  they^be  content  to  expend
away  the  greatest  portion  of  this  animation  in  the  beginning  of  life  ?  Would  they
drinik  out  the  precious  wine  of  life  in  the  morning,  and  leave  bat  the  dregs  for  the
evening  of  hfe's  day  ?  If  there  be  any  possible  way  of  throwing  a  large  portion  of  this
vital  element,  this  animation,  into  the  latter,  the  latest  part  of  life,  were  it  not  that  the
highest  wisdom?  {J.Foster.)  Hints  toyoungmen: — 1.  Young menmusttakenotice
of  that  great  bundle  of  folly  which  is  naturally  bound  up  in  their  hearts,  the  corrup-
tion of  that  age  being  such  as  needeth  not  any  occasion  without  itself  to  cast  it  down.
2.  That  the  means  to  redress  it  is  the  study  of  the  Scriptures,  unto  the  rules  whereof
they  must  have  regard,  and  not  to  the  example  of  men.  3.  That  if  they  will  needs
be  given  to  imitation,  then  must  they  imitate  not  the  most,  but  the  best  of  that  age ;
6U(di  as  was  young  Daniel,  who  in  tender  years  was  able  to  utter  knowledge  (Dan.  L
4) ;  young  Samuel,  who  so  soon  as  he  is  weaned,  must  stand  before  the  Lord  (1  Sam.  i.) ;
yonng  Josiah,  who  at  eight  years  old  walked  uprightly  (2  Kings  ii.) ;  young  Timothy,
who  knew  the  Scriptures  of  a  child ;  yea,  of  Christ  Himself,  who  increased  in  wisdom
as  in  stature,  so  as  at  twelve  years  old  He  was  able  to  confound  the  doctors  and  great
rabbis  of  the  Jews.  4.  That  against  all  the  discouragements  they  shall  meet  withal
from  men,  as  that  they  are  too  forward,  soon  ripe,  and  young  saints,  &c.,  they  must
oppose  the  Lord's  good  pleasure,  who  requireth  firsthngs,  first  fruits,  first-bom  of
man  and  beast ;  the  first  month,  yea,  the  first  day  of  that  month,  for  the  celebrating
of  the  passover  ;  and  delighteth  in  whole  and  fat  offerings,  not  in  the  lame,  lean,
and  blind  sacrifices  which  His  soul  abhorreth  :  for  of  all  the  sons  of  men,  the  Lord
never  took  such  pleasure  as  in  such  who  were  sanctified  even  from  the  womb.  Some
of  the  learned  call  men  to  the  timely  service  of  God,  from  the  allusion  of  Moses's
rod  (Exod.  iii.),  and  Isaiah's  vision  (chap,  ix.),  both  of  the  almond  tree,  because  of  all
trees  that  soonest  putteth  forth  her  blossoms.  How  sound  that  collection  is,  I  will
not  stand  to  inquire ;  only  this  is  true,  that  such  as  would  be  trees  of  righteousness,


76  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  H.


and  known  to  be  of  the  Lord's  planting,  laden  (especially  in  their  age)  with  the  fruits
of  the  Spirit,  must  with  the  almond-tree  timely  bud,  and  blossom,  and  bear,  that
their  whole  lives  may  be  a  fruitful  course,  whereby  God  may  be  glorified,  and  them-
selves receive  in  the  end  a  more  full  consolation.     (T.  Taylor,  D.D.)         Our  young

jnen : "  Tell  me,"  said  Edmund  Burke,  "  what  are  the  prevailing  sentiments  that

occupy  the  minds  of  your  young  men,  and  I  will  tell  you  what  is  to  be  the  character
of  the  next  generation."  This  is  but  an  echo  of  the  epigrams  of  the  ancients.  The
modem  statesman  but  repeats  the  vrisdom  of  the  past.  The  dominant  power  of  the
young  men  of  a  nation  has  been  recognised  in  all  ages.  It  was  becanse  he  taught
her  young  men,  that  Socrates  was  feared  at  Athena.  Standing  in  the  market  place,
visiting  the  gymnasia,  or  speaking  from  the  porticoes,  he  wielded  a  power  that
senators  viewed  alike  with  envy  and  with  dread.  When  Wesley  was  desired  to  leave
Oxford  to  take  a  local  parish,  he  refused,  because,  he  said,  the  schools  of
the  prophets  were  there,  and  he  felt  that  in  forming  the  sentiments  of
young  men  he  was  doing  a  greater  work  for  the  next  generation  than  he  could
possibly  do  in  any  other  locality.  Rules  for  young  men :—  The  Hon.  Stephen

Allen,  who  had  been  Mayor  of  New  York,  was  drowned  from  on  board  the
Henry  Clay.  In  the  pocket-book  was  found  a  printed  slip,  apparently  cut  from  a
newspaper,  a  copy  of  which  we  give  below.  It  is  worthy  to  be  engraven  on  the  heart
of  every  young  man : — "  Keep  good  company,  or  none.  Never  be  idle.  If  your
hands  can't  be  usefully  employed,  attend  to  the  cultivation  of  your  mind.  Always
speak  the  truth.  Make  few  promises.  Live  up  to  your  engagements.  Keep  your
own  secrets  if  yon  have  any.  When  you  speak  to  a  person  look  him  in  the  face.
Good  company  and  good  conversation  are  the  very  sinews  of  virtue.  Good  character
is  above  all  things  else.  Tour  character  cannot  be  essentially  injured  except  by  your
own  acts.  If  any  one  speaks  evil  of  you  let  your  life  be  BO  that  none  wUl  believe
him.  Drink  no  kind  of  intoxicating  liquors.  Ever  live  (misfortune  excepted)
witW  your  income.  When  you  retire  to  bed,  think  over  what  you  have  been  doing
daring  the  day.  Make  no  haste  to  be  rich  if  you  would  prosper.  Small  and  steady
gains  give  competency  with  a  tranquU  mind.  Never  play  at  any  game  of  chance.
Avoid  temptation,  through  fear  you  may  not  withstand  it.  Earn  money  before  you
spend  it.  Never  run  into  debt  unless  you  see  a  way  to  get  out  again.  Never  borrow
if  you  can  possibly  avoid  it.  Do  not  marry  until  you  are  able  to  support  a  wife.
Never  speak  evil  of  any  one.  Be  just  before  you  are  generous.  Keep  yourself  inno-
cent if  you  would  be  happy.  Save  when  you  are  young,  to  spend  when  you  are  old.
Read  over  the  above  maxims  at  least  once  a  week."  Self-control: — "In  the
supremacy  of  self-control,"  says  Herbert  Spencer,  "  consists  one  of  the  perfections
of  the  ideal  man.  Not  to  be  impulsive,  not  to  be  spurred  hither  and  thither  by  each
desire  that  in  turn  comes  uppermost;  but  to  be  self-restrained,  self-balanced,
governed  by  the  joint  decision  of  all  the  feelings  in  council  assembled,  before  whom
every  action  shall  have  been  fully  debated  and  calmly  determined — that  it  is  which
education,  moral  education  at  least,  strives  to  produce."  This  is  the  one  deter-
mining quality  on  which  success  or  failure  in  after  life  most  depends.  Failing  here,
your  failure  is  absolute  and  irremediable.  Success  here  is  success  assured  hence-
forward. Here  are  two  youths — the  one  college-bred,  but  without  self-government ;
the  other  was  never  in  a  college,  but  knows  and  possesses  the  power  of  self-control.
For  all  worthy  work  in  life  the  latter  is  immeasurably  superior ;  he  will  make  %
better  banker,  manufacturer,  legislator,  general.  Knowledge  of  Greek  and  rnathe-
matics  and  Latin  is  valuable,  but  placed  in  the  balance  against  self-control,  it  hai
not  the  weight  of  a  feather  or  the  worth  of  a  farthing.  But  true  education  embraces
self-control,  and,  with  other  acquisitions,  gives  the  scholar  great  advantage.  Mr.
Pitt  was  once  asked  what  quality  was  most  essential  for  a  Prime  Minister.  One  of
the  party  said,  "Eloquence";  another,  "Knowledge";  another,  "Toil."  "No,"
said  Pitt,  "  it  is  Patience,"  and  patience  with  him  had  its  real  meaning  of  self-con-
trol. In  this  quality  he  himself  excelled.  There  is  an  instructive  monument  to
this  great  statesman  in  Westminster  Abbey.  Pitt  stands  erect  with  extended  hand ;
another  figure  represents  Anarchy  writhing  in  chains  at  his  feet,  while  a  calm-
browed  figure  representing  History  is  writing  down  the  record  of  his  victorions
achievements  for  posterity  to  read.  There  is  pressing  need  for  other  Pitts  to  conquer
self,  and  then  conquer  their  fellows  in  this  disordered  world.  Anarchy  and  wrong
yet  ravage  the  land.  They  need  strong,  self-conquered  men  to  put  them  in  chains.
And  be  assured,  impartial  history  waits  to  immortalise  the  name  of  the  great  moral
heroes  of  to-day.


CHIP,  n.]  TITUS.  77

Vers.  7,  8.  In  all  things  shewing  thyself  a  pattern. — A  good  example : — Having
propounded  the  several  precepts  fitted  to  all  ages  of  men  and  women,  the  last  whereof
was  unto  young  men,  our  apostle  here  inserteth  a  precept  unto  Titus  himself,  whence
it  is  probably  gathered  that  Titus  was  now  a  young  man,  as  Timothy  also  was,  in  the
same  oflSce  of  an  evangelist ;  and  being  a  minister,  in  him  he  closely  again  insti-
tuteth  every  minister,  notwithstanding  he  hath  been  most  ample  in  that  argument,
as  though  ministers  could  never  sufficiently  be  instructed.  In  these  two  verses  we
will  consider  two  things.  1.  A  precept.  2.  An  enforcement  of  it.  I.  The  pkkcept
IS,  That  Titus  show  himself  an  example  to  others.  For  as  all  the  persons  formerly
taught,  so  more  especially  the  last  sort,  namely,  young  men,  for  the  slipperiness  of
their  age  need  the  benefit  of  good  example  as  well  as  good  doctrines  and  counsel.
And  this  exhortation  is  enlarged  by  setting  down  wherein  Titus  must  become  an
example,  which  is  done,  first,  more  generally,  "  in  all  things,"  we  read  it,  "  above  all
things  "^ ;  others, "  above  all  men,"  which  readings  may  be  true,  and  grounds  of  good
instruction,  but  I  take  the  first  aptest  to  the  place.  Secondly,  by  a  more  particular
enumeration  of  shining  virtues,  as — 1.  Uncorrupt  doctrine.  2.  Good  life  fruitful
in  good  works ;  and  these  not  one  or  two,  or  now  and  then  in  good  moods,  but  there
must  be  a  constant  trading  in  them  throughout  a  grave  and  pure  conversation.  3.
There  must  be  joined  gracious  speeches  and  words,  for  I  take  it  fitliest  interpreted
of  private  communication,  described  by  two  necessary  adjuncts.  1.  It  must  be  whole-
some.   2.  TJnblameable,  or  not  liable  to  reproof.     11.  The  enforcement  of  the

PBECBPT   IS   TAKEN   FBOM   THE   END   OB  FBUIT   OF  IT,    which    is    twofold.        1.    Shame.

2.  Silence  to  the  withstanders  and  opposers.  And  thus  the  general  scope  of  the
verses  is,  as  if  he  had  more  largely  said,  "  That  this  thy  doctrine,  0  Titus,  thus  aptly
applied  to  all  sorts  of  men,  may  carry  more  weight  and  authority  with  it,  see  thou
that  (considering  thou  art  set  in  a  more  eminent  place,  and  clearer  sun,  and  hast
all  eyes  beholding  and  prying  into  thee)  thou  show  thyself  a  pattern  and  express
type  wherein  men  may  behold  all  these  graces  shining  in  thy  own  life  :  let  them  look
in  thy  glass,  and  see  the  lively  image  of  a  grave  and  pure  conversation,  which  may
allure  them  to  the  love  of  the  doctrine  which  thou  teachest :  let  them  hear  from  thy
mouth  in  thy  private  conferences  and  speech  nothing  but  what  may  work  them  to
Boundness  ;  at  the  least,  keep  thou  such  a  watch  over  thy  tongue,  as  that  nothing
pass  thee  which  may  be  reprehended,  and  hence  will  it  come  to  pass  that  although
thou  hast  many  maliciously  minded  men,  seeking  by  all  means  to  oppose  thy  doc-
trine and  life,  and  to  destroy  the  one  by  the  other,  these  shall  either  be  put  to  silence
and  have  nothing  to  say,  or  if  they  take  boldness  to  speak  anything,  it  being  unjust,
the  shame  shall  be  removed  from  thee  and  fall  justly  upon  themselves  ;  and  all  the
reproach  shall  return  home  to  their  own  doors.  (T.  Taylor,  D.D.)  That  he  that
l8  of  the  contrary  part  may  be  ashamed. — Lessons : — I.  It  is  the  lot  of  FAiTHFuii
MiNiSTEBs  TO  HAVE  0PP0SITE8  AND  ADVERSAEiES  :  yea,  such  as  are  just  contrary  and
directly  opposite,  for  so  the  word  is  used  (Mark  xv.  39).  The  case  is  clearer  than
needeth  proof.  How  the  prophets  were  entertained  our  Saviour  showeth  by  that
speech  to  the  Jews,  "  Which  of  the  prophets  have  not  your  fathers  persecuted  and
slain  ?  "  Moses  was  often  resisted  by  the  people,  and  before  he  shall  go  scot  free,
his  own  brother  and  sister  shall  withstand  him  ;  and  as  he  was  resisted  by  Jannes
and  Jambres,  so  in  all  ages  to  the  end  men  of  corrupt  minds  shaU  start  up  to  resist
the  truth.  That  the  disciples  and  apostles,  notwithstanding  their  apostolical  rod
and  power,  were  resisted,  appeareth  by  Alexander  the  coppersmith,  who  was  a  sore
enemy  to  Paul's  preaching  ;  and  Elimas,  who  was  full  of  subtlety  to  pervert  the
truth,  £ind  strongly  withstood  the  apostles.  How  was  Christ  Himself,  the  chief
Doctor,  withstood  by  the  Scribes,  Pharisees,  Sadducees,  rulers,  and  people,  that  He
had  never  come  into  the  world  if  He  had  not  made  His  reckoning  to  give  His  back
to  the  smiters,  His  face  to  shame  and  spitting,  yea.  Himself  to  the  shameful  and
accursed  death  of  the  cross.  If  it  was  thus  to  the  green  tree,  we  shall  need  seek  no
further  what  was  done  to  the  dry,  but  rather  to  inquire  into  the  reason  hereof,  and
that  is  this:  So  long  as  there  is  a  devil,  darkness,  and  death  in  men's  souls,  so  long
will  there  be  resistance  unto  God,  His  light,  and  life,  in  whomsoever  it  is ;  the  devil
not  only  suggesting,  but  working  effectually  in  the  hearts  of  reprobates,  and  natural
men,  to  withstand  God's  work,  as  Sanballat  and  Tobiah  used  all  means  to  hinder
the  building  of  Jerusalem.  And  so  do  his  instruments,  the  spirits  of  devils,  go
about  the  world  to  provoke  men  unto  war  against  Christ  and  His  little  flock.  Tho8«
spirits  of  devils  are  graceless  and  wicked  men,  carried  by  devilish  motion  and  violence
against  Christ  and  His  kingdom,  and  the  battle  between  Michael  and  his  angels,  and
the  devil  and  his  angels,  shall  not  cease  till  time  be  no  more.    11.  These  thai


78  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTBATOB.  [ohaf.  a.

OPFOSX  TBEHSBLTBB  TO  eOOD  MIiaSTEBS  AND  HEM  ABS  ETEB  SPEASIKO  EVOi,  Ain>
OPENIMO   THBIB    MOUTHS   WITH    BEFBOACHES   AOAIN8T  THEM   AND   THEIB  OODLT  00OB8B8.

Moses  was  charged,  and  that  not  in  corners,  bat  to  his  face,  that  he  took  too  maoh
upon  him,  whereas  be  was  unwilling  to  undertake  all  that  the  Lord  laid  upon  him.
It  went  cnrrent  in  court  and  country  that  Elias  troubled  all  Israel.  Amaziah
accuseth  Amos  to  the  king,  that  the  land  is  not  able  to  bear  all  his  words.  Dio-
trephes  not  only  withstood  the  apostle  John,  but  prattled  against  him.  But  what
is  the  reason  of  all  this,  have  they  any  cause  given  them  ?  The  reason  is  partly
positive  in  themselves,  and  partly  negative  in  the  other.  1.  In  themselves.  (1)  The
malice  of  their  heart  is  such  as  cannot  but  continually  out  of  the  abundance  thereof
set  their  tongues  at  work ;  the  fire  within  sendeth  out  such  smoke  abroad.  (2)  With
this  malice  is  joined  exceeding  pride  and  swelling,  which  moveth  them  to  seek  the
raising  of  themselves,  although  with  the  fall  of  others,  and  make  the  reproach  of
others  as  a  ladder  for  themselves  to  climb  by.  (3)  With  this  malice  and  pride  is
joined  exceeding  subtlety  and  policy  in  their  generation.  Well  know  they  that  they
have  gotten  ever  more  conquests  by  the  strokes  of  their  tongues  than  of  their  hands,
and  seldom  have  they  failed  of  their  purposes.  2.  Now  the  negative  reason  in  good
men  themselves,  why  their  withstanders  speak  evil  of  them,  is  set  down  (1  Pet.  It.  4).

m.   EVEBT  QODLY  HAN'S  BMDEATOUB  MUST  BE  TO  STOP  THE  MOUTHS  OF  BDOH  ADTBB*

SARiEs,  AND  80  MAiTw  THEM  ASHAMED.  £ut  it  is  an  impossible  thing  they  will  have
always  something  to  say.  Yet  so  live  thou  as  thou  mayst  boldly  appeal  unto  Ood.
Let  thine  own  conscience  be  able  to  answer  for  thy  uprightness,  and  so  thou  openest
not  their  mouths ;  if  now  they  open  them  against  thee,  it  is  their  sin  and  not  thine,
and  thus  this  precept  is  expounded  (1  Tim.  v.  14).  Give  no  occasion  to  the  adver-
saries to  speak  evil.  And  is  enforced  with  special  reason  (1  Pet.  ii.  12,  16).  This
is  the  will  of  God,  by  well  doing  to  silence  the  ignorance  of  foolish  men.  If  any
shall  say,  •'  Why  I  care  not  what  they  say  on  me,  they  are  dogs  and  wicked  men,"
and  what  are  we  to  regard  them  ?  The  apostle  teUeth  us  that  yet  for  God's  com-
mandment sake  we  must  not  open  their  mouths,  but  perform  all  duties  of  piety  and
humanity  unto  them.  2.  Because  they  watch  occasions  to  traduce,  we  must  watoh
to  cut  off  such  occasions  (Luke  vi.  7).  The  Scribes  and  Pharisees  watched  Christ
whether  He  would  heal  on  the  Sabbath,  to  find  an  accusation  against  Him.  Christ
did  the  good  work,  but  by  His  question  to  them  cut  off  so  far  as  He  could  the  matter
of  their  malice,  by  clearing  the  lawfulness  of  it.  So  out  of  their  malice  we  shall
draw  our  own  good,  and  thus  it  shall  be  true  which  the  heathen  said,  that  the  enemy
often  hurteth  less  and  profiteth  more  than  many  friends.  3.  What  a  glory  is  it  for
a  Christian  thus  to  slaughter  envy  itself  ?  To  keep  shut  that  mouth  that  would  fain
open  itself  against  him  ?  To  make  him  be  clothed  with  his  own  shame,  who  sought
to  bring  shame  upon  him  and  his  profession  ?  When  a  wretch  cannot  so  put  off  his
forehead  as  to  accuse  him  whom  he  abhorreth,  no  more  than  he  can  the  sun  of
darkness  when  it  shineth;  yea,  when  the  Prince  of  the  world  cometh  to  sift
such  a  member  of  Christ,  yet  He  findeth  nothing  justly  to  upbraid  him  withal?
(Ibid.)  A  scoffer  silenced  : — I  remember  a  story  connected  with  my  native  place.
One  of  the  most  saintly  of  men  lived  there.  Dr.  Andrew  Symington,  a  Cameronian
minister.  Professor  of  Theology  to  the  Reformed  Presbyterian  body  who  represented
the  old  Scottish  Covenanters.  He  was  one  day  walking  down  the  streets  of  Paisley,
and  when  he  came  to  the  Cross  there  was  a  knot  of  men  lounging  there,  among  whom
was  a  sort  of  ruling  spirit,  a  man  who  liked  to  scoff  at  spiritual  matters,  and  at
people  who  lived  a  spiritual  life.  Dr.  Symington  was  passing  through  the  group,
with  his  grave,  tender  look,  and  as  he  passed  by  the  crowd,  with  the  scoffing
man  in  their  midst,  an  awe  and  silence  came  upon  them.  He  went  on ;  and  the
man  who  scoffed  just  looked  after  him  and  whispered,  "  Enoch  walked  vnth  God  I  "
What  a  sermon  to  preach  1  and  yet  the  good  man  never  knew  it  1  (Prof.  Oraham.)
A  consistent  Christian : — A  friend  told  me  of  a  young  man  who  was  a  true  soldier
of  the  Cross,  and  suffered  much  in  consequence,  not  only  from  his  companions,  but
from  his  own  father,  who  was  overseer  in  the  same  works.  That  young  man  showed
forth  Christ  in  all  his  actions,  even  when  his  companions  who  worked  with  him
were  unusually  provoking  in  tormenting  him  about  his  religion,  and,  I  am  ashamed
to  say,  were  often  encouraged  in  their  wickedness  by  his  own  father.  One  morning,
after  enduring  their  cruel  and  insulting  words  for  some  time,  he  turned  to  them
with  a  calm  look  and  said  :  "  Friends,  tell  me,  is  there  anything  in  my  life  that  is  not
consistent  in  a  Christian  ?  If  there  is,  tell  it  to  me,  and  I  will  kneel  in  your  pre-
sence and  ask  God  to  forgive  me."  Complete  silence  fell  on  the  men,  not  one  dared
to  open  his  mouth  as  that  young  man  stood  there  and  challenged  them  to  find
anything  against  him.    {MoQor  Mathers.)


CHAP.  XL}  TITUS.  19

Vers.  9,  10.  Exhort  servants  to  be  obedient. — The  dutiet  of  tervants : — I.  Thobb
DUTIES  ENUMERATED.  1.  Obedience.  2.  Acceptableness  of  service.  The  idea  is
really,  approbation  based  upon  virtaous  actions.  3.  Bespectfniness  of  manner.  4.
Honesty.  5.  Fidelity.  II.  MorrvES  of  duty.  That  the  religion  of  Christ  might
be  honoured  in  the  consistency  of  its  professors.  {F.  Wagstaff.)  Duties  of  ter-
vanU : — I.  The  first  and  proper  dnty  of  every  servant  is  subjection,  or  a  stooping
under  the  authority  of  his  master.  This  consists — 1.  In  an  inward  reverencing  in
heart  the  image  of  God  in  His  superiority.  This  reverent  subjection  of  the  heart
the  Lord  in  His  own  example  requireth  in  all  His  servants,  "  If  I  be  a  master,
where  is  My  fear?"  (Mai.  i.  6),  and  is  the  first  duty  of  that  commandment,
"Honour  thy  father  and  mother."  The  apostle  (Eph.  vi.  6)  calleth  for  fear  and  trem-
bling from  servants  toward  their  mnsters.  2.  In  the  outward  testimony  of  this
inward  reverence,  both  in  speech  and  gesture  before  his  master,  and  behind  his
back ;  but  especially  in  the  free  obedience  of  all  his  lawful,  yea,  and  unequal
commandments,  so  as  they  be  not  unlawful  (Col.  iii.  22).  3.  In  patient  enduring
without  resistance,  rebukes  and  corrections,  although  bitter,  yea,  and  unjust  (1  Pet.
ii.  18, 19).  n.  The  second  virtue  required  of  servants  towards  their  masters  is,
that  tbey  please  theu  in  all  thinos.  How  will  this  precept  stand  with  that  in
Eph.  vi.  6,  where  servants  are  forbidden  to  be  men-pleasers  ?  To  serve  only  as
men-pleasers,  as  having  the  eye  cast  only  on  man  is  hypocrisy,  and  the  sin  of  many
servants,  pleasing  man  for  man's  sake,  and  that  is  condemned  by  our  apostle ;  but
to  please  men  in  God  and  for  God  is  a  duty  in  servants  next  unto  the  first ;  who,  to
show  themselves  well-pleasing  to  their  masters,  must  carry  in  their  hearts  and  en-
deavour a  care  to  be  accepted  of  them,  even  in  the  things  which,  for  the  indignity
and  burdensomeness  of  them,  are  much  against  their  own  minds.  For  this  is  the
privilege  of  a  master  to  have  his  servant  devoted  unto  his  pleasure  and  will,  for  the
attempting  of  any  business,  the  continuance  in  it,  and  the  unbending  of  him  from
it ;  and  when  the  servant  hath  done  all  he  can,  it  was  but  debt  and  duty,  and  no
thanks  are  due  to  him  from  his  master  (Matt.  viii.  9).  But  wherein  must  I  please
my  master  or  mistress  ?  In  all  things,  that  is,  in  aU  outward  things  which  are  in-
different and  lawful.  I  say  in  outward  things,  so  Eph.  vi.  5,  servants  obey  your
masters  according  to  the  flesh ;  wherein  the  apostle  implieth  two  things.  1.  That
the  masters  are  according  and  over  the  flesh  and  outward  man ;  not  over  the  spirit
and  inward  man,  over  which  we  have  all  one  Master  in  heaven.  2.  That  accord-
ingly they  are  to  obey  in  outward  things,  for  if  the  dominion  of  the  one  be  bounded
80  also  must  needs  be  the  subjection  of  the  other.  Again,  these  outward  things
most  be  lawful  or  indifferent ;  for  they  must  not  obey  against  the  Lord,  but  in  the
Lord.  HI.  Servants  are  in  the  third  place  prohibited  crossly  and  stubbornly  to
SEASON,  and  dispute  MATTERS  WITH  THEiB  MASTERS ;  but  in  silenco  and  subjection
to  sit  down  with  the  worse,  even  when  they  suffer  vnrong ;  for  as  they  are  to  carry  a
reverent  esteem  of  them  in  their  hearts  so  must  they  bewray  reverence,  love,  and
lowliness  in  all  their  words  and  gestures ;  neither  are  they  here  coped  from  all  man-
ner of  speech,  for  when  just  occasion  of  speech  is  offered,  as  by  questions  asked,
they  must  make  respective  answers  and  not  in  sullenuess  say  nothing,  for  Solomon
condemneth  it  as  a  vice  and  great  sin  in  servants,  when  they  understand,  not  to
answer  (Prov.  xxix.  19).  IV.  "Not  purloining."  By  the  former,  servants  were
taught  to  bridle  their  tongues;  by  this  precept,  their  hands.  The  word  properly
noteth  the  setting  somewhat  apart  to  one's  private  use,  which  is  not  his,  and  is  used
(Acts  V.  6).  Ananias  kept  away  and  craftily  conveyed  to  his  private  use  that  which
should  have  gone  another  way.  So  that  servants  are  forbidden  to  pilfer  the  least
part  of  their  master's  goods  to  dispose  to  their  own  or  other's  use  without  the
acquaintance  of  their  masters.  Arid  herein,  under  this  principle,  all  manner
of  unfaithfulness  is  inclusively  condemned,  as  the  opposition  in  the  next  words
showeth.  V.  "  But  showing  all  good  fidelity."  1.  In  his  master's  commands,
readily  and  diligently  to  perform  them  of  conscience,  and  not  for  eye  service,  but
whether  his  master's  eye  be  upon  him  or  no.  Wherein  Abraham's  servant  giveth
a  notable  precedent.  2.  In  his  counsels  and  secrets,  never  disclosing  any  of  his  in-
firmities or  weaknesses,  but  by  all  lawful  and  good  means  covering  and  hiding  them.
Contrary  hereunto  is  that  wickedness  of  many  servants,  who  may,  indeed,  rather
be  accounted  so  many  spies  in  the  house,  whose  common  practice  is,  where  they
may  be  heard,  to  blaze  abroad  whatsoever  may  tend  to  their  master  or  mistress's
reproach,  having  at  once  cast  off  both  the  religious  fear  of  God,  as  also  the  reverent
respect  of  God's  image  in  the  persons  of  their  superiors.  3.  In  his  messages
•broa4,  both  in  the  speedy  execution  and  dispatch  of  them,  as  also  in  his  expeuiiea


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n.

about  them  ;  husbanding  his  master's  money,  cutting  off  idle  charges,  and  bring*
ing  home  a  just  account ;  hereby  acknowledging  that  the  eye  of  his  own  conscience
watcheth  him  when  his  master's  eye  cannot.  4.  Unto  his  master's  wife,  children,
Bervants,  wisely  with  Joseph  distinguishing  the  things  which  are  committed  unto
him  from  them  that  are  excepted.  5.  Lastly,  in  all  his  actions  and  carriage,  so  also
in  every  word,  shunning  all  lying,  dissembling,  untruths,  whether  for  his  master's,
his  own,  or  other  men's  advantage ;  in  the  practice  of  which  duties  he  becometh
faithful  in  all  his  master's  house.  (T.  Taylor,  D.D.)  "  Not  answering  again  " ; —
A  lady  once,  when  she  was  a  little  girl,  learned  a  good  lesson,  which  she  tells  for  the
benefit  of  whom  it  may  concern : — "  One  frosty  morning  I  was  looking  out  of  the
window  into  my  father's  farmyard,  where  stood  many  cows,  oxen,  and  horses,  wait-
ing  to  drink.  It  was  a  cold  morning.  The  cattle  all  stood  very  still  and  meek,  till
one  of  the  cows  attempted  to  turn  round.  In  making  the  attempt  she  happened
to  hit  her  next  neighbour,  whereupon  the  neighbour  kicked  and  hit  another.  In
five  minutes  the  whole  herd  were  kicking  each  other  with  fury.  My  mother
laughed  and  said :  '  See  what  comes  of  kicking  when  you  are  hit.  Just  so,  I  have
seen  one  cross  word  set  a  whole  family  by  the  ears  on  some  frosty  morning.'
Afterward,  if  my  brothers  or  myself  were  a  little  irritable,  she  would  say, '  Take
care,  my  children.  Bemember  how  the  fight  in  the  farmyard  began.  Never  give
back  a  kick  for  a  hit,  and  you  will  save  yourselves  and  others  a  great  deal  of  trouble.' "
Not  purloining.-  Honesty  in  little  things: — I.  The  nattjbb  of  the  sin  aqainst
WHICH  THE  TEXT  WARNS  Ds.  Stealing  is  a  term  appUcable  to  the  conduct  of  a  man
who  goes  to  the  house,  or  the  farm,  or  the  shop  of  another,  and  takes  away  his  goods  or
other  property.  We  turn  an  act  of  theft  into  one  of  purloining  when  a  servant
helps  himself,  without  an  understood  allowance  from  his  master  or  mistress,  to
that  which  is  under  his  care,  or  to  which  he  has  access ;  or  when  a  workman
pockets,  for  his  own  use,  what  he  thinks  he  may  bear  away  without  detection ;  or
when  a  labourer  carries  away  from  his  master's  farm  something  to  add  to  his  own
little  stock,  or  to  maintain  his  own  family.  To  steal  is  to  take  what  is  not  our  own.
To  purloin  is  to  take  what  is  not  our  own  too ;  but  it  is  something  we  had  in
trust,  or  to  which  we  had  access.  If  purloining  be  practised  on  a  large  scale,  it
ohaoges  its  name  and  becomes  embezzlement.  II.  The  exceeding  sinfulness  of
THIS  BIN.  There  are  many  excuses  which  are  brought  forward  in  extenuation  of
this  offence.  1.  The  change  of  its  name.  There  is  a  wonderful  imposition  in
words ;  and  many  purloiners  quiet  their  consciences  by  changing  the  name.  Be-
cause it  is  not  commonly  called  stealing,  they  think  it  does  not  involve  the  guilt
of  stealing.  2.  Another  plea  is,  that  however  great  the  amount  may  be  in  the
course  of  months  or  years,  you  are  pleased  to  make  the  depredations  small  in
detail.  It  is  a  petty  affair  of  every  day,  and  so  very  little  as  not  to  be  worth  think-
ing about.  It  does  not  say,  "  Thou  shalt  not  steal  much !  "  but,  ••  Thou  shalt  not
Bteal  I  "  3.  The  next  plea  is,  that  the  master  is  rich  and  will  not  miss  it,  and  so  it  will
do  no  harm.  This  law  does  not  merely  forbid  them  to  steal  from  the  poor,  leaving
them  at  liberty  to  steal  from  the  rich.  III.  The  motives  wmcH  enfokce  the  oppo-
site CONDUCT.  The  servants  whom  Titus  was  to  exhort  were  those  of  his  own  con-
gregation. They  formed  a  Christian  community ;  and  however  the  title  may  be
applied  now,  it  was  then  given  to  those  who  had  renounced  Paganism.  The  ad-
monition was  to  men  who  had  embraced  not  only  the  profession  of  faith,  but  the
faith  itself.  It  is  right  that,  for  every  kind  of  unrighteousness,  men  should  be  re-
proved ;  for  ♦'  the  wrath  of  God  is  revealed,"  &c.  The  more  they  are  burdened  with
a  sense  of  sin,  the  more  will  they  feel  the  importance  of  repentance.  {T.  Chal-
mers, D.D.)  Fidelity  in  a  servant : — Selim,  a  poor  Turk,  had  been  brought  up
from  his  youth  with  care  and  kindness  by  his  master,  Mustapha.  When  the  latter
lay  at  the  point  of  death,  Selim  was  tempted  by  his  fellow-servants  to  join  them  in
stealing  a  part  of  Mustapha's  treasures.  '*  No,"  said  he,  "  Selim  is  no  robber.  I
fear  not  to  offend  my  master  for  the  evil  he  can  do  me  now,  but  for  the  good  he  has
done  me  all  my  life  long."  That  they  may  adorn  the  doctrine  of  God  our  Saviour. —
Servants  adorning  the  gospel: — I.  The  doctkine  of  the  gospel  :  the  doctrine  ofthh
GOSPEL  is  CALLED  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  Christ.  1.  Bccause  He  Is  the  argument  and  subject
of  it.  2.  Because  He  is  the  first  and  chief  messenger  and  publisher  of  it.  3.  Who-
soever have  been  the  teachers  and  pubhthers  of  this  doctrine  from  the  beginning,
either  by  word  or  writing  (not  excepting  prophets  or  apostles  themselves)  or  shall
be  unto  the  end.  They  all  do  it  by  commandment  from  Him,  yea.  Himself  preacheth
in  them  and  in  us.  4.  As  it  proceedeth  from  Him  so  it  tendeth  wholly  unto  Him,
and  leadeth  believers  to  see  and  partake  both  of  His  grace  and  glory  shining  in  the


CHIP,  n.]  TITUS.  81

same.  II.  Christ  is  called  God  otjb  Saviotib.  1.  To  prove  His  ovra  deity,  not  only
in  express  terms  being  called  God,  but  also  by  the  epithet  agreeing  only  to  a  Divine
nature,  oar  Saviour.  2.  To  imply  our  own  misery,  whose  infinite  wretchedness  only
God  could  remove,  and  whose  infinite  good  none  but  God  could  restore.  3.  And
especially  in  regard  of  this  doctrine.  (1)  To  confirm  the  divinity  of  the  same,  it
being  a  doctrine  of  God  and  a  doctrine  of  salvation  proceeding  from  our  Saviour.
(2)  To  enforce  the  duty  towards  it,  namely,  that  seeing  the  author  of  it  is
God,  the  matter  Divine,  the  effect  salvation,  meet  it  is  that  such  a  saving  doctrine
a  doctrine  of  such  tidings,  should  be  beautified  and  adorned.    III.  This  dootbini

IS  ADOBNED  WHEN  IT  IS  UADB  BEADTIFT7L  AND  LOVELY  TTNTO  HEN,  and  thiS  by  tWO  things

in  the  professors  of  it.  1.  By  an  honest  and  unblamable  conversation,  for  carnal
men  commonly  esteem  of  the  doctrine  by  the  life,  and  the  profession  by  the  prao*
tice  of  the  professor.  2.  By  God's  blessing  which  is  promised  and  is  attending  such
walking,  whereby  even  strangers  to  the  Church  are  forced  to  begin  to  like  of  the
profession :  for  God's  blessing  upon  His  people  is  not  only  profitable  to  themselves,
bat  tumeth  to  the  salvation  of  many  others.  So  we  read  that  when  Licinius  was
overcome  by  Constantino,  and  the  persecutions  ceased,  which  had  almost  for  three
hundred  years  together  wasted  the  Church,  how  innumerable  of  them,  who  before
had  worshipped  their  idols,  were  contented  to  be  received  into  the  Church.  On  the
contrary,  the  gospel  is  dishonoured  when  the  Lord  is  forced  to  judge  and  correct  the
abuse  of  His  name  in  the  professors  of  it  (Ezek.  zxxvi.  20).  IV.  Servants  adorn
the  gospel,  when  professing  it,  they,  by  performing  all  faithful  service  to  their
masters  in  and  for  God,  seek  Am>  obtain  the  blessino  or  God  in  the  condition  or
trra  WHEBEiN  He  hath  placed  them.  (2*.  Taylor,  D.D.)  The  duty  of  advancing  the
Christian  religion : — I.  The  explanation  of  the  tebms  used.  1.  By  •'  the  doctrine
of  God  our  Saviour  "  the  apostle  means  the  Christian  religion,  or  that  institution  of
faith  and  manners  which  Jesus  taught  and  published  when  here  on  earth.  2.  To
*•  adorn  the  doctrine  of  God  our  Saviour  "  is  to  advance  the  credit  and  reputation  of
Christian  religion  in  the  world.  It  is  so  to  govern  and  demean  ourselves  that  we  may
reconcile  its  enemies  to  a  good  opinion  of  it ;  that  we  may  procure  and  even  force
regard  and  veneration  towards  it.  8.  By  the  "  they  "  in  the  text,  the  persons  upon
whom  this  duty  is  incumbent,  we  may  fairly  understand  the  whole  body  of  Chris-
tians. II.  The  natdbe,  acts,  and  exercises  or  duty.  How  a  man  may  adorn  the
doctrine  of  God  our  Saviour — 1.  As  it  is  a  rule  of  faith,  or  an  institution  of  religion,
which  we  believe  and  own  as  of  Divine  authority.  By  manifesting,  beyond  any
reasonable  exception,  that  we  unf  eignedly  assent  unto  it,  that  we  firmly  believe  it  to
be,  what  we  pretend,  of  Divine  original.  And  this  will  be  evident  to  all — (1)  If  our
faith  be  perfect  and  entire.  If  we  receive  our  religion  as  it  is  in  itself,  in  all  its
parts,  in  every  article,  and  in  their  plainest  sense.  (2)  If  we  are  steady,  firm,  and
constant  in  the  profession  of  it.  (3)  If  we  express  an  affection,  a  prudent  zeal  in
the  profession  of  it.  2.  As  it  is  a  rule  of  life  and  manners.  To  this  purpose
it  is  absolutely  necessary — (1)  That  our  obedience  be  entire  and  universal,
(2)  That  our  obedience  be  free  and  cheerful.  (3)  If  in  cases  doubtful  we  determine
onr  practice  on  the  side  of  the  law,  and  of  our  duty.  (4)  By  an  eminent  practice
of  some  particular  virtues,  as  of  mercy  and  charity.  Wherever  these  are  expressed  to
the  life — habitually,  bountifully,  freely — all  that  observe  it  will  esteem  the  religion
from  whence  such  a  spirit  flows.    UI.  The  seasons  which  oblige  us,  and  thb

ENCOUBAOBMBNTS  WHICH  MAT  PERSUADE  US,  TO  THE   PBAOTIOE  OF  IT.       1.   To   adorn   the

doctrine  of  God  our  Saviour  by  such  a  faith  and  practice  as  I  have  now  described
is  the  most  infallible  assurance,  both  to  ourselves  and  others,  that  our  principle  is
sincere  and  perfect.  2.  To  live  such  a  life  as  shall  cause  our  religion  to  be  esteemed
and  honoured  in  the  world,  is  the  greatest  blessing,  as  well  to  ourselves  as  to  others,
that  we  can  either  imagine  or  desire.  3.  Another  encouragement  to  such  a  profes-
sion and  practice  of  oiu:  religion  as  shall  adorn  it  are  the  particular  promises
which  are  made  to  those  who  shall  attain  unto  it.  4.-  The  particular  peace
and  satisfaction  which  will  arise  from  such  a  faith  and  life.  iJ.  Lambe.)
Slaves  adorning  the  doctrine  of  Ood : — As  the  number  of  slaves  in  the  first  century
was  so  enormous  it  was  only  in  accordance  with  human  probability  that  many  of
the  first  converts  to  Christianity  belonged  to  this  class;  all  the  more  so,  as  Chris-
tianity belonged  to  this  class ;  all  the  more  so,  as  Christianity,  like  most  great
movements,  began  with  the  lower  orders  and  thence  spread  upwards.  Among  the
better  class  of  slaves,  that  is  those  who  were  not  so  degraded  as  to  be  insensible  of
their  own  degradation,  the  gospel  spread  freely.  It  offered  them  just  what  they
needed,  and  the  lack  of  whicb  had  turned  their  life  into  one  great  despair.    It  gave

6


88  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OBAT.  n.

them  Bomething  to  hope  for  and  live  for.  Their  condition  in  the  world  was  both
socially  and  morally  deplorable.  Socially  they  had  no  rights  beyond  what  their
lord  chose  to  allow  them.    And  St.  Chrysostom  in  commenting  on  this  passage

foints  oat  how  inevitable  it  was  that  the  moral  character  of  slaves  should  as  a  ride
e  bad.    They  have  no  motive  for  trying  to  be  good,  and  very  little  opportunity  of
learning  what  is  right.    Every  one,  slaves  included,  admits  that  as  a  race  they  are
passionate,  intractable,  and  indisposed  to  virtue,  not  because  God  has  made  them
EO,  but  from  bad  education  and  the  neglect  of  their  masters.    And  yet  this  ia  the
elass  which  St.  Paul  singles  out  as  being  able  in  a  peculiar  way  to  adorn  the
doctrine  of  God  our  Saviour  in  all  things."  "  To  adorn  the  doctrine  of  God."  How
is  the  doctrine  of  God  to  be  adorned  ?    And  how  are  slaves  capable  of  adorning  it?
*'  The  doctrine  of  God  "  is  that  which  He  teaches,  which  He  has  revealed  for  our
instruction.    It  is  His  revelation  of  Himself.    He  is  the  author  of  it,  the  giver  of
it,  and  the  subject  of  it.    He  is  also  its  end  or  purpose.    It  is  granted  in  order
that  men  may  know  Him,  and  love  Him,  and  be  brought  home  to  Him.    All  these
facts  are  a  guarantee  to  us  of  its  importance  and  its  security.    It  comes  from  One
who  is  infinitely  great  and  infinitely  true.    And  yet  it  is  capable  of  being  adorned
by  those  to  whom  it  is  given.    There  is  nothing  paradoxical  in  this.    It  is  precisely
those  things  which  in  themselves  are  good  and  beautiful  that  we  consider  capable
of  adornment  and  worthy  of  it.    Thus  adornment  is  a  form  of  homage :  it  is  the
tribute  which  the  discerning  pay  to  beauty.    But  adornment  has  its  relations  not
only  to  those  who  bestow,  but  to  those  also  who  receive  it.    It  is  a  reflection  of  the
mind  of  the  giver ;  but  it  has  also  an  influence  on  the  recipient.    And,  first,  it
makes  that  which  is  adorned  more  conspicuous  and  better  known.    A  picture  in  a
frame  is  more  likely  to  be  looked  at  than  one  that  is  unframed.     Adornment  is  an
advertisement  of  merit :  it  makes  the  adorned  object  more  readily  perceived  and
more  widely  appreciated.    And,  secondly,  if  it  is  well  chosen  and  well  bestowed,  it
augments  the  merit  of  that  which  it  adorns.    That  which  was  fair  before  is  made
BtiU  fairer  by  suitable  ornament.    The  beautiful  painting  is  still  more  beautiful  in
a  worthy  frame.    Noble  ornament  increases  the  dignity  of  a  noble  structure.    And
B  person  of  royal  presence  becomes  still  more  regal  when  royally  arrayed.    Adorn-
ment, therefore,  is  not  only  an  advertisement  of  beauty,  it  is  also  a  real  enhance*
ment  of  it.    All  these  particulars  hold  good  with  regard  to  the  adornment  of  the
doctrine  of  God.    By  trying  to  adorn  it  and  make  it  more  beautiful  and  more
attractive,  we  show  our  respect  for  it ;  we  pay  our  tribute  of  homage  and  admira*
tion.    We  show  to  all  the  world  that  we  think  it  estimable,  and  worthy  of  attention
and  honour.    And  by  so  doing  we  make  the  doctrine  of  God  better  known :  we
bring  it  under  the  notice  of  others  who  might  otherwise  have  overlooked  it :  we
force  it  upon  their  attention.    Moreover,  the  doctrine  which  we  thus  adorn  becomes
really  more  beautiful  in  consequence.    Our  acceptance  of  the  doctrine  of  God,  and
our  efforts  to  adorn  it,  bring  out  its  inherent  life  and  develop  its  natural  value,  and
every  additional  person  who  joins  us  in  doing  this  is  an  augmentation  of  its  powers.
It  is  within  our  power  not  only  to  honour  and  make  better  known,  but  also  to
enhance,  the  beauty  of  the  doctrine  of  God.    But  slaves — and  such  slaves  as  were
found  throughout  the  Eoman  empire  in  St.  Paul's  day — what  have  they  to  do  with
the  adornment  of  the  doctrine  of  God  ?    Why  is  this  duty  of  making  the  gospel
more  beautiful  specially  mentioned  in  connection  with  them  ?   That  the  aristocracy
of  the  empire,  its  magistrates,  its  senators,  its  commanders — supposing  that  any  of
them  could  be  induced  to  embrace  the  faith  of  Jesus  Christ — should  be  charged  to
adorn  the  doctrines  which  they  had  accepted,  would  be  intelligible.    Their  acceptance
of  it  would  be  a  tribute  to  its  dignity.     Their  loyalty  to  it  would  be  a  proclamation
of  its  merits.     Their  accession  to  its  ranks  would  be  a  real  augmentation  of  its
powers  of  attraction.    But  almost  the  reverse  of  all  this  would  seem  to  be  the  truth
in  the  case  of  slaves.     Their  tastes  were  so  low,  their  moral  judgment  so  debased,
that  for  a  religion  to  have  found  a  welcome  among  slaves  would  hardly  be  a  recom.
mendation  of  it  to  respectable  people.    And  what  opportunities  had  slaves,  regarded
as  they  were  as  the  very  outcasts  of  society,  of  making  the  gospel  better  known  or
more  attractive?    Yet  St.  Paul  knew  what  he  was  abont  when  he  urged  Titus  to
commit  the  "  adorning  of  the  ductriue  of  God  "  in  a  special  manner  to  slaves :  and
experience  has  proved  the  soundness  of  his  judgment.     If  the  mere  fact  that  many
slaves  accepted  the  faith  could  not  do  a  great  deal  to  recommend  the  power  aud
beiiuty  of  the  gospel,  the  Christian  lives,  which  they  thenceforward  led,  could.     It
was  a  strong  argument  a  fortiori.     The  worse  the  unconverted  sinner,  the  more
marvellous  his  thorough  conversion.    As  Chrysostom  puts  it,  when  it  was  seen  that


CHAP,  n.]  TITUS,  08

Christiamty,  by  giving  a  settled  principle  of  soffioient  power  to  counterbalance  the
pleasures  of  sin,  was  able  to  impose  a  restraint  upon  a  class  so  self-willed,  and
render  them  singularly  well-behaved,  then  their  masters,  however  unreasonable
they  might  be,  were  likely  to  form  a  high  opinion  of  the  doctrines  which  accom-
plished this.  And  Chrysostom  goes  on  to  point  out  that  the  way  in  which  slaves
are  to  endeavour  to  adorn  the  doctrine  of  God  is  by  cultivating  precisely  those
virtues  which  contribute  most  to  their  masters'  comfort  and  interest — submissive-
ness,  gentleness,  meekness,  honesty,  truthfulness,  and  a  faithful  discharge  of  all
duties.  What  a  testimony  conduct  of  this  kind  would  be  to  the  power  and  beauty
of  the  gospel ;  and  a  testimony  all  the  more  powerful  in  the  eyes  of  those  masters
who  became  conscious  that  these  despised  Christian  slaves  were  living  better  lives
than  their  owners  I  The  passionate  man,  who  found  his  slave  always  gentle  and
submissive ;  the  inhuman  and  ferocious  man,  who  found  his  slave  always  meek  and
respectful ;  the  fraudulent  man  of  business,  who  noticed  that  his  slave  never  pil-
fered or  told  lies ;  the  sensualist,  who  observed  that  his  slave  was  never  intem-
perate and  always  shocked  at  immodesty — all  these,  even  if  they  were  not  induced
(o  become  converts  to  the  new  faith,  or  even  to  take  much  trouble  to  understand  it,
would  at  least  at  times  feel  something  of  respect,  if  not  of  awe  and  reverence,  for  a
creed  which  produced  such  results.  Where  did  their  slaves  learn  these  lofty  prin-
ciples ?  Whence  did  they  derive  the  power  to  live  up  to  them  ?  Nor  were  these
the  only  ways  in  which  the  most  degraded  and  despised  class  in  the  society  of  that
age  were  able  to  "  adorn  the  doctrine  of  God."  Slaves  were  not  only  an  ornament
to  the  faith  by  their  lives ;  they  adorned  it  also  by  their  deaths.  Not  a  few  slaves
won  the  martyr's  crown.  What  slaves  could  do  then  we  all  of  us  can  do  now.  We
can  prove  to  all  for  whom  and  with  whom  we  work  that  we  really  do  believe  and
endeavour  to  live  up  to  the  faith  that  we  profess.  By  the  lives  we  lead  we  can
show  to  all  who  know  anything  of  us  that  we  are  loyal  to  Christ.  By  avoiding
offence  in  word  or  in  deed,  and  by  welcoming  opportunities  of  doing  good  to  others,
we  can  make  His  principles  better  known,  Ajid  by  doing  all  this  brightly  and
cheerfully,  without  ostentation  or  affectation  or  moroseness,  we  can  make  His  prin-
ciples attractive.  Thus  we  also  can  "  adorn  the  doctrine  of  God  in  all  things."
<•  In  all  things."  That  all-embracing  addition  to  the  apostolic  injunction  must  not
be  lost  sight  of.  There  is  no  duty  so  humble,  no  occupation  so  trifling,  that  it
cannot  be  made  into  an  opportunity  for  adorning  our  religion  (1  Cor.  x.  31).
{A.  Plummer,  D.D.)  Chrintians  making  the  gospel  beautiful: — I.  The  wondebfoi.
rossiBiiiiTT  that  is  opened  out  here  before  every  Christian  that  he  may  add  beauty
to  the  gospel.  He  may  paint  the  lUy  and  gild  the  refined  gold.  For  men  do  quite
rightly  and  legitimately  judge  of  systems  by  their  followers.  The  astronomer  does
not  look  directly  up  into  the  sky  when  he  wants  to  watch  the  heavenly  bodies,  but
down  into  the  mirror,  on  which  their  reflection  is  cast.  And  so  our  little  low  lives
down  here  upon  eai-th  should  so  give  back  the  starry  bodies  and  infinitudes  above
as  that  some  dim  eyes,  which  peradventure  could  not  gaze  into  the  violet  abysses
with  their  lustrous  points,  may  behold  them  reflected  in  the  beauty  of  your  life.
Our  lives  should  be  like  the  old  missals,  where  you  find  the  loving  care  of  the
monastic  scribe  has  illuminated  and  illustrated  the  holy  text,  or  has  rubricated  and
gilded  some  of  the  letters.  The  best  Illustrated  Bible  is  the  conduct  of  the  people
that  profess  to  take  it  for  their  guide  and  law.  II.  The  solbum  altebnative.  If
you  look  at  the  context  you  will  see  that  a  set  of  exhortations  preceding  these  ta
the  slaves,  which  are  addressed  to  the  wives,  end  with  urging  as  the  great  motive
to  the  conduct  enjoined,  "  that  the  Word  of  God  be  not  blasphemed."  That  is  th«
other  side  of  the  same  thought  as  is  in  my  text.  The  issues  of  the  conduct  of  pro.
fessing  Christians  are  the  one  or  other  of  these  two,  either  to  add  beauty  to  the
gospel  or  to  cause  the  Word  of  God  to  be  blasphemed.  If  you  do  not  the  one  you
will  be  doing  the  other.  There  are  no  worse  enemies  of  the  gospel  than  its  incon-
sistent friends.  Who  is  it  that  thwarts  missionary  work  in  India?  Englishmen  I
Who  is  it  that,  wherever  they  go  with  their  ships,  put  a  taunt  in  to  the  lips  of  th«
enemy  which  the  Christian  workers  find  it  hard  to  meet  ?  English  sailors  I  The
notorious  dissipation  and  immorality  amongst  the  representatives  of  Euglish  com-
merce in  the  various  Eastern  centres  of  trade  puts  a  taunt  into  the  mouth  of  tha
abstemious  Hindu  and  of  the  Chinaman.  "  These  are  your  Christians,  are  they?"
England,  that  sends  out  missionaries  iu  the  cabin,  and  Bibles  and  men  side  by  sida
amongst  the  cargo,  has  to  listen,  aud  her  people  have  to  take  to  themselves  tha
awlul  words  with  w'aich  the  ancient  Jewish  inconsistencies  were  rebuked:  "Through
yoo  the  name  of  God  is  blasphemed  amongst  the  Gentiles."    And  in  less  soleii^a


84  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n.

manner  perhaps,  but  just  as  truly,  here,  in  a  so-called  Christian  land,  the  incon-
sistencies, the  selfishness,  the  worldliness  of  professing  Christian  people,  the  abso-
lute absence  of  all  apparent  difference  between  them  and  the  most  godless  mao
that  is  in  the  same  circumstances,  are  the  things  which  perhaps  more  than  any-
thing else  counteract  the  evangehstic  efforts  of  the  Christian  Church.     III.  Thb

BORT  OF  LIFE   THAT  WILL  COMMEND  AND  ADOEN   THE  GOSPEL.       1.  It  mUSt  be   a   life  COn-

spicuously  and  uniformly  under  the  influence  of  Christian  principles.  I  put
emphasis  upon  these  two  words  "conspicuously"  and  "uniformly."  It  will  b«}  A
very  little  use  if  your  Christian  principle  is  so  buried  in  your  life,  embedded
beneath  a  mass  of  selfishness  and  worldUness  and  indifference  as  that  it  takes  a
microscope  and  a  week's  looking  for  to  find  it.  And  it  will  be  of  very  little  use,
either,  if  your  life  is  by  fits  and  starts  under  the  influence  of  Christian  principle;
a  minute  guided  by  that  and  ten  minutes  guided  by  the  other  thing — if  here  and
there,  sprinkled  thinly  over  the  rotting  mass,  there  be  a  handful  of  the  saving  salt.
2.  Bemember,  too,  as  the  context  teaches  us,  that  the  lives  which  commend  and
adorn  the  doctrine  must  be  such  as  manifest  Christian  principle  in  the  smallest
details.  What  is  it  Paul  tells  these  Cretan  slaves  to  do  that  they  may  "  adorn  the
doctrine  "  ?  Obedience,  keeping  a  civil  tongue  in  their  heads  in  the  midst  of  pro-
vocation, not  indulging  in  petty  pilfering,  being  true  to  the  trust  that  was  given  to
them.  **  That  is  no  great  thing,"  you  may  say,  but  in  these  little  things  they  were
to  adorn  the  great  doctrine  of  God  their  Saviour.  Ay  !  The  smallest  duties  are  in
Bome  sense  the  largest  sphere  for  the  operation  of  great  principles.  For  it  is  the
little  duties  which  by  their  minuteness  tempt  men  to  think  that  they  can  do  them
without  calling  in  the  great  principles  of  conduct,  that  give  the  colour  to  every  hfe
after  all.  The  little  banks  of  mud  in  the  wheel-tracks  in  the  road  are  shaped  upon
the  same  slopes,  and  moulded  by  the  same  law  that  carves  the  mountains  and  lifts
the  precipices  of  the  Himalayas.  And  a  handful  of  snow  in  the  hedge  in  the
winter  time  will  fall  into  the  same  curves,  and  be  obedient  to  the  same  great
physical  laws  which  shape  the  glaciers  that  lie  on  the  sides  of  the  Alps.  You  do
not  want  big  things  in  order,  largely  and  nobly,  to  manifest  big  principles.  The
smallest  duties,  distinctly  done  for  Christ's  sake,  will  adorn  the  doctrine.  3.  And
then  again,  I  may  say  that  the  manner  of  life  which  commends  the  gospel  will  be
one  conspicuously  above  the  level  of  the  morality  of  the  class  to  which  you  belong.
These  slaves  were  warned  not  to  fall  into  the  vices  that  were  proper  to  their  class,
in  order  that  by  not  falling  into  them,  and  so  being  unlike  their  fellows,  they  might
glorify  the  gospel.  For  the  things  that  Paul  warns  them  not  to  do  are  the  faults
which  all  history  and  experience  tell  us  are  exactly  the  vices  of  the  slave — petty
pilfering,  a  rank  tongue  blossoming  into  insolent  speech,  a  disregard  of  the  master's
interests,  sulky  disobedience  or  sly  evasion  of  the  command.  These  are  the  kind
of  things  that  the  devilish  institution  of  slavery  makes  almost  necessary  on  the
part  of  the  slave,  unlcFS  some  higher  motive  and  loftier  principle  come  in  to
coanteract  the  effects.  And  in  like  manner  all  of  us  have,  in  the  class  to  which  we
belong,  and  the  sort  of  hfe  which  we  have  to  live,  certain  evils  natural  to  our  posi-
tion ;  and  unless  you  are  unlike  the  non-Christian  men  of  your  own  profession  and
the  people  that  are  under  the  same  worldly  influence  as  you  are — unless  you  are
unlike  them  in  that  your  righteousness  exceeds  their  righteousness,  "  Ye  shall  in
no  wise  enter  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Religion  adorned: —
I.  The  purity  of  truth.  The  other  day  we  read  in  the  newspapers  that  in  Berlin
there  is  a  wonderful  gem,  a  sapphire  weighing  ten  ounces,  and  said  to  be  worth — if
it  were  pure — a  million  pounds.  But  there  is  a  flaw  in  it;  it  is  not  "  one  entire  and
perfect  chrysolite."  Ah,  if  it  were  only  pure !  We  damage  our  cause  and  prevent
people  from  joining  us  sometimes  because  we  are  not  true  to  the  principles  we
profess.  Deceit  is  always  ugly ;  truth  is  ever  beautiful.  To  be  pure  and  truthful
in  all  we  say  or  do  cannot  be  accomplished  by  merely  wishing ;  it  will  probably
take  an  entire  life  for  a  man  to  become  genuine  as  Jesus  Christ  was.  Still,  let  us
try ;  and  though  we  fall,  we  should  not  despair.  The  finest  trait  of  beauty  in  a
man's  character  is  when  he  is  so  true  that  his  word  may  be  trusted  as  much  as  his
bond,  and  people  remark  of  him,  "  Well,  if  he  says  so,  it  must  be  true."  II.  The
KHTTHM  OF  LIFE.  Not  ouly  Wear  a  flower  in  your  breast,  but  let  there  be  the  beauty
•f  truth  and  the  perfume  of  kindliness  in  your  looks,  words,  and  act'ons.  Let  me
teU  you  of  a  famous  soldier  who  went  to  the  palace  one  day  to  have  an  audience  of
tiie  king  of  England.  Having  to  wait  a  little,  he  paced  up  and  down  the  ante-
diamber  impatiently,  and  as  he  walked,  his  sword  dragged  and  rattled  behind  him.
The  Iting  opening  the  door,  said  to  a  courtier  loud  enough  for  aU  the  others  to  hear.


CHAP,  n.]  TITUS.  86

"  Dear  me,  what  a  nuisance  that  man's  sword  is ! "  The  veteran  exclaimed,  "  So
jour  Majesty's  enemies  think."  That  was  the  "  retort  courteous,"  wasn't  it  ?  Of
course  the  sword  was  powerful,  and  while  the  hand  that  wielded  it  was  strong  and
the  heart  of  the  soldier  true  and  brave,  still  I  think  he  might  have  carried  his
Bword  quietly ;  though  it  was  terrible  in  the  battle,  need  he  to  make  it  a  nuisance
in  the  palace?  Therefore,  be  thoughtful  of  the  feelings  of  others.  More  on-
pleasantness  is  caused  by  want  of  thought  than  by  want  of  feeling.  Make  your  life
as  musical  and  poetical  as  possible,  agreeable  in  passing  and  pleasant  in  remem-
brance, m.  The  OI.0BY  of  usefulness.  In  being  useful  you  are  adorning  the
religion  of  Christ ;  pluck  up  your  heart,  and  seek  out  opportunities  to  do  good.  Be
a  true  Christian  minister ;  and  remember  that  though  you  are  a  slave  to  circum*
stances,  you  may  adorn  religion  more  than  a  cathedral  can  do.  When  you  thus
live,  prompted  by  love  to  God  aud  love  to  man,  life  shall  be  a  blessing,  and  yoor
heaven  shall  be  begun  below.  (W.  Birch.)  The  grammar  of  ornament: — I.  Thb
OBANDEUB  OF  CHRISTIAN  DOCTBiNE.  "  The  doctrino  of  God."  if  the  gospel  of  Christ
be  the  doctrine  of  God  it  ought  to  reflect  the  attributes  of  God.  We  venture  to  say
it  does  thus  reflect  its  Author ;  the  New  Testament  bears  conspicuously  the  grand
characteristics  of  divinity.  1.  Think  of  the  vastness  of  the  gospel.  We  feel  in  it
the  infinitude  of  Gk>d.  We  are  redeemed  before  the  foundation  of  the  world ;  the
redemption  disclosed  is  that  of  a  race ;  it  is  worked  out  through  the  ages ;  its  issaes
are  in  the  great  eternity  beyond.  2.  Think  of  the  purity  of  the  gospd.  There  is  a
strange  purity  in  revelation.  The  Old  Testament  stretches  like  a  stainless  sky
above  the  wild,  sensual,  corrupt  nations  of  antiquity ;  the  New  Testament  bears
the  same  relation  to  the  life  of  modern  nations.  As  we  look  into  the  pore  blue
of  the  firmament  far  beyond  oar  smoky  atmosphere,  so  do  we  look  up  to  the
righteousness  revealed  in  Christ  as  the  body  of  heaven  for  clearness.  3.  Think  of
the  love  of  the  gospel — comprehending  men  of  all  nations,  languages,  tribes,  and
tongues.  4.  Think  of  the  power  of  the  gospel.  We  feel  in  revelation  the  energy
of  suns,  the  force  of  winds,  the  sound  of  many  seas.  There  is  a  majestic  moral
power  in  the  gospel  that  we  do  not  find  in  the  sublimest  philosophies  of  men,  that
IS  also  painfully  missing  in  the  noblest  sacred  literature  of  the  heathen  (Bom.  i  16).
6.  Think  of  the  permanence  of  revelation.  Science  says,  "  Persistence  is  the  sign
of  reality."  How  divinely  real,  then,  is  the  gospel  of  God  in  Jesus  Christ  1  It  is
the  only  thing  on  the  face  of  the  earth  that  does  persist.  Every  now  and  then
when  a  new  heresy  starts  up  there  is  a  panic,  as  if  the  authority  of  revelation  had
come  to  an  end ;  but  if  you  wait  awhile  it  is  the  heresy  and  the  panic  which  come
to  an  end.  A  gentleman  told  me  that  he  was  walking  in  his  garden  one  day  when
his  little  child  was  by ;  suddenly  the  little  one  burst  into  tears  and  cried  oat
in  terror,  "  Oh  1  father,  the  house  is  falling."  The  child  saw  the  clouds  drifting
over  the  house,  and  mistook  the  movement  of  the  clouds  for  the  movement  of  the
house — the  house  was  right  enough,  it  is  standing  now.  So  sometimes  we  think
that  revelation  is  falling  and  coining  to  nought,  but  it  is  soon  clear  that  the  move-
ment is  elsewhere.  Nations,  dynasties,  philosophies,  fashions,  pass  like  fleeting
vapours  and  shadows,  but  the  gospel  stands  like  a  rock.  Ah  1  and  wUl  stand  when
rolling  years  shall  cease  to  move.  II.  The  sufbeme  dbuonbtbation  of  Chbistiah
DOOTBiNB  IS  FOUND  IN  Chbistian  chabacteb.  "  That  they  may  adorn  the  doctrine
of  God  our  Saviour  in  all  things."  The  gospel  is  not  a  mere  speculation,  a  superb
philosophy,  a  grand  ideal ;  it  is  intensely  practical;  it  is  to  prove  itself  the  doctrine
of  God  by  making  all  who  believe  in  it  like  God.  1.  "Adorn  the  doctrine."  That
is,  reveal,  displaj',  make  conspicuous  and  impressive  the  splendid  contents  of  your
faith.  The  doctrine  of  God  is  in  the  Testaments  in  suppressed  magnificence,  and
the  saints  are  to  give  it  expression,  embodiment :  they  are  to  flash  out  the
unrevealed  glory  in  their  spirit  and  language  and  conduct.  The  vastness,  the
depth,  the  tenderness,  the  beauty  of  their  creed  is  to  be  made  tangible.  Our  creed
must  transfigure  our  life ;  our  life  must  demonstrate  the  divinity  of  our  creed.  As
the  stars  adorn  astronomy,  as  the  roses  of  June  adorn  botany,  as  the  rainbow
adorns  optics,  so  our  conduct  must  flash  out  the  hidden  virtue  and  glory  of  the
doctrine  of  God.  2.  Adorn  the  doctrine  "in  all  things."  The  saints  are  to  illustrate
the  doctrine  of  God  in  all  its  fulness — to  do  it  justice  at  all  points.  And  so  we
have  much  to  do.  Every  system  of  morality  outside  the  Christian  Church:
Platonic,  Aristotelian,  Stoic,  Epicurean,  Utilitarian,  Positivist;  every  system  con-
cerns itself  with  some  pet  virtue,  or  with  some  special  class  of  virtues ;  but  Chris-
tianity  is  most  comprehensive — it  concerns  itself  with  whatever  is  just,  true,  lovely,
or  of  good  report;   everything  virtuous  and  praiseworthy  is  made  an  object  of


M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha?.  n.

aspiration.  We  mast  do  justice  to  the  doctrine  of  Gk>d  throaghoat  onr  whole  per*
Bonality.  At  one  end  of  onr  complex  nature  are  the  grand  faonlties  of  intelligence,
conscience,  will,  imagination,  linking  us  with  the  upper  universe ;  at  the  other  end
of  onr  being  are  basal  instincts  and  affinities  establishing  a  kinship  between  us  and
the  world  below  our  feet.  We  must  see  to  it  that  our  faith  hallows  our  whole  per-
sonality,  that  our  splendid  faculties  are  sacred  to  their  lofty  uses,  that  our  inferior
instincts  are  duly  chastened,  that  we  live  sanctified  in  body,  soul,  and  spirit.  The
ethics  of  Christianity  comprehend  the  whole  grammar  of  ornament.  The  faith  of
Christ  is  a  salvation  from  all  Bin,  a  salvation  into  all  holiness.  As  everybody  knows,
Shakespeare  was  a  great  lover  of  the  old  English  flowers,  frequently  making  them
to  spring  forth  in  his  poems  with  the  freshness  of  nature  itself,  and  so  some  years
ago,  when  his  admirers  restored  the  cottage  in  which  the  dramatist  was  bom,  they
resolved  to  plant  in  its  grounds  all  the  sweet  things  of  summer  found  on  the  bard'a
immortal  page:  rosemary,  ox-lip,  wild  thyme,  pansies,  peony,  lily,  love-in-idleness,
cuckoo-buds,  lady-smocks,  freckled  cowslip,  daisies  pied,  eglantine,  woodbine,
nodding  violets,  musk-roses,  red  roses — all  were  carefully  planted  out  in  the  sun.
What  a  catalogue  of  virtues  could  we  compile  from  revelation !  *What  a  multitude
of  graces  are  here,  and  fine  differentiations  of  sublime  qualities  and  principles  of
moral  life !  Now  all  these  we  are  to  realise  in  actual  life  as  season  and  opportunity
may  permit,  until  the  whole  range  of  our  character  and  action  is  filled  with  beauty
and  fragrance  as  the  garden  of  the  Lord.  In  adorning  the  doctrine  of  Qod  in  all
things  we  render  that  doctrine  the  most  valuable  service  any  may  render  it.  The
world  is  not  persuaded  by  logic,  by  learning,  by  literature,  but  by  life ;  the  mul-
titude believes  in  what  it  can  see — in  the  eloquence  of  conduct,  the  logic  of  facts,
the  feeling  and  power  of  deeds.  We  may  see  this  very  clearly  illustrated  in  another
direction.  Why  do  we  all  believe  in  astronomy  ?  Why  have  we  such  a  positive
faith  in  a  science  which  professes  to  give  the  true  account  of  the  distant  mysterious
firmament ;  which  assumes  to  weigh  suns,  to  analyse  stars,  to  calculate  the  move-
ments of  endless  orbs  and  comets  ?  Do  we  believe  in  all  this  because  we  have  read
Sir  Isaac  Newton,  mastered  his  reasonings,  verified  his  calculations  and  con-
clusions ?  Not  for  a  moment.  The  faith  of  the  million  rests  on  what  it  can  see.
Our  common  faith  in  astronomy  is  derived  not  immediately  from  Newton's  Prin-
cipia,  but  indirectly  through  the  penny  almanac.  At  the  beginning  of  the  year
we  learn  that  an  eclipse  of  the  sun  or  moon  is  predicted,  and  on  the  palpable  fulfil-
ment of  that  prediction  rests  the  firmest  faith  of  modern  times — faith  in  astronomy.
On  the  day  or  night  of  an  eclipse  myriads  of  people  look  into  the  sky  who  never
look  into  it  at  any  other  time,  and  the  exact  fulfilment  of  the  prediction  brings  con-
Tiction  to  their  mind  touching  all  the  large  assumptions  of  celestial  science.
People  believe  in  what  they  see ;  the  popular  faith  is  based  entirely  on  the  darkened
orb.  So  the  faith  of  men  generally  in  Christianity  does  not  rest  on  theology,
criticism,  logic,  but  on  Christianity  as  it  finds  expression  in  the  spirit  and  life  of
its  disciples.  Once  more  men  believe  in  what  they  see,  only  this  time  they  are  not
called  to  look  upon  a  darkened  orb,  but  on  a  Church  bright  as  the  sun  shedding  on
men  and  nations  moral  splendours  like  the  light  of  seven  days.  {W.  L.  Watkinton.)
The  duty  of  adorning  our  ChrUtian  profession: — I.  Take  a  obnebal  view  or  ihb
DOCTRINE  OF  GoD  ouB  Savioub.  It  Is  uot  the  doctrine  of  God,  as  our  Creator,  Pre-
server, Benefactor,  Governor,  &o.,  which  is  here  meant,  but  the  doctrine  that  con-
cerns our  salvation  —  our  fall  in  Adam,  and  its  consequences  (Bom.  v.  12),
ignorance,  insensibility,  sinfulness,  guilt,  condemnation,  &o ;  our  redemption  by
Christ  (1  Cor.  xv.  1-3 ;  Rom.  v.  6-10 ;  1  Pet.  i.  18)  the  means  whereby  we  partake
of  this  redemption,  viz.,  repentance  and  faith  (Mark  i.  15 ;  Acts  xz.  21) ;  the
effects  produced,  as  justification,  whereby  we  pass  from  condemnation  and  wrath
to  acquaintance  and  favour  with  God,  and  are  entitled  to  eternal  life  (Acta  xiii.  38 ;
Tit.  iii.  7) ;  as  renovation  of  nature,  whereby  we  are  qualified  to  bring  forth  fruit
to  the  glory  of  God ;  the  necessity  of  continuing  in  this  state  of  salvation,  and
increasing  in  holiness  (John  xv.  1 ;  Bom.  xi.  19-22) ;  our  enemies  and  hindrances —
Satan,  the  world,  the  flesh  (Eph.  vi.  10-19  ;  1  John  ii.  14,  15  ;  Rom.  viii.  12,  13) ;
onr  friends  and  helps— God  (Bom.  viii.  31),  Christ  (Heb.  iv.  14-16;  2  Cor.  xii.  9),
the  Spirit  (Bom.  viii.  26),  angels  (Heb.  i.  14),  the  people  of  God:  that  we  are
opon  our  trial  for  eternity,  and  many  eyes  upon  us  (Heb.  xii.  1) :  the  issue  of
aU,  the  death  of  the  body,  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  the  resurrection,
judgment,  eternal  life.  II.  Show  what  is  meant  bt  asobnino  it.  Here  is  an
allusion  to  the  ornaments  of  dress.  Dress  may  be  fit  or  unfit  for  us,  suitable
or    unsuitable :    our    temper    and    conduct    must    be    suitable    to    the   goapeL


•HAT.  n.]  TITUS.  87

Instance,  in  the  doctrine  of  our  fall  and  its  consequences.  Does  the  go?pel
teach  that  we  are  fallen,  depraved,  &c.  ?  then  all  high  thoughts  of  ourselves,
all  self-coniidence,  and  impenitence  are  unsuitable  to  this  doctrine ;  hnmi-
lity,  self-abasement,  and  godly  sorrow,  are  suitable  thereto.  In  the  doctrine  of  our
redemption  ;  unbelief,  diffidence,  despondency,  are  unsuitable  ;  faith,  confidence  in
God,  and  peace  of  mind,  are  suitai'o  thereto.  2.  Another  end  for  which  dress
is  used  is  to  represent  and  exhibib  ohe  persons  who  wear  it  in  their  true  character
and  proper  loveliness.  Just  so,  our  temper  and  conduct  should  be  calculated  to  set
forth  the  doctrine  of  the  gospel  in  the  most  correct  and  clear  point  of  view.  3.  A
third  end,  which  some  have  in  view  in  adopting  various  kinds  of  dress,  is  to  add  to
their  comeliness  and  beauty,  and  make  themselves  appear  more  agreeable  than  they
really  are.  We  cannot  p  i3sibly  give  greater  beauty  to  the  gospel  than  it  has,  but
there  are  certain  graces  and  virtues  which  are  more  calculated  to  set  forth  its
beauty  and  amiableness,  and  to  show  it  to  advantage.  Such  are  the  graces  and
virtues  recommended  (Bom  xii.  9-18;  1  Cor.  xiii.  4^-7  ;  Col.  iii.  12-17);  and  in  the
verses  preceding  the  text,  as  truth,  uprightness,  justice,  mercy,  charity,  meekness,
gentleness,  benevolence,  sobriety,  industry,  frugality,  Uberality,  cheerfulness,
gratitude.  III.  How  this  must  be  done  "  in  all  things."  In  all  persons,  old  and
young,  rich  and  poor,  high  and  low.  In  all  conditions  and  states,  as  married  or
single,  parents  or  children,  masters  or  servants.  In  all  places  :  at  home,  abroad,
alone,  in  company,  in  the  church  or  market,  with  our  friends  or  enemies,  the
righteous  or  wicked.  In  all  employments  :  in  religious,  civil,  and  natural  actions.
At  all  times  :  on  the  Lord's  days  ;  on  other  days  ;  at  morning,  noon  and  night ;  in
childhood,  youth,  manhood,  middle  age,  old  age.  {J.  Benson.)  Adorning: — ^Raphael,
the  prince  of  modern  painters,  made  ten  pictures  of  Bible  scenes.  Three  of  them  were
lost,  and  somehow  the  rest  lay  neglected  and  forgotten  for  more  than  a  hundred
years  in  a  garret  at  Arras.  There  Rubens  found  them,  and  persuaded  Charles  I.  of
England  to  buy  them  for  his  palace.  They  were  put  into  good  order,  and  by  and  by
a  room  in  Hampton  Court  Palace  was  built  to  receive  them.  They  are  now  admired
by  thousands  in  the  South  Kensington  Museum,  and,  by  means  of  engravings,  are
better  known,  it  is  said,  than  any  other  work  of  art  in  the  world.  The  gospel  in
Crete  was  like  Raphael's  pictuies  in  the  Arras  garret.  It  was  a  despised  thing,
overlaid  with  frightful  prejudices,  under  which  its  beauty  was  buried.  But  Paul
feels  that  if  the  poor  Christian  slaves  lived  Christian  lives,  they  would  do  for  it
what  Rubens  did  for  the  defaced  and  dusty  paintings  of  Raphael;  they  would  rescue
it  from  neglect,  and  discover  its  heavenly  grandeur  to  admiring  thousands  who
would  multiply  and  spread  it  throughout  the  world.  Every  adorner  of  the  doctrine
walks  along  a  highway  which  has  these  stages.  I.  Saving  faith,  a  heabtt  faith.
A  doctrine  in  logic  or  metaphysics  appeals  only  to  my  head :  it  has  little  or  nothing
to  do  with  the  heart ;  but  "  the  doctrine  "  must  win  the  assent  of  the  mind  and  the
consent  of  the  heart.  The  gospel  plants  all  its  artillery  before  the  heart  till  the
everlasting  gates  are  lifted  up  that  the  King  of  glory  may  enter  and  reign  without
a  rival.  And  you  must  obey  Him ;  for,  being  God  as  well  as  Saviour,  when  Ha
commands  you  must  obey.  You  are  hke  the  wounded  soldier  on  the  battlefield,  to
whom  healing  is  offered  by  the  doctor,  who  has  all  the  authority  of  the  kingdom  at
his  back.  The  sick  man  has  no  right  to  refuse,  he  must  accept  healing  that  he  may
be  fitted  for  the  Queen's  service.  The  offers  of  mercy,  so  gentle,  have  behind  them
all  the  authority  of  heaven.  Christ  as  Saviour  wins  the  heart,  and  as  God  Ha
claims  obedience.  11.  Tbue  confession.  Christ  comes  from  heaven,  and  gives
His  testimony  about  God  and  yourself,  about  sin  and  salvation.  You  in  your  turn
take  up  and  repeat  His  testimony.  Yon  receive  His  record,  and  set  to  your  seal
that  He  is  true.  Your  confession  is  to  be  as  a  true  trademark,  declaring  the  maker
and  quality  of  what  is  within.  The  foot,  or  the  hand,  or  the  eye  must  not  con-
tradict the  lip.  And  you  are  to  put  away  all  mean  shame ;  for  no  one  ever  adorned
a  doctrine  of  which  he  was  ashamed  before  men.  III.  Daily  dutt,  a  hbavenlt
MOBALiTT.  Some  make  much  of  duty,  but  think  that  they  can  get  on  well  enough
without  doctrine.  Were  the  captain  of  a  steamer  to  say,  "  I  want  steam,  but  don't
bother  me  with  coals — dirty,  dull,  heavy  lumps ;  steam,  but  no  coal  for  me,"  you
should  think  him  a  very  foolish  man.  Now  he  is  as  foolish  whose  motto  is,  "  Not
doctrine,  but  life.  The  apostle,  you  see,  unites  the  two.  He  makes  one  thing  of
doctrine  and  piety,  and  one  thing  of  piety  and  morsJity.  To  him  duty  is  tha
adorning  of  the  doctrine.  {James  Wells.)  Adorning  the  truth : — Tha  word
"  doctrine,"  as  used  here,  means  instruction — any  or  all  of  the  great  truths  set  forth
in  the  Divine  word.    The  word  "  adorn  "  means  to  decorate  or  beautify,  as  witb


88  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [otap.  H.

gems  or  garlande  or  goodly  apparel.  I.  This  exhortation  applies  first  to  axj:,  who,
IH  ANT  SENSE  OB  8FHEBE,  ABE  TEACHING  Chbistian  tedths.  1.  It  Is  largely  Violated  in
two  opposite  directions.  (1)  On  the  one  hand,  we  find  the  doctrines  of  grace  set
forth  as  bold,  ugly,  and  repulsive  dogmata.  (2)  On  the  other  hand,  we  find  men
attempting  to  render  the  gospel  attractive  to  the  carnal  heart  by  simply  leaving  all
its  strong  doctrines  out  of  it.  2.  Between  these  extremes,  and  equally  opposed  to
both,  lies  the  true  method  of  teaching.  It  is  not  the  work  of  a  costumer,  arranging
either  a  harlequin  for  farce  or  a  gibbering  ghost  for  tragedy;  but  it  is  a  blessed
imitation  of  Christ,  beautifying  the  whole  heavenly  body  of  truth  by  "  adorning  its
doctrines."  II.  This  exhortation  applies  equally  to  all  Chbibtians,  bidding  them
make  all  these  doctrines  beautiful  by  the  power  of  their  daily  lives.  Let  us  only
live  as  if  the  gospel  we  profess,  instead  of  making  us  gloomy  fanatics  or  self-
righteous  Pharisees,  made  us  rather  kind  and  gentle,  and  lovely  and  joyous ;  never
taking  from  us  a  single  truly  good  thing  on  earth,  but  only  adding  to  each  a  new
charm  and  power.  Thereby  we  shall  wonderfully  adorn  that  gospel.  The  humblest
man  in  our  midst,  it  he  live  imitating  his  Master,  his  hfe  pervaded  with  the
principles  of  his  faith,  truly  glorifies  the  gospel.  Behold  these  humble  children  of
suffering  and  toil — that  faithful-hearted  woman,  plying  her  needle  into  the  waning
night  that  she  may  earn  scanty  bread  for  her  fatherless  children,  amid  all  temp-
tations and  trials  keeping  Christian  faith  and  love  unstained ;  and  as  she  fashions
that  coarse  garment  she  is  working  as  well  a  lustrous  robe  for  God's  glorious
gospel  1  See  that  weary  toiler  in  shop  or  field,  amid  all  antagonisms  to  good  and
BoUcitations  to  evil  making  exhibition  of  all  that  is  honest  and  lovely  and  of  good
report ;  and  while  he  plies  the  hammer,  or  holds  the  plough,  he  is  making  Divine
tmth  beautiful,  as  with  gems  and  fine  gold  fashioning  a  diadem  for  the  gospel  of
Christ.  Oh,  what  a  beauty  and  glory  it  casts  over  this  low  world  and  this  common
life,  just  to  feel  that  amid  all  weary  labour  and  perplexing  cares  we  are  at  work  not
merely  for  ourselves  and  our  beloved  ones,  or  for  the  higher  good  of  our  day  and
generation,  but  verily  and  directly  as  well  for  the  infinite  God  and  His  glory ;  that
there  is  not  one  of  us  so  ignorant  or  obscure  that  he  may  not,  in  his  own  sphere
and  lot,  be  reflecting  splendour  on  every  Divine  attribute,  bringing  forth  nobler
regalia  for  the  coronation  of  Christ !  (C.  Wadnworth,  D.D.)  Qospel  adornment: —
I.  A  name  ot  adobnment  fob  the  gospel.  "  The  doctrine  of  God  our  Saviour."  1.  It
Bets  forth  its  greatness:  "doctrine  of  God."  (1)  Our  fall,  ruin,  sin,  and  punishment
were  great.  (2)  Our  salvation  and  redemption  are  great.  (3)  Our  safety,  happiness,
and  hopes  are  great.  2.  It  sets  forth  its  certainty.  It  is  "of  God."  (1)  It  comes
by  revelation  of  God.  (2)  It  is  guaranteed  by  the  fidelity  o!  God.  (3)  It  is  as
immutable  as  God  Himself.  8.  It  sets  forth  its  relation  to  Christ  Jesus  :  "  of  God
onr  Saviour."  (1)  He  is  the  author  of  it.  (2)  He  is  the  substance  of  it.  (3)  He  is
the  proclaimer  of  it.  (4)  He  is  the  object  of  it.  The  gospel  glorifies  Jesus.  4.  It
sets  forth  its  authority.  (1)  The  whole  system  of  revealed  truth  is  of  God.  (2)  The
Saviour  Himself  is  God,  and  hence  He  must  be  accepted.  (8)  The  gospel  itself  ia
Divine.  God's  mind  is  embodied  in  the  doctrine  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  to  reject  it
is  to  reject  God.  II.  A  method  of  adobnment  for  the  gospel.  1.  The  persons
who  are  to  adorn  the  gospel.  In  Paul's  day,  bond-servants  or  slaves ;  in  our  day,
poor  servants  of  the  humblest  order.  Strange  that  these  should  be  set  to  such
a  task  I  Yet  the  women  slaves  adorned  their  mistresses,  and  both  men  and  women
of  the  poorest  class  were  quite  ready  to  adorn  themselves.  From  none  does  the
gospel  receive  more  honour  than  from  the  poor.  2.  The  way  in  which  these  persons
could  specially  adorn  the  gospel.  (1)  By  obedience  to  their  masters  (ver.  9^.
(2)  By  endeavours  to  please  them:  "please  them  well."  (8)  By  restraining  their
tongues:  "not  answering  again."  (4)  By  scrupulous  honesty  :  "  not  purloining  "
(ver.  10).  (6)  By  trustworthy  character :  "  showing  all  good  fidelity."  3.  The  waj
of  adornment  of  the  doctrine  in  general.  (1)  Adornment,  if  really  so,  is  suitable  to
beauty.  Holiness,  mercifulness,  cheerfulness,  <fco. ,  are  congruous  with  the  gospel.
(2)  Adornment  is  often  a  tribute  to  beauty.  Such  is  a  godly  conversation:  it
hononrs  the  gospel.  (8)  Adornment  is  an  advertisement  of  beauty.  Holiness  calls
attention  to  the  natural  beauty  of  the  gospel.  (4)  Adornment  is  an  enhancement  of
beauty.  Godliness  gives  emphasis  to  the  excellence  of  doctrine.  {C.H,  Spurgeon.)
Living  omamentt : — 1.  I  sometimes  think  that  the  doctrine  of  God  our  Saviour,
may  be  likened  to  a  guide  book,  which  tells  us  how  to  attain  a  holy  character.
When  buying  a  book,  I  always  give  preference  to  one  that  is  illustrated.  I  prise
my  Banyan's  "  Pilgrim's  Progress  "  as  much  for  its  charming  pictures  as  for  its
letteiprMS.    As  pietores  adorn  a  book,  so  let  our  kindly  words  and  loving  deeds  b«


CHAP.  n.J  TITUS.  89

pleasant  illastrations  of  the  Christ  who  dwells  within.    Paol  said,  "  I  live,  yet  not
I,  bat  Christ  liveth  within  me";  but  people  cannot  see  the  Christ  within  yon.  They
are  like  children,  who  cannot  read  the  words  of  a  book,  but  can  understand  it
from  the  pictures.    Therefore,  let  your  life  be  an  adorning  picture  of  the  doctrine
that  the  gentle  and  loving  Christ  dwells  within  His  disciples.     2.  It  may  also
be  likened  to  a  letter  from  a  loved  one.    A  month  or  two  ago,  I  received  a  loving
letter  from  Southport,  from  one  of  our  orphan  chilchren  who  is  now  dangerously  ill ;
and  in  her  letter,  she  enclosed  two  or  three  beautiful  flowers  which  she  had  begged
from  somebody's  garden.    The  letter  was  not  elegantly  expressed  or  beautifully
written,  but  those  flowers  spoke  to  my  heart ;  they  made  the  letter  beautiful.    Let
us  adorn  the  epistles  of  our  lives  with  the  beautiful  flowers  of  peace  and  gentleness.
Your  life  may  be  but  humble  and  poor — some  people  may  even  call  you  vulgar ;  but
still  you  may  adorn  yourself  with  the  perfume  of  love,  and  your  life  shall  lead  men
to  God.     3.  I  think,  too,  that  Christianity  may  be  likened  to  a  shelter  in  the  wilder-
ness  of  a  prodigal's  life.     See  him  yonder,  afar  off,  half  naked,  hungry,  broken-
hearted, looking  for  home,  and  while  he  looks  and  longs  for  home,  his  father  runs,
and  falls  on  his  neck,  and  kisses  him,  and  orders  a  feast  to  welcome  him.    But  soon
after,  his  elder  brother  drew  nigh  to  the  house,  and  hearing  music  and  dancing,  he
cried,  "  What  means  this  ?  "    When  he  was  told  that  it  was  done  to  welcome  his
younger  brother,  he  was  angry  and  would  not  go  in.    The  elder  brother  did  not
adorn,  but  blurred  the  doctrine  of  God  our  Saviour.     The  father  adorned  the
doctrine  that  God  loves  the  penitent  sinner ;  and  you  should  copy  his  spirit  into
your  life.     When  you  forgive  men,  do  it  kindly  and  thoroughly.     A  man  or  a
woman — it  may  be  your  workmate,  or  your  brother,  or  child — having  been  sorely
tempted,  the  weak  one  has  fallen,  and  comes  to  your  door  hungry,  naked,  friendless,
and  penniless.    Take  her  in,  of  course,  with  a  kindly  welcome ;  and  thus,  adorn  the
doctrine  that  God  freely  and  cheerfully  pardons  His  human  children.    4.  The  Christ-
life  may  be  further  likened  to  seed — it  is  a  thing  of  growth,  and  generally  of  slow
growth,  as  is  the  case  with  things  that  are  to  be  lasting.    While  character  cannot  be
whoUy  transferred,  the  seeds  of  love  and  purity  can  be  planted  in  us.    The  seeds  of
truth  are  planted  in  the  receptive  soil  of  our  heart,  which  has  to  be  prepared  for  it,  and
kept  watered  by  prayer  and  faith,  and  continually  weeded  of  those  wild  inclinations
which  always  choke  the  plant.    Like  a  divine  graft,  the  Christ-life  of  purity  and
self-sacrifice  is  joined  to  us,  and  becomes  our  life,  our  love,  our  delight.    When  His
Spirit  dwells  within  us,  we  grow  like  Him  in  our  character,  and  our  fruit  is  after
His  kind.    6.  When  we  receive  the  truths  of  Jesus  and  practise  them  from  day  to
day,  our  lives  shall  exhibit  and  adorn  His  doctrine  of  sacred  charity.    We  need
more  charity ;  the  charity  which  covereth  a  multitude  of  sins,  and  holds  on  to  the
erring  ones  to  the  very  end,  copying  from  Christ,  who  never  forsook  His  wayward
disciples.    Let  us  show  our  charity  when  men  need  it  most.    If  a  man  have  plenty
of  friends  fawning  upon  him,  you  need  not  bestow  your  friendship  ;  but  when  he  is
hungry,  naked,  or  sick,  or  in  grief,  then  be  to  him  the  adornment  of  the  doctrine  of
charity.    Show  men  that  you  believe  in  Christ  by  carrying  out  His  teaching  in  the
friendship  and  charity  of  your  life.    It  is  said  that  Francis  the  Second,  of  Prussia,
took  as  his  motto  these  words  :  *•  The  king  of  Prussia  shall  be  the  first  servant  of
his  people."    If  you  would  be  great  in  God's  sight ;  if  you  would  be  a  power  not
only  in  this  world  but  in  the  next,  be  a  servant  to  your  fellow-men,  especially  in
their  sore  distress.    One  day,  when  Napoleon  was  walking  in  the  streets  of  Paris,
a  man  came  along  bearing  a  heavy  burden  on  his  shoulder.     Napoleon  at  once
stepped  from  the  footpath  into  the  carriage  road,  and  allowed  the  man  to  pass.
Some  of  his  officers  were  very  much  surprised,  saying,  "  Sire,  why  did  you  give
way  to  that  wretched  man  ?  "    Napoleon  replied,  «•  Should  I  not  respect  his
burden?"    So,  let  us  respect  the  misfortunes  of  our  fellow-men.    Let  the  men,
women,  and  children  in  your  street,  through  your  noble  life,  be  led  to  praise  God ;
and  let  your  light  so  shine  that  all  men  may  see  the  goodness  of  the  Lord  through
you  and  be  drawn  unto  Him.     {W.  Birch.)        Adorning  the  doctrine  of  God: —
We  have  been  so  educated  that  we  are  apt  to  think  of  beauty  as  simply  an  attribute
of  matter.    We  are  apt  to  think  that  it  can  be  transferred  to  moral  conduct  only  by
a  figure  of  speech.    Now,  while  we  do  not  deny  that  in  the  constitution  of  the
human  mind  there  is  such  a  condition  of  faculty  as  that  the  perception  of  outline,
or  colour,  or  harmony  in  matter,  or  materialness,  produces  a  certain  enjoyment,  or,
as  we  call  it,  a  certain  sense  of  the  beautiful,  we  aflSrm  that  that  right  conduct —
moral  excellence  as  well  as  intellectual  excellence — produces  upon  the  mind  just  as
clearly  a  sense  of  beauty.    I  might  appeal  to  every  man's  own  experience  in  his


90  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oolp.  a.

home-life — if  his  home-life  is  fortunate — whether  the  qualities  that  he  discerned  in
father  and  mother  were  not  admirable  to  him  in  his  childhood ;  and  whether  ihoj
were  not  admirable  to  him  all  the  way  up.  And  to  many  of  you,  I  speak  with  con-
fidence when  I  say  that,  when  you  have  wandered  far  from  technical  failh,  yea,
when  you  have  largely  fallen  under  the  chill  of  doubt  and  unbelief,  there  still
remains  to  you  a  silver  cord  not  yet  loosed,  and  a  golden  bowl  not  yet  broken,  and
that  that  cord  which  holds  you  to  faith  is  the  mother's  heart,  and  that  that  bowl  is
the  father's  heart,  and  that  yon  believe  against  reason  and  in  spite  of  unbelief,
because  of  the  faith  yet  lingering  in  your  soul  in  the  moral  qualities  that  jou  have
witnessed  in  the  household.  Is  not  courage  beautiful?  Is  not  disinterested
benevolence  beautiful  ?  There  is  the  case  of  the  engineer  who  wonld  not  abandon
his  engine,  but  stood  steadfast  because  he  knew  he  had  a  hundred  lives  behind  him.
He  stood  upon  the  board,  obviously  knowing  that  he  was  rushing  into  the  darkness
of  death.  Then  there  was  that  otber  engineer  who,  on  the  burning  ship  upon  Lake
Erie,  stood  by  the  wheel,  and  steered  for  the  shore,  amidst  the  gathering  and
gaining  flames,  refusing  to  escape,  and  perished  in  the  wheelhouse,  in  the  vain  effort
to  save  those  who  were  committed  to  his  charge.  Are  not  such  deeds  grand  7  Are
not  the  qualities  that  inspire  them  beautiful  ?  Is  there  any  temple,  is  there  any
sculptured  statue,  is  there  any  picture,  that  thrills  the  soul  with  such  enthusiastic
admiration  as  acts  like  these?  And  what  are  they  but  moral  acts?  How  do  all
men  eay  of  them — "They  are  grand,  they  are  beautiful,  they  are  sublime."
Look  at  the  disinterestedness  of  woman's  love.  She  was  won  from  the  father's
house  and  household  with  all  that  was  hopeful  before  her,  to  begin  a  life  of  love.
He  was  fuU  of  generosity,  full  of  manliness,  and  full  of  promise.  The  buds  of  young
developing  life  hung  on  the  bough,  and  were  blossoming,  until  the  fatal  snare  was
set  for  him :  until  the  growing  habit  of  intoxication  fastened  upon  him,  and
degradation  settled  down  upon  him,  and  little  by  little  her  life,  with  anguish  of
foresight,  and  with  anguish  of  love,  is  overclouded.  And  yet,  though  her  father's
door  stands  open  to  call  her  back,  she  wiU  not  abandon  him.  She  thinks  of  her
children,  she  thinks  of  their  future,  and  she  will  not  abandon  him.  He  grows
morose.  More  and  more  he  becomes  like  the  animals.  The  beauty  which  she  first
saw  in  him  lives  now  only  in  memory.  The  recollection  of  the  past,  or  some  dimly-
painted  dream  of  the  future,  is  all  the  source  of  joy  that  is  left  her ;  for  the  present
to  her  is  full  of  woe,  and  sorrow,  and  humiliation.  Gradually  his  friends  forsake
him.  He  is  abandoned  by  one  and  by  another.  He  is  cast  out  of  work  and  out  of
position.  More  and  more  is  he  degraded  and  bestialized ;  and  well  might  she  cry,
"Who  shall  deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this  death?  "  But  she  cries  no  such
thing.  No  angel  in  heaven  ever  ministered  more  patiently,  more  tenderly,  or  more
indefatigably  for  a  soul  than  does  she  for  him.  And  when  at  last  he  dies,  and
every  person  in  the  whole  neighbourhood  breathes  freer,  and  says,  *'  Thank  God,
he  is  gone,  and  she  is  free  at  last  I  "  she  is  the  only  mourner ;  she  is  the  only  one
that  remembers  the  good  that  was  in  him;  and  she  stands  at  his  grave  bowed  down
with  real  grief.  She  stood  by  him  through  good  report  and  through  evil  report,  aa
she  promised  ;  and  love  triumphed.  Tell  me,  unbrutified  men,  is  there  no  beauty
in  self-denial  or  in  self-sacrifice  ?  Take  every  single  moral  quality.  Take  those
fruits  of  the  Spirit  recorded  in  the  word  of  God  which  you  will  find  in  the  fifth
chapter  of  Galatians.  Love— is  not  that  beautiful?  Is  there  anything  that  makes
the  face  so  seraphic  as  the  full  expression  of  a  noble  and  high-minded  love?  Joy —
even  a  curmudgeon  of  avarice  will  look  with  admiration  upon  the  cheery  face  of
outbursting  joy  in  children.  Peace,  such  as  we  often  see  when  the  passions  are
burned  out,  when  the  day  and  its  heat  are  gone,  and  the  soul  in  its  old  age  sits
waiting  for  the  final  revelation — this  is  beautiful.  The  beauty  of  the  house  is  in
the  cradle  or  in  the  arm-chair.  Long-suffering,  gentleness,  goodness,  faith,  meek-
ness, self-control — are  not  these,  when  they  exist  in  plenary  power,  esteemed  by
mankind  honourable  and  beautiful?  and  do  they  not  excite  the  involuntary  ex-
clamation of  surprise?  Now,  it  is  on  account  of  the  intrinsic  beauty  of  moral
quality  that  piety  and  religious  life,  in  their  higher  forms,  are  spoken  of  in  the  word
of  God  as  beautiful ;  and  the  consummation  of  piety  in  the  social  estate,  in  the
Church,  whether  in  the  present  or  in  the  future,  is  celebrated  all  the  way  through
the  Bible  as  beautiful.  When  the  beauty  that  is  in  moral  quality  shall  be  developed
and  made  conspicuous ;  when  not  merely  here  and  there  a  person,  or  a  handful,  or
a  household,  are  harmonious,  all  the  others  being  relatively  at  discords ;  when  not
only  single  families  in  a  neighbouihood,  or  single  members  in  a  Church  are  at  peace  ;
but  when,  in  serried  ranks,  men  shall  shine  with  the  beautv  of  holiness,  ani^  be


CHAP,  u.]  TITUS.  91

lifted  into  a  higher  state  in  which  they  are  able  to  give  positiveness  to  the  fruits  of
the  spirit ;  when  neighbour  does  it  to  neighbour,  and  it  becomes  the  public  senti-
ment,  and  the  air  is  full  of  it — then  will  oome  the  millennial  day ;  then  will  be
realized  that  enchanting  vision  which  danced  in  the  air  before  the  prophet's  eye ;
then  shall  men  live  together  in  righteousness  ;  then  shall  that  state  be  known  which
is  symbolized  by  the  lying  down  of  the  lion  with  the  lamb ;  then  all  brute  natures,
all  that  live  by  vice,  and  cruelty,  and  wickedness,  shall  be  cleansed  out  of  the  earth ;
and  all  men  shall  rejoice  in  the  light,  and  in  the  glory,  and  in  the  supremacy  of
those  spiritual  experiences  which  belong  to  a  religious  life.  It  is  often  the  case,
when  persons  are  brought  into  the  Christian  life — especially  when  in  great  numbers,
and  under  great  excitement — that  the  first  thought  of  every  one  is,  "Now,  what
Ehall  I  do  ?  "  And  some  begin  to  think  of  tracts,  and  wonder  if  it  would  not  be
well  for  them  to  have  a  district.  Others  inquire  if  they  had  not  better  go  out  and
Bee  their  young  friends,  and  preach  to  them.  They  are  taught  explicitly  that  they
must  go  to  work.  It  is  said  to  them,  "  You  are  converted  ;  now  go  to  work.  Start
prayer-meetings.  Bring  in  the  neighbourhood."  I  do  not  say  that  these  things  are
to  be  deprecated:  on  the  contrary,  in  due  degree,  and  with  proper  discretion,  they
all  may  be  duties ;  but  to  represent  a  Christian  life  as  having  its  first  exhibition
and  its  peculiar  testimony  in  setting  itself  to  work  on  and  about  somebody  else  is  a
grave  mistake.  My  advice  to  every  one  of  you  that  has  found  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,
and  that  is  living  in  a  joyful  faith,  is,  make  yourselves  more  comely.  Look  to  your
thoughts  and  dispositions.  Begin  with  yourself  in  your  relations  to  brother  and
Bister,  or  to  father  and  mother.  Let  every  duty  that  is  incumbent  upon  you  as
child,  or  husband,  or  wife,  rise  instantly  to  an  exalted  place,  and  become  more
luminous,  more  beautiful,  better.  And  if,  having  made  home  more  heavenly,  if —
your  disposition  being  ripened  and  beautified — there  be  opportunity  for  enter^Nise
with  others,  do  not  by  any  indolence  or  misconception  neglect  that  opportunity.
Wherever  you  are,  make  those  who  are  next  to  you  in  the  relation  of  life  see  that
you  are  a  better  man  since  you  became  a  Christian  than  you  were  before,  as  a  door-
keeper, or  as  a  doer  of  errands,  as  a  book-keeper,  as  a  salesman,  as  a  schoolboy  or
a  schoolgirl.  In  whatever  station  God  has  placed  you,  in  the  performance  of  your
special  duty,  let  the  testimony  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  so  borne  that  men,  seeing
the  things  which  you  do,  may  be  attracted  to  Him  by  the  exhibition  of  your  personal
character  in  your  relations.  Eemember  that  the  essential  power  of  the  gospel  of
Christ,  in  so  far  as  you  are  concerned,  will  lie  in  how  much  of  Christ  you  have  in
you.  It  is  not  profession,  nor  is  it  doctrine,  though  it  were  preached  by  never
80  eloquent  lips,  that  has  power  with  the  world ;  it  is  Christlikeness  in  men.  It  is
living  as  Christ  lived,  not  in  outward  condition,  but  in  inward  disposition.  He
came  down  that  we  might  go  up.  Though  He  was  rich,  for  our  sakes  He  became
poor,  that  we  through  His  poverty  might  become  rich.  He  wept  that  we  need  not
weep.  He  was  a  man  of  sorrows  and  acquainted  with  grief,  that  He  might  lift
others  out  of  the  lower  sphere.  He  accepted  poverty  as  a  means  of  enriching  us.
You  are  to  follow  Christ's  example ;  and  you  can  preach  no  more  of  Him  than  you
practise.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  All-round  Christianity  : — In  this  Titus  is  counselled  to
place  plainly  before  the  several  classes  of  people  who  claim  to  belong  to  the  Church
of  Christ  the  virtues  they  are  expected  to  cultivate  and  the  vices  they  must  carefully
shun.  Each  class  and  each' rank  has  its  own  special  duties  to  perform,  its  own
special  temptations  to  resist,  its  own  testimony  for  Christ  to  bear.  There  is  no
class,  and  there  is  no  individual  exempt  from  this.  Titus  must  make  no  respect  of
persons,  and  neglect  no  class.  He  must  not  influence  class  against  class,  but
address  himself  to  each,  and  tell  each  how  to  act  towards  the  others.  Each  class
is  under  obUgation  to  fulfil  its  duties  towards  others  so  faithfully  that  it  may  be
Been  at  once  that  they  are  the  disciples  of  Christ.  Now,  if  every  class  of  professing
Christians  were  to  act  in  this  way,  were  to  strive  so  to  act — were  to  think  less  of
the  failure  of  others  in  the  fulfilment  of  duty  and  more  of  their  own,  were  to  look  at
home  first  and  set  about  correcting  what  is  wrong  there — what  a  wonderful  trans-
formation would  be  effected  in  tiie  face  of  society.  Masters  would  ask,  not,  "  Are
my  workmen  as  diligeut  as  they  ought  to  be  ?  "  but  "  Do  I  deal  as  fairly  with  them
as  I  should  ?  "  Servants  would  ask,  not  "  Is  my  master  as  just  towards  me  as  the
law  of  Christ  commands?  "  but  *•  Am  I  doing  what  in  me  lies  to  fulfil  my  duty
towards  him,  as  Christ  would  have  me ?  "  Landlords  would  ask,  not  "Axe  my
tenants  as  industrious  and  thrifty  as  they  might  be  ?  "  but  "  Am  I  dealing  with
them  in  as  fair  and  brotherly  a  spirit  as  I  should  ?  "  Tenants  would  ask,  not  "  Is  my
landlord  not  f>yftAtiT»g  from  me  more  than  he  ought?  "  but  "Am  I  as  careful  over


92  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  o.

his  property  as  I  should  be — as  I  might  be  ?  "  And  so  on  throughout  all  the
relationships  of  Ufe.  But,  alas  I  few  think  of  adopting  this  method  of  adorning
their  Christian  profession.  They  think  it  enough  to  adorn  that  profession  if  they
point  out  to  one  class  the  faults  of  the  others,  or  bemoan  the  wrongs  done  to  them-
selves, forgetful  of,  or  heedless  to,  the  wrongs  they  themselves  do  to  others.  It  was
not  thus  that  our  Lord  desired  His  people.  His  followers,  to  act.  No ;  each  man
was  to  begin  with  himself,  pull  the  beam  out  of  his  own  eye  before  he  set  himself
to  extract  the  mote  out  of  his  neighbour's.  But  not  only  are  we  apt  to  overlook  the
applicability  of  the  law  of  Christian  duty  to  ourselves ;  we  are  apt  also  to  overlook
its  thoroughness  and  comprehensiveness.  There  are  not  a  few  whose  adornment
of  the  Christian  doctrine  goes  little,  if  any,  further  than  the  acceptance  of  the
Church  creed,  and  attendance  with  more  or  less  regularity  on  certain  church
services.  It  is  not  an  uncommon  thiugto  meet  men  and  women  who  boast  of,  who
are  sincerely  proud  of,  their  orthodoxy  and  Church  attendance,  and  who  do  not
think  it  wrong  to  practise  in  business  what  are  called,  say,  the  '*  tricks  of  trade,"  or  in
private  life  to  indulge  in  some  one  or  more  vices.  I  have  myself  heard  a  person  in
a  maudlin  state  of  intoxication  lamenting  the  sad  condition  of  a  friend  who  had
expressed  himself  doubtful  of  the  expediency  of  infant  baptism.  Then,  again,  we
have  instances  of  people  who  magnify  one  particulur  virtue,  which  they  happen  to
practise,  and  who  become  so  proud  of  it  that  they  quite  forget  the  other  virtues
which  our  Christian  faith  inculcates  quite  as  much  on  tbem.  The  virtue  may,  after
all,  however,  not  be  in  their  case  a  virtue  at  all,  or  be  very  little  of  a  virtue.  Christ
would  not  have  the  temperate  man  less  temperate  than  he  is,  but  He  would  ask
him,  though  he  has  no  inclination  towards  strong  drink,  to  examine  himself  and  sea
if  he  has  no  inclination  towards  something  else  which  is  bad,  and  set  himself  against
that.  Christ  would  ask  him,  not  to  think  himself  perfect  because  he  did  not
indulge  in  a  sin  that  has  not  the  least  attraction  for  him,  but  to  try  and  find  out
the  sins  that  do  "  beset  him,"  and  show  his  perfection — the  strength  of  his  character
and  the  power  of  his  faith — by  overcoming  them.  It  may  be  a  temper  that  is  not  yel
under  his  control — a  querulous  disposition  that  destroys  the  peace  of  his  home — A
spirit  of  fault-finding  and  uncharitableness  that  mars  the  blessedness  of  all  inter-
course with  him,  and  transforms  even  his  very  truths  into  falsehoods.  Christ  would
have  us  adorn  the  doctrine  of  God  our  Saviour  in  not  one  thing  but  in  all  things —
have  us  show  that  it  raises  us  above  the  vice  of  drunkenness,  certainly,  but  also
above  that  of  malice,  covetousness,  selfishness,  and  all  uncharitableness.  But  this,
I  repeat,  is  what  too  many  professing  Christians  forget  or  overlook.  Men  are
everywhere  prone  to  make  compromises  in  the  matter  of  Christian  duty — to  hold,
it  may  be,  by  the  creed  and  forget  the  conamandments,  to  think  of  the  sins  of  others
and  forget  their  own,  or  cling  to  one  virtue  and  make  it  to  do  duty  for  all  the  others.
Let  us  be  warned  against  this  folly.  Let  us  remember  that  our  Christian  faith,  if
it  brings  us  light,  lays  on  us  also  obligation;  if  it  reveals  the  love  of  God
towards  us  it  reveals  also  what  He  requires  of  us.  Let  us  remember  how  compre-
hensive is  its  scope,  and  how  personal  is  its  appeal  to  us.  It  is  the  spirit  of  a  new
life — a  new  life  that  must  pervade  our  whole  being  and  manifest  its  sanctifying
presence  in  every  act  we  do  and  every  word  we  say.    {W.  Ewen,  B.D.)

Vers.  11-14.  Tlie  grace  of  God  that  bringeth  salvation. — The  gospel : — L  What
IS  HERE  SAID  OP  ITS  NATUBE.  1.  The  name.  "  The  grace  of  God."  2.  The  subject.
"  Bringing  salvation."  3.  The  manifestation.  "  Hath  appeared."  (1)  None  are
excluded  from  its  benefits.  (2)  None  are  exempt  from  its  appointments.  U.  Its
iNixuENCE.  1.  How  the  gospel  teaches.  (1)  Precept.  (2)  Example.  (3)  Motive.
(4)  Real  and  spiritual  operation  and  efficiency.  2.  What  the  gospel  teaches.  (1)  What
it  teaches  us  to  deny  ?  "  Ungodliness  and  worldly  lusts."  (2)  What  it  teaches  os  to
do?  "  To  live  soberly,  righteously,  and  godly  in  the  present  world."  (3)  What  it
teaches  us  to  expect  ?  "  Looking  for  that  blessed  hope  and  the  glorious  appearing
of  the  great  God  and  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ."  (4)  What  it  teaches  us  to  acknow-
ledge ?  "  Who  gave  Himself,"  Ac.  ( W.  Jay.)  The  gospel  of  the  grace  of  Ood  : —
I.  Its  distinodishino  characteristics.  "  The  grace  of  God."  1.  The  gift.  2.
Its  objects.  3.  Its  purpose.  II.  The  dniversautt  of  its  appearancb.  1.  Adapted
for  all.  2.  Bevealed  for  all.  3.  To  be  proclaimed  to  all.  III.  Tea  inestiuablb
boon  which  it  BESTOWS.  "  Salvation."  1.  From  the  condenmiug  power  cf  sin.  8.
From  the  defilement  of  sin.  3.  From  the  love  of  sin.  4.  From  the  power  of  sin.
5.  From  the  punisbment  of  sin.  IV.  Its  practical  influence,  "Teaching  us,"
Ac    The  way  of  salvation  is  the  highway  of  holiness  and  of  purity ;  the  unclean


CHAP,  n.]  TITUS.  93

may  not  pass  over  it ;  and  within  the  gates  of  the  celestial  city  "  there  shall  enter
nothing  that  defileth,  that  worketh  abomination,  or  that  maketh  a  lie."  Wherever
this  gospel  hath  come,  "  in  demonstration  of  the  Spirit  and  with  power,"  it  hath
swept  away  the  obscure  and  execrable  rites,  the  foul  abominations,  the  detestable
practices  of  paganism.  Wherever  this  gospel  hath  come  "  in  demonstration  of  the
Spirit  and  with  power,"  it  hath  purified  the  polluted,  it  hath  made  the  dishonest
honest,  the  intemperate  sober,  the  licentious  chaste.  It  has  converted  the  monster
of  depravity  into  the  humble,  correct,  consistent,  temperate  disciple  of  Christ.  The
abandoned  woman  it  has  purified  and  refined  ;  and  he  who  was  at  once  the  disgrace,
the  dishonour,  of  his  family,  of  society,  and  of  his  country,  renewed,  reformed,
sanctified,  made  holy,  it  has  placed  at  the  feet  of  the  Eedeemer,  like  the  recovered
maniac,  "  clothed  and  in  his  right  mind."  (T.  Raffles,  D.D.)  The  extensiveness  of
the  gospel  offers  : — That  the  message  which  Jesus  was  anointed  to  deliver  emanated
from  the  sovereign  goodness  and  everlasting  mercy  of  Jehovah,  whereby  before  all
worlds  He  had  devised  a  plan  for  the  restoration  of  ruined  man,  and  contains  a
revelation  of  His  will,  is  a  truth  at  once  most  animating  and  important.  It  is  a
firm  conviction  of  this  momentous  truth  which  induces  the  beUever  to  set  a  proper
value  on  the  gospel  as  the  message  of  glad  tidings  of  great  joy.  I.  Our  thoughts
are  directed,  first,  to  the  source  of  the  gospel,  and  that  source  is  the  grace  of  God.
The  proper  signification  of  the  word  "  grace"  is  favour — unmerited  goodness  and
mercy  in  a  superior  conferring  benefit  upon  others.  The  grace  spoken  of  in  the
text  is  the  revelation  of  the  Divine  will  set  forth  in  the  gospel,  which,  in  the
strictest  sense,  may  be  termed  "  the  grace  of  God  " ;  it  being  a  revelation  to  which
man  had  no  title,  setting  forth  promises  of  which  man  was  utterly  unworthy,
unfolding  a  plan  of  redemption  which  man  had  no  reason  to  expect.  This  grace
"  bringeth  salvation."  Herein  consists  its  importance.  **  What  shall  I  do  to  be
saved?"  "What  good  thing  shall  I  do  to  inherit  eternal  life?"  "Wherewith
shall  I  come  before  the  Lord,  and  bow  myself  before  the  high  God  ?  "  These  are
vitally  important  questions— questions  which  will  frequently  present  themselves
even  to  the  most  careless,  and  they  can  be  satisfactorily  answered  in  the  gospel  alone.
The  gospel  bringeth  salvation,  for  it  points  out  to  man  the  means  of  his  recovery
from  guilt  and  degradation.  This  salvation  is  complete  and  infinite,  including  all
the  blessings  of  the  everlasting  covenant — that  covenant  which  displays  to  us  the
mercy  and  love  of  God  the  Fatber ;  the  benefits  of  the  incarnation,  life,  crucifixion,
ascension,  and  intercession  of  God  the  Son;  and  all  the  enlightening,  enlivening,
and  sanctifying  influences  of  God  the  Holy  Ghost.  In  the  possession  of  these
consists  our  salvation.  The  gospel  directs  man  to  a  Saviour  who  has  promised,  and
is  able  and  willing,  to  bestow  any  blessing  upon  those  who  believe  in  Him :  it
promises  pardon,  reconciliation,  peace ;  it  unfolds  the  glories  of  the  eternal  world ;
and  it  invites  and  stimulates  the  sinner  to  strive,  through  grace,  to  become  meet
for  the  heavenly  inheritance.  II.  Now  consider  the  pebsons  for  whose  benefit  this
grace  of  God  hath  appeared.  The  apostle  says,  "  The  grace  of  God,  that  bringeth
salvation  hath  appeared  unto  all  men  " ;  or,  according  to  the  translation  in  the
margin  of  our  Bibles,  "  The  grace  of  God,  which  bringeth  salvation  to  all  men,  hath
appeared  " ;  and  this  rendering  I  conceive  to  be  the  more  correct.  The  gospel,
then,  is  described  as  bringing  salvation  to  all  men ;  that  is,  as  offering  to  all  who
accept  it  free  and  full  remission  of  sin,  through  the  blood  of  the  Lord  Jesus ;  as
opening  to  all  beUevers  the  gate  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  The  gospel  is  precisely
suited  for  all  the  wants  of  a  fallen  sinner ;  it  meets  him  in  the  hour  of  difficulty ;
and,  consequently,  its  offers  of  mercy  are  addressed  to  every  sinner.  In  the
manifestation  of  Jesus  to  the  wise  men,  who  came  from  the  east  to  worship  Him ;
in  the  prophetic  declaration  of  the  aged  Simeon,  that  the  Child  whom  he  took  up
in  his  arms  should  be  a  light  to  lighten  the  Gentiles ;  in  the  rending  of  the  veil  of
the  temple,  when  Jesus  had  given  up  the  ghost ;  in  the  unlimited  commission —
•'  Go  ye  into  all  the  world,  and  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature  "  ;  and  in  their
qnalification  for  this  important  work,  by  the  miraculous  gift  of  tongues,  we  discover
tiiat  the  new  dispensation  was  designed  for  the  spiritual  and  eternal  benefit  of  the
whole  human  race.  The  rich  dispensation  of  mercy  revealed  in  the  gospel
beautifully  illustrates  the  gracious  character  of  our  heavenly  Father.  It  is  calcu-
lated to  remove  all  erroneous  views  of  His  attributes,  His  mercy.  His  compassion,
"Hla  tenderness  towards  the  works  of  His  hands.  Why  that  gospel  should  not  have
been  clearly  manifested  for  so  many  ages  after  the  fall  of  man — why  eighteen
oentaries  should  have  elapsed,  and  millions  of  our  fellow-creatures  should  still  be
immersed  in  the  gross  darkness  of  heathen  superstition — is  one  of  those  secret


U  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  n.

things  which  belong  to  the  Lord  oar  God.  It  is  not  onr  province  to  sit  in  jadgment
on  tibe  wisdom  of  Jehovah'B  plans — to  weigh  the  wisdom  cf  Jehovah's  counsels;
neither  are  we  to  seek  to  pry  into  the  mysterious  dealings  of  His  providence.  We
are,  rather,  thankfully  to  acknowledge  the  blessings  bestowed  upon  ourselves,  and
earnestly  seek  to  improve  them  to  the  uttermost ;  recollecting  that  responsibility
is  commensurate  with  privilege.     (T.  Bisiland,  M.A.)        The  grace  of  God  : — I.

ThB   OBIOIMAL    first    moving   OAUSB    or    ALL   THE    BLESSIKOB   WE   HAVE   FBOU   GoD  IS

GRACE.  1.  Survey  all  the  blessings  of  the  covenant,  and  from  first  to  last  you  will
see  grace  doth  all.  Election,  vocation,  justification,  sanctification,  glorification,
all  is  from  grace.  2.  To  limit  the  point.  Though  it  is  of  grace,  yet  not  to  exclude
Christ,  not  to  exclude  the  means  of  salvation.  3.  My  next  work  shall  be  to  give
vou  some  reasons  why  it  must  be  so  that  grace  is  the  original  cause  of  all  the  bless-
ings we  receive  from  God ;  because  it  is  most  for  the  glory  of  God,  and  most  for  the
comfort  of  the  creature.  (1)  It  is  most  convenient  for  the  glory  of  God  to  keep  up
the  respects  of  the  creature  to  Him  in  a  way  suitable  to  His  majesty.  (2)  It  is
most  for  the  comfort  of  the  creature.  Grace  is  the  original  cause  of  all  the  good
we  expect  and  receive  from  God,  that  we  may  seek  the  favour  of  God  with  hope
and  retain  it  with  certainty.    II.  Grace  in  the  discoveries  of  the  gospel  hath

BHINED  OUT  IN  A  GREATER  BRIGHTNESS  THAN  EVER  IT  DID  BEFORB.     1.    What  a  darkuCSS

there  was  before  the  eternal  gospel  was  brought  out  of  the  bosom  of  God.  There
was  a  darkness  both  among  Jews  and  Gentiles.  In  the  greatest  part  of  the  world
there  was  utter  darkness  as  to  the  knowledge  of  grace,  and  in  the  Church  nothing
but  shadows  and  figures,  2.  What  and  how  much  of  grace  is  now  discovered  ?  I
answer — (1)  The  wisdom  of  grace.  The  gospel  is  a  mere  riddle  to  carnal  reason,  a
great  mystery  (1  Tim.  iii.  16).  (2)  The  freeness  of  grace  both  in  giving  and  accept*
ing.  (3)  The  efficacy  and  power  of  grace.  (4)  The  largeness  and  bounty  of  grace.
(5)  The  sureness  of  grace.    III.  The  grace  of  God  revealed  in  the  gospel  is  thb

OBEAT  means  OF  SALVATION,  OR  A  GRACE  THAT  TENDS  TO  SALVATION.      1.   It  hath  a  moral

tendency  that  way  ;  for  there  is  the  history  of  salvation  what  God  hath  done  on  His
part ;  there  are  the  counsels  of  salvation  what  we  must  do  on  our  part ;  and  there
are  excellent  enforcements  to  encourage  us  to  embrace  this  salvation.  2.  Because
it  hath  the  promise  of  the  Spirit's  assistance  (Rom.  i.  16j.  The  gospel  is  said  to  be
"  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation,"  not  only  because  it  is  a  powerful  instrument
which  God  hath  appropriated  to  this  work,  but  this  is  the  honour  God  puts  upon
the  gospel  that  He  will  join  and  associate  the  operation  of  His  Spirit  with  no  other
doctrine  but  this.  lY.  This  salvation  which  the  gbaoe  of  God  bringeth  u  fbeb
FOB  ALL  THAT  WILL  ACCEPT  IT.  God  cxcludes  uoue  but  those  that  exclude  themselves.
It  is  said  to  appear  to  all  men — 1.  Because  it  is  published  to  all  sorts  of  men ;  they
all  have  a  like  favour  in  the  general  offer  (John  vi.  37).  2.  All  that  accept  have  a
like  privilege ;  therefore  this  grace  is  said  to  appear  to  all  men.  There  is  no  difier
ence  of  nations,  nor  of  conditions  of  life,  nor  of  lesser  opinions  in  religion,  nor  of
degrees  of  grace.  See  all  summed  up  by  the  apostle  (Col.  lii.  11).  {T,  Manton,  D.D.)
The  Epiphany  and  mission  of  grace : — To  this  important  statement  the  apostle  is
led  up  by  the  consideration  of  certain  very  homely  and  practical  duties  which  fall
to  the  lot  of  Christians  in  various  walks  of  life,  and  these  matters  he  refers  to  as
"  the  things  pertaining  to  sound  doctrine."  He  has  a  word  of  practical  counsel  for
several  distinct  classes  of  persons ;  for  he  knows  the  wisdom  of  being  definite.  In
the  connection  indicated  by  that  little  word  '♦  for  "  we  have  both  an  introduction  to,
and  a  striking  illustration  of,  the  great  truth  that  the  passage  is  designed  to  set
forth.  It  is  the  gospel  with  its  wondrous  revelation  of  grace  that  is  to  provide  us
with  new  and  high  incentives  to  a  life  of  practical  virtue  and  holiness.  It  is  because
we  are  not  under  the  law,  but  under  grace,  that  the  righteousness  of  the  law  is  to  be
fulfilled  in  us.  To  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil,  and  to  restore  and  perfect  the
grandest  work  of  God  on  earth,  was  indeed  an  undertaking  worthy  of  such  condi-
tions  as  the  Incarnation  and  the  atonement.  The  apostle  speaks  of  grace  itself
before  he  proceeds  to  indicate  the  effects  of  grace,  and  of  the  first  grand  object  and
work  of  grace  before  he  proceeds  to  enlarge  upon  its  ulterior  effects.  He  begins
with  the  assertion  that  "  the  grace  of  God  which  bringeth  salvation  to  all  men  hath
appeared."  In  these  opening  words,  first  our  attention  is  invited  to  this  central
object,  the  grace  of  God,  then  to  the  fact  of  its  epiphany  or  manifestation,  and  then
to  its  first  most  necessary  purpose  and  mission — the  bringing  of  salvation  within
the  reach  of  all  men.  I.  All  true  and  evangelical  religion  must  have  its  com-
mencement IN  THE  APPREHENSION  OF  DiVINE  GRACE,  AND  THEREFORE  IT  IS  OF  NO  SMALL
IMPORTANCE  THAT  WE  SHOULD  ENDEAVOUR  CLEARLY  TO  UNDERSTAND  WHAT  IS  DENOTED  BT


OHA?.  a.]  TITUS.  M

THB  WOBD.  Divine  grace,  we  may  say,  is  the  child  of  love  and  the  parent  of  mercy.
The  essential  love  of  the  great  Father's  heart  takes  definite  form,  and  aocommodates
itself  to  our  need ;  reveals  itself  in  facts,  and  presents  itself  for  our  acceptance ;  and
then  we  call  it  grace.  That  grace  received  rescues  from  the  disastrous  effects  of
sin ;  heals  our  inward  diseases,  and  comforts  our  sorrows ;  and  then  we  call  it
mercy.  But  grace  does  not  exhaust  itself  in  the  production  of  mercy  any  more  than
love  exhausts  itself  in  the  production  of  grace.  The  child  leads  us  back  to  the
parent ;  the  experience  of  mercy  leads  us  back  to  that  "  grace  wherein  we  stand  " ;
and  the  enjoyment  of  grace  prepares  us  for  the  life  of  love,  and  for  that  wondrous
reciprocity  of  affection  in  which  the  heavenly  Bridegroom  and  His  Bride  are  to  be
bound  together  for  ever.  Thus  of  the  three  mercy  ever  reaches  the  heart  first ;  and
it  is  through  accepted  mercy  that  we  apprehend  revealed  grace;  similarly  it  is
through  the  revelations  of  grace  that  we  learn  the  secret  of  eternal  love.  And  as
with  the  individual  so  with  mankind  at  large.  Mercy,  swift-winged  mercy,  was  the
first  celestial  messenger  that  reached  a  sin-stricken  world ;  and  in  former  dispensa-
tions  it  was  with  mercy  that  men  had  most  to  do.  But  if  former  dispensations
were  dispensations  of  mercy,  the  present  is  pre-eminently  the  dispensation  of  grace,
in  which  it  is  our  privilege  not  only  to  receive  mercy,  but  to  apprehend  the  attitude
of  God  towards  us  from  which  the  mercy  flows.  But  let  us  remember  that  though
specially  revealed  to  us  now,  the  grace  of  God  towards  humanity  has  existed  from
the  very  first.  The  Lamb  was  slain  in  the  Divine  foreknowledge  before  the  founda-
tion of  the  world.  But  the  grace  of  Ood  has  in  it  a  further  and  higher  object  than
the  mere  provision  of  a  remedy  for  human  sin — than  what  is  merely  remedial.
God  has  purposed  in  His  own  free  favour  towards  mankind  to  raise  man  to  a  posi*
tion  of  moral  exaltation  and  glory,  the  very  highest,  so  far  as  we  know,  that  can  be
occupied  or  aspired  to  by  a  created  intelligence.  Such  is  the  destiny  of  humanity.
This  is  the  singular  favour  which  God  designs  for  the  sons  of  men.  God's  favour
flows  forth  to  other  intelligences  also,  but  not  to  the  same  degree,  and  it  is  not
manifested  after  the  same  fashion.  This  eternal  purpose  of  God,  however,  which
has  run  through  the  long  ages,  was  not  fully  revealed  to  the  sons  of  men  until  the
fulness  of  time  arrived.  It  was  revealed  only  in  parts  and  in  fragments,  so  to  speak.
From  Adam  to  John  the  Baptist  every  man  that  ever  went  to  heaven  went  there  by
the  grace  of  God.  The  grace  of  God  has  constantly  been  in  operation,  but  it  was
operating  in  a  concealed  fashion.  Even  those  who  were  the  subjects  of  Divine  grace
seem  scarcely  to  have  known  how  it  reached  them,  or  in  what  manner  they  were  to
be  affected  by  any  provision  that  it  might  make  to  meet  their  human  sins.  Before
the  full  favour  of  God  could  be  revealed  to  mankind  it  would  seem  to  have  been
necessary  first  of  all  that  man  should  be  put  under  a  disciplinary  training,  which
should  induce  within  him  a  conviction  of  the  necessity  for  the  intervention  of  that
favour,  and  dispose  him  to  value  it  when  it  came.  Grace,  we  have  already  said,  is
the  child  of  love  and  the  parent  of  mercy.  We  discover  now  that  the  love  of  God
is  not  a  passive,  inert  possibility,  but  a  living  power  that  takes  to  itself  definite
form,  and  hastens  to  meet  and  overcome  the  forces  of  evil  to  which  we  owe  our
ruin.  n.  But  fiurther,  the  apostle  not  only  calls  our  attention  to  Divine  grace,  bat
he  proceeds  to  state  with  great  emphasis  ihat  it  has  appbabed  ob  been  made  hani-
FEST.  We  are  no  longer  left  in  doubt  as  to  its  existence,  or  permitted  to  enjoy  its
benefits  without  knowing  whence  they  flow.  In  order  to  be  manifested,  the  grace
of  God  needed  not  only  to  be  affirmed,  but  to  be  illustrated,  I  may  say  demonstrated,
and  then  only  was  man  called  upon  to  believe  in  it.  It  might  have  been  written
large  enough  for  all  the  world  to  see,  that  God  was  love.  It  might  have  been  blazoned
upon  the  starry  heavens  so  that  every  eye  might  have  read  the  wondrous  sentence,
and  yet  I  apprehend  we  should  have  been  slow  to  grasp  the  truth  which  the  words
contain,  had  they  not  been  brought  within  reach  of  our  finite  apprehension  in  con-
crete form  in  the  personal  history,  in  the  life,  in  the  action,  in  the  sorrow,  in  the
death  of  God's  own  Son.  When  I  turn  my  gaze  towards  the  person  of  Olirist  I
am  at  liberty  to  doubt  God's  favour  towards  me  no  longer.  I  read  it  in  every
action,  I  discover  it  ru  every  word.  Here  is  the  first  thought  that  brings
rest  to  the  heart  of  man.  It  has  been  demonstrated  by  the  Incarnation  and
by  the  Atonement,  that  God's  attitude  on  His  side  towards  us  is  already  one  of
free  favour — favour  toward  all,  however  far  we  may  have  fallen,  and  however  un-
deserving we  may  be  in  oarselves.  You  often  hear  people  talking  about  making
their  peace  with  God.  Well,  the  phrase  may  be  used  to  indicate  what  is  perfectly
correct,  but  the  expression  in  itself  is  most  incorrect,  for  peace  with  God  is  already
made.  God's  attitude  towards  us  is  already  an  assured  thing.   We  have  no  occasioa


96  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n.

to  go  about  to  ask  ourselves,  "  How  shall  we  win  God's  favour  ?  "    It  is  possible
for  a  person  to  be  full  of  friendly  intentions  to  me,  and  yet  for  me  to  retain  an
attitude  of  animosity  and  enmity  towards  him.     That  does  not  alter  his  character
towards  me,  or  his  attitude  towards  me ;  but  it  does  prevent  me  from  reaping  anj
bene&t  from  that  attitude.     And  so,  I  repeat,  the  only  point  of  uncertainty  hes  in
our  attitude  towards  God,  not  in  His  attitude  towards  us.     III.  Thus  the  apostle
affirms  that  this  gbace  of  God  ' '  brinqeth  salvation  to  evert  man."    Yes,  God's
free  favour,  manifested  in  the  person  of  His  own  blessed  Son,  is  designed  to  produce
saving  effects  upon  all.    God  makes  no  exception,  excludes  none.    All  are  not  saved.
But  why  not  ?    Not  because  the  grace  of  God  does  not  bring  salvation  to  every  man,
but  because  all  men  do  not  receive  the  gift  which  the  grace  of  God  has  brought  to
them.    There  are  necessarily  two  parties  to  such  a  transaction.     Before  any  benefit
can  accrue  from  a  gift  there  must  be  a  willingness  on  the  one  side  to  give,  and  a
willingness  on  the  other  side  to  receive,  and  unless  there  be  both  of  these  conditions
reahsed  no  satisfactory  result  can  ensue.    Here  then  is  a  question  for  us  all :  What
has  the  grace  of  God,  which  is  designed  to  have  a  saving  effect  upon  all  men,  done
for  us  ?    Has  it  saved  as,  or  only  enhanced  our  condemnation  ?    Now  we  maintain
that  the  enjoyment  of  the  knowledge  of  salvation  by  the  remission  of  sins  is  needed
before  oar  experience  can  assume  a  definitely  Christian  form.    The  first  thing  that
grace  does  is  to  bring  salvation  to  me ;  and  until  I  accept  this  I  am  not  in  a  posi<
tion  to  accept  her  other  gifts.     Grace  cannot  teach  until  I  am  in  a  position  to  learn,
and  I  am  not  in  a  position  to  learn  until  I  am  relieved  from  anxiety  and  fear  as  to
my  spiritual  condition.     Go  into  yonder  prison,  and  set  that  wretched  felon  in  the
condemned  cell  to  andertake  some  literary  work,  if  he  is  a  literary  man.    Put  the
pen  into  his  hand,  place  the  ink  and  the  paper  before  him.     He  fiings  down  the  pea
in  disgust.    How  can  he  set  to  work  to  write  a  history  or  to  compose  a  romance,
however  talented  or  gifted  he  may  be  by  nature,  so  long  as  the  hangman's  rope  is
over  his  head  and  the  prospect  of  a  coming  execution  staring  him  in  the  face  7
Obviously  the  man's  thoughts  are  all  in  another  direction — the  question  of  his  own
personal  safety  preoccupies  his  mind.    Give  him  that  pen  and  paper  to  write  letters
which  he  thinks  may  influence  persons  in  high  quarters  with  a  view  to  obtaining  a
reprieve,  and  his  pen  will  move  quickly  enough.    I  can  understand  his  filling  up
reams  of  paper  on  that  subject,  but  not  on  any  other.     Is  it  likely  that  a  God  who
has  shown  His  favour  towards  us  by  the  gift  of  His  own  Son  should  desire  to  keep
OS  in  uncertainty  as  to  the  effects  of  that  grace  upon  our  own  case  ?    Does  not  the
very  fact,  that  it  is  grace  that  has  brought  salvation  to  us,  render  it  certain  that  it
must  be  in  the  mind  of  God  that  we  should  have  the  full  enjoyment  of  it  ?    Let  as
rather  ask,  how  can  we  obtain  this  knowledge  of  salvation,  this  inward  conviction
that  all  is  well  ?    The  answer  is  a  very  simple  one.    Grace  brings  salvation  within
our  reach  as  something  designed  for  us.    Not  to  tantalize  us  by  exciting  desires
destined  never  to  be  realised,  but  in  order  that  we  may  have  the  full  benefit  of  it —
the  free  favour  of  God  has  brought  salvation  within  our  reach  to  the  very  doors  of
our  hearts.     Surely  we  dishonour  God  when  we  for  a  moment  suppose  that  He  does
cot  intend  us  to  enjoy  the  blessing  which  His  grace  brings  to  us.     All  the  deep  and
precious  lessons  that  grace  has  to  teach  are,  we  may  say,  simply  so  many  deductions
from  the  first  great  object  lesson — Calvary.    It  is  through  the  Cross  of  Christ  that
the  grace  of  God  hath  reached  a  sinful  world ;  it  is  on  the  Cross  that  grace  is  revealed
and  by  that  Cross  that  its  reality  is  demonstrated.    But  we  may  also  add  that  it  is  in
the  Cross  that  grace  lies  hidden.    Yes,  it  is  all  there ;  but  faith  has  to  search  the
storehouse  and  examine  the  hidden  treasure,  and  find  out  more  and  more  of  the
completeness  of  that  great  salvation  which  the  grace  of  God  has  brought  within  our
reach ;  nor  shall  we  ever  know  fully  all  that  has  thus  been  brought  within  our  reach
until  we  find  ourselves  saved  at  last  with  an  everlasting  salvation — saved  from  all
approach  of  evil  or  danger  into  that  kingdom  of  glory  which  grace  has  opened  to  all
believers.     (W.  H.  M.  H.  Aitken,  M.A.)        The  grace  of  God  in  bringing  salvation  to
all  men : — I.  The  obioin  of  salvation.     1.  Man  did  not  deserve  it.     2.  It  was  un-
solicited.    3.  It  was  entirely  the  result  of  Divine  grace.     The  grace  of  God — (1)
Made  all  the  arrangements  necessary  for  salvation.    Devised  the  astounding  plan.
Fixed  upon  the  means,  time,  &c.     The  grace  of  God — (2)  Brought  the  author  of
salvation.    "  Ye  know  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  Ac.  (2  Cor.  viii.  9).    (3)
It  brought  the  message  of  salvation.     Gospel  is  emphatically  the  gospel  of  the  grace
of  God  (Acts  XX.  24).    (4)  It  brings  the  application  of  salvation  to  the  souL    We  are
called  by  His  Rrace — justified  freely  by  His  grace — sanctified  by  His  grace — kept  and
preserved  by  His  grace — and  the  topstone  is  brought  on  amid  ascriptions  of  "  Grace,


CHAP,  n.]  TITUS,  97

grace  nnto  it."  11.  The  extent  of  salyation.  The  grace  of  God  bringeth  salva-
tion— 1.  To  all  classes  and  degrees  of  men.  To  the  rich  and  the  poor ;  noble  and
ignoble;  monarch  and  the  peasant;  the  ruler  and  the  slave.  2.  To  men  of  all
grades  of  moral  guilt.  It  includes  the  moralist,  and  excludes  not  the  profane.  3.
To  men  of  all  ages.  III.  The  infltjenoe  of  salvation  on  the  moral  chabacteb  or
HAN.  It  teaches  and  enforces  the  necessity  of — 1.  The  abandonment  of  ungodliness
and  worldly  lusts.  2.  Sobriety  of  conduct.  3.  Righteousness  of  life.  4.  Godli-
ness of  heart.  Application :  1.  How  we  should  rejoice  in  the  riches  and  fulness  of
Divine  grace.  2.  How  necessary  that  we  cordially  receive  the  invaluable  boon  it
presents.  3.  And  how  important  that  we  practically  exemplify  the  moral  lessons  it
communicates.  {J.  Burns,  D.D.)  The  gospel  described  : — 1.  A  choice  and  ex-
cellent description  of  the  gospel ;  it  is  the  grace  of  God,  that  is  the  doctrine  of  God's
free  grace  and  gratuitous  favour  declared  in  Christ  to  poor  sinners.  2.  The  jo^ul
message  which  the  gospel  brings,  and  that  is  salvation ;  the  gospel  makes  a  gracious
tender  of  salvation,  and  that  universally  to  lost  and  undone  sinners.  3.  The  clear
light  and  evidence  that  it  does  hold  forth  this  message  in  and  by ;  it  has  appeared
or  shined  forth  like  the  day-star  or  the  rising  sun.  4.  The  extent  of  its  glorious
beams,  how  far  they  reach.  It  is  tendered  to  all  without  restriction  or  limitation.  (1)
As  to  nations,  Jew  or  Gentile.  (2)  As  to  persons,  rich  or  poor,  bond  or  free.  (3)
Without  restriction  in  reference  to  the  degree  of  their  graces.  5.  The  great  lesson
which  the  gospel  teaches,  negative  and  positive,  (a)  Negative,  to  deny  ungodliness
and  worldly  lusts ;  where,  by  ungodliness,  understand  all  sins  committed  against
the  first  table ;  by  worldly  lusts,  all  sins  committed  against  the  second  table  ;  called
worldly  lusts  because  the  object  of  them  is  worldly  things,  and  because  they  are  the
lusts  of  worldly  men.  (b)  Positive,  to  live :  (1)  Soberly :  he  begins  with  our  daty
to  ourselves,  then  to  onr  neighbour,  and  last  of  all  to  Gk)d,  and  so  proceeds  from  the
easier  to  the  harder  duties  :  and  observe  the  connection,  soberly  and  righteously  and
godly,  not  disjunctively ;  as  if  to  live  soberly,  righteously,  or  in  pretence  godly,  were
sufficient.  A  sobriety  in  speech,  in  behaviour,  in  apparel,  in  eating  and  drinking,
in  recreations,  and  in  the  enjoyment  of  lawful  satisfactions.  (2)  Bighteously,
exercising  justice  and  charity  towards  our  neighbour ;  he  that  is  uncharitable  is
onjust  and  unrighteous,  and  the  unrighteous  shall  no  more  enter  into  the  kingdom
of  God  than  the  unholy ;  and  all  a  person's  pretences  to  godliness  are  but  hypocrisy
without  righteousness  toward  our  neighbour.  (3)  Godly,  godliness  has  an  internal
and  external  part ;  the  internal  and  inward  part  of  godliness  consists  in  a  right
knowledge  of  Him,  in  a  fervent  love  unto  Him,  in  an  entire  trust  and  confidence  in
Him,  in  an  holy  fear  to  offend  Him,  in  subjecting  our  wills  entirely  to  Him,  in  holy
longings  for  the  fruition  and  enjoyment  of  Him.  The  external  and  outward  part
of  godliness  consists  in  adoration  and  bodily  worship  ;  this  is  due  to  God  from  us ;
He  was  the  Creator  of  the  body  as  well  as  of  the  soul,  and  will  glorify  the  body  as
well  as  the  soul;  therefore  we  are  to  glorify  God  with  o>ir  bodies,  and  with  our
spirits,  which  are  the  Lord's.  6.  The  time  when  and  the  place  where  this  lesson  is
to  be  learned,  in  this  present  world.  Here  is  the  place,  and  now  is  the  time  when
this  duty  of  living  soberly,  righteously,  and  godly  in  this  present  world  is  to  be
performed  by  us.  Learn,  that  a  sober,  righteous,  and  godly  life  in  this  present
world  is  absolutely  necessary  in  order  to  our  obtaining  the  happiness  and  glory
of  the  world  to  come.  {W.  Burkitt,  M.A.)  The  grace  of  God: — Although  the
doctrine  of  the  Churches  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament  be  the  very  selfsame  in
regard — 1.  Of  the  author,  who  is  God  ;  2.  Substance  and  matter,  which  is  perfect
righteousness  required  in  both  ;  3.  Scope  and  end  to  the  justification  of  a  sinner
'before  God  ;  yet  are  there  diverse  accidental  differences  between  them  which,  that  we
may  the  better  understand  both  the  offices  and  the  benefits  by  Christ,  are  meet  to  be
known.  Some  of  them  we  shall  note  out  of  these  words  as  we  shall  come  unto  them.
(1)  The  first  difference  is  in  that  the  gospel  is  called  grace,  which  word  the  law
acknowledgeth  not ;  nay,  these  two  aje  opposed,  to  be  under  the  law  and  to  be  under
grace.  To  be  under  the  law  is  not  to  be  under  it  as  a  rule  of  life,  for  so  all  believers
on  earth,  yea  the  saints  and  angels  in  heaven,  are  under  it ;  but  to  be  under  the
yoke  of  it,  which  neither  we  nor  our  fathers  were  able  to  bear.  For  to  omit  the
least  part  of  the  yoke,  standing  in  the  observation  of — 1.  Many,  2.  Costly,  3.  Labor-
ions,  4.  Burdensome  ceremonies,  what  a  killing  letter  is  the  law  which  commandeth
inward  and  perfect  righteousness,  for  nature  and  actions,  and  that  in  our  own
persons  ?  which  promiseth  life  upon  no  other  condition  but  of  works,  ••  Do  this,
and  live  " ;  and  these  must  be  such  as  must  be  framed  according  to  that  perfect  light
and  holiness  of  nature  in  which  we  are  created,  which  wrappeth  us  under  the  curse

7


98  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n.

of  sin.  Now  to  be  under  grace  is  to  be  freed  from  all  this  bondage ;  not  only  from
those  elements  and  radiments  of  the  world,  bat  eBpecially — 1.  When  the  yoke  of
personal  obedience  to  justification  is  by  grace  translated  from  believers  to  the  person
of  Christ  our  surety,  so  that  He  doing  the  law  we  might  live  by  it.  2.  When  duties
are  not  urged  according  to  our  perfect  estate  of  creation,  but  according  to  the  present
measure  of  grace  received ;  not  according  to  full  and  perfect  righteousness,  but  ac-
cording to  the  sincerity  and  truth  of  the  heart,  although  from  weak  and  imperfect
faith  and  love :  not  as  meriting  anything,  but  only  as  testifying  the  truth  of  our
conversion,  in  all  which  the  Lord  of  His  grace  accepteth  the  will  for  the  deed  done.

3.  When  the  most  heavy  curse  of  the  law  is  removed  from  our  weak  shoulders
and  laid  upon  the  back  of  Jesus  Christ,  even  as  His  obedience  is  translated  unto  us,
and  thus  there  is  no  condemnation  to  those  that  are  in  Him.  4.  When  the  strength
of  the  law  is  abated  so  as  believers  may  send  it  to  Christ  for  performance,  for  it
cannot  vex  us  as  before  the  ministry  of  grace  it  could  ;  which  is  another  law,  namely
of  faith,  to  which  we  are  bound,  the  which  not  only  can  command  us  as  the  former,
but  also  give  grace  and  power  to  obey  and  perform  in  some  acceptable  sort  the  command-
ment, iuodthisis  thedoctrineof  grace  which  we  are  made  partakers  of.  {T.  Taylor,D.D.)
Genuine  Christianity: — I.  A  ibue  and  qbaphio  outlinb  of  doctbine  essential
TO  SALVATION.  1.  How  ancieut  the  purpose  of  this  grace.  2.  How  great  and
glorious  its  nature.  3.  How  benignant  its  design.  4.  How  unrestricted  its  mani-
festation,     n.   A  VIEW   OF  THOSE   WORKS  WHICH   ACCOMPANY  SALVATION.      1.    Vigilant

self-denial.    2.  The  right  governance  of  the  moral  relations  of  life.    IH.  Motives

BT   WHICH     COMBINED   FAITH   AND    OBEDIENCE   HAT   BE     SUSTAINED  AND    ENFOBCED.       1.

The  temporary  nature  of  the  discipline.  2.  The  self-sacrifice  of  Christ.  3.  The
future  manifestation  of  Christ.  {Jas.  Foster,  B.A.)  The  soul-culture  of  the
world  t — L  The  insteument  of  true  soul-culturb.  "  The  grace  of  God,"  i.e.,  the
gospel.  1.  It  is  the  love  of  God.  2.  The  love  of  God  to  save.  3.  The  love  of  God
revealed  to  alL  II.  The  process  of  true  soul-cuiiTube.  1.  The  renunciation  of
a  wrong  course.  2.  The  adoption  of  a  right  course.  3.  The  fixing  of  the  heart
upon  a  glorious  future.  HI.  The  end  of  tbue  soul-culture.  1.  Moral  redemp-
tion.   2.  Spiritual  restoration  to  Christ.     3.  Complete  devotedness  to  holy  labour.

4.  The  self-sacrifice  of  Christ.  His  gift  teaches  the  enormity  of  moral  evil.  (D.
Thomas,  D.D.)  The  souVs  rest: — ^When  the  illustrious,  learned,  and  wealthy
John  Selden  was  dying,  he  said  to  Archbishop  Usher,  "  I  have  surveyed  most  of  the
learning  that  is  among  the  sons  of  men,  and  my  study  is  filled  with  books  and
manuscripts  (he  had  8,000  volumes  in  his  library)  on  various  subjects ;  but  at
present  I  cannot  recollect  any  passage  out  of  all  my  books  and  papers  whereon  I
can  rest  my  soul,  save  this  from  the  sacred  Scriptures :  ♦  The  grace  of  God  that
bringeth  salvation,' "  &c.  Hath  appeared  to  all  men. — Love  made  visible : — I.  The
apostle  sets  forth,  as  the  foundation  of  all,  the  appearance  of  tee  oraoe  of  God.
Grace,  the  theological  term  which,  to  many  of  us,  sounds  so  cold  and  unreal  and
remote,  is  all  throbbing  with  tenderness  and  warm  with  life  if  we  understand  what  it
means.  It  means  the  pulsation  of  the  heart  of  God  pouring  a  tide  of  gracious  love  on
sinful  men,  who  do  not  deserve  one  drop  of  it  to  fall  upon  them,  and  who  dwell  so  far
beneath  His  loftiness  that  the  love  is  made  still  more  wonderful  by  the  condescension
which  makes  it  possible.  The  lofty  loves  the  low,  and  the  love  is  grace.  The  righteous
loves  the  sinful,  and  the  love  is  grace.  Then,  says  my  text,  there  is  something
which  has  made  this  Divine  love  of  God,  so  wonderful  in  its  loftiness,  and  equally
wonderful  in  its  passing  by  men's  sinfulness,  visible  to  men.  The  grace^has  "  ap-
peared." Scientists  can  make  sounds  visible  by  the  symmetrical  lines  into  which
heaps  of  sand  upon  a  bit  of  paper  are  cast  by  the  vibration  of  a  string.  God  has
made  invisible  love  plain  to  the  sight  of  all  men,  because  He  has  sent  us  His  Son.
II.  Notice  the  universal  sweep  of  this  grace.  The  words  should  be  read,  *'  The
grace  of  God,  that  bringeth  salvation  to  all  men,  hath  appeared."  It  brings  salva-
tion to  all  men.  It  does  not  follow  from  that,  that  all  men  take  the  salvation  which
it  brings.  Notice  the  underlying  theory  of  a  universal  need  that  Ues  in  these  words.
The  grace  brings  salvation  to  all  men,  because  all  men  need  that  more  than  any-
thing else.  In  the  notion  of  salvation  there  lies  the  two  ideas  of  danger  and  of
disease.  It  is  healing  and  it  is  safety  ;  therefore,  if  it  be  offered  to  all,  it  is  because
all  men  are  sick  of  a  sore  disease,  and  stand  in  imminent  and  deadly  peril.  That
is  the  only  theory  of  men's  deepest  need  which  is  true  to  the  facts  of  human
existence.  III.  Notice  the  gbkat  work  of  this  grace  made  visible.  It  seems  to
be  a  wonderful  descent  from  "  the  grace  of  God  which  bringeth  salvation  to  all  hath
appeared  "  to  "  teaching  us."     Is  that  all  ?    Is  that  worth  much  ?    If  by  "  teach-


OHAP.  n.]  TITUS,  99

iDg  "  we  mean  merely  a  reiteration  in  words,  addressed  to  the  understanding  or  the
heart,  of  the  great  principles  of  morality  and  conduct,  it  is  a  very  poor  thing,  and
a  tremendous  come-down  from  the  apostle's  previous  words.  Such  an  office  is  not
what  the  world  wants.  To  try  to  cure  the  world's  evils  by  teaching,  in  that  narrow
sense  of  the  expression,  is  something  like  trying  to  put  a  fire  out  by  reading  theBiot
Act  to  the  flames.  You  want  fire  engines,  and  not  paper  proclamations,  in  order  to
stay  their  devouring  course.  But  it  is  to  be  noticed  that  tiie  expression  here,  in  the
original,  means  a  great  deal  more  than  that  kind  of  teaching.  It  means  correcting,
or  chastening.  Our  Physician  has  in  His  great  medicine-chest  balm  and  bandages
for  all  wounds.  But  He  has  also  a  terrible  array  of  gleaming  blades  with  sharp
edges,  and  of  materials  for  cauterising  and  burning  away  proud  flesh.  And  if  ever
we  are  to  be  made  good  and  pure,  as  God  wants  to  make  us,  it  must  be  through  a
discipline  that  will  often  be  agony,  and  will  often  be  pain,  and  against  the  grain.
For  the  one  thing  that  God  wants  to  do  with  men  is  to  bring  their  wills  into  entire
harmony  with  His.  And  we  cannot  have  that  done  without  much  treatment  which
will  inflict  in  love  beneficent  pain.  No  man  can  live  beside  that  Lord  without  being
rebuked  moment  by  moment,  and  put  to  wholesome  shame  day  by  day,  when  he
contrasts  himself  with  that  serene  and  radiant  pattern  and  embodiment  of  all  per-
fection. And  no  man  can  receive  into  his  heart  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come,
the  might  of  an  indwelling  Spirit,  without  that  Spirit  exercising  as  its  first  function
that  which  Christ  Himself  told  us  it  would  perform  ^John  xvi.  8).  {A.  Maclaren,
DJ).)  The  universal  offer  of  salvation: — Salvation  is  offered  to  all  men — I.  Ibbe-
BPECTiTE  OF  THEiB  VARYING  MOBAL  CONDITIONS.  Though  "  all  havc  sinned,"  yet  all  are
not  sinners  in  the  same  degree,  or  after  the  same  fashion.  Sinners  are  of  many
kinds— young,  old,  beginners  in  offences,  hardened  in  crime,  sinners  through  igno-
rance, against  Hght,  <&c.  H.  Because  aIiL  men  need  it.  God  recognises  degrees
of  guilt  and  punishes  "  according  to  transgression."  There  are  "few  stripes"  and
«'  many  stripes  "  ;  yet  all  need  salvation,  and  all  men  may  have  it.  IH.  Because
God  loves  all.  He  is  no  respecter  of  persons,  and  has  no  dehght  in  the  death  of
him  that  dieth.  "  God  so  loved  the  world,"  &o.  IV.  Because  Christ  died  for
ALL.  (F.  Wagstaff.)  The  gospel  Jor  all  sorts  of  men : — It  bringeth  salvation
to  all  men,  that  is,  all  kinds  and  conditions  of  men,  not  to  every  particular  or
singular  of  the  kinds,  but  to  all  the  sorts  and  kinds  of  men,  to  servants  as  well
as  masters,  to  Gentile  as  well  as  Jew,  to  poor  as  well  as  rich.  Thus  i  s  it  said  that
God  would  have  all  men  saved,  that  is,  of  all  sorts  of  men  some.  So  Christ  healed
all  diseases,  that  is,  all  kinds  of  diseases ;  and  the  Pharisees  tithed  all  herbs,  that
is,  all  kinds ;  for  they  took  not  every  particular  herb  for  tithe,  but  took  the  tenth  of
every  kind,  and  not  the  tenth  of  every  herb.  (T.  Taylor,  D.D.)  TJie  grace  of
$alvation  appearing  to  all  men : — The  grace  of  God  is  the  prime  mover  in  the  work
of  salvation.  It  "bringeth  salvation."  Man  had  nothing  to  pay  for  it,  and  man
could  not  merit  it.  I.  But  in  what  respects  does  the  grace  of  God  bring  salva-
tion ?  Here  we  remark  generally,  that  it  brought  it  forward  in  the  decree  from
everlasting.  Again,  the  grace  of  God  brought  salvation  forward  another  stage,  by
publishing  the  promise  of  it  to  man  after  his  ruinous  fall.  This  promise  was  to  be
the  ground  of  man's  faith  and  hope  in  God ;  and  these  graces  were  necessary  for
giving  sinners  an  interest  in  the  Divine  salvation.  The  grace  of  God  advanced
salvation  work  still  further  when  it  brought  the  First-begotten  into  the  world.  It
was  on  this  occasion  that  it  was  purchased.  To  gain  it,  Christ  had  to  sustain  the
rejections  of  men,  the  malice  and  wrath  of  evil  spirits,  and  the  wrath  of  His  heavenly
Father.  No  less  conspicuous  is  the  grace  of  God  in  applying  to  the  soul  the  benefits
of  purchased  redemption.  It  is  not  when  persons  have  ceased  from  the  love  and
commission  of  sin,  that  the  Holy  Spirit  comes  with  power  to  call  them  effectually,
and  to  unite  them  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  No ;  He  addresses  HimseK  to  His
work  when  sinners  are  dead  in  trespasses  and  in  sins — alienated  from  the  life  of
God — without  God  and  without  hope  in  the  world.  But  there  is  still  another  stage
of  the  grace  of  God  that  bringeth  salvation,  and  it  is  the  time  when  Christ  will
raise  His  people  from  the  dead,  and  make  them  sit  visibly  as  they  now  sit  repre-
sentatively in  heavenly  places  with  Himself.     II.  We  shall  now  turn  your  atteution

to   THE  nature  of    THE    SALVATION  WHICH  THE    GRACE  OF  GoD  THUS  BRINGS  TO  SINNERS.

And  here  you  will  notice  in  general  that  the  term  salvation  implies  a  state  of  danger,
or  of  actual  immersion  in  suffering ;  and  denotes  the  averting  of  the  danger,  or  the
deliverance  from  the  suffering.  We  say  of  a  man  who  has  been  delivered  from  a
house  on  fire,  that  he  has  been  saved.  We  also  assert  of  him  who  has  been  drawn
from  a  shipwreck  and  brought  in  life  to  land,  that  he  has  been  saved.    And  in  Uke


100  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m

manner,  we  affirm  in  regard  to  the  man  who  has  been  set  free  from  transgression
and  its  train  of  consequences,  that  he  has  obtained  salvation.  More  particularly,
yon  will  observe — 1.  That  it  is  a  salvation  from  the  guilt  of  sin.  2.  It  includes
deliverance  from  the  defilement  of  sin.  3.  Deliverance  from  the  power  of  j\q.  4.
Deliverance  from  the  very  being  of  sin.  5.  Liberation  from  the  curse  of  Uod.  6.
Freedom  from  the  wrath  of  God.  III.  We  have  thus  given  you  an  outline  of  the
ealvation  spoken  of  in  the  text,  we  shaUj  now  inquibe  in  weui  respects  it  ajpeabs
TO  AiiL  MEN.  There  is  one  class  of  persons  to  whom  salvation  does  more  than
appear ;  for  they  shall  enjoy  it  in  all  its  length  and  breadth.  The  chosen  of  God
shall  be  set  free  from  the  guilt,  the  power,  and  being  of  sin,  and  redeemed  from  the
wrath  and  curse  of  God.  But  there  are  some  respects  in  which  the  salvation  which
they  enjoy,  presents  itself  to  the  view  of  others,  who  never  come  to  the  actual
enjoyment  of  its  precious  blessings.  1.  The  grace  that  bringeth  salvation  appears
to  all,  because  time  and  space  are  given  them  for  seeking  and  obtaining  it.  2.  The
grace  of  salvation  appears  to  all  in  the  inspired  Word  and  appointed  ordinances.
1.  The  grace  of  salvation  appears  to  all,  inasmuch  as  mercy  is  offered  to  them  with-
out distinction.  4.  The  grace  that  bringeth  salvation  appears  to  all,  in  the  common
operations  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  From  our  subject  see — (1)  Ground  for  accepting  the
salvation  of  the  gospel.  (2)  Learn  reason  to  fear  lest  we  should  not  enter  the
heavenly  rest  through  unbehef.  (3)  Ground  of  gratitude  on  the  part  of  the  people
of  God.  They  are  distinguished  above  the  rest  of  mankind.  While  salvation
appears  to  others,  it  is  possessed  and  enjoyed  by  them.    We  now  propose— IV.  To

INQUIRE  INTO  WHAT  IS  MEANT  Vi  THE  TERMS  ALL  MEN.      As  tO  the  import  of   the  tcrmS

"  all  men,"  you  will  observe — 1.  That  they  cannot  mean  every  individual  of  our
race.  It  is  matter  of  fact  that  many,  both  in  the  days  of  the  apostles  were,  and  in
our  own  time  are,  whoUy  unenlightened  by  the  good  news  of  salvation.  2.  The
grace  of  God  appears  to  men  of  all  countries.  This  is  no  contradiction  of  what  we
formerly  said;  for  although  salvation  has  not  yet  been  shown  to  all  the  individuals
of  our  race,  yet  some  of  almost  every  kingdom  under  heaven  have  been  made
acquainted  with  the  gospel  of  God's  Son ;  and  it  is  matter  of  promise  that  all  the
ends  of  the  earth  shall  yet  see  the  salvation  of  our  God.  3.  The  grace  of  God
appears  to  all  kinds  of  men.  None  are  excluded  from  it  who  do  not  exclude  them*
selves.  It  is  presented  to  persons  of  all  ages  and  all  ranks,  to  men  of  every  kind  of
culture  and  attainment.  Nor  does  the  gospel  inquire  into  a  man's  character,  in
order  to  discover  whether  he  is  entitled  to  salvation.  Grace  is  offered  to  the  moral
and  immoral — to  the  virtuous  and  the  vicious.    V.  We  are  now  to  investigate

THE   RESPECTS   IN  WHICH   THE   GRACE  OF   GoD  APPEARS  TO   MEN  IN   GENERAL.       Our  text

does  not  assert  that  the  grace  of  God  is  enjoyed  by  all,  but  only  that  it  appears  to
them.  They  behold  in  somewhat  the  saiue  manner  as  Balaam  said  he  would  see
the  star  that  was  to  arise  out  of  Judah :  "  I  shall  see  Him,  but  not  now  ;  I  shall
behold  Him,  but  not  nigh."  It  is  but  a  distant  sight  that  the  unregenerate  obtain
of  the  grace  of  salvation.  It  appears  to  them  as  a  beauteous  and  glowing  star  in
the  remote  horizon,  which  they  may  admire,  but  do  not  reach.  1.  Time  and  space
are  given  them  for  accepting  salvation.  2.  The  grace  of  God  appears  to  men  in
general  in  their  enjoyment  of  Divine  ordinances.  Ordinances  are  the  appointed
means  of  salvation.  They  are  not  effectual  of  themselves  to  the  communication  of
saving  benefit ;  but  they  are  the  medium  through  which  spiritual  blessings  are  im-
parted. 3.  The  grace  of  God  appears  to  all  in  the  offer  of  salvation  to  every  indi-
vidual. 4.  The  grace  of  God  appears  to  men  in  general  in  the  common  operations
of  the  Spirit.  5.  The  grace  of  God  appears  to  men  in  general  in  the  impressions  of
Divine  truth  upon  the  heart.  (1)  What  a  great  privilege  is  possessed  by  the  hearers
of  the  gospel.  (2)  Keason  for  great  anxiety.  Look  after  the  evidences  of  your  real
Christianity.  (A.  Rosa,  M.A.)  All  men  must  come  to  the  grace  of  salvation: —
The  American  officer  who  was  appointed  to  measure  the  boundaries  of  Mexico  and
the  United  States  tells  us  touchingly  that  the  springs  which  occur  at  intervals  of
sixty  or  a  hundred  miles  apart  in  the  desert  are  perforce  the  meeting-places  of  life.
All  living  creatures  must  gather  there  or  die  in  an  agony  of  thirst.  There
comes  the  American  panther,  and  laps  luxuriously  the  stream  beside  the  timid
hare — the  one  tamed  by  thirst,  the  other  made  brave  by  thirst ;  and  there  come
the  traveller  and  the  trader  and  light  the  camp-fire  beside  the  wigwam  of
the  scalp-clothed  warrior  of  the  prairie,  civiUsed  by  thirst;  they  quaff  the
waters  together.  So  the  waters  of  life  should  be  resorted  to  by  all  mankind.
Teaching  ub  that  denying  ungodliness. — Grace  our  teacher  : — The  apostle  proceed*
k>  state  that  grace  not  only  saves  but  undertakes  our  training ;  and  this,  of  oouise»


OHA».  n.]  TITUS.  101

IB  a  life-long  work,  a  work  that  will  only  be  concluded  when  grace  ends  in  glory.
Now,  obviously,  if  this  work  is  to  be  done  as  it  should  be  done,  the  soai  must,  first
of  all,  be  in  a  position  to  receive  teaching.  If  grace  is  really  to  undertake  our
training,  and  to  teach  us  such  lessons  as  only  grace  can  teach,  surely  she  must  first
of  all  calm  the  tumultuous  misgivings  which  fill  our  hearts  ;  and  until  grace  cias
done  this  for  us,  how  can  she  instruct  us  ?  If  I  am  learning  my  lesson  with  a  view
to  obtain  grace,  it  cannot  be  grace  that  is  acting  the  part  of  the  teacher,  for  she  can
only  teach  where  she  has  been  already  obtained.  Grace  cannot  at  one  and  the  same
moment  be  my  teacher,  and  also  that  to  obtain  which  I  am  being  taught,  for  this,
of  course,  involves  a  contradiction  in  terms.  Hence,  as  we  have  said,  unless  this
first  point  be  settled,  and  we  know  that  we  are  in  the  enjoyment  of  God's  salvation,
we  are  not  in  a  position  to  learn  from  grace,  whoever  else  it  be  that  we  may  learn
from.  And  thus  it  comes  to  pass,  as  a  matter  of  simple  fact,  that  a  large  number
of  nominal  Christians  are  taught,  indeed,  after  a  certain  fashion,  but  they  are  not
taught  by  grace.  They  seek  to  learn  of  Christ  in  order  that  they  may  obtain  the
grace  of  Christ ;  they  endeavour  to  become  conformed  to  Christ  in  order  that  their
resemblance  to  Christ  may  dispose  the  heart  of  God  to  regard  them  with  the  same
favourable  consideration  which  He  bestowed  on  Him  whom  they  seek  to  resemble.
Such  persons  are  under  the  law.  Grace,  then,  is  to  be  our  instructress,  and  she  has
plenty  of  work  before  her  in  the  training  and  preparation  of  the  human  subject  for
the  glorious  destiny  which  lies  before  him.  Then  only  is  it  possible,  after  the
adoption  has  taken  place,  for  the  education  to  begin.  With  these  thoughts
in  our  mind  we  will  proceed  to  consider  grace  as  our  teacher,  and  first  we  will
point  out  the  contrast  between  the  training  of  grace  and  the  operation  of  law.
Before  the  grace  of  God  appeared  men  were  under  another  teacher,  and  his
name  was  "Law."  Grace  is  our  teacher,  and  she  teaches  us  far  more  power-
fully,  far  more  efficiently,  and  far  more  perfectly  than  law  can  ever  teach
us.  But  observe,  she  will  not  share  her  office  of  teacher  with  law.  The
Christian  is  not  to  be  a  kind  of  spiritual  mongrel,  nor  is  his  experience  to  be  of
a  mongrel  type— part  legal,  part  spiritual,  part  savouring  of  bondage,  part  savouring
of  liberty :  but  the  design  of  God  is  that  we  should  stand  fast  in  the  liberty  where-
with Christ  has  made  us  free,  and  never  allow  ourselves,  even  for  a  moment,  to  be
entangled  in  a  yoke  of  bondage.  How  many  Christians  are  there  who  never  seem
to  have  perceived  that  we  are  no  more  to  be  saved  by  grace  and  then  trained  bylaw,
than  we  are  to  be  saved  by  law  and  then  trained  by  grace  ?  How  many  who  need
to  learn  that  as  we  are  to  be  saved  by  grace  at  first,  bo  we  are  to  be  trained  by  grace
afterwards,  untU  at  last  the  corner-stone  is  raised  apon  the  wondrous  structure
which  only  grace  has  reared,  amidst  shouts  of  "  Grace,  grace  unto  it  1 "  All  is  of
grace  from  first  to  last.  Now  in  order  that  we  may  very  clearly  apprehend  what
the  teaching  of  God's  word  is  on  this  subject,  let  UB  just  put  side  by  side  the  teach-
ing of  law  and  the  teaching  of  grace,  contrasting  them  one  with  the  other,  and  then
we  shall  see  how  much  to  the  advantage  of  grace  the  contrast  is.  Grace  teaches
better  than  law.  1.  She  teaches  better  than  law,  first,  because  she  delivers  to  us  a
fuller  and  more  distinct  exhibition  of  the  mind  and  will  of  God  as  regards  human
conduct,  based  upon  a  more  complete  manifestation  of  the  Divine  character.
Grace,  as  she  takes  possession  of  our  heart,  makes  us  acquainted  with  the  mind
and  will  of  God  in  a  manner  in  which  we  should  never  have  become  acquainted
with  these  by  the  mere  infiuence  and  teaching  of  law.  If  you  reflect  for  a  moment,
you  will  see  that  the  object  of  law  is  not  to  reveal  the  mind  and  the  will  of  the
Lawgiver,  but  to  lay  down  certain  positive  precepts  for  the  direction  of  those  to
whom  the  legislation  is  given,  or  for  whom  the  legislation  is  designed.  If  an  Act
of  Parliament  is  passed  by  the  British  Legislature,  by  both  Houses  of  Parliament,
and  a  person  were  to  ask,  "  What  is  the  object  of  this  Act?  "  nobody  would  reply,
"  To  reveal  to  the  British  public  what  is  the  mind  and  will  of  the  members  of  our
Legislature."  Nothing  of  the  kind.  The  object  of  the  Act  is  to  meet  some  specific
political  need,  or  to  give  some  specific  poHtical  direction  to  those  who  are  subject
to  its  authority.  Even  so  the  law  delivered  from  Sinai  was  not  primarily  designed
to  reveal  the  mind  and  will  of  God.  The  law  contained  only  a  very  partial  revela-
tion of  the  mind  and  will  of  God.  The  law  consisted  of  certain  positive  precepts,
which  were  given  in  the  infg,ncy  of  the  human  race  for  the  direction  and  guidance
of  mankind.  The  rules  and  precepts  which  are  laid  down  in  the  nursery  are  not
designed  to  exhibit  the  mind  and  will  of  the  parent,  although  they  are  in  accord-
ance with  that  mind  and  will.  They  are  laid  down  for  the  convenience  and  for  tixt
benefit  of  those  for  whom  the  rules  were   made.     A  child  knows  something


109  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  il

of  the  mind  and  will  of  the  parent  from  personal  oontact  with  that  parent,
bat  not  from  the  rules,  or  only  to  a  very  slender  degree  from  the  rules,  which
are  laid  down  for  its  guidance.  But  when  we  tarn  from  law  to  grace,  then  we
see  at  once  that  we  now  are  dealing  with  a  revelation  of  the  mind  and  the  will
of  Him  from  whom  the  grace  proceeds.  Each  act  of  favour  which  a  parent  bestows
upon  his  child,  or  which  a  sovereign  bestows  upon  his  subject,  is  a  revelation,  so  far
as  it  goes,  of  the  mind  and  will  of  the  parent  towards  that  particular  child,  or  of
the  sovereign  towards  that  particular  subject,  as  the  case  may  be.  And  even  so
every  act  of  grace  which  we  receive  from  Ood  is  a  revelation,  as  far  as  it  goes,  of
the  mind  and  will  of  God  towards  us  who  are  affected  by  the  act.  2.  Not  only  is
the  teaching  of  grace  in  itself  fuUer  and  more  complete,  but  we  are  still  more  im>
pressed  by  the  superiority  of  the  mode  in  which  the  teaching  is  given — the  form  in
which  this  new  doctrine  is  communicated.  In  the  decalogue  you  are  met  with,
"  ThoQ  shalt,"  or,  "■  Thou  shalt  not " — aod  you  observe  at  once  that  the  command
addresses  itself  directly  to  your  will.  Children  are  not  appealed  to  so  far  as  their
understandings  are  concerned.  They  are  told  to  act  in  a  certain  particular  way,
or  not  to  act  in  a  certain  particular  way ;  and  if  a  child  stops  to  reason
with  its  parents,  an  appeal  is  at  once  made  to  parental  authority.  "Yoar
dutj,  my  child,  is  to  obey,  not  to  understand."  Or,  once  again,  the  deca-
logue makes  no  appeal  to  the  affections  of  those  to  whom  it  was  delivered ;
it  deals  not  with  our  moral  states,  or  with  the  motives  from  which  actions  proceed;
it  simply  concerns  itself  with  those  actions,  and  speaks  to  the  will  which  is  re-
sponsible for  them.  But  when  we  turn  from  the  decalogue  to  the  sermon  on  the
mount  we  find  that  all  is  changed.  It  does  not  begin  with  a  direct  appeal  to  the
will,  and  yet  the  will  is  touched  by  a  stronger  influence,  and  moved  to  action  by  a
more  mighty  force,  than  ever  operated  npon  the  will  of  the  Israelites  at  Sinai.
Grace  is  our  teacher ;  and  we  observe  that  the  first  word  that  she  utters  in  this
lesson  is  a  blessing.  The  law  had  summed  up  its  all  of  teaching  with  a  curse —
"  CSarsed  is  he  that  continueth  not  in  all  things  that  are  written  in  this  book  to  do
them."  1.  She  does  not  say,  "  Ye  shall  be  blessed  if  ye  will  become  poor  in  spirit."
Grace  drives  no  bargains ;  but  she  explains  to  us  that  a  state  of  experience  from
which  most  of  us  would  naturally  shrink  is  a  state  of  actual  blesseduess.  Here  yoa
will  observe  that  she  appeals  to  our  enlightened  understanding,  indicating  to  na  a
new  and  a  higher  view  of  self-interest,  showing  that  God's  will,  so  far  from  being
opposed  to  our  truest  well-being,  is  in  complete  and  full  harmony  with  it ;  for  He
is  cor  Father,  and  He  loves  us,  and  therefore  desires  to  see  us  supremely  happy  like
Himself.  Does  she  not  teach  better  than  law  ?  Once  again.  Not  only  does  she
teach  by  giving  us  a  fuller  and  a  deeper  revelation  of  the  mind  and  will  of  God,  and
exhibiting  these  to  us  in  such  a  way  as  that  she  appeals  not  merely  to  our  own  will,
demanding  action,  but  to  our  understanding,  and,  through  our  understanding,  to
our  feelings,  kindling  holy  desires,  and  so  setting  the  will  at  work  almost  before  it
is  aware  that  it  is  working ;  but  she  does  more  than  all  this.  8.  Grace  teaches  us
by  setting  before  our  eyes  the  noblest  and  the  most  striking  of  all  exemplars.  Grace
speaks  to  us  through  human  lips ;  grace  reveals  herself  to  us  in  a  human  life.  Now
we  all  know  how  much  more  we  learn  from  a  personal  teacher  than  from  mere
abstract  directions.  To  watch  a  painter,  and  to  see  how  he  uses  his  brush,  and
carefully  and  minutely  notice  the  little  touches  that  give  so  much  character  and
power  to  the  product  of  his  genius,  does  far  more  for  us  in  the  way  of  making  us
painters  than  any  amount  of  mere  abstract  study  of  the  art  itself.  This  in  itself
may  suffice  to  show  the  superiority  of  grace  as  a  teacher.  While  the  thunder
sounded  from  Sinai  and  the  fiery  law  was  given,  God  still  remained  concealed.
When  the  veil  was  taken  away,  and  God  was  made  flesh  in  the  person  of  Christ,
human  eyes  were  allowed  to  look  at  Him,  and  human  ears  heard  the  sound  of  His
voice.  Perfection  stood  before  us  at  last  in  concrete  form.  When  grace  teaches
us,  she  always  teaches  ub  by  leading  up  to  Christ — by  exhibiting  fresh  views  of  His
perfection,  drawing  out  our  heart  in  admiration  towards  Him.  Happy  they  who
thus  set  themselves  to  learn  Christ  as  their  hfe-lesson,  not  as  a  mere  duty — that  is
legality — but  because  they  have  fallen  in  love  with  Christ !  Happy  they  who  learn
Christ  just  as  the  astronomer  learns  astronomy  1  Why  does  he  study  astronomy  ?
Would  a  Newton  tell  you  that  he  has  spent  all  those  hours  in  the  careful  examina-
tion of  the  phenomena  of  nature,  or  absorbed  in  profound  mathematical  calculations,
because  he  thought  it  his  duty  to  do  it  ?  And  even  so  those  who  are  under  the
teaching  of  grace  learn  Christ,  not  because  they  are  under  a  lepal  obligation  to  learn
Him,  but  because  they  are  mastered  by  an  enthusiastic  admiration  lor  the  Divine


esAt.  n.]  TITUS.  103

object.    There  is  a  beauty  in  Christ  which  wins  the  heart.     But  grace  does  more
than  even  this.  4.  She  not  only  sets  before  us  the  highest  of  all  exemplars,  but  she
establishes  the  closest  possible  relationship  between  that  Exemplar  and  ourselves.
Grace  is  not  content  with  merely  setting  an  example  before  us ;  she  takes  us  by  the
hand  and  introduces  us  to  the  Exemplar,  tells  us  not  only  that  this  Exemplar  ia
content  to  be  our  friend,  but,  more  wonderful  still,  that  He  is  content  to  be  one  with
us,  uniting  Himself  to  us,  that  His  strength  may  be  made  perfect  in  our  weakness.
"  Enow  ye  not,"  says  grace,  "  that  Christ  is  in  you  ?  "     In  you  ;  not  merely  outside
yoQ  as  a  source  of  power,  not  merely  beside  you  as  a  faithful  companion  on  life's
journey,  but  in  you.    "  Christ  is  your  Ufe,"  says  grace.    Do  you  prefer  to  be  under
the  law  ?  Do  you  really  elect  to  be  bondslaves  ?  You  say  your  prayers  in  the  morn-
ing ;  it  is  your  duty  to  do  it.     You  do  not  feel  comfortable  if  you  do  not  say  them.
You  go  to  church ;  but  it  is  not  because  you  love  to  go  and  cannot  stay  away,  or
because  you  want  to  know  more  and  more  of  God,  or  delight  in  His  worship.     "  I
was  glad  when  they  said  unto  me.  Let  us  go  into  the  house  of  the  Lord."    You  go
because  it  is  your  habit.    May  God  save  us  from  such  bondage  as  this  1    Let  us  re-
member that  all  the  while  that  we  are  thus  trifling  there  is  within  our  reach,  if  we
would  but  have  it,  the  glorious  hberty  of  the  children  of  God.  (IT.  H.  M.  H.  Aitken,
M.A.)       Our  teacher's  mode  of  teaching  : — You  will  observe  that  inasmuch  as  grace
proposes  to  form  Christ  in  our  nature,  she  proceeds  upon  an  altogether  different
method  from  that  which  is  followed  by  law.     Grace  purposes  to  make  the  tree  good,
and  then  concludes,  reasonably  enough,  that  the  fruit  will  be  good ;  whereas  law
aims,  so  to  speak,  rather  at  improving  the  fruit  than  at  regenerating  the  tree.
Grace  deals  with  the  springs  of  action,  and  not  primarily  with  action  itself.     She
deals  with  actions,  but  deals  with  them  only  indirectly.     She  begins  her  beneficent
operations  by  setting  right  that  part  of  our  nature  from  which  actions  proceed,  and
so,  from  first  to  last,  grace  is  chiefly  concerned  with  our  motives,  cheeking  the
sordid  and  the  unworthy,  and  developing  the  noble  and  the  godlike.  Now,  the  con-
trast here  lies  between  an  outward  objective  law  exhibited  to  the  human  under-
standing, claiming  the  homage  of  the  will,  and  an  inward  and  subjective  law  which
becames  part  and  parcel,  so  to  speak,  of  the  nature  of  him  who  receives  it.     Now
it  is  by  the  teaching  of  grace  that  this  new  state  of  things  is  introduced  ;  it  is  by
the  operation  of  grace  that  the  Father's  Law  is  to  be  written  upon  the  hearts  of  His
once  rebellious  children.     She  effects  this  blessed  result,  first  by  opening  up  to  us
through  His  Son  a  revelation  of  the  Father's  heart,  and  by  showing  us  how  deep
and  strong  is  His  love  towards  us;  in  the  second  place,  by  sweeping  away  aU
obstacles  between  the  Father's  love  and  our  experience  of  it ;  and  thus  in  the  third
place,  by  bringing  our  humanity  under  the  mighty  operation  of  the  Holy  Spirit  of
God,  whose  work  it  is  to  form  within  us  the  nature  of  Christ ;  and  once  again,  in
the  fourth  place,  grace  indelibly  inscribes  God's  law  upon  our  hearts  in  the  very
terms  of  her  own  manifestation.     For  it  is  from  the  Cross  that  Grace  is  manifested
and  it  is  involved  in  the  terms  of  its  acceptance,  that  to  the  cross  the  eye  of  him
who  accepts  it  should  be  turned.     We  have  just  said  that  tbe  first  effect  of  grace  is
to  reveal  the  Father's  love  to  us,  and  to  sweep  away  all  the  barriers  which  interfere
with  our  enjoyment  of  that  love  ;  by  this  first  act  of  grace  we  are  introduced  into
what  may  be  described  as  the  life  of  love — a  life  in  which  we  are  no  longer  influenced
by  mere  considerations  of  moral  or  legal  obligation.     The  love  of  God  shed  abroad
in  the  bsart,  like  the  genial  rays  of  the  sun,  produces  a  responsive  love  within  us
which  is  simply  the  refraction,  so  to  speak,  of  those  rays  ;  and  this  love,  the  gospel
teaches  us,  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law.   1.  But  love  fulfils  the  law,  not  by  a  conscious
effort  to  fulfil  it,  but  because  it  is  the  voluntary  response  of  the  soul  to  the  Person
from  whom  the  law  has  emanated.    Love  fulfils  the  law,  not  by  commanding  me  to
conform  my  conduct  to  a  certain  outward  and  objective  standard,  but  by  awakening
within  me  a  spiritual  passion  of  devotion  for  the  Person  of  Him  whose  will  is  law
to  those  who  love  Him.    Love  knows  nothing  about  mere  restriction  and  repression
— love  seeks  to  please,  not  to  abstain  from  displeasing ;  and  so  love  fulfils,  not
merely  abstains  from  breaking,  the  law.     Thus  we  see  that  love  takes  us  up  to  an
altogether  higher  level  than  law.    I  cannot  illustrate  this  point  better  than  by  re-
ferring for  a  moment  to  our  earthly  relationships  to  each  other.     There  are  certain
laws  which  are  apphcable  to  these  relationships.    For  instance,  there  are  certain
laws  of  our  land,  and  there  are  certain  laws  contained  in  the  Bible,  which  apply  to
the  natural  relationships  of  the  father  and  of  the  husband.  It  is  obviously  the  dutj
of  the  father  and  the  krasband  to  care  for  his  wife  and  his  children,  to  protect  them,
to  provide  foi  them,  to  endeavour  to  secure  their  well-being  so  far  as  in  him  lies.


104  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha*.  it

A  man  who  occupies  that  relationship  is  bound  to  do  not  less  than  this.  But  does
a  really  affectionate  husband  and  father  perform  those  various  offices  because  the
law  constrains  him  to  do  so,  because  it  is  his  legal  duty  to  do  them  f  Does  he  per-
form acts  of  tenderness  towards  his  wife  and  towards  his  child  because  the  law
demands  them  of  him  ?  Even  so  the  man  whom  grace  has  taught  finds  a  new  law
within  his  nature,  the  law  of  love,  in  surrendering  himself  to  which  he  fulfils  indeed
the  outward  and  objective  law,  not  because  he  makes  an  effort  to  fulfil  it,  but  because
he  is  true  to  his  new  nature.  So  that  I  may  say,  to  put  the  thing  concisely,  grace
is  not  opposed  to  law,  but  is  superior  to  law ;  and  the  man  who  lives  in  grace  lives
not  "  under  the  law,"  because  he  is  above  the  law.  We  imprison  the  wife-beater.
Why  t  Because  he  has  fallen  from  the  level  of  love  altogether,  and  thus  he  has
come  down  to  the  level  of  the  law,  and  is  within  the  reach  of  the  law.  Even  so  here
the  only  persons  who  are  not  under  law  are  the  persons  who  are  above  law.  Is  the
law  written  within  our  hearts,  or  is  it  only  revealed  from  without  ?  In  our  attempt
to  do  what  is  right,  do  we  simply  do,  or  endeavour  to  do,  what  is  right  because  we
have  recognised  a  certain  external  standard  of  duty,  and  axe  endeavouring  to  con-
form our  conduct  to  it  ?  Or  do  we  do  what  is  right  because  we  are  living  in  happy,
holy  intercourse  with  an  indwelling  God  in  whose  love  we  find  our  law,  and  in  sur-
rendering ourselves  to  the  influence  of  whose  love,  our  highest  enjoyment  ?  Herein
lies  the  test  of  the  difference  between  legal  experience  and  evangelical  experience.
2.  Bat  here  let  me  point  out  that  grace,  whilst  she  teaches  us  gently  and  tenderly,  and
in  a  very  different  way  from  law,  has  nevertheless  sanctions  of  her  own.  They  are
the  rewards  and  punishments  which  are  congruous  to  the  life  of  love,  whereas  the
rewards  and  punishments  of  legal  experience  are  such  as  are  congruous  to  the  life
of  legal  servitude.  We  shall  detect  in  a  moment  what  these  sanctions  are  if  we
reflect  upon  the  nature  of  our  relation  to  Him  who  has  now  become  to  as  our  law
of  life.  It  is  the  glory  of  the  life  of  love  that  we  have  something  to  love.  Our  lov«
is  not  merely  an  empty  abstraction,  nor  is  it  merely  a  wasted  energy  that  wanders
in  infinity ;  it  is  attracted  towards  a  living  Person.  In  the  enjoyment  of  His  society,
which  to  the  real  Christian  is  not  s  matter  of  sentiment,  but  a  matter  of  practical
experience,  the  soul  finds  its  highest  privilege.  Ah  1  grace  disciplines  as  well  as
teaches.  She  does  not  spoil  her  children.  She  is  not  like  some  fond  and  indulgent
mother,  who  fancies  that  she  is  benefiting  her  children  when  she  is  really  injuring
them  more  cruelly  than  in  any  other  way  she  possibly  could,  by  always  giving  them
their  own  way.  Grace  does  not  teach  us  to  be  negligent,  thoughtless,  heedless,  care-
less. Grace  does  not  whisper  in  onr  ears,  "  Now  that  you  are  saved  once  yoa  are
saved  for  ever.  Go  on,  and  never  mind  what  happens  to  yoa."  But  grace  teaches
us  very  delicately.  "  I  will  guide  thee,"  says  grace,  "  with  my  eye."  Grace  teaches
us.  She  brings  out  the  scales  of  the  sanctuary,  and  into  the  one  she  puts  our
worldly  idol — our  love  of  popularity,  oar  self-seeking,  our  slothfulness,  our  self-
indulgence,  our  pride  of  heart,  all  those  little  and  great  things  which  we  are  so  apt
to  set  against  the  society  of  Jesus,  or  rather  which  we  are  so  apt  to  allow  to  come
in  between  us  and  the  society  of  Jesus.  Yes,  grace  has  her  sanctions.  And  I  am
afraid  that  there  are  only  too  many  Christians  who  have  often  to  feel  the  force  of
those  dread  sanctions.  Their  whole  hfe  has  come  to  be  a  clouded,  unsatisfactory,
melancholy,  woe-begone  life.  How  many  Christians  are  there  of  whom  it  cannot
be  said  that  the  joy  of  the  Lord  is  their  strength !  And  why  ?  They  are  under  the
discipline  of  grace.  Yes,  God  does  not  forsake  them  altogether.  He  has  not  left
them  to  their  own  waywardness,  but  He  has  visited  their  offences  with  the  rod  and
their  sin  with  scourges.  They  cannot  be  happy  in  the  world  since  they  have  tasted
something  better  in  Christ.  Nor  can  they  be  happy  in  Christ  while  they  cast  long-
ing looks  towards  the  world.  But  grace  has  also  her  rewards,  and  I  love  to  think
of  them.  What  are  they  ?  The  eye,  perhaps,  wanders  on  towards  the  future,  and
we  think  of  the  glories  that  are  to  be  revealed.  In  this  present  world,  amidst  all .
the  trials  to  which  the  Christian  may  be  exposed,  the  school  of  grace  has  its  prizes.
Grace  has  her  prizes.  "  The  fruits  of  the  Spirit  are  love,  joy,  peace."  Grace  teaches
indeed,  but  she  teaches  by  first  of  all  correcting,  nay,  by  regenerating,  the  secret
springs  of  oar  actions.  Unless  these  are  set  right,  how  can  our  actions  be  right  ?
How  can  you  love  God  unless  the  love  of  God  has  conquered  your  heart?  (Ibid.)
The  negative  teaching  of  grace  ;  the  denial  of  ungodliness : — Two  things,  it  will  be
observed,  exist  in  every  physical  organism — a  mysterious  inward  energy  or  life-
power,  and  an  inherent  law  of  being,  or  condition  of  existence.  Between  these  there
can  be  no  kind  of  contrariety  or  antagonism.  We  do  not  see  life  exerting  its
energies  in  defiance  of  the  subjective  laws  of  the  organisms  that  it  inhabits,  nor  do


CHAP,  n.]  TITUS.  105

we  see  those  laws  fulfilled  save  by  the  inward  energies  of  life.  Even  so  the  new
creature  in  Christ  Jesus  has  a  certain  law  of  being  or  condition  of  existence  which
properly  belongs  to  him,  and  it  is  this  that  the  Holy  Spirit  proceeds  to  fulfil,  work-
ing out  and  forming  in  us  a  new  nature  in  the  image  of  Jesus  Christ  Himself.  On
the  Cross  our  new  life  is  purchased ;  but  not  the  less  on  the  Gross  our  old  man  ia
crucified.  In  the  very  act  of  extending  mercy  grace  teaches  her  first  great  lesson.
We  are  saved  because  we  have  died  and  risen  again  with  Christ ;  but  if  so,  we  have
already  denied  ungodliness  and  worldly  lust.  Let  us  observe,  then,  that  this  first
lesson  taught  by  grace  is  a  negative  lesson.  Before  teaching  us  what  to  do,  she
teaches  us  what  we  are  to  have  done  with  ;  before  introducing  us  into  the  positive
blessedness  of  the  new  life,  she  first  of  all  separates  our  connection  with  the  old.
This  negation  of  the  old  must  always  come  before  the  possession  of  the  new ;  and
unless  our  experience  follow  this  order,  we  shall  find  that  what  we  mistake  for  the
new  is  not  God's  new  at  all,  but  simply  Satan's  travesty  of  God's  new  creation.  Let
us  not  fail  to  observe  that  the  apostle  here  speaks  of  our  "  denying  ungodliness."
He  does  not  speak  of  our  combating  ungodliness,  or  of  our  gradually  progressing
from  a  state  of  ungodliness  into  a  state  of  godliness.  "  If  any  man  be  in
Christ  Jesus,  he  is  a  new  creature :  old  things  are  passed  away,  and  all
things  are  become  new.  And  all  things  are  of  God,"  It  is  a  strong  word,
this  word  denial.  Now  it  is  upon  this  primary  fact  that  grace  bases  her
teaching.  She  may  save,  but  does  not  undertake  to  train,  the  graceless.
The  only  improvement  of  the  old  man  that  grace  recognises  is  his  legal  execution  ;
but  this  she  teaches  us  has  already  taken  place  in  the  case  of  those  who  are  in
Christ  JesQS.  Let  us  ask  ourselves,  Are  we  in  the  habit  of  denying,  or  only
of  opposing  ?  But  before  pursuing  our  consideration  of  the  mode  of  denial,  let
ns  pause  to  contemplate  the  objects  here  spoken  of  as  being  denied,  and  we  shall
then  be  in  a  position  to  return  to  this  point  of  denial  and  treat  of  it  more  fully.
The  first  thing  we  are  represented  as  denying  is  ungodliness.  This  sounds  a  very
strong  word,  and  I  dare  say  at  first  most  people  would  be  disposed  to  affirm  that
they  cannot  be  charged  with  this,  whatever  else  they  may  be  guilty  of.  They  may
not  have  been  as  good  as  they  might,  but  ungodly  they  certainly  have  not  been.
We  must  endeavour  to  find  out  what  ungodliness  is.  This  is  certainly  important,
because  unless  we  understand  what  it  is,  it  is  impossible  to  deny  it.  Let  me  then
begin  by  saying  that  ungodhness  is  the  cardinal  and  root-sin  of  the  world.  It  was
the  first  sin  committed  in  the  history  of  the  world ;  and  it  was  the  parent  of  all
other  sins,  and  it  is  usually  the  first  sin  in  the  life  of  each  individual,  and  equally
the  parent  of  all  the  sins  that  follow.  In  the  happy  early  days  of  human  history
when  man,  created  in  God's  own  image,  was  living  in  fellowship  with  his  Creator,
the  characteristic  of  that  pristine  experience  was  doubtless  godliness.  But  there
came  a  change,  a  blight,  a  cloud,  a  darkness,  a  horror.  What  was  it  ?  The  entrance
of  ungodliness.  Here  was  man's  first  temptation;  and  here  came  man's  first  sin.
It  consisted  in  ungodliness  or  impiety,  exhibited  in  a  determination  to  put  self  in
the  place  of  God.  So  was  it  with  the  first  sin,  and  so  it  has  been  with  all  its  suc-
cessors. Ungodliness,  in  one  form  or  another,  has  been  at  the  root  of  them  all,
and  the  deadly  growth  from  this  evil  root  has  cast  its  baleful  shadow  over  universal
history.  Now  we  are  in  a  position  to  form  some  idea  of  what  ungodliness  really
means.  1.  Ungodliness  consists,  first  of  all,  in  the  repudiation  of  God  as  the  final
cause  of  our  being ;  that  is  to  say,  the  end  for  which  we  live.  A  man  is  ungodly
when  he  lives  not  for  God.  I  do  not  care  what  outward  complexion  it  wears.  It
may  be  the  life  of  a  zealous  ritualist  devoted  to  his  party,  or  of  an  earnest  church-
man, or  of  a  staunch  protestant,  or  of  a  decided  evangelical,  or  of  a  stout  noncon-
formist ;  it  makes  no  difference.  Whatever  complexion  our  outward  life  may  wear,
the  man  that  is  not  consciously  living  for  the  glory  of  God  is  leading  an  ungodly
life.  He  has  fallen  from  the  original  position  which  belongs  to  man  in  relation  to
God.  2.  The  second  characteristic  of  ungodliness  will  be  exhibited  in  an  indisposi-
tion on  man's  part  to  take  God  as  the  efficient  cause  of  all  that  he  is  or  wishes  to
be.  Ungodliness  begins  when  we  decline  to  live  for  God ;  ungodliness  is  developed
in  an  incapacity  or  an  indisposition  to  live  by  God.  The  apostle  was  describing  a
godly  experience  when  he  said,  "  I  live ;  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me :  and
the  Ufe  which  I  now  live  in  the  fiesh  I  live  by  the  faith  of  the  Son  of  God,  who
loved  me,  and  gave  Himself  for  me."  '•  Man  shall  not  live  by  bread  alone."  He
needs  that.  "  As  the  eyes  of  servants  look  unto  the  hand  of  their  masters,  and  as
the  eyes  of  a  maiden  unto  the  hand  of  her  mistress ;  so  our  eyes  wait  upon  tha
Lord  our  Ood,  antil  that  He  have  mercy  upon  us."    Is  that  the  kind  of  life  of  de*


106  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  a.

pendence  that  we  are  leading,  drawing  all  our  strength  for  action  from  Him,
receiving  all  our  guidance  in  action  through  Him  ?  Happy  they  who  live  thus.  3.
The  next  characteristic  of  the  life  of  ungodliness  is  that  as,  in  the  first  place,  man
does  not  live  for  God ;  and  as,  in  the  second  place,  he  does  not  live  by  Qod,  so,  in
the  third  place,  he  does  not  live  with  God.  He  knows  not  what  it  is  to  enjoy  the
Divine  society.  The  man  that  knows  what  it  is  to  be  godly — to  "  live  godly  in  Christ
Jesus  " — finds  that  he  cannot  do  without  God  at  home  any  more  than  he  can  do
without  God  at  church ;  he  cannot  do  without  God  in  the  place  of  business  any
more  than  he  can  do  withot  God  in  his  closet.  He  needs  God.  God  has  become  %
kind  of  necessity  to  him.  Jesus  always  near,  always  dear,  is  more  than  life  to
those  of  us  who  really  know  Him.  The  godly  live  with  God.  4.  Once  more,  the
ungodly  life  will  not  only  be  a  life  which  is  not  lived  for  God,  and  not  only  a  life
which  is  not  lived  with  God ;  but  it  will  also  be  a  life  which  is  not  lived  in  God,  and
a  life  in  which  God  lives  not  in  us.  There  is  something  more  blessed  even  than
living  in  the  company  of  Jesus ;  and  that  is  to  know  by  faith  that  we  live  in  Him,
and  to  realise  in  our  inmost  experience  the  still  more  wonderful  fact  that  He  Uvea
in  us.  But  how  does  grace  provide  for  this  complete  separation  between  us  and
this  root-sin,  which  seems  to  have  become  hereditary  in  the  family  of  man  ?  how
does  the  denial  of  ungodliness  take  place  ?  We  seek  an  answer  by  referring  to  two
remarkable  expressions  which  fell  from  our  blessed  Master's  lips,  shortly  before  His
own  passion.  On  that  memorable  occasion  on  which  a  supernatural  voice  responded
to  His  prayer,  "  Father,  glorify  Thy  name,"  He  proceeds  to  state,  "  Now  is  the
judgment  of  this  world ;  now  is  the  prince  of  this  world  cast  out."  Elsewhere  He
supplements  these  words  by  another  similar  statement.  "  When  the  Holy  Ghost
is  come,"  He  says,  "  He  will  convict  the  world  concerning  judgment,  because  the
prince  of  this  world  is  judged."  Most  mysterious  though  these  utterances  may  seem
they  will  be  found  to  throw  a  good  deal  of  light  upon  this  particular  subject.  How
is  ungodliness  to  be  denied  ?  It  is  to  be  denied  by  recognising  God's  judgment
against  it.  The  prince  of  this  world  is  the  very  representative,  as  he  is  the  author,
of  the  world's  ungodliness.  Satan  succeeds  in  obtaining  the  worship  of  humanity
in  a  thousand  different  forms.  But,  however  we  may  serve  him,  he  is  judged.  If
we  ask  how  and  when,  only  one  reply  seems  possible.  Strange  and  paradoxical
though  it  may  seem,  he  is  judged  and  condemned  on  Calvary,  in  the  Person  of  Him
who  exhibited  more  than  any  other  filial  piety  and  true  godliness.  The  ungodliness
of  the  world,  the  revolt  of  human  independence  against  Divine  authority,  is  repre-
sented by  the  world-victim  upon  the  cross  of  Calvary,  and  meets  in  Christ  with  its
proper  doom.  Against  that  world-sin,  against  that  ungodliness  which  is  the  root
and  source  of  every  kind  of  iniquity,  all  the  wrath  of  God  has  been  already  revealed.
I  discover  it  as  I  witness  the  dying  agonies  of  Emmanuel.  A  godless  world  will
not  have  God ;  by  and  by  it  shall  not  have  Him.  It  turns  its  back  upon  God ;  God
must  needs  turn  His  back  upon  it.  "  My  God,  My  God,  why  hast  Thou  forsaken
Me  ?  "  Surely  this  is  the  true  explanation  of  that  bitter  cry  that  was  wrung  from
the  breaking  heart  of  Emmanuel.  There  we  see  the  judgment  of  the  world  passed
npon  the  representative  of  the  world's  sin,  and  it  is  because  that  judgment  has  ex-
pended itself  on  Him  that  there  is  therefore  now  no  condemnation  for  those  that
are  in  Him.  But,  observe,  it  is  only  as  our  faith  sees  our  ungodliness  crucified
there  that  we  are  in  a  position  to  enjoy  this  immunity  from  condemnation.  We  thus
judge  that  He  died  for  all,  that  we  who  live  should  not  henceforth  live  to  ourselves,
but  to  Him  who  died  for  us  and  rose  again.  (Ibid.)  Grace  and  its  lessons : — The
••  saving  grace  of  God  which  has  appeared  to  all  men  "  is  described  by  the  apostle
as  "  teaching  us,"  or  rather  educating,  training  us  in  such  a  way  as  to  secure  the
precious  fruits  that  follow.  It  is  a  characteristic  feature  of  the  gospel  that  it  does
men  good  by  putting  them  to  school,  by  making  them  disciples,  not  simply  for  the
purpose  of  communicating  knowledge,  but  for  that  of  forming  and  maturing  charac-
ter ;  for  education  in  the  highest,  largest,  and  most  emphatic  sense.  This  peda-
gogical design  of  true  religion  is  stamped  upon  all  its  institutions,  and  legible  even
in  its  phraseology.  It  is  not  by  an  unmeaning  figure  of  speech  that  Christians  are
continually  called  disciples,  that  is,  learners,  pupils,  and  that  the  ministers  of
Ghrist  are  spoken  of  as  teachers.  The  church  is  Christ's  school ;  he  who  enters  it
must  enter  as  a  learner,  a  disciple,  with  as  real  and  sincere  a  deference  to  his  great
teacher  as  the  little  child  feels,  when  it  trembles  for  the  first  time  in  the  presence
of  a  master.  Such  submission  is  the  more  imperative  in  this  case,  because  more
truly  than  in  any  other  case  the  process  of  instruction  is  moral  as  well  as  intellectual;
it  is  not  mere  teaching,  it  is  training,  education ;  not  the  mere  acquisition  of  know-


CHAP,  n.]  TITUS,  107

ledge,  although  that  does  lie  ai  the  foundation,  bat  the  cnltivation  of  the  powers
and  affections,  as  a  preparation  for  the  joys  and  services  of  heaven,  as  well  as  for
the  duties  and  the  trials  of  this  present  state.  The  design  and  the  legitimate  effect
of  this  disciplinary  process  are  distinctly  stated  in  the  text,  with  reference  both  to
the  present  and  the  future ;  both  in  a  negative  and  positive  form.  The  negative
design  of  all  this  training  is  that  we  deny,  repudiate,  or  abjure  allegiance  to  the
sinful  dispositions  and  aSections  which  are  paramount  in  fallen  nature,  but  the
objects  of  which  perish  in  the  using,  being  limited  to  this  world,  so  that  they  may
be  described  as  "  worldly  lusts "  or  desires,  and  may  be  said,  so  far  as  they  pre-
dominate, to  put  man  on  a  level  with  the  brutes,  whose  highest  good  is  present
enjoyment  of  the  lowest  kind.  By  all  who  would  be  saved,  these  worldly,  temporal,
and  short-lived  lusts  must  be  denied,  renounced ;  and  this  is  never  done  without  a
simultaneous  or  previous  denial  of  ungodliness,  of  all  indifference  and  enmity  to  God,
which  is  indeed  the  source  of  the  other,  for  when  human  hearts  are  right  towards
God,  the  paramount  control  of  worldly  lusts  becomes  impossible.  This,  however,
is  oiily  the  negative  part  of  the  effect  produced  by  the  spiritual  discipline  to  which  we
are  subjected  in  the  school  of  Christ.  It  has  a  positive  side  also.  It  teaches  us  how
we  are  to  live.  In  reference  to  himself,  the  true  disciple  in  this  school  is  educated
to  be  sober  or  sound-minded ;  the  original  expression  denotes  sanity  as  opposed  to
madness,  not  in  its  extreme  forms  merely,  but  in  all  its  more  familiar  and  less
violent  gradations— all  those  numberless  and  nameless  aberrations  of  the  judgment
which  give  character  to  human  conduct,  even  in  the  absence  of  gross  crime  or  abso*
lute  insanity.  In  opposition  to  this  "madness,"  the  saving  grace  of  God  trains  its
subjects  to  be  rational  or  sober,  and  thus  in  the  highest  sense  and  measure  to  be
faithful  to  themselves.  But  at  the  same  time  it  trains  them  to  be  faithful  to  others,
to  be  just,  in  the  wide  sense  of  the  term  ;  including  all  that  one  can  owe  another —
including,  therefore,  charity  and  mercy,  no  less  than  honesty  and  rigorous  exact-
ness in  &e  discharge  of  legal  obligations.  Justice  or  rectitude,  in  this  enlarged  and
noble  sense,  as  opposed  to  every  form  of  selfishness,  is  no  less  really  a  dictate  and
a  consequence  of  spiritual  training,  than  sanity  or  soundness  of  mind,  as  opposed
to  the  chimeras  and  hallucinations  of  our  state  by  nature.  But  "  soberness  "  and
"  justice,"  in  the  wide  sense  which  has  just  been  put  upon  the  terms,  have  never
yet  been  found  divorced  from  "  godliness."  As  we  have  seen  already,  in  consider-
mg  the  negative  effects  of  training  by  Divine  grace,  it  is  man's  relations  to  his  God,
that  must  adjust  and  determine  his  relations  to  his  fellow-creatures.  The  sym-
metrical position  of  the  points  in  the  circumference  arises  from  their  common  rela-
tion to  a  conunon  centre.  Such  are  the  objects  and  effects  of  Christian  training,
that  is,  of  the  method  by  which  Christ  trains  His  disciples,  with  respect  to  the  pre-
sent state  or  stage  of  man's  existence,  as  distinguished  from  those  future  states  or
stages  to  which  he  cannot  but  look  forward.  For  although  the  sobriety  of  mind
produced  by  the  discipline  of  God's  grace,  causes  men  of  a  morbid,  penurious  dis-
position to  lose  sight  of  present  duties  and  enjoyments  in  a  vague  anticipation  of
the  future,  it  is  so  far  from  excluding  expectation  altogether,  that  our  very  salvation
is  prospective.  "  We  are  saved  in  hope,"  and  that  hope  is  a  blessed  one ;  a  hops
of  blessedness  to  be  revealed  and  realised  hereafter ;  a  hope,  that  is,  an  object  of
hope,  not  yet  fully  enjoyed,  but  only  "  looked  for,"  and  to  look  for  which  is  one  of
the  effects  and  marks  of  thorough  training  in  the  school  of  Christ.  This  hope  is
neither  selfish  nor  indefinite.  It  does  not  terminate  upon  ourselves,  our  own
deliverance  from  suffering,  and  our  own  reception  into  heaven ;  nor  does  it  lose
itself  in  vague  anticipations  of  a  nameless  good  to  be  experienced  hereafter.  The
Christian's  hope  is  in  the  highest  degree  generous  and  well-defined.  It  is  generous,
because  it  rises  beyond  personal  interests,  even  the  highest,  even  personal  salvation,
to  the  glory  of  the  Saviour  as  the  ultimate  end  to  be  desired  and  accomplished.  It
is  well-defined,  because,  instead  of  looking  at  this  glory  in  the  abstract,  it  gives  it  a
concrete  and  personal  embodiment;  it  is  glory,  not  in  the  sense  of  the  metaphysician
or  of  the  poet,  but  in  that  of  the  prophets,  saints,  and  angels  ;  it  is  manifested  and
apparent  excellence,  a  glorious  epiphany,  analogous  to  that  which  marked  Jehovah's
presence  in  the  Holy  of  hohes,  but  unspeakably  transcending  it  in  permanence  and
brightness ;  the  glorious  appearance,  not  of  any  mere  creature,  even  the  most  noble,
but  of  God  Himself,  aud  yet  not  of  God  in  His  essence,  which  is  inaccessible  to
sense,  nor  even  in  some  special  and  distinct  manifestation  of  the  Father,  or  the
Godhead,  under  an  assumed  or  borrowed  fonn  of  whieh  the  senses  may  take  cog-
nisance, but  in  the  well-known  person  of  His  Son,  who  is  the  brightness  of  Hia
glory,  and  the  express  image  of  His  person,  n  whom  dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the


108  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  n.

Godhead  bodily ;  and  therefore  it  is  not  the  untempered  brightness  of  the  Divine
majesty,  and  holiness,  and  justice,  which  to  as  is,  and  must  be,  a  consuming  fire  ;
and  yet  it  is  the  manifested  glory  of  God,  of  the  great  God — great  in  all  conceivable
perfections,  but,  as  the  object  of  this  hope,  emphatically  great  in  mercy — great  in
the  power,  not  to  punish  and  destroy,  but  to  forgive  and  save,  to  save  the  sinner,
to  save  us ; — the  glorious  appearing  of  our  great  God  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  Let
it  not  be  overlooked,  however,  that  the  gospel,  while  it  sets  Christ  before  as  as  an
object  of  believing  expectation,  sets  Him  also  before  us  as  an  object  of  believing
recollection,  and  thus  brings  into  a  delightful  harmony  the  hope  of  favours  yet  to  be
experienced  with  gratitude  for  those  experienced  already.  It  iB  not  simply  as  a
glorious  person,  human  or  Divine,  that  we  look  for  His  appearing ;  it  is  not  simply
as  a  Saviour  or  Deliverer  from  evil  in  the  general ;  i't  is  not  simply  as  a  potenti^
Saviour  or  Deliverer,  one  who  can  save  us  if  He  vnll,  and  will  if  we  should  need  it
at  some  future  time  ;  not  merely  a  Saviour  whose  ability  and  willingness  to  save
are  yet  to  be  displayed  and  proved,  but  as  an  actual  deliverer,  as  one  who  has
already  done  His  saving  work,  by  giving  Himself  for  us,  the  highest  gift,  it  may  in
a  certain  sense  be  said,  of  whicli  even  He  was  capable,  for  us.  His  creatures.  His
rebellious  subjects,  His  despisers,  and  His  enemies  1  What,  then,  was  His  object  ?
To  redeem  us,  to  buy  us  back  from  bondage,  to  save  as  by  the  payment  of  a  ransom
price,  not  only  from  the  punishment  of  sin,  but  from  its  power,  from  its  love,  from
its  pollution,  from  its  foul  and  hideous  embrace,  no  less  than  from  its  sword  and  from
its  chains.  It  was  to  set  as  free  from  sin  itself  that  Christ  redeemed  as ;  not  from
some  sin,  but  from  all  sin ;  not  that  we  should  still  remain,  or  afterwards  fall  back
under  the  dominion  of  the  very  tyrant  from  whose  power  He  redeemed  as ;  not
that  we  should  merely  exchange  one  hard  master  for  another,  or  for  many ; — no,
He  "  gave  Himself  for  us,"  He  laid  down  His  life  for  us,  He  died  upon  the  cross  for
us,  "  that  He  might  redeem  us  from  all  iniquity."  Nor  was  this  deliverance  from
sin  as  well  as  punishment  intended  merely  for  our  advantage,  but  for  His.  He
had  an  end  to  accomplish  for  Himself.  He  died  to  purify  us,  not  merely  that  we
might  be  pure  and  therefore  happy,  but  also  to  purify  a  people  for  Himself ;  a
peculium,  a  possession  of  His  own,  a  Church,  a  body  of  which  He  should  be  the
Head,  a  kingdom  of  which  he  should  be  the  Sovereign.  {J.  A.  Alexander,  D.D.)
The  lessons  that  grace  teaches : — Observe — 1.  Grace  teacheth  us  holiness.  (1)  It
teaches  by  way  of  direction  what  duties  we  ought  to  perform,  and  so  it  makes  use
of  the  moral  law  as  a  rule  of  life.  Obedience  respects  the  command,  as  love  doth
the  kindness  and  merit  of  the  lawgiver.  (2)  It  teacheth  by  way  of  argument ;  it
argueth  and  reasoneth  from  the  love  of  God  (Gal.  ii.  20).  The  law  and  the  prophets
do  not  beseech,  but  only  command  and  threaten ;  but  the  grace  of  God  aseth  a
different  method  in  the  New  Testament.  (3)  It  teacheth  by  way  of  encourage-
ment, as  manifesting  both  help  and  reward.  Uses.  1.  Of  information.  It  showeth
as — (1)  What  is  true  holiness,  such  as  cometh  from  the  teachings  of  grace,  obliging
conscience  to  the  duty  of  the  law,  inclining  the  heart  to  obey  out  of  the  sense  of
God's  love,  and  encouraging  us  by  faith,  drawing  strength  from  Christ,  and  looking
to  God  for  an  acceptance  from  Him.  (2)  That  grace  and  corruption  draw  severed
inferences  and  conclusions  from  the  same  premises.  A  bee  gathereth  honey  from
whence  a  spider  sucketh  poison.  (3)  That  it  is  the  greatest  wrong  one  can  do  to
grace  to  slacken  any  part  of  our  duty  for  grace's  sake  (Jude  14).  2.  Of  trial.
Whether  we  are  made  partakers  of  the  grace  of  God  in  the  gospel?  Have  we
these  teachings  and  arguings  ?  Many  can  endure  to  hear  that  grace  bringeth  salva-
tion, but  that  it  teacheth  us  to  deny  ungodliness,  there  they  flinch.  Men  woald
have  us  offer  salvation  and  preach  promises ;  but  when  we  press  daty,  they  cry  out,
"  This  is  a  hard  saying."  The  cities  of  refuge  under  the  law  were  all  cities  of  the
Levites  and  schools  of  instruction,  to  note  that  whoever  taketh  sanctuary  at  grace
meeteth  instruction ;  it  is  no  benefit  to  thee  else.  In  the  general,  doth  it  persuade
you  to  make  a  willing  resignation  of  yourselves  to  God?  (Bom.  xii.  1.)  (1)  Doth
it  press  you  to  deny  lusts?  (Ezra  ix.  13, 14.)  (2)  Doth  it  press  you  to  good?  (1  John
V.  3.)  2.  Grace  teacheth  us  both  to  depart  trom  evil  and  also  to  do  good  fPsa.  xxziv.
15),  '  Depart  from  evU,  and  do  good  " ;  Isa.  i.  16,  17,  *'  Cease  to  do  evil,  learn  to  do
well."  We  must  do  both,  because  God  hates  evil  and  delights  in  good ;  we  must
hate  what  God  hates,  and  love  what  God  loves.  That  is  true  friendship — eadem  velle
et  nolle — to  will  and  nill  the  same  thing.  I  durst  not  sin,  God  hates  it ;  I  darst  not
omit  this  duty,  God  loves  it.  Let  it  prey's  us  not  to  rest  in  abstaining  from  sin
merely.  Many  are  not  vicious,  but  they  are  not  sanctified ;  they  have  no  feeling  of
the  power  of  the  new  life.    3.  We  must  first  begin  with  renounciag  evil ;  that  ia


CHAP,  It]  TITUS.  109

the  first  thing  grace  teacheth.  Since  the  fall,  the  method  is  analytical,  to  unravel
and  undo  that  which  hath  been  done  in  the  soul.  So  it  is  said  of  Christ  (1  John
iii.  8).  Dagon  must  down,  ere  the  ark  be  set  up.  It  cannot  be  otherwise,  it  must
not  be  otherwise  ;  there  must  be  mortifying  and  subduing  of  sin  by  acts  of  humilia-
tion and  godly  sorrow  before  there  will  be  experience  of  grace.  4.  It  is  not  enough
to  renounce  one  sin,  but  we  must  renounce  all ;  for  when  the  apostle  speaks  of
denying  ungodliness,  he  intends  aU  ungodliness.  Compare  this  with  1  Peter  ii.  1 ;
James  i,  21.  I  might  give  you  several  reasons.  One  sin  is  contrary  to  God  as  well
as  another.  There  is  the  same  aversion  from  an  eternal  good  in  all  things,  though
the  manner  of  conversion  to  the  creature  be  different.  Again,  one  sin  is  contrary
to  the  law  of  God  as  well  as  another ;  there  is  a  contempt  of  the  same  authority  in
all  sins.  God's  command  binds,  and  it  is  of  force  in  lesser  sins  as  well  as  greater ;
and  therefore  they  that  bear  any  respect  to  the  law  of  God  must  hate  aU  sin — ••  I
hate  vain  thoughts,  but  Thy  law  do  I  love  "  (Psa.  cxLx.  113).  God  hath  given  a  law  to
the  thoughts,  to  the  sudden  workings  of  the  spirit,  as  well  as  to  actions  that  are
more  deliberate ;  and  therefore,  if  we  love  the  law,  we  should  hate  every  lesser
contrariety  to  it,  even  a  vain  thought.  And  all  sin  proceedeth  from  the  same  cor-
ruption ;  therefore,  if  we  would  subdue  and  mortify  it,  we  must  renounce  all  sin.
Use  1.  Direction  what  to  do  in  the  business  of  mortification.  We  must  deny  all
ungodliness ;  not  a  hoof  must  be  left  in  Egypt.  Grace  will  not  stand  with  any
allowed  sin ;  and  in  demolishing  the  old  building,  not  one  stone  must  be  left  upon
another.  (1)  In  your  purpose  and  resolution  you  must  make  Satan  no  allowance ;
he  standetn  hucking,  as  Pharaoh  did  with  Moses  and  Aaron ;  first  he  would  let
them  go  three  days  into  the  wilderness;  then  he  permitted  them  to  take  their
little  ones  with  them  ;  but  they  would  not  go  without  their  cattle,  their  flocks,  and
their  herds  also ;  they  would  not  leave  anything — no,  not  a  hoof — behind  them.
So  the  devil  would  have  a  part  left  as  a  pledge,  that  in  time  the  whole  man  may
fall  to  his  share  (2  Kings  v.  18).  (2)  We  should  often  examine  our  hearts,  lest
there  lurk  some  vice  whereof  we  think  ourselves  free  (Lam.  iii  40).  (3)  Desire
God  to  show  you  if  there  be  anything  left  that  is  grievous  to  His  Spirit  (Job  xxziv.
32).  (4)  When  any  sins  break  out,  set  upon  the  mortification  of  them.  Do  not
neglect  the  least  sins ;  they  are  of  dangerous  consequence ;  but  renew  thy  peace
with  God,  judging  thyself  for  them,  and  mourning  for  them,  avoiding  temptations,
cutting  off  the  provision  for  the  flesh  (1  Cor.  ix.  27).  Use  2.  Of  trial.  Do  we
renounce  all  sin  ?  But  you  will  say,  "  Who  can  say  I  nave  made  my  heart  clean,  I
am  pure  from  sin  ?  "  (Prov.  xx.  9.)  I  answer — (1)  It  must  be  done  in  purpose  and
resolution.  In  conversion  there  is  an  entire  surrender  of  the  soul  to  God.  (2)
There  must  be  a  serious  inclination  of  the  will  against  it.  Carnal  men  will  profess
a  purpose  and  faint  resolution,  but  there  is  no  principle  of  grace  to  bear  it,  no  bent
of  the  will  against  it — "  I  hate  every  false  way  "  (Psa.  cxix.  104).  A  child  of  God
doth  not  escape  every  false  way ;  but  he  hateth  it,  the  inclination  of  the  new  nature
is  against  it,  and  therefore  sin  is  not  committed  without  resistance.  3.  There  must
be  endeavours  against  it.  The  case  of  obedience  must  be  universal,  though  the
success  be  not  answerable — "  Then  shall  I  not  be  ashamed  when  I  have  respect  unto
all  Thy  commandments  "  (Psa.  cxix.  6) ;  not  when  I  have  kept  them,  but  when  I
have  a  respect  to  them  all.  We  should  never  be  able  to  look  God  in  the  face  if  our
acceptance  lay  upon  keeping  all  His  commandments ;  but  we  must  respect  them
all,  and  endeavour  to  keep  them  all,  and  dispense  with  ourselves  in  no  known  fail-
ing, and  still  the  work  of  denying  all  sin  must  be  carried  on  by  degrees.  (T.  Manton,
D.D.)  The  effects  of  the  grace  of  God : — 1.  What  does  this  grace  teach  us  to

deny  ?  and  the  answer  is  "  Ungodliness  and  worldly  lusts."  (1)  Ungodliness  means
impiety,  blasphemy,  and  all  forms  of  public  infidelity ;  and  most  certainly  all  such
evils  are  condemned  in  the  passage :  but  surely  the  mere  negative  fom  is  intended
to  include  far  more  than  these.  Ungodly  means  not  godly,  and  points  to  the  con-
dition of  the  soul  in  which  God  is  simply  shut  out.  A  godly  man  is  a  man  in  wnom
God  dwells — a  man  who  thinks,  speaks,  and  acts  for  God.  Even  so  an  ungodly
man  is  a  man  who  simply  thinks,  speaks,  and  acts  without  any  reference  to  God —
he  seeks  his  own  pleasure  or  interest,  and  guides  his  conduct  according  to  the
maxims  of  sagacity  and  worldly  prudence.  He  thus  becomes  rich,  or  learned,  or
eloquent,  or  victorious  in  battle ;  but  seeing  God  was  neither  consulted  nor  cared
for  in  the  whole  of  it,  he  remains  an  ungodly  man.  (2)  But  what  are  these  worldly
lusts,  these  cosmical  desires  ?  All  that  relates  merely  to  the  kosmos,  or  great
material  visible  world — all  that  the  men  of  the  world  hont  so  eagerly  after,  and
long  to  possess.    Tonr  quiet  retreat  in  the  bosom  of  green  fields  and  enchanting


110  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  n.

Bceneiy  delights  and  satisfies  you,  and  that  is  worldly  lust ;  you  make  yonr  oaIoala>
tion  in  the  counting-house,  and  look  forward  with  contentment  to  the  success  of
your  mercantile  speculations,  and  that  is  worldly  lust ;  you  set  your  heart  upon
excelling  your  fellow-men,  be  it  in  science,  or  in  wisdom,  or  in  warfare,  and  that
too  is  worldly  lust.  Everything  whose  end  is  in  this  fallen  state  of  things  is  worldly
lust ;  everything,  however  honest  and  noble  and  praiseworthy  among  men,  which
has  not  God  for  its  motive  and  its  end,  is  worldly  lust.    2.  But  how  are  we  to  live?

(1)  Soberly.  This  refers  to  our  own  character,  and  implies  many  of  the  duties  that
we  owe  to  ourselves.  It  denotes  soundness  of  mind,  as  well  as  temperance  regard-
ing the  indulgence  of  the  appetites.  (2)  Bighteously.  This  means  justly,  and  sums
up  the  duties  which  we  owe  to  our  fellow-men.  Justice  is  one  of  the  exact  virtues,
which  can  be  easily  recognised  and  definitely  measured ;  and  hence  it  is  the  great
palladium  of  the  nations,  the  very  basis  of  social  intercourse  and  mercantile  pros-
perity.  Justice  is  a  noble,  but  not  one  of  the  highest  virtues,  and  therefore  it  is
well  fitted  to  be  the  common  medium  or  life  of  a  community.  An  act  of  injustice
is  recognisable  and  punishable ;  not  so  avarice,  ambition,  or  forbidden  pleasure ;
and  here,  too,  we  see  its  fitness  for  moulding  and  strengthening  the  natural  character.
(3)  This  is  the  idea  of  natural  justice,  and  forms  the  staple  commodity  with
publicists  and  jurists ;  but  righteousness,  as  defined  in  the  person  of  Christ  and  in
the  Scriptures,  is  a  much  higher  and  nobler  principle.  Justice  is  based  upon  rights ;
and  the  Christian,  as  such,  has  none,  save  to  love  all  men,  and  be  put  to  death  for
this  love,  as  his  Master  was.  Bight  says.  Smite  the  smiter  till  he  gets  his  due ;  but
the  gospel  says.  Turn  the  other  cheek.  (4)  Lastly,  we  should  live  godly — viz.,
with  God,  in  God,  and  for  God.  This  is  the  glorious  end,  so  far  as  this  world  is
concerned,  which  the  saving  grace  of  God  is  intended  and  calculated  to  accomplish
in  the  believing  Church  of  Christ.  Like  their  Divine  Master,  they  are  not  of  the
world,  though  in  it ;  and  though  in  the  midst  of  defilement,  they  remain  undefiled.
This  is  the  victory  that  overcometh  the  world,  even  our  faith.  3.  But  what  does
this  grace  teach  us  to  look  for  ?  I  answer,  in  the  first  place,  the  apostle  directs  the
believer's  eye  here,  as  elsewhere,  to  the  glorious  Person  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  as
the  centre  and  home  of  the  longing  heart.  (1)  What  is  our  position  ?  It  is  that
of  waiting  for,  and  looking  for,  the  coming  of  the  Lord — not  waiting  upon  the  Lord
merely,  which  is  also  a  duty,  but  waiting  for  the  Lord  from  heaven,  who  shall
change  our  vile  bodies,  and  make  them  like  unto  His  glorious  body.  He  is  the
centre  in  which  the  ages,  ceremonies,  and  dispensations  all  meet  and  have  their
stability — the  unity  which  harmonises  time  and  eternity,  creation  and  Creator — the
living  fountain  which  sends  forth  the  benediction  of  God  over  the  ages,  dispensa-
tions, and  nations  in  a  thousand  streams.  As  the  Jews  hoped  and  waited,  so  we
hope  and  wait.  Our  position  is  the  same,  and  the  Person  whom  we  wait  for  is  the
same;  they  waited  for  His  coming  in  the  flesh,  and  we  for  His  coming  in  glory.

(2)  Is  this  hope  an  important  doctrine  of  the  New  Testament  f  I  answer,  Very
unportant ;  for  our  text  calls  it  the  bleesed  hope,  so  that  it  is  full  of  real  blessing
to  the  believer.  What  can  be  more  blessed  to  the  soul  than  the  person  of  the  ador-
able Bedeemer,  whom  even  unseen  we  love  so  ardently  ?  All  our  hopes  are  about
to  be  realised  in  His  glorious  appearing,  when  we  shall  be  with  Him  and  like  Him
for  ever.  {W.  Graham,  D.I).)  The  practical  effects  of  the  grace  of  Ood : — I.  The
rouNDATioN  OF  ALL  TBTTE  BELioioN.  Not  our  owu  rcasou  Or  wisdom,  which  cannot
give  US  light  and  knowledge ;  not  our  own  righteousness,  which  can  never  merit
salvation  or  recommend  us  to  God;  not  our  own  strength  or  ability,  which  is
insufficient  to  help  us  to  do  or  suffer  the  will  of  God,  to  be  pious  or  virtuous
(John  xv.  4,  5;  2  Cor.  iii.  5) ;  but  the  grace  of  God  in  these  different  senses — ^viz.,
I)ivine  Light  from  the  Word  and  Spirit  of  God;  this  instructs  [ircuSevovaa),
"  teaching  us,"  as  a  master  his  pupils,  as  we  are  able  to  receive  it,  the  free  favour
and  nnmerited  love  of  God ;  this,  by  justifying  and  adopting,  encourages  and
inclines,  adds  correction  and  discipline  to  instruction,  and  gives  us  the  will  to  be
the  Lord's :  the  influence  of  the  Spirit;  this  gives  resolution,  fortitude,  and  power.
We  may  infer  from  this  that  they  who  are  not  acquainted  with,  nor  possessed  of,
the  grace  of  God,  can  have  no  true  religion ;  or  their  religion  is  a  superstructure
without  a  foundation;  that  is,  it  is  only  imaginary,  illusive,  unreal.      U.  Thk

■CPEBSTBTTCTUBX   TO  BE   RAISED   ON   THIS   FOUNDATION.       BcIigiOU   itSClf    iS   the   SUpCr-

■tmcture  that  must  be  raised  on  this  foundation,  the  stream  that  must  flow  from
this  fountain.  It  consists  of  two  parts.  1.  It  is  negative ;  "  denying  ungodliness
and  worldly  lasts."  In  this  way  true  religion  first  appears,  and  manifests  its
reality :  it  makes  us  "  cease  to  do  evil "  before  we  can  "  learn  to  do  well ; "  It  strips


CHAP,  n.]  TITUS.  Ill

□6  of  "  the  old  man  "  before  it  clothes  us  with  "  the  new."  Without  this  there  can
be  no  religion ;  there  is  not  even  repentance  if  there  be  not  its  fruits  (Matt.  iii.  8 ;
Ln^e  iii.  8).  2.  But  it  has  a  positive  part,  which  is  to  '•  Uve  soberly,  righteously,
and  godly."  Man  is  here  considered  as  an  individual  on  earth,  as  a  member  of
Eociety  connected  with  his  fellow-creatures,  and  as  a  creature — a  redeemed  creature
— a  subject  and  servant  and  child  of  his  Creator,  Preserver,  King,  and  Lord.    III.

ThB   happiness   that  awaits  AUi   THAT   CO   THIS,  AND   THB    BLESSED  PBOSPECT  OPENED

BEi-OBB  THEH.  "  Looking  for  that  blessed  hope,"  &o.  Hope  here  is  put  for  the
object  of  hope,  a  state  of  future  and  eternal  bleBsedness,  perfection,  and  felicity,
both  in  soul  and  body.  The  grace  of  God  begets  us  again  to  a  well-grounded  and
*'  lively  hope  "  of  it ;  the  gospel  enlightens  us  as  to  this  hope,  and  reveals  it ;  the
free,  unmerited  mercy  and  love  of  God  justifies,  adopts,  and  entitles  us  to  it ;  the
Spirit  of  Grace  renews  and  fits  us  for  it.  In  the  way  of  godliness,  righteousness,
and  sobriety,  we  wait  for  it,  and  are  brought  to  it.  "  The  glorious  appearing  of  the
great  God,"  or,  of  our  great  "  God  and  Saviour,"  shall  raise  our  bodies,  and  after
the  process  of  the  final  judgment,  shall  put  us  in  the  possession  of  it.  (J.  Benson.)
The  purpose  of  the  discipline  of  grace : — I.  The  faib  picture  of  what  oub  lives
BHOTTLD  be.  1.  Bccause  we.  are  to  a  large  extent  made  up  of  blind  desires  which
take  no  account  of  anything  except  their  appropriate  food,  the  commandment  comes
from  the  deepest  recesses  of  each  nature,  as  well  as  from  the  great  throne  in  the
heavens — "Live  soberly."  The  engines  wiU  work  on  all  the  same,  though  the
bows  of  the  ship  be  turned  to  the  rocks,  and  driving  straight  on  the  reef.  It  is  the
engineers'  business  to  start  them  and  keep  them  going ;  it  is  their  business  to  turn
the  screw ;  it  is  somebody  else's  business  to  look  after  the  navigation.  We  have
our  "  humours  under  lock  and  key,"  in  order  that  we  may  control  them.  And  if
we  do  not,  we  shall  go  all  to  rack  and  ruin.  So  "  Uve  soberly  "  says  Paul.  2.  The
next  requirement  is  "  righteously."  We  stand  in  certain  relations  to  a  whole
universe  of  things  and  of  people,  and  there  does  rise  before  every  man,  however  it
may  be  accounted  for,  or  explained  away,  or  tampered  with,  or  neglected,  a  standard
of  right  and  wrong.  And  what  Paul  here  means  by  "  live  righteously  "  is,  "  Do  as
you  know  you  ought  to  do,"  and,  in  shaping  your  character,  have  reference  not
merely  to  its  constitution,  but  to  its  relations  to  all  this  universe  of  outside  facts.
So  far  as  the  word  may  include  our  duty  to  others,  I  may  just  remind  you  that
"  righteousness  "  in  reference  to  our  fellows  demands  mercy.  The  common  anti-
thesis which  is  drawn  between  a  just  man,  who  will  give  everybody  what  they
deserve,  and  not  one  scrap  more  nor  less  if  he  can  help  it,  and  a  kindly  man  is
erroneous,  because  every  man  has  a  claim  upon  every  other  man  for  lenient  judg-
ment and  undeserved  help.  He  may  not  deserve  it,  being  such  a  man  as  he  is ;  but
he  has  a  right  to  it,  being  a  man  at  all.  3.  The  last  of  the  phases  under  which
the  perfect  life  is  represented  here  takes  us  up  at  once  into  another  region.  If
there  were  nobody  but  myself  in  the  world,  it  must  be  my  duty  to  Uve  controlling
myself,  since  I  stand  in  relations  manifold  to  creatures  mani'old,  and  to  the  whole
order  of  things,  it  is  my  duty  to  conform  to  the  standard,  and  to  do  what  is  right.
And  just  as  plainly  as  the  obligations  to  sobriety  and  righteousness  press  on  every
man,  so  plainly  is  godliness  necessary  to  his  perfection.  For  I  am  not  only  bound
by  ties  which  knit  me  to  my  fellows,  or  to  this  visible  order,  but  the  closest  of  aU
bonds,  the  most  real  of  all  relations,  is  that  which  binds  us  each  to  God.  And  if
'•  msua's  chief  end  be  to  glorify  God,"  and  then,  and  thus,  "  to  enjoy  Him  for  ever,"
then  that  end,  in  its  very  nature,  must  be  aU-pervasive,  and  diffuse  its  sweetness
into  the  other  two.  For  you  cannot  sliver  up  the  unity  of  a  Ufe  into  little  sections
and  say,  "this  deed  has  to  be  done  soberly,  and  that  one  righteously,  and  this  one
godly  " ;  but  godliness  must  cover  the  whole  life,  and  be  the  power  of  self-control
and  of  righteousness.  "All  in  all  or  not  at  aU."  Godliness  must  be  uniform  and
universal.  H.  Notice  what  a  hakd  task  the  man  has  who  will  uve  bo.  The
apostle,  very  remarkably,  puts  first,  in  my  text,  a  negative  clause.  The  things  that
he  says  we  are  to  deny  are  the  exact  opposites  of  the  characteristics  that  he  says
we  are  to  aim  after.  Now,  says  Paul,  there  is  no  good  to  be  done  in  the  matter  of
acquiring  these  positive  graces,  without  which  a  life  is  contemptible  and  poor
unless,  side  by  side  with  the  continual  effort  at  the  acquisition  of  the  one,  there  be
the  continual  and  resolute  effort  at  the  excision  and  casting  out  of  the  other.
Why  ?  Because  they  are  in  possession.  A  man  cannot  be  godly  unless  he  casts
out  the  ungodliness  that  cleaves  to  bis  nature  ;  nor  can  he  rule  himself  and  seek
after  righteousness  unless  he  ejects  the  desires  that  are  in  possession  of  his  heart.
You  have  to  get  rid  of  the  bad  tenant  if  you  would  bring  in  the  good  one.     You


112  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix.

have  to  turn  the  current,  which  is  running  in  the  wrong  direction.  And  so  it  cornel
to  be  a  very  hard,  painful  thing  for  a  man  to  acquire  these  graces  of  which  my  text
speaks.  If  it  were  only  advancing  in  practice,  or  knowledge,  or  sentiment,  or  feel-
ing, that  would  not  be  so  difficult  to  do ;  but  you  have  to  reverse  the  action  of  the
machine ;  and  that  is  hard.  Can  it  be  done?  Who  is  to  keep  the  keepers  T  It  is
difficult  for  the  same  self  to  be  sacrifice  and  priest.  It  is  a  hard  matter  for  a  man
to  crucify  himself,  and  we  may  well  say,  if  there  can  be  no  progress  in  goodness
without  this  violent  and  thorough  mutilation  and  massacre  of  the  evil  that  is  in  us,
alas!  for  us  all.  III.  What  God  gives  tjs  to  maze  such  life  possiblf.  Christ
and  His  love ;  Christ  and  His  life ;  Christ  and  His  death ;  Christ  and  His  spirit ;
in  these  are  new  hopes,  motives,  powers,  which  avail  to  do  the  thing  which  no  man
can  do.  An  infant's  fingers  cannot  reverse  the  motion  of  some  great  engine.  Sut
the  hand  that  made  it  can  touch  some  little  tap  or  lever,  and  the  mighty  masses  of
polished  iron  begin  to  move  the  other  way.  Jesus,  who  comes  to  us  to  mould  our
hearts  into  hitherto  nnfelt  love,  by  reason  of  His  own  great  love,  and  who  gives  to
as  His  own  Spirit  to  be  the  life  of  our  lives,  gives  us  by  these  gifts  new  motives,
new  powers,  new  tastes,  new  affections.  He  puts  the  reins  into  our  hands,  and
enables  us  to  control  and  master  our  unruly  tempers  and  inclinations.  If  you  want
to  clear  out  a  tube  of  any  sort,  the  way  to  do  it  is  to  insert  some  solid  substance,
and  push,  and  that  drives  out  the  clogging  matter.  Christ's  love  coming  into  the
heart  expels  the  evil,  just  as  the  sap  rising  in  the  trees  pushes  off  the  old  leaves
that  have  hung  there  withered  all  the  winter.  As  Luther  used  to  say,  "You  cannot
clean  out  the  stable  with  barrows  and  shovels.  Turn  the  Elbe  into  it."  Let  that
great  flood  of  life  pour  into  our  hearts,  and  it  will  not  be  hard  to  "  live  soberly."
He  comes  to  help  us  to  live  "righteously."  He  gives  us  His  own  life  to  dwell  in
oar  hearts,  in  no  mere  metaphor,  but  in  simple  fact.  And  they  that  trust  in  Jesus
Christ  are  righteous  by  no  mere  fiction  of  a  righteousness  reckoned,  but  by  the
blessed  reaUty  of  a  righteousness  imparted.  He  comes  to  make  it  possible  for  ua
to  Uve  "  godly."  For  He,  and  He  alone,  has  the  secret  of  drawing  hearts  to  (Jod ;
because  He,  and  He  alone,  has  opened  the  secret  of  God's  heart  to  us.  {A.  Mae-
laren,  D.D.)  And  worldly  lusts.  — The  denial  of  worldly  lust : — All  things  in  out-
ward nature  have  their  element,  and  our  moral  nature  must  have  its  element,  in
which  to  Uve,  and  move,  and  have  its  being.  Beasts  Uve  on  earth,  birds  fly  in  air,
fishes  swim  in  water ;  but  each  of  these  animal  organisms  requires  its  own  element,
and  no  amount  of  education  will  make  a  fish  enjoy  fresh  air.  Even  so  the  ungodly
man  has  this  world  for  his  element,  even  as  the  true  beUever  has  God  for  his
element.  The  ungodly  is  of  the  earth  earthy  ;  he  receives  the  world's  spirit ;  he
enters  into  its  mind ;  he  forms  his  character  La  accordance  with  its  genius ;  he
submits  to  its  dictates ;  he  measures  everything  by  its  standard.  He  lives  in  the
world,  and  is  of  the  world,  just  as  the  true  believer  Uves  in  God,  and  is  of  God.
He  is  one  with  the  world,  and  the  world  with  him.  He  is  represented  by  the  world;
for  he  is  in  the  world,  just  as  the  Christian  is  in  Christ,  and  the  world  fives  in  him,
just  as  Christ  lives  in  the  heart  of  His  own  people,  forming  its  own  nature  within
him,  and  conforming  him  to  its  character.  Yes,  the  child  of  the  world  wiU  always
be  like  the  world  tlat  he  makes  his  god.  You  remember  what  the  Psalmist  says  about
the  gods  of  the  heathen.  "Their  idols  are  silver  and  gold,  the  works  of  men's
hands."  Then  he  goes  on  to  add  the  startling  assertion,  "  They  who  make  them
are  Uke  unto  them  ;  so  are  aU  they  that  put  their  trust  in  them."  And  '•  they  that
make  them  are  Uke  unto  them  " — not  only  do  we  become  the  slaves  of  that  which
we  have  created,  but  we  also  become  assimilated  to  the  creation  of  our  own  per-
versity. I  mean  to  say  that  those  who  Uve  in  the  world  and  for  the  world  become
worldly ;  and  if  that  sounds  but  a  little  thing  to  some  ears,  let  me  say  that,  if  my
observation  have  not  failed  me,  "  worldly  "  means  hoUow-hearted,  empty-headed,
frivolous,  selfish,  sordid,  incapable  of  realising  the  true  dignity  of  our  own  nature,
insensible  to  higher  motives,  heedless  of  grave  responsibiUties,  unreal,  conventional,
hypocritical,  false,  deceiving  and  deceived.  Shall  I  give  an  example  of  what  I
mean  7  There  are  scores  of  mothers  in  our  land  who  are  at  this  moment  quite
prepared  to  sell  their  daughters  to  the  highest  bidder.  The  question  with  them  ia
not  "  What  is  the  moral  character?"— far  less  "  What  is  the  religious  character
of  the  man  that  shall  marry  my  daughter  ?  "—but  "  How  many  thousands  a  year
has  he?  What  wiU  be  his  position  in  society?"  I  only  mention  that  8i8  one  ol
the  many  instances  that  could  be  given  of  the  hoUowness  and  heartlessness  of
the  worldly  Ufe;  because  we  see  it  here  conquering  and  paralysing  one  of  the
very  strongest  and  purest  instincts  of  nature  —a  mother's  love.     So  the  world  goet


CHAP,  n.]  TITUS.  113

on,  getting  hoUower  and  hollower.  The  very  conversation  of  the  worldling  is  sug-
gestive of  the  havoc  which  the  spirit  and  genius  of  worldliness  have  made  in  the
man's  true  character.  What  is  worldly  conversation  for  the  most  part  but  an
exhibition  of  littleness  and  frivolity?  It  never  seems  to  get  below  the  surface.  Men
of  the  world  know  nothing  of  the  fellowship  of  heart  with  heart.  Just  think  how
impossible  it  would  be  for  two  such  persons  to  discuss  with  each  other  their  inner
life  and  heart  experiences.  Oh,  empty,  hollow,  world,  is  this  man's  best  substitute
for  God !  Now  the  apostle  affirms  that  we  have  denied  worldly  lust  as  well  as
ungodliness.  We  have  renounced  and  repudiated  it  for  ever.  But  here  rises  the
question,  How  have  the  world  and  worldly  lust  been  thus  denied  ?  or  how  are  we
to  deny  it?  and  how  are  we  to  be  freed  from  it?  Various  answers  to  this  inquiry
meet  us  from  different  quarters.  "Turn  your  back  upon  the  world,"  says  the
ascetic.  "Wander  into  the  depths  of  the  desert.  Shut  yourself  up  in  an  eremite's
cave,  or  hide  yourself  within  a  monastic  enclosure."  But  even  so,  how  shall  I  be
sure  that  I  may  not  carry  a  little  world  of  my  own  along  with  me  ?  How  shall  we
get  rid  of  the  world's  bondage  ?  or  how  shall  we  deny  this  worldly  lust,  and  rise
above  it?  "Despise  it,"  says  the  cynio.  "Be  indiSerent  to  all  considerations  of
pain  and  pleasure.  Never  mind  what  the  world  thinks  of  you.  Rejoice  in  being
pecuhar."  May  not  our  Diogenes  be  creating  for  himself  a  greater  conqueror,  or  a
greater  tyrant,  in  his  own  inflated  self-consciousness,  than  ever  was  an  Alexander
or  a  Xerxes  ?  No ;  we  want  a  better  answer  than  this.  Again  I  ask,  "  How  am  I
to  deny  worldly  lust?"  It  is  all  round  me.  "  God  forbid  that  I  should  glory,  save
in  the  Cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  whereby  the  world  hath  been  crucifled  to  me,
and  I  onto  the  world."  That  is  the  answer.  Grace  had  taught  St.  Pacd  that
lesson.  He  did  not  learn  it  on  Sinai,  but  at  Calvary.  "  There  was  a  time  when
thon  didst  think  well  of  the  world,  wast  elated  by  her  blandishments,  wast  alarmed
at  the  thought  of  her  frown.  Thou  didst  value  her  good  opinion,  and  didst  shrink
above  everything  else  from  forfeiting  it ;  thou  wast  attracted  by  her  glitter,  and
blinded  by  her  display.  But  now,  behold  the  world  is  revealed  as  a  traitress  and  a
nsurper,  a  rebel  against  Infinite  Benevolence,  and  a  deceiver  of  all  her  deluded
votaries ;  for  in  her  judgment  theirs  is  revealed.  Child  of  God,  the  world  is  crucified
to  thee.  There  she  hangs,  represented  in  the  great  Victim  of  her  malice  under  the
ban  of  God's  wrath,  blighted  with  a  curse,  blasted  by  the  dread  thunderbolt  from
the  hand  of  Omnipotent  Justice.  Thou  seest  her  now  exposed  to  shame  and  ever-
lasting contempt.  Nor  canst  thou  make  a  cunning  compromise  between  thy  God
and  her  whom  thou  seest  crucified  yonder;  for  there  can  be  no  compromise  between
a  condemned  culprit  and  his  judge.  No :  •  If  any  man  love  the  world,  the  love  of
the  Father  is  not  in  him ' ;  for  the  friendship  of  the  world  is  enmity  towards  God.
And  even  that  is  not  all,"  Grace  goes  on  to  say.  "  By  that  same  Cross  thou,  too,
art  crucified  unto  the  world.  To  the  world  He  is  a  despised,  rejected  outcast,
crucified  outside  the  camp ;  and  as  He  is,  so  art  thou  in  this  present  world.  Surely
thou  canst  not  refuse  to  bear  His  reproach,  to  whom  thou  owest  thy  all  of  dignity
and  honour.  But  even  this  is  not  aU.  Thou  art  crucified  unto  the  world ;  '  for
thou  art  dead,  and  thy  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God.'  Thy  old  worldly  life  has
been  forfeited ;  but  through  death  and  resurrection  thon  hast  been  bom  again  as  a
citizen  of  the  New  Jerusalem.  Thou  art  raised  up  into  the  heavenly  places  in
Christ  Jesus ;  and  now  thou  art  not  of  the  world,  as  He  is  not  of  the  world.  Art
thou  content  to  accept  the  privileges  of  the  Atonement  ?  Thou  rejoicest  to  accept
them.  Then  understand  that  one  of  the  privileges  of  the  Atonement  is,  that  thou
shouldst  be  separated,  by  the  very  terms  of  the  Atonement,  from  thy  old  relation-
ship to  a  God-resisting  world— a  world  which  has  presented  itself  to  the  hearts  of
its  children  as  a  substitute  for  the  Being  to  whom  it  owed  its  origin. "  Can  we  con-
ceive it  possible  for  a  true  believer  to  address  his  Saviour  thus :  "  0  Lord,  I  desire
to  escape  hell,  and  I  understand  that  Thy  Atonement  has  been  made  in  order  that
I  may  escape  it ;  but  I  understand  also  that  Thy  Atonement  had  in  view  several
other  objects,  about  which  I  have  no  concern.  I  gather  that  it  was  also  designed
to  save  me  from  sin ;  but  about  that  I  am  indifferent,  so  long  as  I  escape  sin's  oon-
eequences.  I  will  accept  the  immunity  from  condemnation.  I  will  be  very  glad  to
know  that  the  doors  of  hell  are  shut  in  my  face,  and  that  the  doors  of  heaven  are
opened.  But  further  than  this  I  have  no  desire ;  indeed,  were  I  to  accept  more,  the
consequences  to  myself  might  not  be  pleasant."  It  is,  perhaps,  impossible  to  con-
ceive of  such  language  in  the  lips  of  any  true  child  of  God ;  yet  I  fear  that  such
words  describe  only  too  accurately  the  attitude  assumed  by  too  many  who  think
themselves  Christians  indeed.    They  seek  to  retain  sufficient  religion  to  enable  them

8


114  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [oha*.  n.

to  entertain  the  hope  of  heaven ;  bat  they  cover  this  over  so  skilfally  with  a  cloak
of  worldly  conformity,  that  they  are  hardly  suspected  by  their  acquaintance  and
friends  of  possessing  any  religion  at  all.    Such  Christians  attempt  to  lead  a  doable
life  in  religious  society ;  they  can  talk  as  well  as  any  one  on  religious  subjeots,  and
may  pass  with  strangers  for  earnest  and  decided  Christians;  but  amongst  the
citizens  of  the  world  they  assume  quite  a  di£ferent  manner,  and  can  be  as  flippant
and  frivoloas  and  insincere  as  any  with  whom  they  associate.    Tes ;  it  must  be  one
tbing  or  the  other — the  world  or  God ;  we  cannot  choose  both.     If  we  decide  to
choose  the  world  and  seek  a  substitute  for  God,  then  let  as  get  the  very  best  sub-
stitute we  possibly  can  find.      Do  you  select  money  for  your  substitute?      If  it
be  pleasure  you    select,  then  live  for   pleasare.      Our  choipe  lies  between  the
two;   but  ere  we  decide  for  the  world,  let  us  remember  tne  solemn  sentence
nttered    by  inspired  lips,   but    amply    confirmed    by    daily   observation,  •'  The
world  passeth   away,   and  the   lust   thereof."      If    we  vaake   choice  of   it,    we
cannot  keep  it;  if  we  decline  to  deny  it,  it  will  soon  deny  us.      (W.  H.  M.  H.
Aitken.)         Live  soberly,  righteously,  and  godly,  In  this  present  world.— Preaent
day  Christian  life : — Is  tiiis  a  good  time  for  a  sober,  righteous,  and  godly  life  ?
•'  Business  standards,"  it  is  said,  "  are  relaxing ;  home  habits,  loose ;  self-seeking,
the  common  rule ;  plain  living  and  high  thinking,  not  the  custom  of  the  time."
in  such  a  state  of  mind  two  things  seem  possible.    One  is  to  yield  to  the  pressure
of  the  age.    Accepting  its  inconsistency  with  the  Christian  life,  one  may  adapt
himself  to  standards  which  his  conscience  never  can  approve.    That  is  the  common
worldliness  of  the  present  age,  surrendering  character  to  the  social  pressure  of  the
time.     The  other  thing  to  do  is  to  run  away  from  the  age.    That  is  what  thousands
of  the  choicest  souls  have  done  throughout  Christian  history.     They  have  thought
it  impossible  to  live  a  sober  Ufe  in  the  full  current  of  their  own  time ;  and  so  they
have  fled  from  its  influence,  hiding  themselves  in  monasteries  and  peopling  the
desert  with  their  caves.    No  one  can  survey  the  story  of  these  ascetics  and  hermits
without  a  glow  of  admiration.     It  is  a  great  thing  that  the  enticements  of  each
age  which  have  overpowered  so  many  souls  have  been  powerless  over  a  few.     But
none  the  less  this  whole  story  is  not  the  story  of  a  battle,  but  of  a  flight.     And  it
was  a  fruitless  flight.    Fleeing  from  the  world,  they  fled  from  all  the  chance  they
had  to  make  it  better.    If,  then,  the  sober,  righteous,  and  godly  man  is  not  to  yield
himself  to  the  present  age,  nor  yet  to  flee  from  it,  what  is  he  to  do  ?    Why,  he  is
to  use  it — to  take  it  just  as  it  is,  as  the  God-given  material  out  of  which  the
Christian  character  fit  for  the  present  time  is  to  be  wrought.    The  saints  of  the
past  have  been,  for  the  most  part,  those  who  have  fled  from  the  world ;  but  the
Christian  saint  of  to-day  is  the  person  who  can  use  the  world.     Such  a  person  may
be  all  unconscious  that  he  is  doing  anything  heroic.     He  is  simply  the  man  in  the
business  world  who,  amid  looseness  and  dishonour,  keeps  himself  true  and  clean ;
simply  the  woman  who,  amid  luxury  and  affectation,  keeps  her  simplicity  and
sympathy ;  simply  the  youth  who,  without  the  least  retreat  from  the  influences
which  beset  him  in  a  place  like  this,  makes  them  contribute  to  his  growth  of
character.    That  is  a  harder  thing  than  to  be  a  hermit,  and  quite  as  noble  as  to  be
a  saint.     It  is  the  sober,  righteous,  and  godly  life  lived  in  the  midst  of  this  present
age.     The  man  who  hides  himself  behind  the  spirit  of  the  age,  and  makes  it  the
apology  of  his  own  folly  or  sin,  is  simply  deceived.     He  is  like  many  a  man  in  that
western  country,  who  has  thought  himself  standing  in  a  hopeless  desert  when  he
really  stood  in  what  might  be  a  garden  of  the  world.    He  simply  abandons  it  to
barrenness,  instead  of  turning  upon  it  the   stream  of   service  which  is  at  his
command,  and  for  which  the  desert  longs.    The  man,  who  throws  a  sober  and  a
godly  life  into  the  main  movement  of  the  present  age,  is  but  contributing  the
fertilising  power  to  a  receptive  and  responsive  world ;  and  the  hills  and  valleys
about  him  will  shout  for  joy  at  their  redemption  by  that  pure  and  abundant  stream.
(F.  O.  Peabody,  D.D.)        Every-day  life  : — I.  The  ingredients  of  bveby-dat  lite.
1.  Conversation  is  a  large  element  of  every-day  life.     The  power  of  speech  is  one
of  the  grand  distinctions  of  man  and  of  his  Ufe  upon  the  earth.    It  is  thus  he
clothes  invisible  thought  with  form,  and  confers  upon  the  subtle  intangible  reality
an  immortality  of  earthly  recognition.     Our  daily  conversation  determines  all  the
tone  of  our  mmd ;  it  stamps  and  it  stereotypes  our  temper.     It  reveals  whether
charity  and  virtue,  manly  or  womanly  grace,  dignify  our  character ;  or  whether  we
are  frivolous,  vain,  heartless,  and  worldly.     2.  Wish  is  an  equally  extended  depart-
ment of  every-day  Ufe.     It  is  in  our  nature  to  be  conscious  of  desires  after  a  great
many  things,  and  these  desires  are  not  in  themselves  sinful ;  they  are  even  nece»


OHAP.  n.)  TITUS.  115

ear;  to  the  maintenance  of  life,  to  the  onward  progress  of  mankind,  to  the  sab-
duing  and  replenishing  of  the  earth  which  God  has  lent  to  us,  and  in  which  He  has
given  as  a  life-interest.  These  desires  of  all  kinds  are  the  spring  of  nearly  all  that
we  do  in  this  life.  Let  as  bring  them  ap  now,  and  see  what  is  the  revelation  they
will  give  as  of  ourselves.  Perhaps  we  shall  find  a  legion  of  devils,  which  must  be
cast  out ;  a  storm  of  passions,  which  must  be  hushed ;  a  brood  of  revenges,  vexa-
tions, bad  resolves,  xmbrotherly  triumphs,  impure  hankerings,  which  must  be
trampled  out  of  as.  Perhaps  they  are  humble,  virtuous,  charitable,  reasonable,
modest,  chaste,  holy  desires,  fit  for  a  brother  or  sister  of  Jesus.  A  moment's
thought  will  prove  that  these  desires  of  ours,  these  genuine  intentions,  these  self-
born,  or  heaven-inspired,  wishes,  are  our  very  self ;  and  if  we  are  to  be  religious
men,  religion  must  have  sway  over  these.  3.  Work  is  another  main  element  in
life.  The  business  of  life,  the  daily  toil  and  drudgery  of  a  man,  these  help  to  con-
stitute his  every-day  life.  It  must  be  possible  to  bring  all  this  under  the  empire  of
religion — to  supply  a  set  of  motives  that  can  dignify  the  commonest  occupation,
consecrate  the  humblest  toil,  and  make  "  daily  drudgery  divine  " — motives  which
can  explode  and  defiagrate  those  wretched  purposes  and  evil  desires  that  have  so
often  issued  in  violated  laws  and  broken  hearts ;  and  motives  which  will  hallow
and  purify  all  our  service  and  every  talent.  4.  But  there  is  another  large  depart-
ment of  every-day  life  to  which  it  is  necessary  to  refer — I  mean  Eecreation.  That
which  is  recreation  to  one  man  would  be  a  complete  penance  to  another  ;  that  which
some  of  yoa  think  a  most  enjoyable  relaxation  is  to  others  an  intolerable  weariness.
Some  mode  of  spending  the  leisure  hour  is  necessary  to  every  man ;  and  perhaps
nothing  more  surely  indicates  his  temper  and  spirit  than  the  method  in  which  he
finds  it  most  agreeable  to  while  away  his  spare  time  and  gather  strength  for
farther  duty.  As  religion  penetrates  every-day  life,  the  whole  tone  of  recrea-
tion rises  in  character,  until  it  becomes  harmless,  pleasant,  virtuous,  holy,
religions,  and  useful.  To  promote  this  end  is  one  great  enterprise  of  the  Church.
II.  The  beqtjibements  of  the  gospel  as  to  evert-dat  life.  1.  Sobriety  meais  the
chastisement  of  all  our  passions,  the  resolute  endeavour  to  gain  and  keep  the  con-
trol  of  all  our  desires,  the  determination  to  repress  angry  feelings  as  well  as  impure
fancies,  to  subdue  inordinate  affection  quite  as  much  as  depraved  taste.  Sobriety
means  resistance  to  every  form  of  temptation.  It  has  its  realm  in  work  quite  as
much  as  in  recreation — in  recreation  quite  as  much  as  in  work.  2.  Eighteousness
is  clearly  something  more  than  a  refusal  to  commit  an  act  of  cruelty  or  dishonesty.
Bighteous  living  includes  this ;  but  it  means  very  much  more  than  this.  We
must  respect  every  just  claim  upon  us,  not  merely  upon  our  money,  but  upon  our
affection,  our  reverence,  and  our  good  offices — and  we  must  recognise  and  yield  the
right  to  every  man  who  has  one,  to  our  good  words,  to  our  time,  to  our  service,  to
our  best  efforts — or  we  are  not  acting  justly.  3.  The  life  here  spoken  of  is  to  be  a
life  of  godliness  ;  we  must  date  and  draw  our  motives  from  the  highest  source.  The
government  of  ail  our  passions,  the  recognition  of  every  just  claim  upon  us,  must
spring  from  no  mere  vague  notion  that  it  is  right  to  do  this,  but  from  the  discovery
of  the  ground  of  our  nature,  our  relation  to  the  living  God,  our  obligation  to  the
soflfering  Saviour,  and  our  responsibility  to  the  Spirit  of  grace.  {H.  R.  Reynolds,
D.D.)  The  true  value  of  morality  : — This  passage  is  an  admirable  example  of  the
manner  of  the  apostle  in  mingling  exhortation  to  present  duties  with  the  recogni-
tion and  enforcement  of  that  Divine  power  from  which  true  obedience  springs.
In  other  words,  we  find  blended  here  morality  and  spirituality.  Both
the  one  and  the  other  are  made  to  cohere,  and  to  be  in  consistency  with  each
other  ;  and  both  of  them  spring  from  considerations  of  manhood  in  ourselves,  and
of  gratitude  and  allegiance  to  God.  It  is  difficult  to  give — nor  is  it  necessary  that
we  should  give — a  definition  of  morality.  It  is  a  phrase  in  every  man's  mouth.  It
does  not  mean  the  same  with  all,  however.  Men  take  their  ideas  of  morality,  not
only  from  the  communities  in  which  they  live,  but  from  the  circles  in  which  they
associate  in  any  one  community  ;  and  what  would  be  considered  as  morality  in  a
certain  sort  of  neighbourhood  in  this  city,  would  not  be  considered  as  continental
morahty.  Morality  in  a  neighbourhood  may  not  be  morality  in  a  family  of  refine-
ment and  culture.  There  is  something  higher  than  morality  in  a  cultured  house-
hold. But  yet  men  are  regarded  as  moral  who  act  in  accordance  with  the  laws  of
the  land  and  with  the  customs  of  the  community,  and  who  avoid  any  outbreaking
Bins  which  shock  the  average  conscience.  It  may  be  said,  in  the  first  place,  that
morality  possesses  the  benefit  of  the  most  important  negatives.  A  trulv  moral  man,
in  ^e  judgment  of  all,  should  be  a  man  who  does  not  get  drunk,  and  does  not  steal.


116  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii.

and  does  not  commit  burglary,  and  does  not  bear  false  witness.    In  other  words,  he
is  one  who  is  rid  of  outbreaking  vices  and  outrageous  crimes.     Well,  that  is  credit-
able.    You  ought  not  to  be  guilty  of  such  things.     And  if  you  have  had  a  strong
bias  in  your  nature  in  any  of  these  directions,  and  have  arrested  it,  and  that  under
circumstances  where  influences  from  without  threatened  to  carry  you  away,  it  is  no
small  thing.     It  is  a  great  thing  that  you  have  avoided  those  pitfalls  in  which  bo
many  have  been  destroyed.     Still,  that  is  not  the  sum  of  all  excellence.    It  is  not
enough  for  you  to  congratulate  yourself  upon,  as  I  think  we  shall  see.     I  not  only
recognise  the  import  and  excellence  of  morahty  in  such  sterling  virtues  as  these,
but  I  exhort  men  to  them  ;  and  I  say  :  "  If  you  cannot  go  any  further,  go  as  far  as
that.      It  is  a  great  deal  better  to  go  so  far  than  not  to  reacli  that  point.      It  may
be  only  a  beginning,  but  it  is  a  beginning."     Secondly:  Morality  includes  those
simple  virtues  which  are  indispensable  to  a  wholesome  life  in  society.     A  man  can
scarcely  be  called  moral  who  is  destitute  of  worldly  honour.     Honour  is  a  sort  of
secular  and  partial  conscience.     It  is  functional ;  but  within  its  limits  it  serves  a
most  important  end,  and  keeps  aUve  those  fragmentary  elements  of  a  higher  life,
of  a  higher  moral  sense,  to  which  all  men  should  be  brought.   Truth  is  one  of  those
elements  which  is  regarded  as  indispensable  to  morality — that  is  to  say,  such  ordi-
nary truth  as  passes  current  in  life.     Therefore  morality  includes  honour,  and
truth,  and  fidelity,  as  well  as  honesty  and  fairness.     And  men  say,  "  I  am  a  moral
man,"  meaning  by  that  that  they  are  possessed  of  these  social  and  business-like
virtues.    The  experiences  of  civil  life  and  commercial  life  have  found  out  many
things  which  are  very  necessary  for  the  easy  conduct  of  affairs.  For  the  regulation  of
society,  for  the  living  together  of  great  masses  of  men,  various  things  are  incul-
cated, as  essential  to  morality.   Public  sentiment  demands  certain  things  which  are
necessary  to  morality.     The  law  prescribes  certain  things  which  are  indespensable
to  morality.     The  customs  prescribe  certain  negatives  which  enter  into  the  popular
idea  of  morality.    And  all  of  these  are  designed  to  take  away  the  friction  from  the
machinery  of  life,  and  to  raise  men  above  animal  violence  and  above  deceit,  and
put  them  upon  a  certain  plane  of  moral  sentiment.     All  that  I  complain  of  in
reference  to  them  is,  that  they  are  so  low,  that  they  are  such  uneducated  and  un-
developed forms  of  excellence,  that  they  tend  to  dampen  men's  ambition,  and  to
render  them  satisfied  with  the  germs  of  things,  instead  of  leading  them  to  aspire
after  higher  excellences  of  which  these  are  but  the  basilar  leaves.     For — first;
Morality  in  this  grand  sense  founded  upon  external  convenience,  and  not  upon  the
requirements  of  things  relating  to  man's  whole  nature.   So  it  is  a  mere  fragmentary
thing ;  and  it  is  a  fragmentary  thing  in  its  lowest  stages  of  development.  Secondly :
It  restrains  the  outplay  of  evil ;  but  it  does  not  attempt  to  purify  and  to  cure  the
sources  of  evil.      Thirdly :  It  permits  heinous  faults  which  impoverish  character,
and  waste  the  heart  of  man.     Thus,  a  man  may  be  a  moral  man  who  is  peevish,
morose,  fretful.    Fourthly  :  Morality  aims  to  build  up  a  man  outwardly  in  his  con-
dition, but  not  inwardly  in  his  character.     It  does  not  seek  to  develop  one  single
spiritual  grace.    Lastly :  It  leaves  out,  wholly,  the  world  to  come,  and  all  the  obli-
gations which  we  owe  to  God,  and  all  the  relations  which  are  established  between
the  soul  and  the  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.     It  leaves  out  religion.     That  is  to  say,  it
leaves  out  the  highest  forms  of  aspiration  and  of  duty,  and  all  that  which  faith
brings  within  the  circuit  of  our  knowledge  and  makes  imperative.     Here,  then,  are
the  deficiencies  of  morality.    I  have  said  that  in  conduct,  in  its  lowest  form,  it  has
its  value ;  but  I  think  yon  will  now  perceive  that  it  cannot  be  a  substitute  for
religion.     And  yet,  men  who  have  only  morality,  say,  "  What  lack  I  yet  ?  "    Now,
if  an  Indian,  with  a  fragmentary  dress,  should  present  himself  as  a  full-dressed
man  before  you,  would  you  deride  the  idea  that  he  was  properly  clad  ?    Would  you
have  him  throw  away  the  little  he  had  before  he  got  more  ?     Complete  dress  is
what  one  wants ;  but  is  nothing  short  of  that  of  any  value  ?    I  do  not  say  to  the
young,  ••  These  moralities  are  of  no  value  to  you."    They  are  of  great  value  to  yon.
Truth-speaking,  fidelity,  industry,  cleanliness,  punctuality,  frugality,  enterprise —
these  are  real  excellencies.     Have  these  at  least.     Have  these  anyhow.    But  will
you  be  content  with  these?   Is  there  not  something  in  every  human  soul  which  has
the  touch  of  inspiration  in  it,  and  which  leads  it  to  aspire  to  something  more  than
these  quaUties,  which  belong  to  the  undeveloped  mass  of  mankind?     Morality  ii
not  in  any  sense,  then,  a  substitute  for  spiritual  religion,  any  more  than  industry
and  frugality  are  substitutes  for  patriotism.     Every  man  ought  to  be  frugal  and  in-
iustrious;  but  many  are  frugal  and  industrious  who  have  no  patriotism.     "Well,
then,"  you  will  say,  "  what  about  those  qualities  when  a  man  dies?    A  man  hae


CHAP,  n.]  TJTUS.  117

been  indostrioas,  and  frugal,  and  honest,  and  moderately  truth- speaking  all  his  life
long ;  and  when  he  dies,  and  goes  to  judgment,  what  is  to  be  done  with  these
qm^ties  which  yon  say  are  good  ? "  Well,  they  are  of  benefit  to  yon  now ;  they
are  of  benefit  to  you  in  a  thousand  ways  in  this  world ;  but  they  do  not  constitute  that
character  which  is  to  fit  you  for  the  world  to  come.  They  do  not  go  to  make  the
golden  key  which  unlocks  those  mysteries  of  love  which  you  have  need  of.  These
minor  qualities  are  not  a  substitute  for  it.  You  go  forth  an  ungrown  spirit ;  you  go
forth  with  lower  leaves  without  the  bloom  and  the  fruit ;  and  the  lower  is  no  sub-
stitute for  the  higher.  Moreover,  out  of  every  one  of  these  lower  states,  if  we  did
but  know  it,  may  be  developed,  by  the  Divine  grace,  that  which  shall  bring  forth  the
true  spiritual  life.  If  you  know  enough  to  take  one  step,  take  a  second.  If  yoa
know  enough  to  recognise  law  and  obligation,  and  that  low  sense  of  character
which  is  required  by  society,  you  have  that  foimdation  on  which  moral  govern-
ment itself  rests,  and  you  know  enough  to  go  on  from  step  to  step,  and  from
strength  to  strength,  and  develop  out  of  your  lower  knowledges  higher  attainments.
Spirituality  is  only  the  normal  and  legitimate  development  of  men  in  their  higher
forms.  Divinely  inspired,  Divinely  led,  and  Divinely  blessed.  It  is  God  that  works
in  those  who  work  out  their  own  salvation.  It  is  the  Divine  oo-operation  and
guiding  influence  that  works  upon  your  mind  ;  and  out  of  this  joint  working  come
all  the  grace,  aU  the  hope,  all  the  faith,  all  the  sweet  fruition  of  love,  the  sense  of
immortality,  and  the  longing  for  it,  which  we  experience.  And  whatever  is  just,  and
true,  and  pure,  and  sweet,  and  of  good  report,  upon  earth,  and  in  the  heavenly
circle — ^all  this  comes,  to  be  sure,  by  the  grace  of  Ood ;  but  it  comes  by  the  grace
of  Ood  through  the  development  of  your  own  faculties,  and  through  your  own
striving.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  Good  works: — This  passage  has  deen  described  as
"  a  concise  epitome  of  the  Christian  system  in  its  practical  bearing  on  human  ex-
perience and  conduct."  St.  Paul's  great  theme  was  faith,  but  no  one  acquainted
with  his  writings  can  charge  him  with  indifference  respecting  works.  I.  Thb
WOBKSSS.  A  careful  study  of  the  passage  will  show  that  these  are— 1.  Bedeemed
ones,  "  Might  redeem  us "  (ver.  14).  The  bond  slaves  of  Satan  cannot  work  for
God.  David  said,  "  O  Lord,  truly  I  am  Thy  servant ;  Thou  hast  loosed  my  bonds."
2.  Saved  ones,  "  Bringeth  salvation  "  (ver.  11).  The  believer  does  not  work  for
salvation,  but  from  it.  Like  the  new-bom  child,  he  does  not  move  to  get  life,  but
because  he  has  it.  3.  Instructed  ones,  "  Teaching  us  "  (ver.  12).  The  Christian
needs  to  be  taught  what  to  do  (Acts  ix.  6),  and  how  to  do  it,  "  His  way,"  (Psa.  xxv.
9).  4.  Hopeful  ones,  "  Looking  for  that  blessed  hope"  (ver.  13).  The  hope  of  the
Lord's  coming  is  a  great  stimulus  to  holiness  and  activity  (Heb.  x.  25).  II.  Thb
woBKSHop.  "  This  present  world  "  (ver.  12).  The  believer's  first  sphere  of  action
is  in  the  world.  This  is  —1.  A  good  sphere  for  the  believer.  It  must  be,  for  oar
Lord  prayed  not  that  His  people  should  be  taken  out  of  the  world  (John  xvii.  15|.
Conflict  with  evil  is  bracing  (1  John  ii.  14).  2.  A  sphere  of  much  danger.  This
present  world  is  an  evil  world,  "  This  present  evil  world  "  (Gal.  i.  4).  Demas  was
damaged  by  it  (2  Tim.  iv.  10),  and  our  Lord,  remembering  the  presence  of  the  evil,
prayed  that  His  disciples  might  be  kept  from  it  (John  xvii.  15).  A  sphere  of  use-
fulness. Here  Christ  achieved  His  gracious  and  beneficent  purposes,  "  He  was  in  the
world  "  (John  i.  10).  Here  is  the  material  which  may  be  shaped  into  crowns  to
adorn  the  Redeemer's  brow.  We  may  say,  as  Dr.  Macleod  said  to  Dr.  Guthrie,  in
reference  to  the  Cowgate  in  Edinburgh,  "A  fine  field  of  labour,  sir."  IIL  Thb
WORKS.  What  have  God's  workmen  to  do  ?  Many  things.  Note — 1.  The  rejection
of  bad  models,  "Denying"  (ver.  12).  A  bad  model  wUl  result  in  bad  work.  See
this  in  the  case  of  Nadab,  "Way  of  his  father"  (1  Elings  xv.  26).  To  deny
(apvioiuu)  is  to  disown.  The  believer  disowns  "  ungodliness,"  that  which  is  not  in
the  likeness  of  God  or  after  the  mind  of  God.  (See  2  Pet.  ii.  5,  6.)  "Worldly
lusts  "  are  those  things  which  are  the  staple  of  the  desires  of  worldly  men  (John  viii.
44 ;  1  John  ii.  16).  2.  The  maintenance  of  a  healthy  moral  sense,  "  Live  soberly."
"  Sobriety,"  s^ys  Mr.  Aitken,  "  according  to  the  Greek  moralist,  Aristotle,  is  that
which  preserves  or  protects  and  maintains  in  due  activity  our  moral  sense."
Temptation  often  produces  moral  intoxication.  It  destroys  the  balance  of  mind,
and  reason  is  in  a  measure  dethroned.  Against  this  evil  we  must  be  constantly
watching,  or  there  will  be  discord  and  disorder  in  our  lives.  3.  The  production  of
what  is  right,  "  Righteously  "  (ver.  12).  The  believer  must  do  right  in  his  relation
to  his  family,  his  friends,  society,  and  the  whole  world.  4.  The  imitation  of  the
best  model,  "Godly"  (ver.  12).  The  believer  is  to  be  God-like.  He  must  aim  at
no    lower    standard.     (Matt.   v.    48 ;    1    Pet.    ii.   21.)     IV.    Thb   wobeuanshi?.


118  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n.

"  Zealous  of  good  works  "  (ver.  14).  The  best  work  can  only  be  acoomplished  hj
the  enthusiastic  worker.  This  is  true  of  works  of  art.  Think  of  the  enthusiasm
of  Michael  Angelo,  of  Bubens,  of  Mozart,  of  Ptdissy.  The  best  work  is
work  for  God,  and  for  this  the  highest  enthusiasm  is  required.  What  a  stimuloa
to  zeal  we  have  in  the  example  of  our  Lord,  "Who  gave  Himself"  (ver.  14).
Well  might  Brainerd  say,  •'  Oh  that  I  were  a  flaming  fire  in  the  service  of  my
Godl"  ^H.  Thome,)  The  ChrUtian'$  business: — I.  The  Christian's  business,
while  an  mhabitant  of  this  present  world.  1.  What  he  must  renounce.  (1)  Un-
godliness. (2)  Worldly  lusts.  2.  What  he  must  cultivate.  (1)  With  regard  tc
his  personal  character  he  is  to  "  live  soberly."  While  in  the  world,  he  is  not  of  the
world.  His  heart  is  weaned  from  its  honours,  riches,  and  pleasures.  He  uses  this
world  without  abusing  it.  (2)  We  now  pass  on  to  view  the  Christian  in  his  social
capacity.  He  is  to  live  "  righteously  "  as  well  as  •'  soberly."  This  term  includes
all  his  relative  obligations,  (a)  With  regard  to  the  relation  in  which  he  stands  to  his
fellow  creatures  in  general,  he  looks  upon  himself  as  a  member  of  one  great  family,
all  of  whom  have  suffered  a  common  shipwreck.  He  sees  himself  rescued  from  the
wreck  by  an  act  of  infinite  grace,  and,  therefore,  he  cannot  exult  over  the  rest  of  the
crew  as  though  by  his  own  right  hand,  or  by  his  own  arm  he  had  gotten  himself
the  victory.  Tender  compassion  towards  the  whole  race  fills  his  breast.  He  longs
to  tell  the  whole  world  of  "  the  grace  of  Grod  which  bringeth  salvation  " ;  and  he
uses  every  means  in  his  power  to  diffuse  the  knowledge  of  this  unsearchable  grace.
(&)  In  his  relation  also  to  the  Church  of  Christ  the  Christian  would  live
•'  righteously."  He  must  here,  also,  be  influenced  by  the  law  of  love.  Consider
the  many  ties  which  bind  Christians  to  each  other.  Having  a  common  Father,
redeemed  by  the  same  precious  blood,  pervaded  by  the  same  Spirit,  possessing  one
hope  of  their  calling — what  more  can  they  need  to  cement  the  bond  that  anites
them  ?  (3)  In  his  religious  duties  he  is  to  cultivate  godliness,  (a)  He  seeks  to
please  God.  (b)  He  loves  to  hold  communion  with  God.  (c)  He  delights  to  think
of  God.  (d)  He  glorifies  God  in  his  body  and  in  his  spirit.  II.  The  Chbistian'i
EOPK  IN  pbosecutino  HIS  BUSINESS.  What  is  it  that  urges  on  the  worldling  to  labour
and  toil  ?  What  is  it  that  keeps  him  in  one  unbroken  course  of  regular  and  well-
sustained  exertion  ?  Or,  again,  what  is  it  that  excites  the  shipwrecked  mariner  to
stem  the  foaming  surge  ?  What  is  it  that  keeps  him  clinging  with  invincible  firm-
ness to  the  friendly  plank  ?  Is  it  not  hope  ?  Now  if  the  expectation  of  worldly
gain,  and  of  a  temporal  salvation  can  yield  such  support,  oh  1  say,  what  should
be  the  sustaining  power  of  your  hope — the  hope  of  your  Saviour's  second  coming.
Whether  we  consider  the  blessedness  of  your  hope,  a  complete  salvation ;  or  whether
we  consider  the  time  of  its  consummation,  the  glorious  appearing  of  the  Bedeemer;
or,  whether,  again,  we  look  to  the  character  of  your  expected  Saviour — in  whatever
point  of  view  we  behold  your  blessed  object  of  hope — we  cannot  but  feel  how
mighty  should  be  its  influence  in  stirring  you  up  to  "  live  soberly,  righteously,  and
godly  in  this  present  world."  (H.  Cadell,  M.A.)  Right  living : — I.  Soberly.  1.
We  must  have  control  over  all  the  base  passions  of  our  nature.  The  monarch  of
himself  is  king  of  men.  2.  There  is  to  be  a  proper  restraint  over  the  more  refined,
the  aesthetic  elements  of  our  nature.  If  you  can  build  a  fine  house  and  pay  for  it
with  your  own  money — not  your  neighbour's,  nor  God's — build  it,  adorn  it  with
statuary,  beautify  it  with  paintings  :  but  make  art  the  handmaid  of  religion.  See
to  it  that  the  more  you  spend  on  yourself,  the  more  you  give  to  God.  3.  There
must  also  be  a  wise  control  over  our  professional  pursuits.  Bemember,  this  world
is  not  alL  Let  eternal  verities  dwarf  earthly  vanities.  II.  Bightkv^uslt,  or
rather  "justly" — the  word  points  to  moral  rectitude.  1.  We  are  not  need-
lessly to  injure  our  neighbour.  His  property,  person,  and  good  name  are
sacred.  2.  We  are  to  render  to  every  one  his  due.  We  must  be  just  in
all  our  dealings.  3.  We  are  to  strive  to  lead  all  to  salvation  througli
Christ.  Our  duty  to  man  is  not  negative.  Duty  is  "  due-ty."  The  Christian  is  to
be  Christlike :  thus  he  will  draw  men  to  God.  IH.  Godly.  Eegard  to  God  runs
through  all  our  other  duties  ;  personal  and  relative  duties  must  be  done  with  an  eye
to  His  glory.  But  some  duties  refer  at  once  to  Him.  1.  Bepentance  towards  God
— a  heart  broken  for  and  from  sin.  2.  Faith  in  Jesus  Christ.  Yon  cannot  please
God  if  you  refuse  to  trust  Him.  3.  Obedience.  This  includes  all  duties.  {R.  S.
MacArthur,  D.D.)  The  sober  life  : — Hitherto  we  have  been  occupied  in  con-

sidering the  negative  teaching  of  Grace,  by  which  her  pupils  are  trained  to  deny
nngodliness  and  worliUy  lust.  Grace  begins  by  separating  us  from  connection  with
the  old,  that  she  may  hasten  to  introduce  us  into  connection  with  the  new<     £«ha


OBAT.  n.}  TITUS,  119

does  not  rest  satisfied  with  inducing  merely  the  denial  of  ungodliness  and  worldly
lasts.  Grace  begins  by  oommnnicating  life,  and  along  with  it  a  new  life-power,
which  is  to  manifest  its  presence  in  the  character  and  conduct  of  those  who  receive
it.  We  must  possess  the  new  life  before  we  can  live  it.  It  must  be  received  before
it  can  be  manifested.  You  might  just  as  well  expect  a  piece  of  dead  wood  to  grow
into  a  tree  the  moment  you  planted  it  in  the  ground,  and  attached  to  it  by  some
artificial  process  a  few  bunches  of  leaves,  or  clusters  of  fruit.  Your  own  common
sense  tells  you  that  yoo  may  plant  your  walking-stick  in  your  garden,  and,  with  the
utmost  possible  care,  you  may  prune  it,  and  water  it,  and  perform  all  other  possible
horticultural  operations  upon  it,  but  it  remains  a  dead  stick  at  the  end  of  the
process,  and  nothing  but  a  dead  stick ;  and  you  cannot  make  it  grow  into  life.  Let
as  desist  from  conceiving  that  we  can  ever  grow  into  a  state  of  spiritual  vitality  by
our  efforts  to  improve  ourselves.  Not  only  are  we  taught  that  Grace  saves  us  from
and  separates  us  from  the  old,  but  that  it  introduces  us  into  the  new.  Not  only  is
tiie  ransomed  soul  dead  unto  sin,  but  alive  unto  God.  We  rise  into  a  state  of
vitality  when  first  we  begin  to  trust  ourselves  to  Christ  for  life  ;  then  only  can  we
receive  the  gift  of  life  in  Jesus  Christ  from  the  hand  of  God,  and  begin  to  be,  in  the
full  sense  of  the  word,  Uving  souls.  Are  we  trying  to  live  soberly,  righteously,  and
godly,  because  law  claims  it  of  us  ?  or  are  we  living  thus  because  we  claim  it  by
faith  of  God,  as  the  law  of  our  new  nature  that  we  should  do  so  ?  Let  us  proceed
to  consider  the  positive  characteristics  of  our  new  life,  to  which  the  apostle  here
calls  attention.  We  notice  that  of  the  three  words  that  he  employs — ^the  first  brings
before  us  primarily  that  which  we  owe  to  ourselves ;  the  second,  chiefly  that  which
we  owe  to  our  fellow-man ;  and  the  third,  exclusively  that  which  we  owe  to  God.
The  first  suggests  to  our  minds  the  thought  of  the  relations  of  the  various  parts  of
our  c'omplez  nature  to  each  other ;  the  second,  of  our  relations  to  society ;  and  the
third,  of  our  relations  to  God.  Let  us  begin  by  considering  the  first  of  these  three
words  as  suggesting  an  important,  we  may  say  an  essential,  lesson  of  Grace.  It  is
the  privilege  of  the  true  child  of  God  to  lead  a  sober  life.  The  ancient  Greek
moralist,  Aristotle,  in  speaking  of  this  word,  suggests  an  etymological  derivation  of
the  term,  which,  though  not  perhaps  philologically  correct,  may  yet  serve  to  indicate
the  true  character  of  the  idea  conveyed  by  the  expression  to  his  own  mind  and  the
minds  of  his  contemporaries.  He  speaks  of  the  word  here  used  as  formed  of  two
words,  signifying  the  preservation  of  the  moral  sense,  and  accordingly  defines
temperance  or  sobriety  to  be  that  which  preserves  or  protects,  and  maintains  in  due
activity  our  moral  sense.  This,  at  all  events,  gives  us  a  good  idea  of  what  an
intelligent  Greek-speaking  man  would  understand  by  the  word  "  sobriety."  Let  us
refiect  for  a  moment  upon  the  idea  thus  suggested  to  our  minds.  It  implies,  we
observe,  the  possibility  of  our  moral  sense  being  lost,  or  so  interfered  with  as  for  the
time  being  to  be  rendered  inoperative.  How  different  things  appear  when  we
contemplate  them  in  the  abstract  and  in  cold  blood,  so  to  speak,  from  what  they  do
when  once  they  have  become  causes  of  actual  temptation  to  us.  How  readily  did
the  moral  sense  of  David  reprobate  the  pitiless  injustice  and  rapacity  of  the  wealthy
despoiler !  How  often  is  this  blinding  influence  exercised  by  passion  1  Or,  again,
with  respect  to  worldly  lust,  which  is  a  common  form  of  moral  insobriety,  how
easy  is  it  for  us,  in  our  calmer  moments,  to  deride  the  world,  to  look  down  con-
temptuously upon  it. — '*  Well,  after  all,  what  an  idle  show  it  is — what  a  poor
painted  pageant !  "  And  then  we  come  down  from  the  mount  of  contemplation,  we
find  ourselves  sucked  into  the  stream  before  we  know  what  is  happening ;  and  there
we  are,  just  as  worldly  as  other  people.  What  has  happened  ?  We  have  lost  our
moral  sense.  We  are  blinded  by  the  force  of  the  temptations  to  which  we  have
been  exposed,  and  the  influences  by  which  we  are  surrounded.  Now,  let  us  endea-
vour to  get  an  idea  into  our  minds  of  some  of  the  various  forms  which  this  insobriety
may  assume  (Rom.  xii.  3).  A  man  who  thinks  more  highly  of  himself  than  he
ought  to  think,  might  not  at  first  sight  appear  to  us  to  be  one  who  is  leading  a  life
wanting  in  sobriety ;  and  yet  that  is  just  the  description  that  St.  Paul  gives  of  such
a  person.  In  1  Peter  iv.  7,  we  have  a  solemn  warning  given  to  us  upon  this  subject :
"  The  end  of  all  things  is  at  hand :  be  ye  therefore  sober."  Keep  your  heads  clear,
the  apostle  seems  to  say.  You  are  only  down  here  for  a  few  short  days.  The  end
of  all  things  is  at  hand.  Now  observe,  that  where  this  intoxicating  influence
prevails,  man  becomes  a  prey  to  inward  discords  and  disorders.  The  higher  elements
in  his  nature  are  no  longer  able  to  master  the  lower  and  keep  them  in  their  proper
place.  Now  Grace  proposes  to  introduce  and  maintain  moral  harmony  withm  our
nature ;  bo  that,  instead  of  element  being  arrayed  against  element,  and  part  against


120  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  u.

part,  the  whole  may  live,  and  continue  to  live,  under  the  perfect  law  of  liberty.
Grace  nndertakes  so  to  train  us  that  passion  shall  not  be  able  to  tyrannise  over  the
nnderstanding,  or  desire  ride  rough-shod  over  conscience  ;  but  that  those  elements
in  our  nature  which  are  necessarily  highest  shall  occupy  their  own  proper  position*
and  those  elements  which  are  necessarily  lower  shall  be  subordinated  to  the  superior
and  commanding  faculties  which  God  has  set  over  them*  Such  in  general  terms  is
the  character  of  the  sober  life.  Bat  how  are  we  to  establish  this  inward  harmony  ?
How  is  this  most  anarchical  world  one  day  to  be  set  in  perfect  order  ?  When  and
how  will  the  true  cotmos  be  realised  ?  We,  basing  our  hope  upon  a  most  sure  word
of  prophecy,  look  forward  to  that  glorious  period  of  the  future,  of  which  I  read,
•'  Behold,  a  king  shall  reign  in  righteousness,  and  princes  shall  execute  judgment  in
the  earth."  There  is  a  time  coming  when  Messiah's  sceptre  shall  sway  the  hearts
of  men,  and  "  the  kingdoms  of  this  world  shall  become  the  kingdoms  of  our  Lord
and  of  His  Christ."  Meanwhile,  until  that  glorious  day  come,  it  is  possible  for  as,
each  one  of  us,  in  our  own  souls  to  realise  a  millennium,  where  "  the  wolf  and  the
lamb  shah  lie  down  together,  and  the  lion  shall  eat  straw  like  the  ox."  The
millennium  begins  within  each  human  heart  when  Jesus  Christ  is  King.  We  have
all  read  of  the  horrors  of  the  first  French  Revolution.  We  recall  with  a  shudder  the
ghastly  tale  of  that  reign  of  terror,  when  the  guillotine  was  the  prominent  object  in
Parisian  histo^,  and  the  noblest  and  the  best  blood  of  France  was  flowing  in  the
gutters.  Tes,  it  was  a  terrible  time  ;  but  in  what  oocarred  then  you  have  a  picture
of  what  occurs  in  every  homan  heart  where  insobriety  is  rampant.  What  is  to  be
done  to  remedy  this  terrible  moral  disorder  7  How  is  sobriety  to  be  established  7
Thus  we  see  that  this  virtue  of  sobriety  is  something  more  than  a  mere  negation.
It  consists  not  merely  in  escaping  from  the  tyranny  of  lust,  but  in  possessing  such  a
eound  jadgment,  such  a  calm  recollectedness,  such  an  administrative  capacity,  so
to  speaik,  as  shall  enable  us  to  hold  the  reins  of  government  under  Divine  authority
in  the  commonwealth  of  our  being,  as  "  a  king  against  whom  there  is  no  rising  ap  "
(Prov.  XXX,  31) — our  renewed  will  becoming  God's  own  vicegerent  within  our
redeemed  and  consecrated  nature.  Sobriety  regulates,  but  does  not  exterminate —
modifies,  but  does  not  ignore — our  natural  propensities,  which  in  themselves
become  only  good  or  bad  as  they  are  kept  in  their  proper  place,  or  allowed  to  depart
from  it.  Nor,  again,  is  sobriety  to  be  confused  with  phlegmatic  dulness  and
insensibility ;  on  the  contrary,  it  is  perfectly  compatible  with  the  loftiest  eutha-
Biasm,  and  is  often  the  guide  and  supporter  of  burning  zeal.  Nor,  once  more,  mast
we  fail  to  distinguish  between  sobriety  and  moroseness.  There  is  nothing  gloomy,
nothing  misanthropic,  nothing  aSected  or  annatoral,  though  much  that  is  super-
natural, in  the  sober  life.  The  sober  Christian  sees  things,  not  so  much  by  the
*'  dry  light "  of  the  ancient  philosopher  as  in  the  warm  hght  of  Divine  love  that
pervades  everything.  Are  we  living  a  sober  life  ?  Do  we  know  what  it  is  thus  in
Ood'B  name  and  by  Gtod's  power  to  possess  our  sools  ?  How  common  a  thing,  for
example,  is  it  to  meet  with  Christian  people  who  are  the  victims,  not  the  masters,  of
an  evil  and  irritable  temper,  which  is  ready  to  be  excited  on  even  the  slenderest
provocation,  and  to  suggest  the  stormy  word,  the  bitter  thought,  the  hasty  and
unjustifiable  action  I  Such  a  habit  of  soul  is  simply  one  form  of  that  moral
insobriety,  that  incapacity  of  self-control,  which  erases  from  our  minds,  so  to  speak,
for  the  moment,  the  sober  conclusions  of  reason,  silences  oar  moral  sentiment,  or
BO  bewilders  and  confuses  it,  that  it  is  no  longer  able  to  form  a  jast  estimate  of
conduct,  to  condemn  the  wrong  and  maintain  the  right.  But  are  you  living  by
Grace  ?  Can  Christ  in  you  e^ibit  a  bad  temper  7  The  truth  is,  we  come  down
from  the  level  of  Grace  and  "  walk  as  men,"  and  then  we  need  scarcely  wonder
that  the  old  tree  brings  forth  the  old  evil  fruit.  Or,  to  take  another  illustration,
how  many  professing  Christians  are  hampered  and  marred  by  some  form  of  worldli*
ness,  by  vanity,  love  of  money,  or  by  the  ambitious  dreams  of  youth?  This  is  but
another  form  of  insobriety ;  oar  spiritual  apprehension  has  been  confused  by  the
insurrection  of  lower  desires  unworthy  of  our  Christian  character.  How  many
ChristianB  have  to  complain  of  their  bondage  to  their  own  sensual  propensities  ?
Let  me  point  oat  that  as  Grace  provides  as  with  the  power,  so  in  the  very  first  great
lesson  that  she  gives  as  she  teaches  how  the  power  is  to  be  apphed.  It  is  through
faith  that  we  receive  the  first  great  blessing  that  Divine  Grace  communicates  ;  it  is
through  faith  that  we  receive  all  others.  Our  will  has  indeed  to  be  exercised,  but
it  has  to  be  exercised  rather  in  admitting  its  own  inability,  and  in  surrendering  t«
Another  the  task  for  which  it  feels  incompetent,  than  in  endeavouring  to  perform
the  task  itself.   {W.  E.  M.  E.  Aitken,)      The  righteous  life  .-—The  word  "  righteow-


CHAP,  n.]  TITUS.  121

ness  "  sometimes  signifies,  or  at  any  rate  includes,  what  is  here  spoken  of  as
temperance  or  sobriety,  and  sometimes  what  is  here  spoken  of  as  "  godliness."
Bat  inasmnoh  as  it  here  stands  side  by  side  with  these  two  other  terms,  we  believe
it  to  be  used  in  a  narrower  sense,  and  to  have  special  reference  to  our  relations
with  our  fellow-man.  The  true  meaning  of  the  word  "  righteousness  "  is  suggested
to  US  by  a  reference  to  the  root  word  "  right,"  from  which  it  is  derived,  just  as
analogously  in  the  Greek  language  the  word  SiKawavvri  draws  its  essential  import
from  its  connection  with  its  root  word  SiicTj.  The  idea  of  righteousness  springs  from
the  recognition  of  right.  There  are  certain  rights  which  have  their  origin  in  the
nature  of  our  relations  with  others,  which  they  are  justified  in  claiming  that  we
Bhoold  respect,  and  from  which  we  cannot  escape,  and  the  recognition  of  these
rights  and  the  fulfilment  of  these  claims  is  that  which  we  understand  by  ' '  right-
eousness, "  We  are  under  certain  obligations  in  the  first  instance  to  God,  and  God
has  certain  rights  in  us  which  He  cannot  for  a  moment  ignore  or  decline  to  assert
and  enforce.  In  recognising  these  rights,  and  in  responding  to  these  claims,  we
fulfil  the  law  of  righteousness,  so  far  as  God  is  concerned.  Further,  there  are
certain  rights  which  our  fellow-men  have  in  us,  which  we  are  not  less  bound  to
respect ;  and  inasmuch  as  we  are  at  present  using  the  term  righteousness  in  the
somewhat  restricted  sense  that  I  have  indicated,  it  will  be  desirable  to  give  this
second  class  of  rights  our  special  consideration.  Tes,  our  fellow-men  have  certain
rights  in  us  from  which  we  cannot  free  ourselves.  We  owe  to  society  a  great  debt.
Perhaps  we  do  not  sufiQciently  let  our  minds  dwell  upon  the  thought  of  our  debt  to
society,  yet  everything  around  might  well  remind  us  of  it.  The  very  food  that  we
eat  is  the  product  of  social  labour.  We  are  dependent  upon  society,  and  hence  are
constantly  indebted  to  it.  The  very  money  which  we  offer  in  return  for  these
benefits  is  but  the  symbol  of  the  accumulated  labour  of  mankind ;  and  those  who
are  bom  in  the  possession  of  most  of  it  are  therefore  the  greatest  debtors  of  all.  It
is  true  that  some  of  us  endeavour  to  contribute  to  the  wealth  of  society  by  our
labour,  thus  making  some  return  for  what  we  have  received  ;  but  if  we  reflect  how
very  different  our  condition  is  from  what  it  would  have  been  had  we  been  cut  off
from  society  from  our  early  years  we  shall  be  able  to  see  how  much  our  debt
exceeds  our  capacities  of  repayment.  The  Christian  feels  that  he  owes  an  even
heavier  debt  than  this  to  his  feUow-man.  He  cannot  forget  that  it  was  through  the
devotion  of  human  messengers,  who  jeoparded  their  lives  in  the  task,  that  the  glad
tidings  of  the  gospel  ever  became  so  widely  known  as  to  reach  his  ear.  He  cannot
forget  his  debt  to  the  Church  of  Christ  all  through  the  ages,  nor  his  obligations  to
those  who  have  represented  her  beneficent  influences  towards  him.  Who  shall
say  how  much  we  may  have  been  influenced  for  God  and  for  good,  by  comparatively
trivial  circumstances,  which  have  not  even  left  their  impress  upon  our  memory,  or
perhaps  of  which  we  have  never  known  at  all?  "AU  souls  are  Mine,"  says  the
great  Father  of  spirits ;  and  because  they  are  His,  therefore  they  possess  a  certain
definite  claim  upon  our  consideration,  indifference  to  which  must  needs  argue
indifference  to  Him.  There  are  certain  things  which  society  has  a  right  to  claim
that  we  should  not  do,  and  there  are  others  which  society  has  a  right  to  claim  that
we  should  do.  Now,  as  a  rule,  human  laws  only  recognise  the  negative  claims  of
right.  They  provide  means  for  checking  men  from  performing  unlawful  deeds.
When  we  turn  from  laws.  Divine  and  human,  to  conventional  morality,  here  also  we
find  ourselves  mainly  dealing  with  the  negative  side  of  moral  obligation.  The  idea
of  righteousness  most  generally  entertained  by  society  is  negative  rather  than
positive.  Men  flatter  themselves  that  if  they  have  done  no  very  definite  harm  to
any  one  they  have  pretty  well  fulfilled  the  law  of  righteousness.  How  often  are  we
told  by  those  whom  we  seek  to  convict  of  sin,  and  of  their  need  of  a  Saviour,  that
they  have  always  endeavoured  to  do  their  duty  by  God  and  man ;  and  when  we
come  to  examine  what  their  idea  of  duty  is,  we  discover  that  they  simply  mean  that
they  are  not  criminals  or  open  offenders  against  public  decency !  But  let  us  observe,
in  spite  of  the  common  sentiment,  that  the  positive  claims  of  the  law  of  righteous-
ness are  just  as  strong  and  just  as  incapable  of  being  defeated  as  are  its  negative
claims.  In  plain  language,  we  are  just  as  much  bound  to  live  for  the  good  of  our
fellow-men  as  to  abstain  from  injuring  them  ;  and  even  if  we  can  satisi^  ourselves
that  we  have  abstained  from  injuring  our  fellow-men,  unless  we  can  also  show  that,
according  to  the  measure  of  our  opportunity,  we  have  actually  benefited  them,  we
are  not  in  a  position  to  claim  that  we  have  even  made  an  attempt  to  fulfil  the  law  of
righteousness.  But  have  men  as  a  rule  as  much  right  as  they  think  they  have,  to
eonclade  that  they  have  fulfilled  even  the  negative  claims  of  the  Divine  law  ?    We


123  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n.

may  wrong  our  neighbour  without  any  overt  action,  and  perhaps  more  grievously
than  il  we  had  injured  his  body  with  our  hand.  The  scandalous  story,  even  the
uncharitable  thought,  which  may  be  the  parent  of  so  many  cruel  actions,  who  shall
say  how  much  of  base  injustice  there  may  be  in  these,  and  yet  the  world  thinkb
lightly  of  them.  How  much  of  selfish  grasping  and  pushing  may  strain  tha
relations  of  man  with  man,  and  yet  no  such  act  of  dishonesty  or  violence  be
committed  as  could  be  taken  cognisance  of  by  law.  All  this  may  pass  for  justice
amongst  men,  but  does  it  appear  so  in  the  eyes  of  God?  So  what  does  it  matter
how  little  we  pay  our  commercial  clerks,  or  our  half-starved  sempstresses ;  or  what
does  it  matter  if  we  deny  a  Sabbath  to  our  cab  and  omnibus  drivers,  and  keep  them
slaving,  some  fourteen  hours  a  day,  all  the  year  round.  Justice,  after  all,  is  not
such  a  very  common  virtue  amongst  mankind.  But  it  is  possible  for  us  to  injure
our  neighbour  in  other  ways  than  these,  and  thus  equally  to  offend  against  the
negative  demands  of  the  law  of  righteousness.  How  many  are  ready  enough  to
affirm  "  that  they  have  never  done  any  harm  to  anybody,"  who  have  never  even
reflected  upon  the  injury  that  may  have  been  caused  even  to  their  nearest  friends  by
the  unholy  effect  of  their  influence  or  example.  How  many  a  once  pure-minded
and  innocent  girl  is  wrecked  and  ruined  for  life,  by  learning  only  too  well  the
lessons  of  vanity  and  levity  taught  by  companions  and  acquaintances,  who  never
seemed  to  themselves  to  be  vicious.  But  even  when  it  can  be  shown  that  we  are
blameless  in  this  respect,  we  have  yet  to  face  its  positive  claims.  The  same
authority  that  claims  that  we  should  do  justly  tells  us  also  that  God  requires  that
we  should  love  mercy.  This  is  as  much  a  matter  of  obligation,  arising  out  of  our
relations  with  our  feUow-man,  as  is  the  other ;  and  the  man  that  does  not  love
mercy,  although  he  may  flatter  himself  that  he  does  justly,  has  not  fulfilled  the  law
of  righteousness.  But  while  under  the  Old  Dispensation  the  legal  obligation  was
distinctly  recognised,  we  shall  see  here  also  how  much  better  and  more  effectually
grace  teaches  than  law.  Grace  is  not  content  with  laying  down  the  positive
precept ;  she  presses  this  lesson  upon  our  mind  more  forcibly  than  any  command-
ment could,  by  setting  before  us  this  as  the  most  prominent  and  striking  character-
istic  of  the  life  of  Him  whom  she  has  already  taught  us  to  trust  and  love.  His
was  no  cold  negative  morality,^  no  mere  abstinence  from  sin  in  every  form ;  His
morality  was  the  fulfilment  of  the  law,  because  it  was  the  continuous  exhibition  of
love  to  the  sons  of  men.  His  career  is  thus  epitomised  by  one  who  was  an  eye-
witness of  it.  "  He  went  about  doing  good,  and  healing  all  that  were  oppressed
of  the  devil ;  for  God  was  with  Him."  More  than  this ;  Grace  not  only  exhibits
to  ns  this  perfect  ideal,  and  sets  before  us  a  personal  example  of  pure  unselfish
benevolence  in  His  life  and  history,  but  she  offers  to  as  all  her  best  benefits  as  the
result  of  His  having  possessed  and  exer/sed  towards  ns  those  qualities  which  she
desires  as  to  imitate.  •'  The  love  of  Christ  constraineth  us,"  exclaims  the  apostle ;
that  is  to  say,  not  our  love  for  Christ,  but  the  consciousness  of  His  love  to  us —
"  because  we  thus  judge,  that  if  one  died  for  all,  then  all  died :  and  that  He  died  for
all,  that  they  who  live  should  not  henceforth  live  unto  themselves,  but  nnto  Him
who  died  for  them,  and  rose  again."  Who  that  has  been  a  recipient  of  Divine
favour  can  be  insensible  to  such  an  argument  as  that  ?  How  can  we  avail  ourselves
of  the  self-sacrificing  love  of  Christ  for  our  own  salvation,  and  yet  be  unmindful  of
the  obligation  under  which  this  lays  us  ?  We  owe  our  salvation,  our  immunity
from  condemnation,  and  our  justification  before  God,  to  the  fact  that,  as  representing
our  unrighteousness,  Christ  died,  while,  representing  the  righteousness  that  God
expects  of  us.  He  lived.  But  if  this  be  so,  how  can  we  claim  the  benefits  of  His
life  and  death  without  repudiating  that  which  in  Him  was  crucified,  and  accepting
that  which  in  Him  won  the  smile  of  the  Divine  Father's  approval  J  To  sum  up
then,  Grace  teaches  us  to  hve  righteously,  first  by  showing  in  a  human  life  what
righteousness,  both  negative  and  positive,  is,  next  by  loading  us  with  all  the
spiritual  benefits  that  we  enjoy  in  virtue  of  the  righteousness  of  this  our  Great
Exemplar ;  so  that  gratitude  to  Him  binds  us  to  a  life  of  righteousness,  and  further
by  the  illustration  of  God's  judgment  against  aU  unrighteousness  and  sin,  and  by
the  fulfilment  of  that  judgment  upon  the  person  of  the  sinner's  Eepresentative  on
the  Cross  of  Calvary,  and  as  the  necessary  sequel  to  this  legal  condemnation  by  the
introduction  of  the  Divine  Spirit  as  a  power  of  righteousness  into  our  hearts.  Surely
there  is  no  lack  of  means  towards  the  end  in  the  school  of  grace.  She  is  well
supplied,  not  only  with  lessons,  but  with  all  that  is  needed  to  bring  the  lessons  home.
But  further,  our  idea  of  righteousness  must  ever  be  relative  to  our  subjective
oonditioD.     That  which  does  not  offend  my  sense  of  righteousness  to-day,  I  may


CHAT.  n.J  TITUS.  128

distinctly  oondemn  and  repudiate  a  twelvemonth  hence.  We  can  speak  with
assurance  of  extreme  forms,  either  of  evil  on  the  one  hand,  or  of  good  on  the  other;
but  our  judgment  begins  to  waver  and  assurance  to  forsake  us  as  we  approach  the
border  line,  and  it  is  only  as  we  become  through  Grace  possessed  more  and  more  of
God,  and  more  and  more  taken  possession  of  by  God,  that  our  vision  becomes  clear
enough  to  enable  us  to  discern  the  dividing  line,  or  even  anything  that  closely
approaches  to  it.  But  the  learners  in  the  school  of  Grace  have  one  great  advantage.
They  are  not  students  of  ethics,  but  children  of  God ;  and  therefore  it  is  less  their
habit  to  inquire  whether  a  thing  is  right  or  wrong,  than  to  endeavour  to  discover
whether  or  not  it  be  in  accordance  with  the  mind  of  God  concerning  them.  They
have  bo  desire  to  discover  the  minimum  of  obligation,  but  a  great  ambition  to  reach
the  maximum  of  devotion.  As  the  knowledge  of  the  Divine  will  opens  more  and
more  clearly  upon  their  apprehension,  they  yield  their  members  more  and  more  fully
servants  of  righteousness  unto  holiness ;  for  this  is  how  Grace  teaches  as  to  live
righteously.  The  just  or  righteous  man  lives  by  his  faith.  He  is  not  only  quickened
by  it  at  first,  but  lives  by  it  when  he  is  quickened,  and  herein  lies  his  power  for
righteousness.  But  such  an  one  cannot  be  satisfied  with  mere  negative  morality ;
for  love  glows  within  his  heart,  kindled  by  the  breath  of  God;  and  love  is  the
fulfilling  of  the  law.  He  owes  it  to  his  God,  he  owes  it  to  his  new  life,  he  owes  it  to
society,  to  live  not  for  himself.  {Ibid.)  The  godly  life: — We  proceed  now  to
consider  the  crowning  characteristic  of  the  new  life  and  grandest  lesson  that  Grace
essays  to  teach.  All  her  other  lessons,  however  important  in  themselves,  are
designed  to  lead  up  to  godliness ;  and  unless  this  lesson  is  learnt,  all  others  must
remain  incomplete ;  for  this  word  brings  before  us  the  true  end  of  man.  The  true
end  of  man  is  to  be  attained  in  his  own  personality ;  it  is  in  the  proper  development
and  education  of  the  highest  and  most  spiritual  faculties  of  his  nature,  and  in  the
concentration  of  these  upon  their  proper  object,  that  man  rises  to  his  true  destiny
and  fulfils  the  great  purpose  of  his  being.  That  object  is  God ;  and  in  the  develop-
ment of  those  faculties  which  have  God  for  their  proper  object,  and  in  their
concentration  upon  Him,  consists  the  state  or  habit  of  godliness,  while  the  education
and  training  of  these  faculties  is  the  work  of  grace,  as  she  teaches  us  to  lead  a  godly
life.  Christianity  is  a  rehgion,  not  a  mere  etiiical  system,  and  designed  to  produce
spirituality  rather  than  morality — to  teach  man  to  reaUse  and  take  advantage  of  his
proper  relations  with  God,  not  to  show  him  how  he  can  improve  himself  inde-
pendently of  any  such  relations.  God  is  the  centre  around  which  all  the  moral
teaching  of  the  New  Testament  revolves,  or  from  which  it  radiates.  In  the  Christian
system  the  revelation  of  the  attributes  of  God  in  the  person  of  His  Son  is  the
standard  of  moral  truth,  and  relation  of  our  conduct  to  God's  will  thus  revealed  the
criterion  of  its  moral  character.  The  word  "  conversion,"  with  which  modern
evangelising  preaching  has  made  us  all  familiar,  and  more  particularly  the  word
in  the  original  Greek  which  we  thus  translate,  is  very  well  chosen  as  being
suggestive  of  the  only  possible  commencement  of  the  life  of  godliness.  It  signifies
not  only  a  turning,  but  a  turning  towards  God.  When  first  His  Divine  infiuenoea
begin  to  move  ns,  He  finds  us  with  our  hearts  averted  from  Him,  and  our  Uvea
setting  in  an  opposite  direction.  Then  comes  the  first  great  change :  the  godless
heart  is  brought  by  the  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  feel  its  need  of  God,  and  in
gelding  to  this  sense  of  need,  and  in  the  endeavour  to  satisfy  it,  the  godly  life  finds
its  commencement.  "Jesus  Christ  died  for  our  sins,  the  just  for  the  unjust,  to
bring  us  to  God."  When  that  great  change  has  taken  place,  which  we  usually  call
conversion,  its  most  salient  feature  is  always  the  complete  alteration  and,  we  may
say,  reversal  of  all  our  previous  relations  with  God.  Instead  of  fiying  from  Him,
we  have  now  boldness  to  approach  Him ;  instead  of  looking  upon  His  service  as  a
yoke  of  bondage,  we  find  it  the  only  freedom.  It  is  doubtless  with  a  view  to  this
end  that  faith  has  been  Divinely  appointed  as  the  subjective  condition  of  justification.
He  has  appointed  simple  faith  in  Himself ;  for  this  reason,  amongst  others,  that
faith  brings  us  into  the  closest  and  most  personal  relations  with  God  Himself.  No
man  who  accepts  the  Christian  revelation  at  all  can  fail  to  recognise  the  justice  of
the  Divine  claims.  Created  at  God's  pleasure,  and  for  His  glory ;  redeemed  by  the
life  of  His  Son,  and  consecrated  by  the  gift  of  the  Divine  Spirit ;  the  believer  must,
as  a  matter  of  theory  at  any  rate,  admit  that  he  is  under  an  obligation  to  his  God,
from  the  force  of  which  it  is  impossible  to  escape.  Two  thoughts,  however,  about
these  rights  of  God  in  His  creature  we  may  call  attention  to  in  passing.  The  first
is,  that  these  claims  of  God  upon  us  are  not  arbitrary  in  their  character,  or  despotic
in  their  operation;  they  are  perfectly  consistent  with,  and  indeed  they  are  the


124  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n.

expression  of,  Divine  love  towards  man,  and  therefore  they  are  most  strictly  in
accordance  with  our  true  interests.  The  apparent  opposition  that  sometimes  seems
to  exist  between  man's  interest  and  God's  will  arises  from  the  fact  that  man  doea
not  clearly  apprehend  his  own  interests,  and  confuses  between  his  real  good  and  his
temporary  gratification ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  he  misunderstands  the  nature  of
the  Divine  will.  If  we  could  only  obtain  a  firm  and  practical  grasp  of  this  great
truth,  that  our  interests  and  God's  will  must  coincide,  what  different  lives  we  should
lead  I  The  second  thought  to  which  I  desire  to  refer  flows  from  this,  an  ever-
necessary  sequel.  Since  God's  claims  cannot  be  opposed  to  our  truest  well-being,
therefore  they  can  never  be  withdrawn  or  even  modified.  Were  God  to  ask  less  than
He  does  He  would  be  doing  us  an  injury,  not  a  benefit ;  for  He  would  be  teaching
us  to  be  satisfied  with  something  less  than  our  highest  good.  These  claims  of  Ood
upon  us  are  like  the  claims  of  the  law  of  riphteousness,  both  negative  and  positive.
From  certain  forms  of  conduct  the  law  of  godliness  demands  that  we  should  abstain  ;
while,  on  the  other  hand,  there  are  certain  things  which  it  enjoins,  *'  Ye  cannot  serve
God  and  manamon."  This  first  negative  claim  of  God  upon  His  creature  man  is
represented  in  the  Decalogue  as  being  attributable  to  a  certain  attribute  of  the  Divine
character,  which  is  denoted  by  the  word  ' '  jealousy."  Such  being  the  nature  of  the
first  claim  of  the  law  of  godliness,  and  such  the  attribute  to  which  it  is  due,  let  us  pro-
ceed to  consider  the  second,  and  then  to  observe  how  Grace  teaches  us  to  comply  with
these  claims.  "  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thine  heart,  and  with  all
thy  soul,  and  with  aJl  thy  might "  (Deut.  vi  5).  This  claim  includes  all  others ;  for
here  also  "  Love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law."  But  how  shall  we  respond  to  these
claims  ?  The  Law  might  say  to  the  Israelites,  "  Thou  shalt  have  none  other  gods
but  Jehovah."  But  none  the  less  Israel  proceeded  to  copy  the  idolatries  of  Egypt
and  Canaan.  And  the  law  may  repeat  its  solemn  prohibition  to  men  in  oor  own
day,  but  will  that  keep  them  from  worshipping  at  the  shrine  of  Mammon,  or  Pleasure,
or  Fashion  ?  The  Law  might  tell  the  Israelites  to  love  the  Lord  their  God  with  all
their  heart ;  but  that  did  not  prevent  them  from  turning  their  backs  upon  Him
altogether.  '•  My  people  have  forgotten  Me  days  without  number."  Grace  presents
to  as  the  claims  of  God  in  the  light  of  privileges,  ever  pointing  to  the  Cross  for  an
argument  to  move  our  wills,  and  appealing  to  the  true  character  of  the  Divine
purpose  for  a  justification  of  her  claims.  Here  is  a  specimen  of  the  way  in  which
she  urges  God's  claims,  "  I  beseech  you  therefore,  brethren,  by  the  mercies  of  God,
that  ye  present  your  bodies  a  Uving  sacrifice,  holy,  acceptable  unto  God,  which  is
your  reasonable  service.  And  be  not  conformed  to  this  world :  but  be  ye  transformed
by  the  renewing  of  your  mind,  that  ye  may  prove  what  is  that  good,  and  perfect,
and  acceptable,  will  of  God."  So  long  as  our  hearts  resent  or  even  demur  to  the
daims  of  God  upon  us  we  cannot  enjoy  the  fellowship  of  God.  We  are  not  agreed.
But  as  soon  as  we  have  joyfully  accepted  these  claims,  even  though  we  may  have
only  begun  very  inadequately  to  fulfil  them,  the  cause  of  disagreement  is  removed,
and  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  the  soul  from  enjoying  the  life  of  fellowship  with
God.  It  is  not  diflBcult  to  see  the  connection  between  this  habit  of  fellowship  with
God  and  the  next  feature  of  the  life  of  godliness  to  which  we  will  refer,  and  the
development  of  which  constitutes  frequently  the  next  forward  step  in  Christian
experience.  EeconciUation  is  necessary  to  fellowship,  fellowship  is  necessary  to
personal  love.  This  affection  is  the  result  of  personsil  knowledge,  and  increases
with  it.  They  must  perforce  love  Him  most  who  know  Him  best,  and  they  must
know  Him  best  who  are  most  in  His  society,  who  Uve  in  the  secret  of  His  presence.
Nor  is  this  love  of  the  soul  for  God  a  mere  enthusiasm  of  admiration,  though
admiration  must  ever  be  one  of  its  most  prominent  elements.  Nor  is  this  love  of
the  soul  for  God  a  mere  sentiment,  a  sickly  enthusiasm.  Men  have  been  prompt  to
turn  their  backs  upon  the  dearest  earthly  affection,  the  tenderest  ties,  because  the
love  of  God  led  them  on.  But  the  love  of  God  must  needs  produce  very  definite
subjective  effects  upon  him  who  knows  its  blessedness.  Even  amongst  us  men,
where  persons  are  bound  together  by  close  and  mutual  affection,  it  has  often  been
observed  that  a  certain  assimilation  takes  place  between  them,  even  though  they
may  have  originally  been  very  unlike  each  other — an  assimilation  that  affects  not
only  character,  but  outward  manners  and  habits,  sometimes  even  extending  to  the
expression  of  the  countenances  and  the  tones  of  the  voice.  It  is  not  surprising,
then,  that  they  who  walk  with  God,  and  thus  come  completely  under  the  influence
of  the  love  of  God,  should  be  conformed  unto  the  Divine  image.  "  Beholding  His
glory,  we  are  changed  into  the  same  image  from  glory  to  glory,  as  by  the  Spirit  of
the  Lord."    The  characteristics  of  the  godly  life  are  of  the  most  practical  kind,  fox


CHAP,  n.]  TITUS.  125

true  godliness  influences  everything,  elevating  and  purifying  all,  and  he  who  Uvea  it
will  oi?er  such  a  contrast  in  his  life  and  conversation  to  those  who  live  it  not,  that
men  shall  stiU  be  constrained  to  marvel  at  such,  and  to  take  knowledge  of  them
that  they  have  been  and  still  are  with  Jesus.  Are  we  living  godly  in  Christ  Jesus?
It  often  happens  that  present  salvation,  in  virtue  of  the  atoning  work  of  Christ,  haa
been  accepted  without  any  very  definite  apprehension  of  what  I  may  describe  as  the
moral  and  actual  benefits  ensured  to  us  by  that  work,  and  of  the  claims  that  God
makes  upon  us  in  consequence  of  it.  Where  this  has  been  the  case,  a  change  so
marked  and  definite  that  it  is  sometimes  described  as  a  second  conversion  often
takes  place,  when  first  the  eyes  are  fuUy  opened  to  see  what  the  fulness  of  God'a
provision  actually  is.  My  next  word  of  counsel  would  be,  that  the  soul  that  wishea
to  grow  in  godliness  should  cultivate  a  habit  of  delicate  sensibility  to  the  Divine
influences.  This  is  chiefly  to  be  done  by  making  prompt  and  unquestioning
response  to  the  Divine  motions.  Yield  to  those  heavenly  desires,  those  Godward
aspirations,  which  suddenly  interrupt  the  ordinary  occupations  of  the  mind.  Next
I  would  say.  Be  very  jealous  of  idols.  The  object  maybe  in  itself  an  innocent  one ;
it  becomes  most  guilty  when  it  takes  in  any  degree  the  place  of  God.  And  lastly,
do  not  be  satisfied  with  anything  that  seems  to  be  beneficial  until  you  find  God  in
it.  The  Bible  will  be  a  •'  weU  of  salvation,"  just  in  so  far  as  God  speaks  to  ua
from  its  pages  through  the  Incarnate  Word,  and  by  the  Divine  Spirit.  (I6?rf.)
Sobriety  and  righteousness  : — 1.  The  doctrine  of  grace  teacheth  not  only  to  aostain
from  evil,  but  also  to  do  good,  and  is  the  mistress  of  true  sanctification  in  both
parts  of  it,  both  the  mortification  of  sin,  as  also  quickening  in  righteousness.  For
as  it  is  in  the  lighting  of  a  dark  house,  first  darkness  must  give  place,  and  light
must  succeed,  so  is  it  in  the  shining  of  this  light  of  grace,  the  night  must  pass,  and
then  the  day  must  come ;  the  old  man  must  be  cast  off  with  his  lusts,  and  then  the
new  man  put  on.  2.  Note  that  where  the  gospel  bringeth  to  any  person  salvation,
there  it  looketh  for  return  of  some  recompense ;  and  namely  this,  tliat  it  be
entertained  with  sobriety,  righteousness,  and  godliness,  which  are  the  three  graces
which  go  hand  in  hand,  and  every  one  looking  at  another.  Sobriety  keepeth  the
house,  and  moderateth  the  mind  at  home  ;  righteousness  looketh  forth,  and  giveth
every  man  his  due  abroad ;  piety  looketh  up  unto  God,  and  giveth  Him  His  right.
Sobriety  preserveth,  and  la  content  with  its  own  estate  and  portion  ;  righteousness
preserveth,  and  is  content  that  other  men  enjoy  their  estate  and  portion;  piety
preserveth,  and  is  willing  that  God's  part  be  reserved  unto  Him.  Again,  sobriety
mast  go  before  as  a  nurse  of  the  other  two,  for  he  that  dealeth  not  soberly,  cannot
deal  justly,  but  depriveth  the  Church,  the  commonwealth,  and  family  of  their  due.
Righteousness  without  godliness  is  but  atheism,  and  a  beautiful  abomination;
and  piety  without  righteousness  is  but  hypocrisy;  for  how  absurd  it  is  to
be  precise  with  man  and  careless  how  wickedly  we  deal  with  God?  Now
aa  sobriety,  the  first,  is  the  nurse  of  the  two  latter,  so  piety,  the  last,  is  the
mother  of  the  two  former,  which,  where  it  is  wanting,  neither  of  the  former,  nor  both
of  them,  can  commend  a  man  unto  God.  Therefore,  none  of  these  thrse  adverbs  of
Paul  (as  a  learned  writer  speaketh)  must  be  forgotten,  which  jointly  contain  all  the
rules  of  Christian  life.  (T.  Taylor,  D.D.)  In  this  present  world: — 1.  Note  that
godliness  must  not  so  lie  hid  in  the  heart,  but  it  must  appear  in  the  eyes  of  the
world,  neither  must  it  be  neglected  tiU  death,  but  exercised  in  this  present  world  :
a  point  the  more  needful  to  be  propounded,  in  that  every  man  naturally  wisheth
with  Balaam  to  die  well  and  godly ;  but  forgetting  the  practice  of  piety  in  their  life
time,  we  see  the  most  men  would  be  put  in  mind  of  God  at  their  death,  and  send
for  the  minister  when  the  physician  hath  left  them  hopeless  of  life,  yea,  albeit
they  have  forgotten  the  Almighty,  and  neglected  acquaintance  with  Him  all  their
days,  yet  at  the  finishing  of  them  they  would  seem  to  seek  unto  Him.  But  it  is
most  righteous  with  God  that  an  ungodly  life  be  finished  with  a  proportional  death,
whatsoever  it  seemeth  to  be :  and,  therefore,  it  is  a  safe  rule  worthy  our  remem-
brance, that  whatsoever  we  would  be  found  doing  on  our  dying  day,  to  be  doing  it
every  day  while  we  live.  2.  Note  hence  that  it  ia  a  most  deceitful  and  desperate
argument  thus  to  conclude — If  I  be  ordained  to  salvation  let  me  never  pray,  never
serve  God,  and  do  what  I  will  I  shall  be  saved,  and  on  the  contrary ;  and  hence  to
oast  off  all  the  care  of  godliness ;  for  this  openly  proclaimeth  want  of  grace,  which
directeth  men  to  the  means,  and  leadeth  them  the  way  of  salvation  in  this  present
world.  God  in  wisdom  hath  combined  to  every  end  His  means  in  all  His  ordinai7
eoarsea ;  as  to  natural  life,  bread,  sleep,  physic ;  so  to  the  spiritual,  the  word,
Moraments,  prayer,  sobriety,  righteousness,  piety ;  and  therefore  the  argument  will


126  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (oHi*.  n.

be  fonnd  in  the  contrary  thus :  If  Ck>d  have  appointed  me  to  die  the  death  of  the
rigfateoas,  He  bath  ordained  me  to  the  means,  namely,  to  live  the  life  of  the
righteoas ;  if  to  glory,  then  to  grace ;  if  to  the  fall  revelation  of  glory  hereafter,
then  to  the  firstf raits  of  it  here  in  grace;  if  to  the  city  of  the  great  King  hereafter,
then  to  the  snbnrbs  here ;  there  is  no  jamping  to  heaven,  no  more  than  a  man  can
leap  from  one  city  to  another  apon  earth.  3.  Note  hence  what  is  the  proper  end  of
every  man's  life  in  this  present  world,  namely,  that  in  the  way  of  a  sober,  righteoas
and  religious  life,  he  may  attain  everlasting  happiness  hereafter.  Alas,  how  do
many  pervert  the  end  of  their  lives,  some  to  get  wealth,  hononr,  and  great  estates ;
others  to  sit  down  to  eat  and  drink,  and  rise  up  to  play  ;  others  to  trade  in  some
one  or  other  special  sin  and  lust,  but  let  us  that  will  be  wise  to  salvation,  seeing
it  is  called  to-day,  and  our  acceptable  time  and  day  of  salvation  is  come  upon  as,
beware  of  hardening  our  hearts.  Let  us  not  dare  to  strive  against  the  Holy  Gbost
in  the  ministry,  for  contenmers  of  grace  in  this  present  world  shall  never  partake
of  the  glory  of  the  just  hereafter.  {Ihid.)  Godliness  must  calculate  the  resisting
element : — Power  is  calculable  by  the  results  it  yields,  but  if  we  are  attempting  to
estimate  the  force  of  a  projectile,  we  shall  take  account  not  only  of  the  velocity  at
which  it  moves,  but  also  of  the  quality  and  tenacity  of  the  resisting  material  which
it  Bhows  itself  competent  to  penetrate.  One  evidence  of  the  vital  energy  of  Chris-
tianity is  shown  in  this,  that  in  all  its  movements  and  demands  and  prohibitions,  it
runs  steadily  counter  to  the  whole  grain  of  natural  desire.  Whatever  Christianity
has  done  or  may  yet  be  doing  in  the  world,  it  is  doing  it  all  in  the  teeth  of  spon-
taneous impulse.  It  is  a  system  that  requires  us  to  love  oar  neighbour  as  we  do
ourselves.  It  enjoins  upon  us  to  crucify  our  affections  and  lusts.  It  is  a  religion
that  is  contented  with  nothing  less  than  sacrifice.  It  meets  the  sool  at  the  level  of
its  higher  needs,  to  be  sure ;  bat  that  is  not  the  level  at  which  we  find  it  our  first
impulse  to  live.  Christianity  prohibits  oar  doing  a  host  of  things  that  we  would
like  to  do,  and  requires  us  to  do  another  host  of  things  that  we  have  no  disposition
to  do.  Every  inch  that  Christianity  has  gained,  or  may  still  be  gaining,  it  has
gained  by  a  square  fight.  All  advance  that  it  has  made  has  been  so  much  conquest
on  the  one  side,  over  against  so  much  reluctant  and  contested  surrender  on  the
other.  In  estimating  the  draught-power  of  a  locomotive,  we  must  consider  not  only
the  rate  at  which  it  moves  and  the  tons  of  freight  it  drags,  but  the  grade  at  which
it  is  pulling.  If  I  can  row  eight  miles  an  hour,  it  is  important  to  know  whether  I
can  do  it  with  the  wind,  or  in  the  teeth  of  it.  There  is  nothing  evangelical  in  a
man's  first  impulses.  So  in  estimating  the  inherent  vigour  of  Christianity,  it  must
be  studiously  considered  that  in  all  its  advances  it  has  steadily  trained  upon  it  the
charged  and  primed  artillery  of  man's  natural  lust  and  congenital  ambition.  All
the  way  from  the  last  man  that  became  a  Christian,  back  to  Peter  who  forsook  his
fishing-tackle  at  the  Lord's  call,  the  process  of  becoming  a  Christian  has  been  a
process  of  surrender.  Count  that  carefully  in  calculating  the  spiritual  dynamics
of  the  doctrine  of  the  Nazarene.  {C.  H.  Farkhurst,  D.D.)  Duty  to  our  Father  in
heaven  must  be  united  with  duty  to  our  brother  on  earth : — You  have  a  son,  I  will
suppose,  in  a  distant  land.  He  has  been  prosperous,  he  has  become  honoured,  In-
fluential, and  beloved.  He  has  won  golden  opinions  from  all  for  his  abilities,  his
charities,  his  devotion  to  the  interests  of  the  community.  He  is  known  as  a  tender
father ;  he  is  reputed  a  munificent  benefactor  and  large-hearted  philanthropist.
The  colony  rings  with  his  praises.  Does  not  your  paternal  heart  throb  with  a  par-
donable pride  as  you  hear  of  the  goodness  and  the  greatness  to  which  he  has
attained  ?  «'  Alas  I  "  you  say,  •*  what  might  be  my  pride  is  my  pain.  My  boy  has
been  absent  for  twenty  years,  and  took  a  father's  fond  blessing  with  him,  but
during  that  long  period  he  has  sent  no  tidings  to  his  parents.  His  commercial
correspondence  has  been  carried  on  with  most  commendable  regularity,  but  never
a  solitary  line  has  he  written  home.  All  the  news  we  get  of  him  comes  at  second
hand.  We  hear  of  his  bounties  to  others,  but  we  are  getting  poor  in  our  old  age
and  no  token  has  come  to  ns.  He  has  not  shown  in  any  way  that  he  is  even  aware
of  our  existence. "  Now  what  are  your  ideas  of  such  sonship  as  that  ?  Are  not  the
benefactions  of  such  a  man  an  abomination,  and  his  fascinations  an  offence  ?  Here,
then,  is  a  picture  of  the  behaviour  of  the  man  who,  just  in  all  earthly  dealings,  and
tender  in  all  human  relations,  yet  lives,  with  regard  to  his  highest  obligations,
simply  as  though  God  were  not.  {J.  Halsey.)  Looking  for  that  blessed  hope. —
The  hope  of  the  resurrection: — "I  believe  in  the  resurrection  of  the  body."  And
what  does  this  imply?  Does  it  merely  mean  that  we  assent  to  there  being  snoh  a
thing,  as  a  bare  truth  in  the  abstract  ?    Does  it  mean,  ' '  I  believe  that  men's  bodies


CHAP,  n.]  TITUS.  M7

Bhall  rise  ?  "  And  when  we  continae,  "  And  in  the  life  everlasting,"  do  we  merely
intend  by  this,  "  I  believe  that  some  shall  live  for  ever  7  "  Oh,  surely  not :  we  can-
not have  snch  a  cold  unworthy  idea  of  the  articles  of  the  Christian  faith  as  this.
When  I  utter  these  words  in  church,  when  I  profess  them  as  my  belief,  I  mast
surely  mean  that  I  regard  them  as  facts  in  my  own  life  and  course.  I  take  the  wordii
as  they  stand  in  the  Nicene  Creed,  where  the  very  same  expression  is  used  as  in
our  text :  "  I  look  for  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  and  the  life  of  the  world  to  come."
That  is,  I  expect  in  my  own  case,  I  look  forward  to  witnessing,  and  sharing  in,  the
things  thus  spoken  of.  If  you  ask  me  what  reason  have  I  in  my  own  case  to  look
for  such  blessed  participation  in  the  resurrection  to  life  eternal,  my  answer  is  plain
and  decisive.  "  I  look  for  the  resurrection  of  the  body,  and  the  life  everlasting,"
because  God  has  assured  these  blessings  to  me  in  my  covenant  relation  with  Him  in
Christ  as  a  member  of  Christ's  body.  Now,  many  of  you  are  aware  that  in  saying
this  I  am  touching  on  a  question  much  debated  among  religious  writers  of  a
certain  stamp :  I  mean  the  question  as  to  what  is  called  personal  assurance  :  the
question  as  to  whether  it  is,  or  is  not,  an  essential  portion  of  the  Christian's  faith
to  be  assured  of  his  own  part  in  Christ,  and  his  own  ultimate  share  in  Christ's
salvation.  Now,  this  is  a  question  which  no  Christian  Churchman  can  be  at  any
loss  how  to  answer.  He  will  answer  it  as  we  have  done  above ;  and  tell  the  inquirer
that  his  own  personal  part  in  God's  covenant  and  God's  promises  is  not  a  matter
which  can  be  left  to  uncertain  and  easily  mistaken  feelings  and  experiences  of  his
own,  but  is,  as  we  said  before,  at  the  foundation  of  his  whole  spiritual  life,  which
is  built  up  upon  it,  as  it  is  built  on  the  fact  of  God's  mercies  to  him  in  Christ.
And  this  being  so,  important  effects  are  produced,  or  ought  to  be  produced,  on
our  views  of  several  things,  either  present  or  in  prospect.  1.  The  first  of  which
I  shaJl  apeak  is  our  view  of  death.  If  a  blessed  resurrection  in  an  inoorrup.
tible  body  is  to  be  ours,  any  one  can  easily  see  that  the  act  and  state  of  death,  so
terrible  where  this  hope  is  not,  at  once  loses  its  formidable  character,  and  shrinks
op  into  utter  insignificance.  Doubtless  it  will  and  must  be  a  confiict  when  it  comes,
that  solemn  moment  of  parting  from  the  body :  but  what  is  a  conflict  where  victory -
is  assured  to  us  ?  What  soldier  ever  dwells  long  and  gloomily  on  the  fearful  in-
cidents of  battle,  by  way  of  bracing  his  courage  to  meet  it  ?  Is  it  not  ever  the
rule,  and  should  it  not  ever  be  our  rule,  to  dwell  on  the  triumph  beyond,  and  so
to  forget  the  struggle  by  which  it  is  to  be  reached  ?  2.  And  as  this  confidence  of
hope  will  alter  our  view  of  death,  so  vriU  it  also  of  life.  What  is  life  to  the
man  of  this  world — to  the  poor  creature  who  does  not  know  whether  it  is  not  to  be
cut  short  for  ever  at  the  day  of  death  ?  Life  to  him  is  simply  a  snatching-time :
to  get  as  much  as  he  can  oat  of  it,  to  eat  and  drink,  and  amass  gain,  and  earn
repute,  and  win  importance,  and  fill  as  large  a  space  as  he  can  with  what  credit  he
may :  and  there  is  an  end  of  it.  Thousands  on  thousands  are  leading  just  this  life
and  nothing  more :  often  varnished  over  with  pure  and  bright  colours — decent
charities,  expected  attendance  on  religion,  and  the  like :  but  none  can  deny  that,
judging  by  the  practice  of  most  men,  such  is  the  general  view  of  life  ;  that  as  to
eternity  and  so  on,  it  is  an  uncertainty  after  all,  and  it  is  better  to  take  the  present
good  in  hand,  than  to  lay  up  for  such  an  uncertainty.  Now  then,  does  a  man,  in  his
heart,  in  his  deepest  thoughts  and  views  of  the  future,  look  for  the  resurrection  of  the
body  and  the  life  everlasting  ?  And  can  he  any  longer  think  thus  of  life  ?  Why,  to
the  other  man,  this  life  is  all :  he  knows  of  nothing  beyond  it ;  but  to  this  man,  what
is  beyond  it  is  almost  all,  and  this  hfe  is  as  compared  to  it  almost  as  nothing.  But
how  t  Even  as  the  seed-time,  which  though  in  a  certain  field  it  may  be  but  one
morning  in  a  year,  yet  on  that  one  morning  depends  all  the  use  and  produce  of  that
field  for  that  year — so  is  it  with  the  Christian  believer's  estimate  of  this  life.  It  is,
as  compared  with  that  beyond  the  grave,  but  as  a  moment — but  as  a  point  hardly
to  be  appreciated :  yet  in  the  use  of  this  moment,  in  the  conplexion  of  this  Uttle
point,  is  involved  the  whole  character  and  degree  of  blessedness  of  that  immeasur-
able eternity.  Life  is  now  not  a  snatching-time,  but  a  laying-up  time :  a  time  of
treasuring  up  things  which  may  be  of  account  there.  3.  There  is  another  thing
concerning  which,  if  we  look  in  our  own  persons  for  the  resurrection  of  the  dead
and  the  life  everlasting,  our  views  will  necessarily  undergo  a  change,  and  that  is,  the
body.  It  may  not  be  very  easy  to  say  what  the  mere  worldly  man  thinks  of  the
body  in  which  he  finds  hunself  dwelling.  But  I  am  afraid  we  should  not  be  far
wrong  in  believing  that  the  very  last  thmg  which  he  expects  is,  that  it  will  rise  from
the  grave,  and  be  his  dweUing  for  ever.  This  doctrine,  at  which  the  wise  Athenians
scoffed,  is  still  despised  by  those  who  think  themselves  wise  after  this  world's


128  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n.

measure.  They  have  some  vague  notion  of  a  probability  of  the  immortality  of  the
soul  and  a  future  judgment,  without  ever  reflecting  that  we  shull  be  judged  in  the
body  for  the  deeds  done  in  the  body.  And  the  consequence  is  that  in  their  view  the
man  is  not  one,  but  two  persons,  soul  and  body  :  the  soul  is  meant  to  be  saved  by
religion,  but  the  body  has  little  or  nothing  to  do  with  religion.  And  then  those  who
are  not  only  worldly,  but  irreUgious,  go  further  than  this  ;  and  pretend  to  tell  us,
from  the  speculations  of  misused  science,  that  the  life  which  is  so  mysteriously
placed  in  the  body  is  necessarily  and  inseparably  united  to  it,  and  therefore  perishes
when  the  body  decays.  How  different  an  aspect  do  the  things  of  the  body  present
to  him  who  regards  it  as  his  companion  through  a  blessed  eternity — to  him  who
reads  and  feels  what  the  apostle  teUs  us,  that  Christ  is  the  Saviour  of  the  body ; —
that  we  are  now  waiting  for  the  adoption,  that  is,  the  redemption  of  the  body.  How
careful  will  he  be  to  train  this  his  future  servant  for  its  blessed  ministrations  there ;
— to  put  it  entirely  under  the  power  of  God's  purifying  Spirit  of  grace  : — to  subdue
in  it  all  impure  and  unholy  desires,  all  inordinate  indulgences  of  lawful  appetite,
and  render  it  a  habitation  if  it  may  be  worthy  of  Him  whose  temple  it  ought  to  be.
4.  Yet  another  change  will  be  wrought  by  looking  for  the  resurrection  of  the  body,
and  the  life  everlasting  :  and  that  will  be  in  our  views  of  and  affections  towards
others  around  us.  If  the  painter  who  painted  for  posterity  needed  more  care  in  every
touch  than  the  other,  who  painted  merely  for  the  day,  will  not  he  who  loves  for
eternity  love  more  wisely,  more  tenderly,  more  cautiously  and  self-denyingly  than
he  who  merely  gratifies  a  present  predilection  ?  A  fellow-member  of  the  body  of
Christ — one  with  whom  I  hope  to  hold  converse  which  shall  never  know  parting
nor  end  in  the  presence  of  Him  who  is  Love — if  I  remember  this,  and  act  on  this,
can  I  wantonly  wound  the  feelings  of  such  an  one  ?  Can  I  hinder  such  an  one  in
the  path  to  glory?  Can  I  to  such  an  one  act  a  part,  and  put  on  guile,  to  serve  any
worldly  purpose  f  "  They  take  the  sun  out  of  heaven,  who  take  away  friendship
oat  of  life"  :  thus  wrote  the  heathen  philosopher;  but  we  may  say  a  worthier
thing—  they  take  away  the  sun  out  of  heaven,  who  take  the  hope  of  the  resurrection
out  of  friendship.  5.  Once  more,  he  who  looks  for  the  resurrection  of  the
dead  and  the  life  everlasting,  will,  in  proportion  as  this  blessed  hope  is  present  to
him,  find  his  thoughts  of  Christ  evermore  changed  and  exalted,  and  made  more
precious  to  him.  From  a  distant  historical  character  to  a  present  Saviour — this  is
the  first  great  change  in  a  man's  thoughts  of  Christ.  From  a  present  Saviour  to
be  the  desire  of  his  soul — one  whose  likeness,  and  nothicg  else,  will  satisfy  him  ;
this  is  the  next  change,  and  it  is  no  less  an  one  than  the  former :  it  is,  after  all,
that  which  constrains  a  man,  that  which  leads  him  on,  that  which  vnll  transform
him  into  Christ's  image  from  glory  to  glory.  And  I  see  not  how  this  latter  change
can  take  place,  without  a  man's  looking  for  this  blessed  hope  of  the  resurrection.
( Dean  Alford.)  The  happy  hope  : — There  are  two  appearances  spoken  of  in  this
context — the  appearance  of  "  the  grace  of  God  that  bringeth  salvation  " ;  and
parallel  with  that,  though  at  the  same  time  contrasted  with  it,  as  being  in  very  im-
portant senses,  one  in  nature  and  principle,  though  diverse  in  purpose  and  diverse
in  manner,  is  what  the  apostle  here  calls  "  the  glorious  appearing  of  the  great
God."  I.  The  appearance  of  the  grace  leads  to  the  appearance  of  the  olobt.
The  identity  of  the  form  of  expression  in  the  two  clauses  is  intended  to  suggest  the  like-
ness of  and  the  connection  between  the  two  appearances.  In  both  there  is  a  visible
manifestation  of  God,  and  the  latter  rests  upon  the  former,  and  completes  and
crowns  it.  But  the  difference  between  the  two  is  as  strongly  marked  as  the  analogy ;
and  it  is  not  difficult  to  grasp  distinctly  the  difference  which  the  apostle  intends.
While  both  are  manifestations  of  the  Divine  character  in  exercise,  the  specific  pbase
(so  to  speak)  of  that  character  which  appears  is  in  one  case  "  grace,"  and  in  the
other  "  glory."  If  one  mii,'ht  venture  on  any  illustration  in  regard  to  such  a  subject,
it  is  as  when  the  pure  white  light  is  sent  through  glass  of  different  colours,  and  at
one  moment  beams  mild  through  refreshing  green,  and  at  the  next  flames  in  fiery
red  that  warns  of  danger.  The  grace  has  appeared  when  Divine  love  is  incarnate
among  ns.  The  long-suffering  gentleness  we  have  seen.  And  in  it  we  have  seen,
in  a  very  real  sense,  the  glory,  for  "  we  beheld  His  glory — full  of  grace."  But  be-
yond that  lies  ready  to  be  revealed  in  the  last  time  the  glory,  the  lustrous  light,  the
majestic  splendour,  the  flaming  fire  of  manifest  Divinity.  Again,  the  two  verses
thus  bracketed  together,  and  brought  into  sharp  contrast,  also  suggest  how  like,  as
well  as  how  unlike,  these  manifestations  are  to  be.  In  both  cases  there  is  an
appearance,  in  the  strictest  sense  of  the  word,  that  is  to  say,  a  thing  visible  to  men'i
senses.    Can  we  see  the  grace  of  God  ?   We  can  see  the  love  in  exercise,  cannot  we  T


CHAP,  n.]  TITUS,  129

How  ?     '•  He  that  hath  seen  Me  hath  seen  the  Father ;  and  how  sayest  thou  then,
Show  ns  the  Father?  "   The  appearance  of  Christ  was  the  making  visible  in  human
form  of  the  love  of  God.     My  brother  !     The  appearance  of  the  glory  will  be  tha
same — the  making  visible  in  human  form  of  the  light  of  throned  and  sovereign
Deity.     What  we  look  for  is  an  actual  bodily  manifestation  in  a  human  form,  on
the  solid  earth,  of  the  glory  of  God  !     And  then  I  would  notice  how  emphatically
this  idea  of  the  glory  being  aU  sphered  and  embodied  in  the  living  person  of  Jesua
Christ  proclaims  His  Divine  nature.    It  is  '•  the  appearance  of  the  glory  " — then
mark  the  next  words — "  of  the  great  God,  and  our  Saviour."    The  human  possesses
the  Divine  glory  in  such  reality  and  fulness  as  it  would  be  insanity  if  it  were  not
blasphemy,  and  blasphemy  if  it  were  not  absurdity,  to  predicate  of  any  simple  man.
The  words  coincide  with  His  own  saying,  "  The  Son  of  Man  shall  come  in  His  glory
and  of  the  Father,"   and  point  us  necessarily  and  inevitably  to  the  wonderful
thought  that  the  glory  of  God  is  capable  of  being  fully  imparted  to,  possessed  by,
and  revealed  through  Jesus  Christ ;  that  the  glory  of  God  is  Christ's  glory,  and  the
glory  of  Christ  is  God's.    And  then  I  must  touch  very  briefly  another  remarkable
and  plain  contrast  indicated  in  our  text  between  these  two  '*  appearings."    They
are  not  only  unlike  in  the  subject  (so  to  speak)  or  substance  of  the  manifestation,
but  also  in  the  purpose.    The  grace  comes,  patient,  gentle,  sedulous,  labomring  for
our  training  and  discipline.    The  glory  comes — there  is  no  word  of  training  there !
What  does  the  glory  come  for  ?    The  one  rises  upon  a  benighted  world — lambent
and  lustrous  and  gentle,  Uke  the  slow,  silent,  climbing  of  the  silvery  moon  through
the  darkling  sky.    But  the  other  blazes  out  with  a  leap  upon  a  stormy  heaven,  "  as
the  lightning  cometh  out  of  the  east,  and  shineth  even  unto  the  west,"  writing  its
fierce  message  across  all  the  black  page  of  the  sky  in  one  instant,  "  so  shall  also  the
coming  of  the  Son  of  Man  be. "    II.  The  appeabing  of  thb  globy  is  a  blessed
HOPE.    The  hope  is  blessed;  or  the  word  "happy"  may,  perhaps,  be  substituted
with  advantage.     Because  it  will  be  full  of  blessedness  when  it  is  a  reality,  there-
fore it  is  fuU  of  joy  while  it  is  but  a  hope.    The  characteristics  of  that  future  mani-
festation of  glory  are  not  such  that  its  coming  is  wholly  and  universally  a  joy.
There  is  something  terrible  in  the  beauty,  something  menacing  in  the  brightness.
But  it  is  worth  noticing  that,  notwithstanding  all  that  gathers  about  it  of  terror,  all
that  gathers  about  it  of  awful  splendour,  all  that  is  solemn  and  heart-shaking  in
the  thought  of  judgment  and  retribution  for  the  past,  the  irreversible  and  irrevoc-
able past,  yet  to  Paul  it  was  the  very  crown  of  aU  his  expectations  of,  and  the  very
shining  summit  of  all  his  desires  for,  the  future — that  Christ  should  appear.
The  hope  is  a  happy  one.    If  we  know  "the  grace"  we  shall  not  be  afraid
of  "the  glory."    If  the  grace  has  disciplined  in  any  measure  we  may  be  sure  that
we  shall  partake  in  its  perfection.    They  that  have  seen  the  face  of  Christ  looking
down,  as  it  were,  upon  them  from  the  midst  of  the  great  darkness  of  the  cross,  and
beneath  the  crown  of  thorns,  need  not  be  afraid  to  see  the  same  face  looking  down
upon  them  from  amidst  all  the  blaze  of  the  light,  and  from  beneath  the  many
crowns  of  the  kingdoms  of  the  world,  and  the  royalties  of  the  heavens.    Whosoever
hath  learnt  to  love  and  believe  in  the  manifestation  of  the  grace,  he,  and  he  only,
can  believe  and  hope  for  the  manifestation  of  the  glory.     III.  The  qbacb  dis-
ciplines us  TO  hope  foe  the  globt.    The  very  idea  of  discipUne  involves  the
notion  that  it  is  a  preparatory  stage,  a  transient  process  for  a  permanent  result.    It
carries  with  it  the  idea  of  immaturity,  of  apprenticeship,  so  to  speak.     If  it  is  dis-
cipline, it  is  discipline  for  some  condition  which  is  not  yet  reached.    And  so,  if  the
grace  of  God  comes  "  disciplining,"  then  there  must  be  something  beyond  the  epoch
and  era  within  which  the  disciple  is  confined.     Here  is  a  perfect  instrument  for
making  men  perfect,  and  what  does  it  do  ?    It  makes  men  so  good  and  leaves  them
so  bad  that  unless  they  are  to  be  made  still  better  and  perfected,  God's  work  on  the
soul  is  at  once  an  unparalleled  success  and  a  confounding  failure — a  puzzle,  in  that
having  done  so  much  it  does  not  do  more ;  in  that  having  done  so  little  it  has
done   so  much.     The   aohievements  of  Christianity  upon   single   souls,   and  its
failures  upon  those  for  whom  it  has  done  most,  when  measured  against,  and  com-
pared with,  its  manifest  adaptation  to  a  loftier  issue  than  it  has  ever  reached  here
on  earth,  all  coincide  to  say — the  grace — because  its  purpose  is  discipline,  and
because  its  pui-pose  is  but  partially  achieved  here  on  earth — demands  a  glory,  when
they  whose  darkness  has  been  partially  made  "  light  in  the  Lord,"  by  the  discipline
of  grace,  shall  "  blaze  forth  as  the  sun  "  in  the  Heavenly  Father's  kingdom  of  glory.
Yield  to  the  discipline,  and  the  hope  will  be  strengthened.   You  will  never  entertain
in  any  vigour  and  operative  power  upon  your  Uves  the  expectation  of  that  comins

9


130  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n.

of  the  glory  unless  yoa  live  soberly,  righteoQsly,  and  godly  in  this  present  world.
That  discipline  submitted  to  is,  if  I  may  so  say,  like  that  great  apparatus  which
you  find  by  the  side  of  an  astronomer's  biggest  telescope,  to  wheel  it  upon  its  centre
and  to  point  its  tube  to  the  star  on  which  he  would  look.  So  our  anticipation  and
desire,  the  faculty  of  expectation  which  we  have,  is  wont  to  be  directed  along  the
low  level  of  earth,  and  it  needs  the  pinions  and  levers  of  that  gracious  discipline,
making  us  sober,  righteous,  godly,  in  order  to  heave  it  upwards,  full-front  agaiost
the  sky,  that  the  stars  may  shine  into  it.  The  speculum,  the  object-glass,  must  be
polished  and  cut  by  many  a  stroke  and  much  friction  ere  it  will  reflect  "  the  image
of  the  heavenly  " ;  so,  grace  disciplines  us,  patiently,  slowly,  by  repeated  strokes,
by  much  rubbing,  by  much  pain — disciplines  us  to  Uve  in  self-restraint,  in  righteous-
ness and  godliness,  and  then  the  cleared  eye  beholds  the  heavens,  and  the  purged
heart  grows  towards  "  the  coming  "  as  its  hope  and  its  life.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)
The  hlested  hope: — I.  The  gbeat  object  of  the  Chbibtian  hope.  The  true
rendering  is  not  "  the  glorious  appearing,"  but  • '  the  appearing  of  the  glory."  There
are  two  appearings — that  of  "  the  grace  of  God,"  sind  that  of  "  the  glory."  These
two  manifestations  are  paralleled  in  many  respects,  as  is  shown  by  the  very  fact
that  the  same  word  is  employed  in  reference  to  both,  but  they  diSer  substantially
in  this,  the  aspect  of  the  Divine  character  manifested  by  each.  The  one  is  like  the
silver  moon  flooding  all  things  with  silvery  and  gentle  light ;  the  other  is  like  the
flash  of  the  lightning  from  one  side  of  the  heavens  to  the  other.  Both  the  manifes-
tation of  the  grace  and  that  of  the  glory  are  given  through  the  same  medium.  Jesus
Christ  is  the  means  of  making  the  grace  visible  ;  and  Jesus  Christ  will  be  the  means
of  making  the  glory  visible.  And  these  two  appearances  are  connected  in  such  a
manner  that  the  former  is  evidently  incomplete  without  the  latter.  As  certainly  as
the  cradle  at  Bethlehem  required  tne  open  grave  and  the  ascension  from  Olivet,  so
certainly  does  the  ascension  from  Olivet  require  the  return  to  judgment.  The  past
has  in  it  one  great  fact,  to  which  the  world  must  turn  for  light,  for  leading,  for  life.
And  that  past  fact,  like  an  eastern  sky  that  flings  its  colouring  into  the  furthest
west,  irradiates  the  future  and  points  onwards  to  His  return  again.  So  that  past
fact  and  its  companion  yet  to  be  are  like  two  great  towers  on  opposite  sides  of  some
fathomless  abjss,  from  which  stretch  the  slender  rods  which  are  sufficient  to  bear
the  firm  structure  on  which  we  may  tread  across  the  gulf,  defiant  of  the  darkness,
and  find  our  way  into  the  presence  of  God.  II.  The  Christian  anticipation  o»
THE  APPEABiNO.  "Looking,"  says  the  apostle,  "for  that  blessed  hope."  How
comes  he  to  call  it  blessed  ?  If  it  be  a  flashing  forth  of  the  Divine  glory,  and  if  It
be,  as  it  distinctly  is,  a  coming  to  judge  the  earth,  there  must  be  much  about  it
which  will  touch  into  activity  not  unreasonable  fears,  and  may  make  the  boldest
and  the  truest  shrink  and  ask  themselves  the  old  question,  "  Who  shall  stand  when
He  appeareth  ? "  But  Paul  here  stretches  out  the  hands  of  his  faith,  and  the
yearnings  of  his  desire  to  it.  Whence  comes  this  confidence  ?  It  comes  from  the
power  of  love.  How  beautiful  it  is,  how  merciful,  and  how  strange  that  the  very
same  yearning  after  bodily  presence,  the  same  restlessness  in  separation,  sind  the
same  fulness  of  satisfaction  in  companionship,  which  mark  the  lower  loves  of  earth,
can  be  transferred  wholly  to  that  higher  love  !  This  hope  is  blessed  because  of  the
power  of  the  assurance  which  we  all  may  have  that  that  coming  can  bring  no  harm
to  us.  "  Herein  is  our  love  made  perfect,  that  we  may  have  boldness  before  Him
at  the  day  of  judgment."  It  is  blessed  because  the  manhood  which  is  thus  lifted
to  participate  in  and  to  be  the  medium  of  manifesting  to  a  world  the  Divine  glory,
is  our  manhood ;  and  we  sball  share  in  the  glory  that  we  behold,  if  here  we  have
trusted  in  the  grace  that  He  revealed.  "  He  shall  change  the  body  of  our  humilia-
tion that  it  may  be  fashioned  after  the  likeness  of  the  body  of  His  glory."  And  the
hope  is  blessed  because,  in  contradistinction  to  all  earthly  objects  of  hope,  it  is
certain — certain  as  history,  certain  as  memory.  It  is  as  secure  as  treasures  that  we
keep  in  the  cedar-presses  of  our  remembrances.  It  is  also  blessed  because,  being
thus  certain,  it  is  far  enough  in  advance  never  to  be  outgrown,  never  to  be  fulfilled
and  done  with  here.  So  it  outlasts  all  others,  and  may  be  laid  in  a  dying  hand,
like  a  rosebud  clasped  in  cold  palms,  crossed  on  each  other,  in  the  coffin ;  for  not
until  we  have  passed  the  veil  shall  we  receive  the  hope.  He  will  come  to  the  world ;
you  and  I  will  go  to  Him  ;  either  way,  we  shall  be  for  ever  with  the  Lord.  And  that
is  a  hope  that  will  outlast  Ufe  and  death.  IH.  The  teaching  ob  corbkction
WHICH  stbenothens  THE  HOPE.  The  fact  that  the  first  manifestation  is  of  an
educational  and  corrective  kind  is  in  itself  an  evidence  that  there  is  another  one  to
follow.     For  the  very  idea  of  training  implies  that  there  is  something  for  which  wo


CHAP,  n.]  TITUS,  131

•re  being  trained ;  and  the  very  word  "correction"  or  "discipline"  involves  the
tiioaght  of  an  end  towards  which  the  process  is  directed.  That  end  can  be  no  lesa
than  the  fntare  perfecting  of  its  subjects  in  that  better  world.  God  does  not  take
the  rough  bar  of  iron  and  turn  it  into  steel  and  polish  it  and  shape  it  and  sharpen
it  to  so  fine  an  edge,  in  order  that  He  may  then  break  it  and  cast  it  "  as  rubbish  to
the  void."  Yon  will  find  in  prehistoric  tombs  broken  swords  and  blunted  spears
which  were  laid  there  with  the  corpses ;  but  God  does  not  so  break  His  weapons,
nor  is  death  the  end  of  our  activity.  If  there  be  discipline  there  is  something
for  which  the  discipline  is  meant.  If  there  be  an  apprenticeship  there  is  somewhere
work  for  the  journeyman  to  do  when  he  has  served  his  articles  and  is  out  of  hit
time.  There  will  be  a  field  in  which  we  shall  use  the  powers  we  have  acquired
here  ;  and  nothing  can  bereave  us  of  the  force  we  made  our  own,  being  here.  Grace
disciplines,  therefore  there  is  glory.  Again,  our  yielding  to  the  grace  is  the  best
way  of  strengthening  our  hope  of  the  glory.  The  more  we  keep  ourselves  under  tiie
influences  of  that  mighty  salvation  that  is  in  Jesus  Christ,  and  let  them  chasten  and
correct  us,  and  submit  our  inflamed  eyes  to  their  healing  pains,  the  more  clearly
will  they  be  able  to  see  the  land  that  is  afar  off.  Telescope  glasses  are  polished  in
order  that  they  may  enable  the  astronomer  to  pierce  the  depths  of  the  heavens.
Diamonds  depend  for  their  brightness  on  the  way  in  which  they  are  out,  and  it
is  poor  economy  to  leave  some  of  the  precious  stones  on  the  mass,  if  thereby  its
reflecting  power  and  its  radiance  be  diminished.  God  outs  deep  and  rubs  hard,
in  order  that  He  may  brighten  the  surface  and  the  depth  of  our  souls,  that  they
may  receive  in  all  its  purity  the  celestial  ray,  and  flash  it  back  in  varied  colours.  So,
if  we  would  live  in  the  buoyant  hope  of  the  manifestation  of  the  glory,  let  us  docilely,
prayerfully,  penitently,  patiently,  submit  ourselves  to  the  discipline  of  the  grace.
(Ibid.)  The  Christianas  blessed  hope  : — I.  The  tobcb  Ain>  fitnbsb  o»  thb  aboument
DBAWN  FBOM  THE  HOPE  ov  A  CHRISTIAN.  The  ground  of  our  hope  lies  not  in  our  merit,
but  in  God's  mercy ;  the  reward  for  which  we  are  encouraged  to  look  is  not  of  debt,
but  of  grace.  And  supposing  it  a  very  small  and  inconsiderable  thing,  yet,  upon  all
the  principles  of  reason,  it  is  encouragement  to  do  what  otherwise  we  are  in-
differently bound  and  obliged  to  do.  But  the  abundant  grace  of  our  God  in  Christ
Jesus  hath  invited  us  to  expect  an  abundant  reward ;  and  whatever  force  there  is
in  hope  to  move  men  to  action,  is  aU  bent  to  push  them  on  to  well-doing,  by  a  just
view  of  that  reward  which  God  hath  promised.  If  hope  can  stimulate  men  to
vigour  and  vigilence  in  any  case,  it  wants  not  something  to  look  for  ia  the  course
of  well-doing  and  on  a  better  foundation  than  can  be  attained  respecting  any
comfort  in  life.  II.  The  time  when  this  blessed  bewabd  shall  be  confebbed.
That  is  the  great  day  when  our  great  God  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  shall  appear.
And  if  we  consider  the  design  and  manner  of  this  appearance  we  shall  see  abundant
reason  to  live  soberly,  righteously,  and  godly  in  expectation  of  it.  1.  The  design
of  it  is  to  judge  the  world  in  righteousness,  to  call  every  man  to  account  for  his
conduct  in  life,  and  render  to  every  one  according  to  his  works.  Then  the  godly
shall  receive  the  glorious  reward  of  eternal  life  with  glorious  advantages,  as  we  shall
see  more  particularly  if  we  consider — 2.  The  manner  of  that  appearance  which  is
here  expressed  by  a  peculiar  epithet,  serving  to  distinguish  it  from  all  other
appearances,  particularly  from  His  first  appearance  in  our  nature.     III.  Thk

TEMPEB  AND  TURN  OF  MIND  FIT  AND  NECESSARY  TO  GIVE  THESE  ARGUMENTS  THEIR  PROPER

INFLUENCE  UPON  US.  Looking  is  in  Scripture  common  style  to  express  the  principles
and  disposition  of  the  mind  with  respect  to  things  Divine  and  heavenly.  And  with
regard  to  the  blessed  hope  and  glorious  appearing  here  mentioned,  it  means — 1.  A
firm  persuasion  of  the  truth  and  reality  of  those  things.  No  wonder  if  they  are
ungodly  and  slaves  to  worldly  lusts  who  look  not  for  a  future  reckoning.  2.
Looking  for  the  blessed  reward  signifies  a  lively  hope  of  obtaining  it,  which,  on  that
very  account,  is  called  the  blessed  hope.  3.  Looking  here  denotes  an  earnest
longing,  an  ardency  of  desire  to  obtain  the  blessed  hope,  and  see  the  blessed  day
when  Christ  shall  appear.  4.  Looking  for  the  blessed  hope  means  a  constant  and
habitual  attention  to  this  as  the  chief  end  and  object  we  ought  to  have  in  view.
{Wm.  Best.)  The  glorious  expectation  : — I.  The  life  of  the  believer  now  is  on»
OF  expectation.  We  are  "  looking  for."  1.  Our  condition  is  one  of  continual
expansion— growth  in  grace.  The  child  is  never  satisfied.  Clothes  become  too
small,  toys  loose  their  charm,  sympathies  are  enlarging,  and  he  is  constantly
looking  for  something  else.  The  child  of  God  is  in  that  position — the  heart  is
enlarging,  and  expectation  is  the  natural  result.  2.  The  resources  of  the  gospel
are  unfolding.     The  love  of  God  swells,  the  Cross  of  Jesus  is  higher,  and  com-


133  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  it

munion  with  the  Saviour  is  closer.  Travellers  continued  their  search  until  thej
found  the  great  lakes  in  Central  Africa  which  form  the  water-shed  of  the  Nile.  So
the  streams  of  grace  lead  us  on  to  the  fountain.  Our  course  is  God-ward.  II.
The  lite  of  the  believeb  hekeatteb  will  be  one  of  realisation.  So  we  interpret
the  words  of  the  apostle — looking  for  the  object  or  fulfilment  of  our  blessed  hope.
1.  Jesus  is  to  come  to  take  the  government  of  the  Church,  and  assert  His  sway
over  mankind.  This  is  a  glorious  thought,  especially  when  we  remember  how
little  we  are  able  to  do  in  extending  His  kingdom.  2.  Jesus  will  appear  in  the  last
day  as  the  judge  of  all.  He  will  be  accompanied  by  myriads  of  saints  and  angels,
not  as  a  root  out  of  the  dry  ground,  without  form  or  comeliness,  but  in  the  glory  of
His  Father.  3.  Jesus  wiU  appear  to  take  home  His  disciples  as  they  pass  through
physical  death.  {Weekly  Pulpit.)  The  hope  of  the  Church  under  the  gospel  dis-
pensation : — I.  What  this  hope  is.  II.  Who  abe  entitled  to  look  for  the  glorious
appearing  as  a  blessed  hope  to  them.  III.  The  influence  which  this  blessed  hope
must  have  on  all  who  are  really  possessed  of  it.  {F.  Hewson,  M.A.)  The
blessed  hope  of  grace : — Grace  teaches  us,  not  only  by  referring  us  to  the  great  facts
of  the  past,  but  also  by  setting  before  our  awakened  hope  the  sublime  and  crowning
event  of  the  future,  and  in  this  respect  also  she  exhibits  the  superiority  of  her
teaching  to  that  which  law  could  offer.  Under  the  law  the  future  could  hardly  be
contemplated  without  terror  ;  for  who  could  feel  so  secure  of  his  legal  righteousness
as  to  be  able  to  look  forward  to  that  day  without  a  misgiving  ?  We  cannot  enter-
tain such  happy  anticipations  with  respect  to  the  future  unless  we  are  quite  sure
of  our  own  relations  to  God  in  the  present.  Let  us  put  a  case.  If  our  Queen  were
about  to  make  a  progress  through  this  realm,  and  if  it  was  understood  that,  as  soon
as  she  reached  the  city  of  York,  of  one  dozen  felons  confined  in  the  prison  yonder,
six  were  to  be  taken  out  and  promptly  executed  at  the  moment  of  her  arrival,  while
six  should  be  liberated ;  and  if  of  those  twelve  felons  no  single  one  knew  for  certain
whether  he  were  one  of  the  six  that  were  to  be  set  free,  or  of  the  six  that  were  to
be  executed,  is  it  conceivable  under  such  circumstances  that  any  of  those  felons
would  long  for  and  entreat  Her  Majesty's  speedy  advent?  Would  it  not  be  far
more  conceivable  that  they  would  all,  if  they  were  permitted,  petition  her  to  defer
her  visit,  and,  if  possible,  to  abandon  it?  Not  otherwise  must  it  be  with  us,  as  we
look  forward  to  this  dread  event  of  the  future,  unless  we  know  that  by  the  saving
grace  of  God  we  are  prepared  for  it.  But  while  our  attitude  towards  this  great
event  of  the  future  may  serve  as  a  test  of  the  reality  or  unreality  of  our  religion,  it
may  also  be  employed  by  the  true  Christian  as  a  gauge  of  his  spiritual  condition.
Do  we  really  love  His  appearing  ?  Is  it  a  subject  much  in  our  thoughts  ?  Does  it
cheer  us,  or  does  it  make  us  uncomfortable  to  think  of  it  ?  How  apt  are  even  those
who  have  known  something  of  the  grace  of  God  to  take  root,  as  it  were,  here  upon
earth,  instead  of  living  as  strangers  and  pilgrims  I  But  the  love  of  Christ's
appearing  is  not  only  a  test  of  our  spiritual  health  and  progress,  it  may  also
largely  contribute  to  the  promotion  of  these.  The  truth  is  the  life  and  the  hope
act  and  react  upon  each  other.  Personal  godliness  must  ever  strengthen  and
intensify  our  hope ;  but  then  again  our  rejoicing  in  hope  will  ever  stimulate  our
desires  after  growth  in  grace.  What  the  effect  of  Advent  light  upon  our  daily  lives
must  needs  be  is  indicated  by  numerous  passages  of  Scripture.  "  We  know  that
when  He  shall  appear,  we  shall  be  like  Him ;  for  we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is.  And
every  man  that  hath  this  hope  in  Him  purifieth  himself,  even  as  He  is  pure."  It
is  not  difficult  to  understand  in  how  many  ways  we  may  be  favourably  affected  in
our  present  personal  experience  by  the  thought  of  this  blessed  hope.  Surely  much
of  the  gloomy  despondency  or  depression  that  frequently  paralyses  our  spiritual
activities  might  be  more  easily  mastered  if  we  only  lived  more  in  the  Advent  light,
cheering  our  hearts  with  the  anticipations  of  coming  glory.  But  the  thought  of
this  blessed  hope  does  more  than  cheer  us  amidst  the  vicissitudes  of  life  ;  it  also
tends  to  strengthen  our  faith,  and  thus  to  invigorate  our  whole  spiritual  experience ;
for  while  we  dwell  upon  the  thought  of  the  complete  victory  that  Christ  is  one  day
to  win,  the  thought  will  naturally  suggest  itself  to  our  minds,  as  we  return  to  the
consciousness  of  the  present  from  the  hopes  of  the  future.  Cannot  He  who  will  one
day  conquer  the  world  conquer  even  now  our  old  nature  ?  Thus  the  very  contem-
plation of  these  glorious  prospects  in  the  future  proves  a  source  of  strength  as  well
as  of  cheer  in  the  present.  But  most  of  all,  the  thought  of  this  blessed  hope  ie
■pecially  designed  to  induce  watchfulness.  "  Therefore  be  ye  also  ready,"  cries  our
blessed  Lord  ;  "  for  in  such  an  hour  as  ye  think  not  the  Son  of  Man  cometh."  One
ether  benefit  likely  to  arise  from  the  thought  of  the  glorious  appearance  of  oux


CHAP,  II.]  TITVS,  133

Savioar,  and  affecting  our  conduct  and  character,  suggests  itself  here.  Surely  we
cannot  fail  to  find  in  this  prospect  a  mighty  stimulus  to  our  zeal.  The  time  is
short.  Soon  the  Master  will  come  to  take  account  of  His  servants.  Fain  would
we  be  able  to  say  when  He  appears,  as  He  was  able  to  say  to  His  Father,  "  I  have
finished  the  work  that  Thou  gavest  Me  to  do."  But  if  this  habit  of  looking  for  that
blessed  hope  is  likely  to  be  productive  of  so  many  advantages  in  our  present
experience,  it  may  be  asked.  How  is  such  a  habit  to  be  formed  7  Strangers  passing
through  a  hostile  land  cannot  but  look  forward  to  a  change  in  their  position.  Grace\
teaches  us  then  to  love  the  Lord's  appearing,  by  reminding  us  that  we  are  already
citizens  of  the  heavenly  kingdom,  in  the  revelation  of  which  we  are  to  find  a  full
satisfaction,  which  cannot  be  ours  amidst  the  hostile  influences  of  the  house  of  our
pilgrimage.  We  long  for  the  moment  when  the  power  of  the  usurper  shall  be
overthrown,  and  our  King  receive  the  homage  which  is  His  due  from  aX\,  just  as  a
Hushai  or  Ittai  must  have  longed  for  the  restoration  of  David,  and  the  downfall  of
the  odious  traitor  Absalom.  Nor  does  the  expectation  of  the  true  Christian  end
even  here.  He  cannot  forget  that  human  history  is  to  be  crowned  by  "  the
marriage  of  the  Lamb."  In  that  mysterious  event  of  the  future  the  destiny  of  the
creature  is  to  be  attained,  and  the  pleasure  of  the  Creator  in  His  own  work  is  to  be
fulfilled.  But  it  is  Grace,  and  Grace  alone,  that  bids  us  cherish  such  hopes  as  this-n
Law  might  train  a  servant,  but  could  not  prepare  a  bride.  To  sum  up,  we  may
say  that  Grace  teaches  us  to  love  Christ's  appearing  by  revealing  to  us  the  mystery
of  our  spiritual  union  with  Him,  from  which  there  arises  a  certain  identity  of
interests,  and  consequently  of  desires.  As  He  is,  so  are  we  in  this  present  world,
"  despised  and  rejected  of  men"  ;  where  He  is,  there  in  Him  we  are  in  the  world  of
glory — seated  in  heavenly  places  with  Christ  Jesus,  accepted  of  the  Father  in  th«
Beloved.  As  He  shall  be,  such  shall  we  be  by  and  by,  when  He  appears  in  His
kingdom.  "  We  know  that  when  He  shall  appear  we  shall  be  like  Him ;  for  we
shall  see  Him  as  He  is."  Surely  it  is  indeed  "  a  blessed  hope,"  and  every  one  that
hath  it  must  needs  "  purify  himself,  even  as  He  is  pure."  We  see  then  that  while
our  hope  becomes  bright  and  real  just  in  so  far  as  we  walk  soberly,  righteously,  and
godly  in  this  present  world,  so  the  cultivation  of  this  blessed  hope  helps  us  and
stimulates  us  thus  to  live.  (W.  H.  M.  H.  Aitken.)  The  tonic  of  hopeful  life  : —
These  words  of  Goethe,  repeated  by  Carlyle  in  the  happiest  and  most  auspicious
moment  of  his  life,  ought  to  be  in  the  heart  and  on  the  lips  of  every  earnest  man
and  woman.  Half  the  energy  of  the  world  is  wasted  in  vain  regrets  or  in  paralysing
despair.  The  world  needs,  more  than  anything  else,  a  continual  reinforcement  of
its  faith  in  the  noblest  things  and  in  its  own  future.  Its  mistakes  are  of  small
account  so  long  as  it  is  true  to  high  aims  and  firm  in  the  conviction  that  they  can
be  realised.  The  moment  of  waning  faith  and  fading  hope  is  also,  and  pre-
eminently, the  moment  of  despair.  A  glance  beneath  the  surface  of  any  decaying
civilisation  in  the  past  always  discovers  an  expiring  belief  in  progress ;  a  glance
beneath  the  surface  of  any  advancing  and  triumphant  civilisation  always  discerns
a  high,  aspiring  hope  which  believes  that  all  things  are  possible  to  those  that
strive.  Pessimism,  the  religion  of  despair,  once  generally  accepted  would  paralyse
the  race.  Half  the  world  is  weary,  faint-hearted,  overborne  by  calamity  and
sorrow ;  it  needs,  most  of  all,  courage,  cheer,  and  the  contagious  hope  that  goes
from  strong  men  like  an  atmosphere.  There  is  a  surplusage  of  truth  in  the  world ;
men  know  what  they  ought  to  do  well  enough,  but  they  lack  the  power  to  do  it.
What  they  need  above  all  things  is  impulse  ;  instruction  is  to  be  found  on  all  sides,
but  power  is  not  so  common.  Christ  started  with  the  conception  of  a  sick  and
weary  world,  and  He  lived  and  taught  that  men  might  be  comforted  and  healed.
Strong,  buoyant  natures  forget  too  often  the  hourly  need  of  a  world  that  is  still  sick
and  weary ;  the  cry  of  the  children  does  not  shadow  often  enough  the  sunshine  in
which  they  live.  The  first,  the  most  imperative,  duty  of  every  earnest  man  and
women  is  to  be  strong,  in  order  that  strength  may  go  from  them  through  every
channel  of  expression  and  activity.  Make  yourselves  rich  in  hope,  in  order  that
you  may  have  the  supreme  happiness  of  giving  to  the  poor.  There  are  men  and
women  in  every  community  who  have  a  tonic  quality  in  them,  whose  very  presence
inspires  hope  and  reinforces  faith.  They  carry  in  their  faces  a  revelation  of  the
strength  which  comes  with  a  strong  healthy  grasp  upon  life,  and  a  clear,  far-sighted
outlook  upon  its  experiences  and  vicissitudes.  They  say,  with  the  force  of  personal
example  aiid  influence,  "  We  bid  you  hope."  Is  this  your  message  to  the  men
about  you?  Waiting  the  coining  of  Christ: — When  I  was  a  boy,  just  after  the
marriage  of  the  Prince  and  Princess  of  Wales,  it  was  announced  that  they  were  to


134  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [objlp.  a.

Tidt  the  town  in  which  I  lived.  On  the  appointed  day  a  ramoor  spread  amongst
the  expectant  crowd  that  their  route  was  changed  for  some  reason,  so  that
it  was  probable  they  would  not  come.  I  shall  never  forget  the  appearance  of
the  streets  and  houses.  The  streets  were  thronged  with  working  men,  shop-
keepers, merchants  along  with  their  wives  and  daughters;  the  windows  and
the  roofs  of  the  houses  were  filled  with  anxious  people.  They  wondered  whether
the  royal  pair  would  come  or  not,  but  very  few  went  away.  Many  had  stood
there  for  six  hours  when  the  word  came,  "  They  are  coming  in  two  hours."  Did
the  crowd  disperse  ?  No ;  they  waited  long  and  patiently  to  see  a  face  bowing
from  a  carriage  window.  The  Prince  never  did  anything  for  them,  nor  did  they
expect  him  to  do  anything  for  them,  but  still  they  waited,  and  when  he  passed,
rent  the  air  with  cheer  after  cheer  to  show  their  loyalty.  How  many  Christians
are  waiting  longingly  for  the  coming  of  their  Prince  and  King  ?  (D.  McEwan.)
The  glorlouB  appearing  of  the  great  God. — The  two  appearing!,  and  the  discipline  of
grace : — I.  Odb  position.  1.  The  people  of  God  stand  between  two  appearances
(vers.  11,  13).  We  Uve  in  an  age  which  is  an  interval  between  two  appearings  of
the  Lord  from  heaven.  Believers  in  Jesus  are  shut  off  from  the  old  economy  by
the  first  coming  of  our  Lord.  The  times  of  man's  ignorance  God  winked  at,  but  now
commandeth  all  men  everywhere  to  repent.  We  are  divided  from  the  past  by  a  wall
of  light,  upon  whose  forefront  we  read  the  words  Bethlehem,  Gethsemane,  Calvary.
We  date  from  the  birth  of  the  Virgin's  son :  we  begin  with  Anrio  Domini.  All  the
rest  of  time  is  before  Christ,  and  is  marked  off  from  the  Christian  era.  The
dense  darkness  of  the  heathen  ages  begins  to  be  broken  when  we  reach  the  first
appearing,  and  the  dawn  of  a  glorious  day  begins.  We  look  forward  to  a  second
appearing.  Our  outlook  for  the  close  of  this  present  era  is  another  appearing — an
appearing  of  glory  rather  than  of  grace.  This  is  the  terminus  of  the  present  age.
We  look  from  Anno  Domini,  in  which  He  came  the  first  time,  to  that  greater  Anno
Domini,  or  year  of  our  Lord,  in  which  He  shall  come  a  second  time,  in  all  the
splendour  of  His  power,  to  reign  in  righteousness,  and  break  the  evil  powers  as  with
a  rod  of  iron.  See,  then,  where  we  are  :  we  are  compassed  about,  behind  and  before,
with  the  appearings  of  our  Lord.  Behind  us  is  our  trust ;  before  us  is  our  hope.
S.  Our  position  is  further  described  as  being  in  this  present  world,  or  age.  We  are
living  in  the  age  which  lies  between  the  two  blazing  beacons  of  the  Divine  appear-
ings ;  and  we  are  called  to  hasten  from  one  to  the  other.  It  is  but  a  little  time,  and
He  that  will  come  shall  come,  and  will  not  tarry.  Now  it  is  this  "  present  world  "  :
oh,  how  present  it  is  I  How  sadly  it  surrounds  us  1  Tet  by  faith  we  count  these
present  things  to  be  unsubstantial  as  a  dream  ;  and  we  look  to  the  things  which  tkra
not  seen,  and  not  present,  as  being  real  and  eternal.  We  hurry  through  this  Vanity
Fair:  before  us  lies  the  Celestial  City  and  the  coming  of  the  Lord  who  is  the
King  thereof.  II.  I  have  to  call  your  attention  to  the  imstbuotion  which  is  given
to  US  by  the  grace  of  God  which  has  appeared  unto  all  men.  A  better  trans-
lation would  be,  "  The  grace  of  God  that  bringeth  salvation  hath  appeared  to  all
men,  disciplining  us  in  order  that  we  may  deny  ungodliness  and  worldly  lusts."  1.
Grace  has  a  discipline.  We  generally  think  of  law  when  we  talk  about  school-
masters and  discipline ;  but  grace  itself  has  a  discipline  and  a  wonderful  training
power  too.  The  manifestation  of  grace  is  preparing  us  for  the  manifestation  of
glory.  What  the  law  could  not  do,  grace  is  doing.  As  soon  as  we  come  under  the
conscious  enjoyment  of  the  free  grace  of  God,  we  find  it  to  be  a  holy  rule,  a  fatherly
government,  a  heavenly  training.  We  find,  not  self-indulgence,  much  less  licen-
tiousness ;  but  on  the  contrary,  the  grace  of  God  both  restrains  and  constrains  us  ;
it  makes  us  free  to  holiness,  and  delivers  us  from  the  law  of  sin  and  death  by  "  the
Uw  of  the  spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus."  2.  Grace  has  its  chosen  disciples,  for  yoa
eannot  help  noticing  that  while  the  eleventh  verse  says  that "  the  grace  of  God  that
bringeth  salvation  hath  appeared  to  all  men,"  yet  it  is  clear  that  this  grace  of  God
has  not  exercised  its  holy  discipline  upon  all  men,  and  therefore  the  text  changes
its  "  all  men  "  into  "  us."  8.  The  discipline  of  grace,  according  to  the  apostle,  has
three  results — denying,  living,  looking.  (1)  When  a  young  man  comes  to  college  h«
usually  has  much  to  unlearn.  If  his  education  has  been  neglected,  a  sort  of  instino-
tive  ignorance  covers  his  mind  with  briars  and  brambles.  If  he  has  gone  to  some
faulty  school  where  the  teaching  is  flimsy,  his  tutor  has  first  of  all  to  fetch  out  of
him  what  he  has  been  badly  taught.  The  most  difficult  part  of  the  training  of
young  men  is  not  to  put  the  right  thing  into  them,  but  to  get  the  wrong  thing  oat
of  them.  We  have  learned  lessons  of  worldly  wisdom  and  carnal  policy,  and  these
m  DMd  to  unlearn  and  deny.     The  Holy  Spirit  works  this  denying  in  us  by  the


OHA».  r]  TITUS.  135

discipline  of  grace.  (2)  But  then  you  cannot  be  complete  with  a  merely  negativa
religion  ;  yon  must  have  something  positive  ;  and  so  the  next  word  is  living — that
"  we  should  live  soberly,  righteously,  and  godly,  in  this  present  world."  Observe,
that  the  Holy  Ghost  expects  us  to  live  in  this  present  world,  and  therefore  we
are  not  to  exclude  ourselves  from  it.  This  age  is  the  battle-field  in  which  the
soldier  of  Christ  is  to  fight.  Society  is  the  place  in  which  Christianity  is  to  exhibit
the  graces  of  Christ.  You  are  to  shine  in  the  darkness  like  a  light.  This  life  ia
described  in  a  threefold  way— (o)  You  are,  first,  to  live  "  soberly  " — that  is,  for
yourself.  "  Soberly  "  in  all  your  eating  and  your  drinking,  and  in  the  indulgence  of
all  bodily  appetites — that  goes  without  saying.  You  are  to  live  soberly  in  aU  your
thinking,  all  your  speaking,  all  your  acting.  There  is  to  be  sobriety  in  all  your
worldly  pursuits.  You  are  to  have  yourself  well  in  hand :  you  are  to  be  self-re-
strained, (b)  As  to  his  fellow-men  the  believer  lives  "righteously."  I  cannot
understand  tnat  Christian  who  can  do  a  dirty  thing  in  business.  Craft,  cunning,
over-reaching,  misrepresentation,  and  deceit  are  no  instruments  for  the  hand  of
godly  men.  Dishonesty  and  falsehood  are  the  opposites  of  godliness.  A  Christian
man  may  be  poor,  but  he  must  live  righteously :  he  may  lack  sharpness,  but  he
must  not  lack  integrity.  A  Christian  profession  without  uprightness  is  a  lie.  Grace
must  discipline  us  to  righteous  living,  (c)  Towards  God  we  are  told  in  the  text  we  are
to  be  godly.  Every  man  who  has  the  grace  of  God  in  him  indeed  and  of  a  truth,
will  think  much  of  God.  God  will  enter  into  aU  his  calculations,  God's  presence
will  be  his  joy,  God's  strength  will  be  his  confidence,  God's  providence  will  be  his
inheritance,  God's  glory  will  be  the  chief  end  of  his  being,  God's  law  the  guide  of
his  conversation.  Now,  if  the  grace  of  God,  which  has  appeared  so  plainly  to  all
men,  has  really  come  with  its  sacred  discipline  upon  us,  it  is  teaching  us  to  live  in
this  threefold  manner.  (3)  Once  more,  there  is  looking  as  well  as  living.  One
work  of  the  grace  of  God  is  to  cause  us  to  be  "  looking  for  that  blessed  hope  of  the
glorious  appearing  of  the  great  God  and  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ."  What  is  that
"  blessed  hope  "  ?  Why,  first,  that  when  He  comes  we  shall  rise  from  the  dead,  if  we
have  fallen  asleep ;  and  that,  if  we  are  alive  and  remain,  we  shall  be  changed  at  His
appearing.  Our  hope  is  that  we  shall  be  approved  of  Him,  and  shall  hear  Him  say,
"  Well  done,  good  and  faithful  servant"  This  hope  is  not  of  debt,  but  of  grace  :
though  our  Lord  will  give  us  a  reward,  it  will  not  be  according  to  the  law  of  works.
We  expect  to  be  like  Jesus  when  we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is.  IH.  The  text  sets  forth
certain  of  otjb^ncoubagements.  1.  In  this  great  battle  for  right,  and  truth,  and
holiness,  wtel  could  we  d'o~H"W^  were  left  alone?  But  our  first  encouragement  is
that  grace  has  come  to  our  rescue ;  for  in  the  day  when  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ
appeared  among  men,  He  brought  for  us  the  grace  of  God  to  help  us  to  overcome
all  iniquity.  He  that  struggleth  now  against  inbred  sin  has  the  Holy  Spirit
within  him  to  help  him.  He  that  goes  forth  to  fight  against  evil  in  other  men  by
preaching  the  gospel  has  the  same  Holy  Ghost  going  with  the  truth  to  make  it  like
a  fire  and  like  a  hammer.  2.  A  second  encouragement  is  that  another  appearing
is  coming.  He  who  bowed  His  head  in  weakness,  and  died  in  the  moment  of  victory,
is  coming  in  all  the  glory  of  His  endless  life.  When  the  hour  shall  strike  Hie  shall
appear  in  the  majesty  of  God  to  put  an  end  to  the  dominion  of  sin,  and  bring  in
endless  peace.  Satan  shall  be  bruised  under  our  feet  shortly ;  wherefore  comfort
one  another  with  these  words,  and  then  prepare  for  further  battle.  Grind  your
swords,  and  be  ready  for  close  fighting  I  Trust  in  God,  and  keep  your  powder  dry.
3.  Another  encouragement  is  that  we  are  serving  a  glorious  Master.  The  Christ
whom  we  follow  is  not  a  dead  prophet  like  Mahomet.  Truly  we  preach  Christ
crucified  ;  but  we  also  believe  in  Christ  risen  from  the  dead,  in  Christ  gone  up  on
high,  in  Christ  soon  to  come  a  second  time.  He  lives,  and  He  lives  as  the  great
God  and  our  Saviour.  4.  Then  come  the  tender  thoughts  with  which  I  finish,  the
memories  of  what  the  Lord  has  done  for  us  to  make  us  holy :  "  Who  gave  Himself
for  OS."  Special  redemption,  redemption  with  a  wondrous  price — "  who  gave  Him-
salf  for  UB."  He  died — forget  not  that — died  that  your  sins  might  die,  died  that
every  lust  might  be  dragged  into  captivity  at  His  chariot  wheels.  He  gave  Himself
for  you  that  you  might  give  yourselves  for  Him.  Again,  He  died  that  He  might
purify  us — purify  us  unto  Himself.  How  clean  we  must  be  If  we  are  to  be  clean
nnto  Him  !  The  apostle  finishes  up  by  saying  that  we  are  to  be  a  people  "  zealous
of  good  works."  Would  to  God  that  all  Christian  men  and  women  were  disciplined
by  Divine  grace  till  they  became  zealous  for  good  works!  In  holiness  zeal  ia
sobriety.  We  are  not  only  to  approve  of  good  works,  and  speak  for  good  works,  but
we  are  to  be  red-hot  for  them.    We  are  to  be  on  fire  for  everything  that  is  right  and


136  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (chap.  n.

true.  (C.  n.  Spurgeon.)  Expectation  of  Christ's  coming  : — I.  True  believers  in
Jesus  Christ  look  and  wish  that  He  may  come,  as  He  will  be  then  olobified  in
A  world  whebe  He  has  been  set  at  nought  and  despised.  If  the  sun,  after  a
whole  day's  dark  and  uninterrupted  gloom  of  clouds,  sets  in  an  evening  of  thick
mists  and  impenetrable  darkness,  who  is  there  that  rejoices  not  when  the  next
morning  opens  in  a  clear  and  radiant  sky,  and  a  full  and  unclouded  effulgence  ol
his  splendour  ?  And  if  Jesus,  the  Sun  of  Righteousness,  thus  leaves  our  world  in
darkness  and  reproach,  all  those  who  have  a  sincere  and  cordial  value  for  Him  will
hail  Him  when  He  returns  the  second  time  in  His  own  and  His  Father's  glories,  and
will  often  wish,  during  the  night  of  His  absence,  that  the  hour  was  come  when  He
shall  appear  in  that  might  and  majesty,  in  that  honour  and  glory  which  belong  to
Him,  and  by  which  He  will  dissipate  all  the  misconstructions  concerning  Him,  as
the  bright  beams  of  the  rising  sun  scatter  the  shades  of  thickest  darkness,  and  pour
glory  and  heat,  peace  and  pleasure,  over  the  face  of  gladdened  nations.  II.  True
believers  look  and  wish  for  the  coming  of  Jesus  Christ,  in  order  to  put  ak  end  to
THEiB  PAIN  AND  soBROw.  The  wouud  that  was  inflicted  upon  our  nature  at  the  first
grand  apostasy  has  been  kept  open  and  bleeding  on  through  all  generations  ;  and
when  we  take  a  view  of  mankind,  what  misery  and  wretchedness  from  all  quarters
meet  our  eyes,  and  affect  our  hearts  1  Not  to  mention  those  great  capital  calamities
which  with  an  enormous  scythe  lay  waste  whole  cities  and  kingdoms  at  once,  i.e.,
earthquakes,  famines,  pestilence,  and  war.  There  are  many  smaller  mischiefs  that
harass  and  afflict  us ;  I  mean  the  dreadful  train  of  common  diseases,  from  which  no
city  or  town,  it  may  be,  is  ever  entirely  free,  and  which  often  bring  us  to  an  untimely
grave,  even  in  the  very  bloom  and  strength  of  our  constitutions.  Add  to  all  this,
that  pain  and  sorrow  have  still  a  wider  spread  in  our  world,  from  the  ten  thousand
vexations  and  disappointments  of  the  present  state.  Such  and  so  various  are  the
pains  and  sorrows  of  the  present  state,  but  they  shall  all  be  ended  at  the  second
coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  When  this  wished-for  period  shall  arrive,  "  God
shall  wipe  away  all  tears  from  our  eyes,"  from  what  causes  soever  they  have  flowed,
and  "  there  shall  be  no  sorrow  nor  crying,  neither  shall  there  be  any  more  pain,  for
the  former  things  are  passed  away."  IH.  Another  reason  why  true  believers  look
and  wish  for  the  second  coming  of  Christ  is,  because  He  will  at  His  second
COMING  finish  THE  BEiGN  OF  DEATH.  How  dismal  and  distressing  is  the  reign  of
death  at  present  I  What  havoc  does  he  make,  in  a  few  years,  in  our  world !  How
many  of  our  dear  relatives,  the  brethren  of  our  flesh,  and  of  our  friends,  the  brethren
of  our  souls,  have  fallen  victims  to  the  power  of  this  great  and  general  destroyer  ?
And  we  ourselves  must  soon  expect  to  feel  the  stroke  of  this  king  of  terrors.  We
may  literally  say  that  we  are  dying  daily.  In  the  midst  of  life  we  are  in  death.  Death
has  sent  us  the  heralds  of  his  approach,  and  we  hear  the  sound  of  his  feet  and  the
sharpening  of  his  dart  in  every  disease  and  pain,  in  every  infirmity  and  decay  that
we  feel.  But  when  Christ  comes,  death  shall  be  no  more.  His  prison,  the  grave,
shall  be  broken  up,  and  his  chains,  powerful  as  they  may  be,  shall  all  be  burst
asunder.  "  Because  Christ  lives,  His  people  shall  live  also."  IV.  Another  reason
why  true  believers  look  and  wish  for  Christ's  second  coming,  is  taken  from  thb

OBEAT  GLOBY  AND  THE  CONSUMMATION  OF  THEIB  FELICITY  WHICH  THEY  SHALL  THEM

OBTAIN.  They  are  then  acknowledged,  approved,  and  welcomed  as  the  children  of
God,  and  the  brethren  and  joint-heirs  with  Jesus  Christ.  And  as  their  positive
feUcity,  their  joy  without  measure  and  without  end,  in  the  presence  and  fruition  of
God  and  the  Lamb,  lies  before  them,  and  ages  appear  rolling  on  after  ages  in  the
immense  eternity,  all  bright  in  glory  and  rich  in  blessing,  so  neither  is  there  any
possible  fear  that  their  bliss  shall  ever  fail,  or  that  the  possessors  shall  ever  be
removed  away  from  their  enjoyments.  Lessons  :  1.  Let  our  thoughts  dwell  upon
this  great  and  glorious  subject.  Even  the  very  make  of  our  bodies  themselves,
though  our  inferior  part,  shows  us  that  we  are  not  to  grovel  upon  earth,  but  to  view
and  contemplate  our  kindred  skies  ;  and  shall  not  our  souls  mount  up  from  this  low
world,  and  its  vain  scenes,  and  look  forward  "  to  the  things  which  are  not  seen  ?
As  risen  with  Christ  seek  those  things  which  are  above,  where  Christ  sitteth  on  the
right  hand  of  God ;  set  your  affection  on  things  above,  not  on  things  on  the  earth  •*
(CoL  ill.  1-4).  Oh  for  the  telescope  of  faith  to  be  often  Uf ted  up  to  explore  not  only
the  land  that  is  afar  off,  but  the  coming  of  the  Prince  of  it  in  all  His  glory  1  Let  us
see  the  heavens  opening  to  give  Him  a  passage  unto  our  earth,  the  solemn  state  of
His  majestic  Person,  the  bright  armies  of  the  skies  in  attendance  upon  Him,  to
augment  the  glory  of  His  coming,  and  to  perform  His  will.  2.  What  a  miserable
portion  have  those  souls  who  have  no  interest  in  the  blessedness  and  glories  of  thii


CHIT,  n,]  TITUS.  137

day !  To  be  excluded  from  a  lot  and  portion  in  the  honours  and  happiness  con>
ferred  on  the  children  of  God  and  the  redeemed  of  the  Lamb  at  His  second  coming,
and  to  be  consigned  over  to  the  miseries  of  endless  perdition  with  the  devil  and  his
angels  ;  to  dwell  with  devouring  flames  and  everlasting  burnings ;  what  a  fearf al
end  is  here  I  And  if  this  be  the  end  of  sinners,  then  what  avaU  all  their  present
worldly  possessions,  pleasures,  and  honours  ?  3.  Let  us  give  all  diligence  that  we
may  be  prepared  for  the  second  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Let  us  keep  this
solemn  day  in  our  continual  view,  and  let  none  of  the  vanities  of  this  life  be  ever
sofFered  to  intercept  its  prospect,  or  darken  its  glories.  And  whilst  we  contemplate
it,  let  us  be  getting  ready  for  it.  Let  us  be  concerned  that  our  corruptions  may  be
more  and  more  subdued,  and  that  our  graces  may  be  more  and  more  exercised  and
strengthened.  (J,  King,  B. A.)  Our  state  of  expectation  and  the  reasons  for  it : — L
It  is  clear  that  the  nature  of  otjb  expectation  depends  upon  the  natdbb  of  the
PBOMiSES  which  EXCITE  IT ;  it  wiU  be  more  or  less  strong  and  definite  as  they  are
more  or  less  so.  Now  when  we  examine  these  promises,  we  find  in  them  a  remarkable
mixture  of  certainty  and  of  uncertainty ;  certainty  as  to  the  event — uncertainty  as  to
the  time  of  its  occurrence.  £[istory,  as  well  as  prophecy,  viewed  as  a  whole,  gives
the  Christian  student  the  same  result — certainty,  and  yet  uncertainty  ;  assuring  us
of  His  coming,  and  yet  leaving  the  time  of  that  coming  a  mystery.  And  the  nature
of  our  expectation  must,  as  we  have  said,  correspond  to  the  nature  of  the  revelation
which  excites  it :  it,  too,  must  be  thus  certain,  and  yet  uncertain.  We  are  fully
persuaded  as  to  the  event ;  doubtful,  and  in  anxious  suspense,  as  to  the  time  of  it ; —
now  "  lifting  up  our  heads  because  our  redemption  draweth  nigh,"  now  saying,
••  Why  tarry  the  wheels  of  His  chariot  ?  "  Now  full  of  joy  at  some  sign  accom-
plished— now  filled  with  sadness  at  finding  that  it  is  yet  to  be  fulfilled :  fear  mingling
with  our  hope,  and  yet  hope  brightening  our  despondency ;  but,  through  all,  sus-
tained by  the  assured  certainty  of  the  event  which  so  perplexes  us  by  the  uncertainty
of  its  arrival.  II.  But  we  have  now  to  inquibe  why  we  abe  thus  kept  in  this
STATE  of  uncebtaintt.  The  answer  to  this  question  is  to  be  found  in  that  fact
which  explains  so  much  that  isdifficnltin  Scripture,  namely,  that  this  present  dispen-
sation is  merely  preparatory  to  another.  The  whole  life  of  each  Christian,  and,  there-
fore, the  whole  life  of  the  Church,  is  the  time  given  for  the  acquisition  of  that  character
which  we  shall  need  in  heaven.  To  this,  every  event  in  our  life,  every  arrangement  in
our  dispensation,  was  designed  to  be  conducive ;  and,  if  you  bear  this  in  mind,  you  will
see  how  it  was  necessary  that  there  should  be  this  mixture  of  assured  certainty  and
anxious  suspense  in  our  expectation  of  the  Lord's  second  coming.  In  the  first
place,  the  fact  that  Christ  shall  come  must  be  clear  and  indubitable,  in  order  to
fix,  steadily,  the  hope  of  the  Church,  in  all  ages,  upon  Christ,  her  future  King.
Beyond  time,  and  the  things  of  time — above  its  mists  and  its  storms,  we  must  see,
and  see  clearly,  Jesus  Christ  our  King.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  the  coming  of
Christ  is  assured  to  us  by  every  possible  assurance  that  can  be  given,  so  that  doubt
concerning  it  is,  to  him  who  believes  the  Bible,  impossible.  This  much,  then,  of
our  present  state  is  clearly  intelligible :  we  can  see  why  the  fact  of  the  second
advent  should  be  certain  ;  but  why  should  the  time  be  uncertain  ? — why  are  we  in
this  state  of  anxious  suspense  as  to  when  our  Lord  is  to  appear  ?  We  understand
this  when  we  remember  that  besides  the  general  purpose  of  giving  us  a  love  for,
and  a  dependence  upon,  Christ,  by  setting  His  coming  before  us  as  the  one  thing
to  be  looked  for,  the  promise  of  His  coming  is  to  have  certain  special  effects  upon
us ;  it  is  to  produce  in  us  certain  particular  tempers  and  feelings — two  especially :
it  was  designed  to  comfort  us  under  trial,  and  also  to  be  a  strong  motive  to  watch-
fulness. Had  the  time  of  our  Lord's  second  coming  been  known  from  the  first  it
would  have  utterly  frustrated  the  design  of  making  this  life  a  state  of  probation  and
of  gradual  sanctification.  The  early  Church  would  have  been  languidly  indifferent ;
the  latter  Church  intensely  and  absorbingly  expectant :  the  one  would  have  been
tried  above  measure,  the  other  have  had  no  trials  at  all.  The  one  would  have  been
patient,  but  not  watchful ;  the  other  would  be  watchful,  but  not  patient ;  neither,
in  the  true  sense  of  the  word,  could  have  been  said  to  wait  for  the  coming  of  Christ.
But  if,  on  the  contrary,  the  date  of  this  event  is  concealed,  and  the  prophecies  and
signs  of  it  80  contrived  that  at  any  given  moment  there  may  be  reason  for  thinking
it  to  be  near  at  hand,  and  reasons,  also,  for  pronouncing  it  to  be  far  off ;  if  now  it
needs  the  straining  gaze  of  ardent  faith  to  catch  a  glimpse  of  it,  and  now  it  seems
advancing  full  upon  our  view ;  if  now  it  seems  to  approach,  and  now  to  recede,  so
that  the  earlier  Church  might  sometimes  deem  it  nigh,  and  the  latest  generation
•ometimes  think  it  far  off,  then  at  all  times,  and  in  all  ages,  would  this  event  have


138  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [oha».  n.

its  full  practical  effect  upon  the  Church,  m.  Bot  this  is  not  thb  oin<T  bbasoh
WBT  THE  TiMB  OF  His  coHiKO  BHOXTLD  BB  THUS  UNCEBTAIN.  So  far  we  havo  been
viewing  it  with  reference  only  to  the  saints  ;  it  may,  and  shoald,  be  Tiewed  with
reference  to  the  ungodly.  To  those  who  love  Him  not,  as  well  as  to  those  who  do,  it
is  said,  "  Behold,  I  come  quickly."  And  what  is  the  promise  of  the  second  advent
meant  to  be  to  such?  A  solemn  warning;  and  a  fearful  snare  if  they  neglect
that  warning.  {Abp.  Magee.)  The  second  advent  of  Chritt : — I.  An  impobtant
OHABACTBR.  1.  His  Diviue  character — ••  the  great  God."  "  Great "  in  majesty,
wisdom,  knowledge,  power,  love.    Crowned  with  all  perfections  peculiar  to  Deity.

2.  His  relative  character — "our  Saviour."  8.  In  this  combined  and  glorious
character  He  will  make  His  second  appearance.  II.  An  ihpobta^tt  bvbnt.  1.
Sudden.  2.  Glorious.  3.  A  contrast  to  His  first  appearance  in  humiliation.  HI.
An  impobtant  exebcise.  "Looking  for,"  &o.  (Homilist.)  The  coming  of
Christ: — I.  Chbist  oomes  to  the  penitent  soul  in  convebsion.  II.  Chbist
couES  to  the  tbied  and  afflicted  Chbistlan  to  help  and  comfobt.  nL  Chbist
comes  to  the  diligent  sebvant  to  bncoubaqb  and  aid  him.  IY.  Chbist  comes
to  the  dtino  Chbistian  to  beoeivb  his  spibit.  (F.  Wagstaff.)  The  appearing
of  Christ : — I.  An  exalted  chabacteb.  1.  God.  2.  Saviour.  II.  An  ihtebest-
INO  STENT.  1.  His  own  appearing  will  be  glorious.  "  His  countenance  will  be  as
the  sun  shineth  ,in  his  strength."  2.  The  manner  of  His  appearing  will  be
glorious.  He  will  take  the  clouds  for  His  chariot ;  He  will  come  in  the  clouds  with
power  and  great  glory.  3.  The  attendants  at  His  appearing  will  be  glorious.  Aii
innumerable  multitude  of  celestial  spirits  will  grace  His  train  and  perform  His
will.  4.  The  oircumstances  of  His  appearing  will  be  glorious.  The  heavens  will
pass  away  with  a  great  noise ;  the  dead  shall  be  raised ;  the  Son  of  Man  shall
ascend  His  great  tribunal,  and  before  Him  shall  be  gathered  all  nations ;  the  final
sentence  vriil  be  pronounced  and  executed.  III.  A  joyfdl  expectation.  1.  The
hope  of  a  blessed  resurrection.  2.  The  hope  of  a  blessed  mansion.  3.  The  hope
of  a  blessed  society.  4.  The  hope  of  obtaining  the  most  blessed  enjoyments.  5.
The  hope  of  being  employed  in  the  most  blessed  services.  IV.  The  believeb's
CONDUCT  in  the  prospect  of  this  blessedness.  •*  Looking  for  that  blessed  hope,"  &c.
What  is  meant  by  this  expression  ?  1.  It  includes  a  full  conviction  of  the  certainty
of  Christ's  appearing.  The  ground  of  our  persuasion  is  the  Word  of  God.  Our
faith  is  built  on  the  Divine  testimony.  2.  To  look  for  the  glorious  appearing  of  the
great  God  and  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  is  to  love  and  desire  His  appearing.  ^  3.
To  look  for  the  appearing  of  Jesus  Christ  is  to  wait  patiently  for  it.  4.  In  looking
for  the  appearing  of  Christ  the  believer  makes  it  His  constant  study  to  be  always
ready  for  His  appearing,  so  to  have  his  lamps  trimmed  that  he  may  be  prepared,
at  a  moment's  warning,  to  meet  the  bridegroom.  (The  Pulpit.)  The  future
state : — The  present  state  is  not  permanent,  neither  do  its  circumstances  render  it
desirable  that  it  should  be  so.  Its  perishing  hopes,  groundless  fears,  profitless  pur-
suits, faithless  friendships,  its  toils,  stripes,  aflaictions,  make  it  far  from  happy.
The  Christian,  then,  looks  for  something  better.  The  future  state — 1.  Is  necessary
to  solve  the  mysteries  of  Providence.    2.  Is  requisite  to  complete  human  happiness.

3.  Is  the  end  of  the  Christian  faith.  4.  Is  the  declared  purpose  of  God.  _  6.  Is
advisable  as  a  development.  (^Homilist.)  The  glorious  appearing  of  Christ : —
I.  In  view  of  such  an  experience,  made  sure  to  us  in  the  near  future,  our
religion  should  be  a  source  of  perpetual  comfort  and  joyous  expectation.  11.
Present  ills  and  seeming  losses  and  self-denials  should  be  borne  with  resig-
nation and  composure,  in  view  of  the  imminence  of  the  glorious  appearing
of  the  great  God  and  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  to  finish  His  appointed  work
and  reward  His  faithful  ones.  III.  There  is  no  influence  so  potent  on  the
faith,  heart,  and  life  of  the  Christian,  as  the  near  and  daily  contemplation  of
this  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ  in  the  power  and  glory  of  heaven  to  consummate
His  work  of  grace  and  His  reign  of  love.  {J.  M.  Sherwood,  D.D.)  The
revisers*  rendering  of  this  passage : — "  The  appearing  of  the  glory  of  our  great
God  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ."  Among  the  foolish  charges  which  have  been
brought  against  the  revisers  is  Uiat  of  favouring  Arian  tendencies  by  blurring  those
texts  which  teach  the  Divinity  of  Jesus  Christ.  The  present  passage  would  be  •
sufficient  answer  to  such  a  charge.  In  the  A.V.  we  have  «'the  glorious  appearing
of  the  great  God,  and  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,"  where  both  the  wording  and  the
comma  make  it  clear  that  "  the  great  God  "  means  the  Father  and  not  our  Saviour.
Tlie  revisers,  by  omitting  the  comma,  for  which  there  is  no  authority  in  the  original,
and  by  placing  the  "  our  "  before  both  substantives,  have  given  their  authority  to  the


mxT.  n.]  TITUS.  139

Tiew  that  St.  Paul  means  both  "  great  God  "  and  "  Saviour "  to  apply  to  Jesas  Christ.
It  is  not  any  Epiphany  of  the  Father  which  is  in  his  mind,  but  the  "  Epiphany  of  the
glory  of  our  great  God  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ."  The  wording  of  the  Greek  is  such
that  absolute  certainty  is  not  attainable ;  but  the  context,  the  collocation  of  the
words,  the  use  of  the  word  "Epiphany,"  and  the  omission  of  the  article  before
"  Saviour,"  all  seem  to  favour  the  revisers'  rendering.  And,  if  it  be  adopted,  we
have  here  one  of  the  plainest  and  most  direct  statements  of  the  Divinity  of  Christ
to  be  found  in  Scripture.  As  such  it  was  employed  in  the  Arian  controversy,
Although  Ambrose  seems  to  have  understood  the  passage  as  referring  to  the  Father
and  Christ,  and  not  to  Christ  alone.  The  force  of  what  follows  is  enhanced  if  the
revisers'  rendering,  which  is  the  strictly  grammatical  rendering,  is  maintained.
It  is  as  being  "  our  great  God "  that  He  gave  Himself  for  us,  that  He  might
"  redeem  us  from  all  iniquity " ;  and  it  was  because  He  was  God  as  well  as
man,  that  what  was  uttered  as  a  bitter  taunt  was  really  a  glorious  truth ;
— "  He  saved  others ;  Himself  He  cannot  save."  {A.  Plummer,  D.D.)
Who  gave  Himself  for  us. — ChrisVi  gift  to  us,  and  ours  to  Him  : — I.  The
rHSPEAKABLB  AMD  ALL-powEBFXJL  GIFT.  Christ  began  to  givc  Himself  when  from
the  depths  of  eternity  He  passed  within  the  limitations  of  men,  and,  drawn  by
our  need,  and  impelled  by  filial  obedience  and  fraternal  love,  entered  within  the
conditions  of  our  existence,  "  and,  forasmuch  as  the  children  were  partakers  of
flesh  and  blood,  Himself  likewise  took  part  of  the  same."  It  was  much  that  Christ
should  stretch  out  His  hand  to  bless,  should  "  give  His  back  to  the  smiter  and  Hia
cheeks  to  them  that  plucked  off  the  hair,"  and  bear  His  cross  on  His  own  shoulders,
and  should  be  fastened  to  it  on  Calvary.  Did  you  ever  think  that  it  was  perhaps
more  that  He  should  have  a  hand  with  which  to  bless,  and  a  back  to  be  bared  to
the  scourge,  a  cheek  that  did  not  flush  with  one  angry  spot  when  rude  spittings
were  shot  upon  it  and  traitorous  kisses  touched  it ;  shoulders  to  bear  His  cross,  and
a  body  to  be  nailed  upon  it.  Why  had  He  these  but  because,  ere  He  had  them.  He
gave  Himself  for  us  ?  And  so,  having  its  roots  in  eternity,  that  gift  included
all  His  wonderful  self- oblivious  and  world-blessing  life  and  culminated  in  the  death
upon  the  cross.  But  then,  mark  still  further,  that  the  apostle  here  gives  us  another
thought  which  deepens  the  wonderf ulness  and  the  preciousness  of  this  gift ;  for,
speaking  to  a  man  who  had  never  come  near  Jesus  Christ  in  the  flesh,  and  including
in  hia  words  the  whole  race  of  mankind  to  the  last  syllable  of  recorded  time,  he
declares  that  "  He  gave  Himself  for  us."  How  did  He  give  Himself  for  us  unless  in
the  giving  He  had  the  knowledge  of  us  and  His  heart  turned  to  as ;  unless  when
He  yielded  Himself  to  life  and  to  death,  the  thoughts  of  all  the  men  in  the  world,  and
that  should  thereafter  be  in  it,  were  the  motives  that  impelled  Him  ?  And  how
did  "  He  give  Himself  for  us  "  unless  He  gave  Himself  for  me  and  for  thee  ?  11.
The  bedeemino  poweb  of  the  gift.  It  is  noteworthy  that  here,  in  the  apostle's
summing  up  of  the  great  purpose  of  the  life  and  death  of  Jesus  Christ,  he  isolates
from  all  other  consequences  of  that  mighty  fact,  blessed  as  those  are,  and  selects
as  the  sole  object  to  be  considered  this  power  to  deliver  men  from  the  bondage
of  evil.  Jesus  Christ  died  for — not  only  that  He  might  redeem  yon  from  the
penalties  of  sin,  nor  from  its  guilt,  but  that  He  might  redeem  you  from  doing
it.  You  want  more  than  culture,  more  than  the  morality  of  prudence,  more  than
education  of  conscience,  in  order  to  weaken  passion  and  to  strengthen  will,  so  that
a  man  may  shake  oS  the  bondage  of  the  evil  which  he  has  done,  and  may  begin
to  walk  in  newness  of  life.  I  know  of  no  power  that  enables  a  poor  man,  beset  and
hardened  by  torturing  tyrants  of  his  own  passions,  and  feeble  against  the  strong
Beduotions  of  outward  temptation,  to  stand  fast  and  overcome  them  all,  shaking
their  fetters  from  his  emancipated  limbs,  but  the  realisation  of  that  infinite
sacrifice,  that  changeless  Divine  human  love,  that  mighty  pure  Brother's  life,  from
which  there  flow  into  men's  hearts  motives  and  powers  and  impulses  which,  and
which  alone,  are  strong  enough  to  make  them  free.    IH.  The  answebino  gift

IHAT  COBBE8POND8  TO,  AND  IS  EVOKED  BY,  ChBIST'S    GIFT   OF    H1M8ELF.       The  Only  Way

by  which  we  can  win  another  for  ourselves  is  by  giving  ourselves  to  that  other.
Hearts  are  only  bought  by  hearts  ;  love's  flame  can  only  be  kindled  by  love's  flame.
The  only  way  by  which  one  spiritual  being  can  possess  another  is  when  the  possessed
loves  and  yields  to  the  love  of  the  possessor.  And  thus  Jesus  Christ  makes  us
His  own  by  giving  Himself  to  us  for  our  own.  There  is  no  power  known  in
humanity  that  can,  I  was  going  to  say,  decentralise  a  human  life  and  lift  it  clean
off  its  pivot  of  self  except  the  power  of  the  unspeakable  love  of  Jesus  Christ  on
the  cross.    We  revolve  round  our  own  centres,  self  is  our  centre ;  but  that  great


140  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  a.

Sun  of  Eighteousness  has  mass  enough  to  draw  hearts  and  lives  from  their  Httla
orbit,  and  to  turn  them  into  satellites  of  its  own.  And  then  they  move  in  musio
and  in  light  around  the  Sun  of  their  souls.  IV.  The  enthusiabm  fob  good  which
THAT  OKBAT  GIFT  wnjj  KINDLE.  "  Zealous  of  good  works."  The  apostle  means
substantially  the  same  thing  as  he  and  the  others  mean  by  "righteousness" — the
deeds  of  all  kinds  which  correspond  to  men's  place  and  power — "whatsoever
things  are  lovely  and  of  good  report."  He  thinks  that  if  a  man  has  rightly
pondered  and  yielded  himself  to  the  influence  of  that  serene  and  supreme  example
of  a  beautiful  work,  Christ's  giving  of  Himself  for  us,  he  will  not  only  do  such  works,
but  be  passionately  desirous  of  opportunities  for  doing  them.  It  is  a  deal  easier  to
be  zealous  for  the  Church,  for  a  society,  for  a  political  or  religious  party  or  school,
for  a  movement  or  a  cause,  tban  to  be  "  zealous  for  good  works."  And  aU  that
zeal  is  froth  unless  the  other  be  with  it.  All  Christ's  flock  are  earmarked  thus.
They  are  zealous  for  good.  They  like  and  they  seek  for  good  works.  {A.  Mae-
laren,  D.D.)  The  great  redemption : — How  great  a  theme — how  glorious  a  work

is  this !  To  redeem  a  few  bodies  from  slavery,  what  has  it  cost !  To  effect  but
a  partial  alleviation  of  their  suffering,  a  prospective  and  future  freedom,  what
efforts,  what  sacrifices,  what  a  hard  and  protracted  struggle  have  been  necessary !
But  we  "  are  not  redeemed  with  silver  and  gold  from  our  vain  conversation  (that
is,  our  life  of  iniquity),  but  with  the  precious  blood  of  Christ."    I.  We  notice  what

WAS  THE   IMPLIED   CONDITION  OF  MANKIND   THAT  INDUCED   JeSUB   ChBIST  TO   UNDEBTASB

THIS  AHDTJ0D8  woBK  ON  THEiB  BEHALF.  We  Were  Under  the  influence  of  moral  evil.
1.  We  were  held  under  the  sentence  of  the  supreme  law — a  law  undeniably  just  and
pure,  calculated  to  maintain  the  prerogatives  of  the  sovereign  Lord,  and  worthy
of  being  feared  as  the  expression  of  His  righteous  will.  2.  The  human  soul,  created
at  first  in  God's  image,  was  polluted  and  degraded.  As  a  temple  now  in  ruins,
desecrated,  and  perverted  from  its  original  purpose,  no  longer  fit  for  him  to  inhabit.
3.  The  condemnation  and  pollution  of  the  soul  involved  its  ultimate,  if  not  its
present  misery — the  loss  of  all  pure  felicity  and  pure  immortality.  "  Sin,  when  it
is  finished,  bringeth  forth  death  " — a  privation  of  all  happiness,  a  subjection  to
all  suffering.  II.  We  obsebve  what  it  is  heee  said  Cheist  did  fob  us — He  gave
Himself  for  us. — This,  under  any  view,  was  an  act  of  stupendous  goodness  and
compassion.  But  its  peculiar  features  must  be  distinctly  traced.  1.  The  Person
who  gave  Himself.  Tlie  Father's  co-equal  and  co-eternal  Son,  whom  angels
worship  and  devils  dread,  whom  the  universe  acknowledges  as  its  author.  He
gave  Himself  for  us,  a  ransom-price  of  ineffable  excellence  and  worth  I  2.  What  was
the  deed  ?  The  most  entire  self-sacrifice.  He  gave  Himself,  not  only  to  teach  us,
comfort  us,  labour  for  us,  but  to  die  for  us.  3.  The  unparalleled  magnanimity  of  the
idct.  Who  so  great  as  He  ?  who  so  mean  as  we  ?  What  being  so  glorious  as  He  ?
who  so  worthless  as  we?  III.  Let  xjs  distinctly  appbeciate  His  pubfosb,  ob  thb
END  OF  His  wondrous  self-devotement.  To  redeem  us  from  all  iniquity.  1.  To
rescue  us  from  the  sentence  pronounced  upon  all  iniquity  by  the  Divine  law  ;  and
this  by  being  made  a  curse  for  us.  The  law  has  no  more  power  over  you.  2.  To
redeem  us  from  the  dominion  of  sin  in  our  hearts  and  minds.  He  designed  that
we  should  not  continue  slaves  of  iniquity,  vassals  of  Satan,  and  victims  of  guilt.
What  a  noble  purpose,  to  regenerate  that  which  was  so  degenerate,  and  restore  that
which  was  in  ruins,  and  purify  that  which  was  so  polluted  !  3.  His  design  included
the  recovery  of  onr  immortal  life;  for  to  redeem  from  all  iniquity  must  signify  to
redeem  from  all  the  effects,  all  the  consequences,  all  the  privations  and  inflictions
which  iniquity  in  all  its  possible  relations  can  incur.  IV.  We  notice  how  this
deed  of  His  effects  the  pubpose  He  pboposed.  1.  His  death  is  the  moral
substitute  for  ours ;  or  that  great  moral  consideration  on  account  of  which  God
is  pleased  to  pardon  sin,  to  accept  the  repenting  sinner,  and  justify  the  ungodly
who  believes  in  Jesus.  Here  we  can  perceive  that  there  is  a  reasonable  foundation
for  the  practical  display  of  the  Divine  love  to  lost  souls.  It  is  a  conception  of  the
Divine  and  infinite  mind,  and  evidently  worthy  of  that  mind,  since  it  is  "  glory
to  God  in  the  highest,  on  earth  peace,  good-will  towards  men."  2.  We  may
perceive,  also,  that  the  sacrifice  of  Cbrist  becomes  the  basis  on  which  Divine
influences  are  granted  to  renovate  fallen  man.  The  Holy  Spirit  becomes  our
sanctifier,  because  Christ  has  restored  us  to  Divine  favour,  satisfied  the  law,  and
removed  every  barrier  to  our  adoption.  3.  The  discovery  of  this  grand  fact
of  Chrict's  sacrifice  is  found  the  most  eflScient,  indeed  the  only  snooessful,  means
of  recovering  us  to  a  sincere  obedience  and  a  lively  hope  of  glory.  This  works  the
great  moral  miracle  of  transforming  a  heart  of  stone  to  one  of  flesh,  a  heart  of  sin


CHAT,  n.]  TITUS.  141

to  one  of  virtue,  a  heart  of  enmity  to  one  of  love.  Application  :  1.  Can  we  saj,
"  He  hath  loved  me,  and  given  Himself  for  me  "  ?  Then  let  us  prove  our  vital
union  by  all  the  fruits  of  godliness.  2.  Can  we  find  no  evidence  that  we  are
redeemed  from  our  iniquity  ?  then  let  us  fear  the  impending  issue,  and  flee  for
refuge  to  lay  hold  on  the  hope  set  before  us.     (The  Evangelist.)  Christ's  gift  of

Himself  for  our  redemption  : — I.  The  pebson  here  spoken  of.  "  The  great  God,"  <fec.
n.  The  gift.  4.  The  dignity  of  the  person  bestowing  it.  2.  The  sacrifice  at  which
it  is  made.  3.  Its  value.  4.  The  motive  which  impelled  the  donor  to  bestow  it —
love.  5.  The  benefit  which  accompanies  it.  (A.  Alexander,  D.D.)  Christ's  gift  of
Himself: — In  that  Christ  gave  Himself — 1.  We  learn  that  there  can  be  neither  other
priest  nor  other  sacrifice  than  Christ  Himself :  both  which  our  apostle  accurately
noteth  in  a  diverse  phrase,  which  at  the  first  seem  to  sound  the  self-same  ;  neither
duth  our  EngUsh  so  distinguish  them  as  the  Greek  doth.  The  former  is  in  our
text,  which  more  properly  betokeneth  that  Christ  offered  no  other  oblation  or
sacrifice  than  Himself :  hence  is  it  said  that  for  this  end  God  gave  Christ  a  body,
that  in  the  same  He  might  perform  this  part  of  His  Father's  will.  The  latter  is  in
1  Tim.  ii.  6,  which  implieth  more  directly  that  Christ  Himself  gave  Himself,  and
that  there  can  be  no  other  priest  in  this  oblation  than  He  that  is  the  sacrifice :
neither,  indeed,  can  He  be  offered  of  any  other  save  Himself,  who  for  this  purpose
"sanctified  Himself,"  as  the  altar  sanctifieth  the  gift  and  the  temple  the  gold.
2.  In  that  it  is  said  that  Christ  gave  Himself  we  may  note  that  He  gave
Himself  wholly,  both  His  body  and  soul,  in  sacrifice,  and  spared  neither:
for  we  had  deserved  a  double  death  which  it  was  meet  that  Christ  by  a  doable
death  should  destroy;  by  His  bodily  death  pull  out  the  sting  of  the  death  of  our
bodies,  and  utterly  abolish  the  death  of  our  souls  by  the  death  of  His  soul ;  and
to  this  purpose,  that  our  consolation  might  be  full,  the  Scripture  showeth  how
that  His  soul  was  heavy  unto  the  death,  and  that  a  little  before  His  suffering
His  soul  was  sore  troubled.  And  Isaiah  expressly  affirmeth  that  His  soul
travailed  in  His  death,  and  that  He  made  His  soul  an  offering  for  sin  and
poured  out  His  soul  unto  death,  and  that  He  made  His  grave  with  the  rich
in  His  death:  where  note,  that  he  speaketh  in  the  plural  number  to  note  this
double  death  of  Christ ;  and  what  other  thing  did  Himself  proclaim  with  such
a  loud  voice  upon  the  cross  when  He  cried,  "  My  God,  My  God,  why  hast  Thoa
forsaken  Me  ?  "  For  what  other  is  the  death  of  the  soul  but  to  be  separated  from
God,  the  fountain  of  life?  which  point  helpeth  us  to  understand  such  places
of  the  Scripture  as  affirm  that  Christ  suffered  and  died  according  to  the  flesh
(John  vi.  51),  and  that  Christ  offered  His  body  (Heb.  x.  10),  and  all  those  which
ascribe  all  our  salvation  to  the  blood  of  Christ.  All  which  must  be  synecdochically
understood,  under  one  kind  comprehending  all  His  suffering  and  never  excluding
any  part  of  it,  every  one  of  them  being  equivalent  to  this  speech  of  the  apostle,  "  who
gave  Himself  "  :  that  is,  both  His  body  and  soul,  or  wholly  unto  the  death ;  neither
can  the  death  of  the  cross  be  other,  which  is  joined  with  the  malediction  of  God
from  which  we  by  it  were  wholly  delivered.  3.  Where  it  is  said  that  Christ  gave
Himself  it  may  be  further  noted  that  His  whole  passion  and  death  was  voluntary ;
for  what  is  more  free  than  gift  ?  and  this  appeareth  in  that  He  was  wont  to  say
beforehand  that  He  must  go  away  unto  His  Father,  that  He  must  leave  the  world
and  His  disciples,  that  He  had  power  to  lay  down  His  life  and  take  it  up  again  and
that  no  man  could  take  it  from  Him  ;  for  who  could  take  that  life  from  Him,  whose
sinless  nature  of  itself  was  not  obnoxious  to  death,  it  being  the  stipend  of  sin  ?
(T.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Christ  must  be  received : — 1.  If  Christ  gave  Himself  for  us,  then
suffered  He  not  for  His  own  sins,  for  He  knew  no  sin,  being  most  holy  in  His  con-
ception, withont  original  sin ;  according  to  the  word  of  the  angel  "  That  holj
thing  that  shall  be  born  of  thee "  (Luke  i  35) ;  as  also  most  innocent  in
all  His  life,  for  no  guile  was  found  in  His  mouth;  and  who  could  accuse
Him  of  sin,  of  which  innocency,  not  only  His  friends,  the  prophets  and
apostles,  but  His  greatest  foes  also,  by  God's  providence,  became  witnesses?
Pilate's  wife  wished  her  husband  to  have  nothing  to  do  with  that  just
man.  Pilate  himself  confessed  he  found  no  fault  in  Him.  The  centurion  said,
surely  this  man  was  the  Son  of  God.  Caiaphas  said,  that  one  man  must  die,
not  for  Himself,  but  for  the  people ;  the  thief  on  the  cross,  "  this  man  hath  done
nothing  amiss."  Nay,  Judas  himself  cried  out  that  he  had  betrayed  innocent
blood ;  not  to  speak  anything  of  the  many  confessions  of  the  devils  themselves,
that  He  was  the  Son  of  the  Most  High.  2.  If  Christ  have  given  Himself  for  as,
we  must  receive  this  gift  and  the  benefit  of  it,  seeing  a  gift  not  received  ia  to


14i  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  ii.

no  purpose  or  profit.  And  the  means  to  receive  Christ  and  apply  Him  with  all  His
benefits  is — (1)  To  know  Him,  for  darkness  comprehendeth  Him  not ;  and  He  came
to  His  own,  out  they  not  knowing  £[im  received  Him  not,  but  crucified  Him,  whom
had  they  known,  they  would  never  have  crucified  the  Lord  of  Glory.  (2)  By
prizing  the  gift  above  gold,  silver,  pearls ;  esteeming  the  precious  blood  of  the
mimaculate  Lamb  above  every  corruptible  thing  under  the  sun,  aU  which
cannot  redeem  our  soul.  (3)  By  opening  the  door  of  the  heart,  purified
by  faith,  to  entertain  Him,  while  He  oSereth  Himself  with  all  His  merits  in
the  Word  and  sacraments,  and  this  not  as  a  stranger,  by  giving  a  night's  lodging,  but
as  our  husband  and  head,  never  to  be  departed.  3.  If  Christ  has  given  Himself
so  willingly  to  such  a  cursed  death  for  us,  we  must  also  in  way  of  thankfulness
give  ourselves  unto  Him.  He  gave  His  body.  His  soul.  His  glory,  and  all  for  us ;
we  must  not  think  much  to  part  with  body,  goods,  name,  liberty,  or  life  itself,  for
His  sake,  when  He  calleth  us  unto  Him.  The  law  of  thankfulness  requireth  that
we  should  part  with  such  things  as  in  comparison  are  but  trifles  for  Him,  who
thinketh  not  His  dearest  things  too  good  for  us  ;  and  the  rather,  because  when  we
have  done  all  we  can,  we  can  never  be  sufficiently  thankful  for  this  greatest  gift
that  ever  was  given  to  the  sons  of  men ;  we  can  never  speak  sufficiently  of  it,  nor
ever  wade  deep  enough  into  the  ocean  of  that  love  that  presenteth  us  with  such
a  gift  as  this  is.     (Ibid.)  Christ's  gift  of  Himself  for  ut : — I.   Thb    pbbson

BEFEBBED  TO.  Show — 1.  His  Diviuity.  2.  His  humanity.  8.  Union  of  both.  4.
Superiority  to  angels  and  all  other  existences.  II.  What  this  pebson  did.  "  Gave
Himself  for  us."  1.  Voluntarily.  2.  Personally.  3.  Sacrifioially.  HI.  Thb
PUBPOSE  FOE  WHICH  He  GAVE  HiMSELP  poB  US.  1.  To  **  redeem  "  or  deliver  us ;  not
from  poverty,  or  affliction,  or  death,  but  from  "  iniquity  " — aU  iniquity — its  guilt,
condemnation,  power,  inbeing,  consequences.  2.  To  "  purify  "  us ;  to  separate  us
unto  Himself  from  the  world  and  sin ;  "  a  peculiar  people " — in  nature,  names,
possessions.  3.  •'  Zealous  of  good  works  " — not  passive,  but  active.  Lessons  :  Our
redemption  is — 1.  Wrought  out  by  love  and  blood.  2.  Entire  and  perfect.  3.
Into  blessed  experience  and  useful  living.      (Local  Preacher's  Treasury.)  The

duty  of  tiling  one's  life  for  others : — "  Who  gave  Himself  for  us."  We  are  familiar
with  tne  expression  that  Jesus  Christ  gave  His  life  for  man.  I  would  not  take
anything  away  from  the  meaning  and  magnitude  of  the  act  of  dying ;  but  I  should
be  glad  to  give  more  emphasis  and  power  to  the  fact  that  Christ  gave  His  life
as  much  while  He  was  living  as  while  He  was  dying,  and  that  to  give  life  may
mean  either  to  use  it  or  to  lay  it  down.  All  Christ's  was  a  giving.  Although
comprehensively  viewed,  it  was  a  single  gift,  yet  it  was  a  continuous  gift,
developing  in  every  direction.  It  was  a  multiple  force,  ever  varying.  It  wm  one
prolonged  giving  of  Himself  away  to  others.  For  He  lived  not  for  Himself.  He
sought  not  His  own.  He  did  not  employ  His  reason,  nor  His  moral  sentiments,
nor  His  active  forces,  nor  His  time,  nor  His  power,  for  Himself.  He  honoured  His
Father,  and  sought  the  welfare  of  men.  And  the  three  years,  or  nearly  three,  tbat
preceded  His  death,  were  in  some  respects  a  far  more  remarkable  gift  than  was  the
death  itself.  And  in  the  case  of  our  Divine  Lord,  He  gave  Himself  both  while
living  and  while  dying.  So  the  lesson  to  be  derived,  it  seems  to  me,  from  many
of  the  descriptions  of  Christ's  gift  of  Himself,  is  a  lesson  to  be  pondered  in  regard
to  the  use  of  our  lives,  rather  than  in  regard  to  their  termination.  We  give  our
life  best,  not  when  we  die,  but  while  yet  we  are  living.  It  is  true  that  men  often
give  their  lives  in  some  sense  as  Christ  did ;  but  the  more  obvious  and  the  more
common  and  attainable  imitation  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  that  which  seeks  to
imitate  His  life,  rather  than  His  death.  No  man  can  give  his  life  for  the  world  as
Christ  did.  Though  a  man  may  give  his  life  for  the  world,  no  man  can  stand  sinless;
but  He  did.  No  man  is  related  to  God  as  was  the  Saviour.  From  no  man  reaches
out  those  threads  which  connect  him  with  the  spiritual  and  invisible  realm  as
Christ  was  connected  with  it.  What  the  other-side  influence  was  I  have  said
we  do  not  know  ;  but  that  there  was  one  we  are  told.  And  this  we  cannot  have.
Here  is  a  grand  official  difference.  There  is  a  universal  character  belonging  to
the  influence  of  the  death  of  Christ  which  does  not  and  cannot  belong  to  that
of  any  man.  Yet,  in  so  far  as  moral  influence  is  exerted  by  one's  death  on  his
fellow-men,  it  is  possible,  though  in  a  far  lower  sphere,  and  in  a  far  less  degree,
that  we  should  follow  and  imitate  our  Lord  by  giving  our  life  for  one  another.
Every  patriot  who  is  sacrificed,  on  account  of  the  heroic  fidelity  of  his  Ufe,  to
the  public  weal ;  every  martyr  whose  blood  is  shed  as  a  seal  and  witness  of
that  holy  faith  by  which  he  would  illumine  and  bless  the  world ;  every  prisoner


CBAt.  n.]  TITUS.  143

lingering  in  dungeons,  and,  with  long  dying,  suSering  unseen  and  forgotten  by  the
miUtitude  for  whose  welfare  his  life  is  spent ;  every  man  who  goes  forth  to  lands  ol
fever  and  malaria,  and  to  early  death,  knowing  that  he  carries  religion,  civilisation,
and  liberty  to  the  ignorant  at  the  price  of  his  own  Ufe,  aud  cheerfully  dies  in  tiie
harness  there,  where  men,  being  most  degraded  and  thankless,  are  on  that  very
account  more  needful  of  this  very  sacrifice  of  some  one — all  these,  and  all  others
whose  death  is  brought  about  by  persistent  adhesion  to  the  welfare  of  men,  follow
their  Lord  not  less  really  because  the  sphere  is  lower  and  narrower.  They  follow
their  Lord  in  death  and  through  death.  While,  then,  it  is  possible,  literally,  to
give  our  life  for  others,  and  while  we  may  sometimes  be  called  in  the  performance
of  our  duty  to  do  it,  so  that  we  shall  not  say  that  dying  for  others  is  antiquated ;
yet,  in  the  main,  if  we  are  to  follow  our  Lord,  and  to  give  our  lives  for  others,
it  must  be  by  the  use  which  we  make  of  those  lives.  Now,  he  who  devotes  the
active  hours  of  his  life  to  those  spheres  to  which  Providence  calls  men,  is  really
giving  himself  for  others.  When  a  man  stands  upon  the  deck,  and  at  the  bench,  and
by  the  forge,  and  in  the  furrow,  and  in  the  colliery — then,  if  ever,  if  he  has  a  life
to  Uveof  true  piety,  is  the  time ;  and  there,  at  the  post  of  duty,  is  the  place.  For  all
the  humblest  avocations  and  employments  are  so  arranged  that,  while  they  serve
to  support  the  actor,  they  do  a  hundred  times  as  much  for  the  community  as  they
do  for  him  that  follows  them.  Why,  that  old  smith,  rugged  himself,  almost,  as  the
storms  he  prepares  to  combat,  hammers  morning  and  night  upon  the  lin^s  that
form  the  chain  which  clasps  the  cable.  It  may  be,  as  in  the  olden  time,  yet  more
ponderously,  that  he  in  the  smithy  works  on  the  huge  shank  of  the  anchor,  and
when  his  summer's  work  or  winter's  toil  is  done,  and  it  is  sold  for  the  ship,  men
ask  him,  "  What  got  you  for  your  labour  ?  "  Nobody  ever  thinks  of  saying  to  him^
"  You  have  worked  a  whole  winter  to  make  a  gift ;  what  have  you  given  to  the
community  ?  What  has  he  given  ?  It  may  not  be  known  for  a  long  time.  On
yoyage  after  voyage  the  ship  goes,  and  there  lies  his  gift  useless  and  unsuspected.
Some  day  the  ship  bears  back  a  thousand  precious  souls,  among  them  mothers  whose
flowers  He  at  home  waiting  for  them  to  return ;  fathers,  who  cannot  be  spared  from  the
neighbourhood ;  public  men  of  signal  service — the  very  salt  of  the  times  in  which
they  live ;  heroes  and  patriots  many.  Then  it  is  that  the  storm  beats  down  and
seeks  to  whelm  them  all  in  the  sea,  and  to  whelm  the  community  in  mourning.
Then  it  is  that,  when  every  other  effort  has  been  made  in  vain,  the  anchor  is
thrown  out.  And  now  the  storm  rages  with  increased  violence,  as  if  it  were  yet
more  angry  because  it  is  thwarted.  But  the  good  blacksmith's  work  holds.  Sinking
far  out  of  sight,  and  grappling  the  foundations  of  the  earth,  it  will  not  let  go.  And
we,  for  the  first  time,  see  the  value  of  his  gift.  Every  link  has  been  properly
welded;  and,  though  the  wind  howls,  and  the  sea  wages  a  fierce  and  desperate
battle,  and  the  strain  is  tremendous,  the  storm  passes  by,  and  there  rides  the  gallant
ship  safe  !  There  is  what  he  gave.  He  gave  a  chain,  an  anchor,  to  the  community,
and  salvation  to  the  hundreds  on  board  the  ship,  and  joy  and  peace  where  the
tidings  came  of  souls  saved  from  the  remorseless  deep.  And  yet,  how  many  men
think  simply  that  he  made  an  anchor,  and  got  so  many  hundred  dollars  for  it !  He
made  an  anchor  and  saved  a  hundred  lives.  So  men  that  fiU  our  houses  with
conveniences,  with  comforts,  with  various  instruments  by  which  our  time  is
redeemed  to  higher  and  nobler  uses ;  men  that  make  implements — tiiey  give  my
brain  a  gift.  He  that  makes  a  machine  emancipates  me.  For  if  matter  caimot
be  made  to  toil  upon  matter,  then  men  must  toil  upon  it.  And  just  in  proportion
as  you  make  slaves — the  only  slaves  that  are  fit  for  this  world — machine  slaves —
just  in  that  proportion  you  redeem  the  mind  to  greater  leisure,  and  to  a  larger
sphere  for  the  moral  functions  of  manhood.  Ajid  all  men  that  labour  thus
productively  and  skilfully  are  real  benefactors  of  the  community.  Let  every  man,
then,  follow  the  occupation  that  God  has  given  him,  and  understand  that  in
following  it  he  is  rendering  a  service  to  his  fellow -men;  and  let  him  feel,  "I  am
honoured  in  these  appointed  channels  of  God's  providence,  that  I  am  permitted  to
give  my  life  for  my  fellow-men — that  is,  to  live  it  for  them."  Now,  in  proportion
as  you  are  noble,  in  proportion  as  God  has  made  you  wise  and  stronger  than
anybody  else,  in  proportion  as  study  and  opportunity  have  refined  you  and  cultured
you — in  that  proportion  God  requires  that  you  should  give  the  benefit  of  your  gifts
and  attauiments  to  the  whole  community.  You  cannot  follow  Christ  except  you  do
it.  Lastly,  consider  the  wickedness  of  what  seldom  passes  for  a  wicked  life.  I  am  not
speaking  of  a  life  of  vice  and  of  crime,  which  is  the  diseased  form  of  all  vdckednesa
^wickedness  carried  to  its  most  morbid  condition.    But  see  how,  aU  through  lile»


144  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n.

men  of  repute,  men  of  standing,  men  of  inflaence,  men  that  are  praised  while  they
live  and  are  eulogised  when  they  die,  are  men  that  are  given  to  the  lust  of  pride
and  vanity.  They  live  inordinately  for  themselves.  They  do  not  actually  do
harm,  it  may  be ;  but  they  are  men  who  are  full  of  ambition  all  for  themselves.
They  are  like  the  oak  which  stands  hi  the  night  to  gather  dew  for  itself,  and  then,
if  tile  wind  in  the  morning  shakes  it,  is  willing  to  part  with  the  few  drops  that
it  reidly  cannot  hold  on  to ;  and  they  call  themselves  benevolent  I  There  are  men
that  spread  abroad  gigantic  arms,  and  gather  the  wealth  of  heaven — whatever  God's
bounty  can  give  them — meaning  it  all  for  themselves ;  and  a  few  accidental  drops
of  kindness  here  and  there  give  them  some  claim  to  generosity  and  benevolence.  But
where  are  the  channels  into  which  their  Ufa  flows  ?  Where  are  the  uses  that  these
great  forces,  concentrating  in  them,  subserve?  They  live  for  pride,  for  vanity — the
meanest  of  all  feelings  when  it  is  in  excess — and  for  self.  They  live  for  everything
but  others.  You  need  not  be  a  criminal,  you  need  not  be  a  very  wicked  man,  you
may  neither  riot  or  debauch,  you  may  neither  steal  nor  gamble ;  and  yet,  you  may
live  stained,  leprous,  spotted,  and  hideous  before  God,  before  all  holy  angels,  and
before  right-thinking  men.  Tour  life  may  be  a  vast  activity;  and  yet  may  be
a  huge  vortex  where  everything  tends  to  that  centre — self.  And  that  is  to  be
wicked  enough.  You  do  not  need  to  be  any  wickeder.  And  yet,  you  may  be  as
wicked  as  that,  and  still  be  very  respectable  in  the  eyes  of  men.  This  question
eomes  home  very  nearly  to  us.  What  we  are  doing  for  others  is  to  measure
oar  following  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  and  not  what  we  are  doing  of  necessity,
bat  what  we  are  doing  on  purpose,  what  we  are  doing  consciously,  what
we  are  striving  to  do,  what  we  put  oar  heart  and  soul  into.  If  there  be
any  of  yoa,  then,  that  desire  to  follow  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  to  give
yourselves  for  others,  as  He  gave  Himself  for  our  comfort,  living  or  dying
ye  are  the  Lord's — ^living  or  dying,  and  the  one  as  much  as  the  other.  {H.  W.
Beecher.)  That  He  might  redeem  os  from  all  iniquity. — The  redemption  from
lawleMtTuss: — When  we  hear  that  we  are  not  under  the  law,  there  is  a  danger
of  our  allowing  ourselves  to  feel  a  vague  impression  that  the  requirements  of
the  gospel  cannot  be  quite  so  strict,  and  that  we  are  now  a  good  deal  more
free  to  take  our  own  way  than  if  we  were  under  the  old  bond  of  legal  restraint.
A  general  laxity  of  moral  tone  has  too  often  been  disguised  under  a  title  of  Chris-
tian Uberty ;  and  a  reference  to  the  consolations  of  the  gospel  and  the  provisions
of  grace  has  too  frequently  prevented  any  serious  distress  and  contrition  at  the
eonseiousness  of  the  inconsistencies  and  shortcomings  of  an  anholy,  self-indulgent
life.  In  making  the  Christian  revelation,  God  has  been  careful  to  guard  against
such  an  abuse  of  gospel  truth  by  exhibiting  side  by  side,  as  correlative  and
mutually  dependent  truths,  the  proclamation  of  pardon,  and  the  provision  for
holiness.  If  we  fall  into  the  Antinomian  snare,  it  will  be  not  only  in  spite  of  the
plain  teaching  of  Christ,  but  also  in  defiance  of  the  great  moral  lesson  exhibited  In
the  Atonement.  "Who  gave  Himself  for  as,  that  He  might  redeem  as  from  all
iniquity,"  that  is  the  negative  object  of  the  teaching  of  grace ;  and  purify  ♦*  unto
Himself  a  peculiar  people,  zealous  of  good  works,"  that  is  the  eternal  and  positive
purpose  of  God  towards  the  elect  bride  of  His  Divine  Son.  The  word  translated  in
our  version  of  this  passage — iniquity — might  literally  be  rendered  lawlessness,  and
suggests  the  moral  attitude  and  condition  of  him  who  is  altogether  ignorant  of,  or
indifferent  to,  the  claims  of  the  Divine  law,  or  who  wantonly  sets  them  at  defiance.
From  such  a  state  of  soul  and  habit  of  life  Christ  is  here  represented  by  St.  Paul
as  dying  to  redeem  us,  and  we  may  add,  from  all  that  in  any  way  savours  of  or
leads  up  to  these ;  for  it  is  from  all  lawlessness  that  we  are  redeemed,  whatever
specific  form  it  may  assume.  Let  us  consider  a  little  more  closely  how  our  natural
disposition  towards  lawlessness  is  affected  by  the  influences  of  true  Christian
experience ;  in  other  words,  how  grace  guards  against  or  triumphs  over  lawless-
ness. This  life  of  lawlessness  is  quite  compatible  with  knowledge  of  the  law ;
indeed  it  only  assumes  its  worst  moral  type  when  the  sinner  is  famUiar  with  the
law's  claims  and  sanctions,  just  as  the  worst  criminals  are  those  who  know  that
the  State  has  enacted  laws  against  the  crimes  they  are  committing,  and  who  yet
continue  to  commit  them  ;  but,  whether  ignorant  of  it  or  familiar  with  it,  the  law-
less  will  resent  or  endeavour  to  evade  legal  restraint,  and  to  a  greater  or  less  extent
act  as  though  no  law  existed.  The  great  attraction  of  the  life  of  lawlessness  is  the
liberty  which  it  seems  to  promise.  The  lawless  soul  recognises  no  superiof
authority,  and  is  ready  to  ask  defiantly,  "  Who  is  Lord  over  us  ?  "  For  while  the
life  of  lawlessness  appears  to  be  a  life  of  liberty,  when  we  come  to  examine  it  a  little


CHAT,  n.]  TITUS.  145

more  closely,  we  make  the  startling  discovery  that  it  is  really  a  life  of  skilfully  con-
cealed bondage.     The  truth  is,  that  lawlessness  itself  becomes  a  law,  and  operates
with  inexorable  force  upon  those  who  have  sought  their  liberty  in  it — the  apostle
calls  it  "  the  law  of  sin  and  death."     We  may  illustrate  this  by  referring  to  the
analogies  of  social  Ufa.     We  know  well  that  in  human  society  lawlessness  mast
mean  tyranny.     Any  one  member  of  society  who  acts  oat  of  law  will  be  sure  to
infringe  the  rights  of  some  other  which  the  law  was  designed  to  protect.  The  thief
leads  a  life  of  lawlessness,  but  it  is  at  the  expense  of  others  on  whom  he  preys.  Law-
lessness must  ever  mean  the  subjection  of  the  weaker  to  the  stronger,  and  from  this
we  may  judge  what  must  inevitably  be  the  condition  of  the  lawless  man.  If  in  such
an  one  the  higher  elements  were  really  the  stronger,  no  worse  consequences  perhaps
might  happen  than  the  production  of  a  morbid  asceticism  or  a  stoical  insensibility  ;
but  unhappily  with  such  this  is  not  the  case.    The  lawless  man,  by  his  very  law-
lessness, is  cut  off  from  God,  and  therefore  from  all  those  holier  influonces  which
might  have  stimulated  these  higher  elements  of  his  nature,  and  enabled  them  to
hold  their  own,  while  by  the  same  lawlessness  he  is  exposed  to  the  influence  of  the
great  author  of  lawlessness,  with  whose  spirit  in  this  respect  he  is  in  perfect
sympathy.    Hence  the  lower  elements  in  the  man's  nature,  in  one  form  or  another,
are  sure  to  carry  all  before  them,  and  to  exercise  a  certain  tyrarmous  supremacy  by
virtue  of  the  right  of  the  stronger.    Thus  we  see  that  there  comes  into  existence  a
certain  law  of  lawlessness,  which  is  the  most  execrable  of  all  forms  of  slavery,  and
which  binds,  as  with  an  iron  yoke  of  bondage,  those  who,  to  realise  their  foolish
dream  of  independence,  have  turned  their  back  on  the  law  of  God.     Lawlessneaa
becomes  law,  and  when,  wearied  with  the  tyranny  of  lawless  forces,  the  lawless
heart  would  fain  return  to  a  state  of  allegiance  to  law,  it  finds  itself  precluded  from
doing  so  by  that  anarchical  force,  that  other  law  in  the  members,  which  vrfll  not
submit  to  the  dictates  of  the  will,  any  more  than  to  the  commands  of  God.    Herein
lies  the  most  startling  illustration  perhaps  that  can  be  found  of  that  dread  law  of
Nemesis  in  which  the  ancients  believed  so  firmly,  and  not  without  good  cause.
By  and  by  voluntary  yielding  becomes  compulsory  submission,  and  he  is  the  slave  to
a  greater  or  less  extent  of  that  habit  of  lawlessness  to  which  he  has  surrendered
himself.    But  there  is  more  than  this  to  be  said.    When  we  consider  the  position
of  God  as  the  moral  Governor  of  the  universe,  it  is  easy  to  see  that  it  is  a  just  and
righteous  thing  that  they  who  reject  His  authority  should  be  allowed  to  find  their
punishment  in  their  own  miserable  experiences,  that  He  should  ordain  the  self-
imposed  tyranny  of  lawlessness  to  be  the  scourge  of  lawlessness.    But  if  this  be  so,
this  cursed  bondage  comes  upon  the  lawless  not  merely  as  a  natural  sequel  attribut-
able to  the  force  of  habit,  but  as  a  part  of  the  effect  of  that  Divine  law  of  retribution
which  backs  with  terrible  san^itions  the  revealed  law  of  God,  the  complete  effects  of
which  will  be  exhibited  in  the  doom  of  the  lost.    Now  if  a  man  turn  his  back  upon
his  allegiance  to  the  law,  it  will  follow  as  a  matter  of  right  as  well  as  of  necessity
that  he  shall  fall  under  the  supremacy  of  the  great  lawbreaker,  and  become  the
slave  of  that  spirit  that  now  worketh  in  the  children  of  disobedience.    Hence,
although  Satan's  authority  over  us  is  a  usurpation,  yet  there  is  a  certain  sense  in
which  his  sway  is  backed  by  right.     We  have  given  him  a  claim  over  our  desecrated
nature  by  our  wilful  apostasy  from  God.     Sin  and  death  form  as  much  the  subjeo-
tive  law  of  the  sinner's  experience  as  life  and  hoUness  constitute  the  law  of  the
experience  of  the  saint.    Just  as  this  outward  world  itself  has  laws  of  its  own  laid
down  by  infinite  wisdom,  which  regulate  its  motion  and  form  its  character ;  as
every  flower  of  the  field  is  possessed  of  a  law  of  its  own,  in  obedience  to  which  it
assumes  a  certain  form,  and  passes  through  a  definite  process  of  development ;
even  so  the  experience  of  the  lawless  has  a  certain  subjective  character,  and  is
governed  by  laws  which  belong  to  it.    As  nature  has  fixed  laws  of  its  own,  so
fallen  nature  has  fixed  laws  of  its  own  ;  and  this  law  of  fallen  nature,  the  law  of  sin
and  death,  springs  into  existence,  as  I  have  been  endeavouring  to  show,  as  the  direct
Nemesis  of  sin.     With  these  thoughts  present  to  our  mind,  clearly  discerning  that
lawlessness  works  out  its  own  Nemesis  and  prepares  its  own  retribution,  we  proceed
to  ask  how  can  man  be  saved  from  penalties  so  justly  incurred,  and  delivered  from
those  legal  provisions  which  render  him  the  victim  of  his  own  lawlessness  ?     St.
Paul's  words  in  the  passage  supply  us  with  the  only  satisfactory  answer,  revealing  to
ns  an  undertaking  that  was  indeed  worthy  of  a  God.    In  one  way  only  oould  a
means  be  provided  to  enable  those  who  had  become  the  lawful  captives  of  the
anarchical  powers  of  darkness  to  pass  from  that  condition  into  lawful  liberty.
Whatever  God  does  must  be  in  accordance  with  law.    God's  dealings  with  humanity

10


lie  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  it.

mnst  be  consistent  with  His  dealings  with  other  intelligences.  God  cannot,  and
will  not,  arbitrarily  exercise  towards  man,  however  favoured  man  may  be,  an  unjust
and  unholy  partiality.  So  we  read  in  this  passage  that  "  Christ  gave  Himself  for
us,  that  He  might  redeem  us  from  all  lawlessness."  It  was  only  by  redemption
that  alike  the  claims  of  law  and  the  force  of  lawlessness,  as  against  the  sinner,
eould  be  met ;  and  the  only  redemption  price  that  the  great  Judge  of  all  could
either  propose  or  accept  is  that  which  is  indicated  in  our  text—"  Christ  gave  Him-
self for  U8."  Now  it  is  evident  that  if  the  redemption  of  humanity  is  to  be  effected
by  the  sufferings  of  Christ  as  the  voluntary  victim  of  the  broken  law,  His  sufferings
should  bear  some  close  resemblance  to  those  which  sin  has  incurred  ;  otherwise
the  great  lesson  suggested  by  His  sufferings  must  be  lost,  and  one  supreme  object
of  Vbem  be  defeated.  The  passion  of  man  for  self  leads  man  to  submit  to  the
tyranny  of  sin,  even  though  he  hates  and  despises  it  while  he  yields  to  it.  The
passion  of  Christ  for  human  souls  led  Him  to  submit  to  be  made  sin  for  as,  though
He  knew  no  sin,  and  intensely  loathed  it,  even  while  He  represented  it.  But  the
similarity  extends  even  further.  We  have  seen  that  it  is  part  of  the  Nemesis  of  law-
lessness that  the  lawless  sinner  comes  under  the  power  of  him  who  is  emphatically
the  lawless  one,  and  that,  having  renounced  all  allegiance  to  Divine  law,  he  should
experience  the  results  of  the  negation  of  law  amidst  the  representatives  of  lawless-
ness beneath.  Even  so  our  blessed  Lord  was  content  to  be  given  over,  not  only
into  the  hands  of  wicked  men,  but  in  some  mysterious  sense  to  the  cruel  animosity
of  the  lawless  spirits  of  evil.  "  This,"  He  exclaims,  "  is  your  hour,  and  the  power  of
darkness."  Perhaps,  without  intruding  into  mysteries  that  are  too  profound  for
our  limited  knowledge,  we  may  even  go  a  step  further,  and  suggest  that  as  it  is
doubtless  part  of  the  just  retribution  on  lawlessness  that  the  lawless  should  be  left
to  himself,  and  cut  off  from  all  connection  with  Him  who  is  the  eternal  source  of
law,  even  so  Christ,  representing  our  lawlessness,  was  cut  off  from  all  conscious
connection  with  His  Divine  Father  in  those  terrible  moments  spent  upon  the  Cross,
when  the  confession  of  inward  and  agonising  desolation  was  wrung  from  His  break-
ing heart.  I  picture  to  myself  the  dying  Son  of  Man  as  in  some  sense  outlawed,
denied  all  recognition  and  protection  from  above,  and  victimised  by  violence  and
cruelty  below.  In  this  voluntary  submission  of  the  Son  of  God  to  penalties  such
as  are  due  to  the  lawlessness  of  man,  we  have  presented  to  our  minds  the  most
solemn  and  striking  tribute  that  ever  was  paid  to  the  majesty  of  Law.  And  now
that  the  ransom  has  been  paid,  it  is  our  blessed  privilege  to  claim  the  full  benefits
of  this  redemption  from  all  lawlessness,  and  to  return  in  our  own  actual  experience
to  the  happy  liberty  of  the  law.  From  henceforth  ours  is  to  be  a  life  of  law,  but
not  such  a  life  of  law  as  we  vainly  tried  to  lead  before  we  accepted  His  redemption.
Christ  has  not  redeemed  us  from  one  form  of  bondage  only  to  place  us  under
another.  He  has  redeemed  us  from  lawlessness  not  to  place  us  under  law,  but  to
place  US  in  law,  and  law  in  us.  Thus  St.  Paul  speaks  of  himself  as  being,  not  with-
out law,  or  lawless  towards  God,  but  lawbound  to  Christ.  It  suggests  the  thought
that  devotion  to  Christ  had  become  a  law  of  hfe  to  St.  Paul,  in  the  fulfilment  of
which  he  found  his  "  perfect  law  of  liberty. "  We  are  redeemed  from  lawlessness
that  we  may  enjoy  the  liberty  and  not  feel  the  constraint  of  law,  and  this  end  is
attained  when  law  coincides  with  inclination,  which  it  will  when  its  seat  is  within
the  heart.  Law  is  liberty  when  we  live  from  law,  not  by  law.  The  Christian
carries  the  law  of  his  being  within  him,  just  in  the  same  way  as  the  objects  of
the  natural  world  carry  the  law  of  their  own  motion  or  development  in  them-
selves. He  has  but  to  be  true  to  his  new  nature,  to  recognise  its  instincts,
to  yield  to  its  impulses,  to  respond  to  its  claims,  to  gratify  its  desires,  and  he
will  find  himself  fulfilling  the  law  without  any  thought  of  fulfilling  it,
indeed  without  a  thought  of  its  being  law.  Christ  has  redeemed  us  from
lawlessness  that  He  may  Himself  become  our  life-law,  because  He  is  our  new
nature.  Two  things  surely  are  manifest  in  New  Testament  Scripture ;  first,  that
in  redemption  all  has  been  done  for  us  that  is  necessary  to  render  it  possible  for  us
to  "  attain  the  prize  of  our  high  calling  " ;  second,  that  we  shall  only  attain  the
prize  of  our  calling  as  we  by  faith  appropriate  to  ourselves  what  has  thus  been
made  ours.  It  is  most  instructive,  with  these  two  thoughts  in  our  minds,  to  notice
how  throughout  the  New  Testament  the  work  is  represented  as  done,  and  yet  to
be  done ;  the  blessing  as  bestowed,  and  yet  to  be  appropriated.  A  few  instances
cut  of  many  must  suffice  ;  but  they  might  be  multiplied  almost  indefinitely.  We
are  spoken  of  as  already  saved,  and  as  being  saved,  and  yet  are  directed  to  work  out
oar  own  salvation  (Acts  ii.  47 ;  Phil.  ii.  12).    We  are  dead  with  Christ,  and  oar  old


OBAV.  n.)  TITUS.  147

man  is  crucified  with  Him,  and  yet  we  are  to  mortify  oar  members  that  are  on  the
earth  (Bom.  vi.  6,  8;  Col.  iii.  5).  We  have  pat  ofF  the  old  man,  and  yet  we  are
taught  to  put  him  off  (Col.  iii.  9, 10 ;  Eph.  iv.  22J.  Do  you  believe  really  that
Christ  has  redeemed  you  from  all  lawlessness,  whetner  in  little  things  or  in  great  ?
and  do  you  claim  the  practical  effect  of  the  deliverance  in  the  same  way  in  which
yoa  once  claimed  the  practical  effect  of  His  expiation  for  your  justification  ?  How
many  of  as  can  believe  readily  enough  that  His  redeeming  grace  may  raise  us
above  flagrant  forms  of  iniquity,  and  yet  doubt  His  ability  to  save  us  from  the
more  common,  and  therefore  less  startling,  forms  of  infirmity  and  sin.  From  all
He  has  already  redeemed  as.  For  sin  shall  not  have  dominion  over  you ;  for
Christ  gave  Himself  for  us,  that  He  might  redeem  us  from  all  lawlessness;  and
He  gives  Himself  to  us,  that  He  may  become  Himself  our  law.  1  es,  let  us  believe
it,  itom  all  lawlessness.  That  embraces  the  little  things  as  well  as  the  great
things.  It  embraces  the  little  tempers,  which  are  so  lawless,  the  rattle  of  the
tongae,  which  is  a  very  lawless  member.  Be  no  longer  satisfied  with  hoping
and  longing,  and  desiring,  and  wishing  for  better  things ;  but  bring  your  strong
faith  to  bear  upon  God's  fact.  Christ  died  to  ransom  you  from  all  lawlessness,
and  He  has  not  died  in  vain.  Believe  that  you  are  redeemed,  and  claim  it  of
the  Bedeemer  that  He  shall  apply  His  own  redemption.  {W.  H.  M.  H.  Aitken.)
Redemption  and  its  obligationt : — I.  Chbist's  wobk  oj  bedemption.  1.  This
redemption  is  presented  to  us  in  the  Word  of  God  in  a  threefold  aspect.  In  one
place — "  Christ  hath  redeemed  as  from  the  curse  of  the  law,  being  made  a  curse  for
us."  In  our  text — "  Christ  hath  redeemed  us  from  all  iniquity  " — that  is,  from  the
power  of  indwelling  sin.  And  in  other  passages  the  day  of  Christ's  second  advent
is  spoken  of  as  the  day  of  redemption,  because  it  is  at  His  return  that  the  glorifica-
tion of  His  redeemed  people  will  be  consummated  by  the  "  redemption  of  our  bodies. "
The  price  at  which  this  redemption  was  effected  is  declared  by  St.  Peter  not  to  have
been  a  corruptible  price,  as  silver  and  gold,  but  the  precious  blood  of  Christ,  as  of
a  lamb  without  blemish  and  without  spot.  Thus,  then,  you  wiU  perceive  that  the
basis  of  Christ's  redemption  is  this — His  self-surrender  is  a  sacrifice  for  the  sins
of  man.  His  death  in  its  design  was  an  expiatory  sacrifice  for  the  sins  of  the  world.
2.  The  fountain  has  its  source  from  the  throne  of  Deity,  and  the  rise  of  the  stream
of  mercy  is  lost  amid  the  depth  of  the  eternal  counsels.  The  work  of  Christ  was
not  the  cause  but  the  fruit  of  the  Father's  love.  Christ  Himself,  the  provision  of
Christ,  the  surrender  of  Christ,  is  the  manifestation  of  the  love  of  God.    II.  Thb

DESIGN   OF  BEDEMPTION,    AND   THB  CONSEQUENT  OBLIOATION   OF   THE   REDEEMED.      The

redemption  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  involves  this  great  and  mighty  principle — that
if  I  have  been  bought  by  the  precious  blood  of  Christ  I  am  not  my  own ;  that  hence-
forth the  love  of  Christ  is  to  constrain  me,  that  henceforth  I  am  not  to  live  to  myself,
but  to  Hini  that  died  for  me  and  rose  again,  and  that  I  am  to  glorify  God  in  my  body
and  in  my  spirit,  which  are  God's.  I  J.  C,  Miller,  M.A.)  A  perfect  redemption : —
1.  If  Christ  hath  freed  and  redeemed  us  from  all  iniquity,  then  hath  He  made  no
partial  redemption ;  He  satisfieth  not  for  the  fault,  and  leaveth  us  to  satisfy  for  the
punishment ;  neither  redeemeth  us  from  the  eternal  punishment,  but  giveth  us
leave  to  satisfy  for  the  temporal.  But  if  Christ  have  redeemed  us  from  all  iniquity,
if  He  said  on  the  Cross,  It  is  finished,  that  is,  the  whole  work  of  man's  redemption
is  consummate  and  perfect ;  if  at  one  time  He  made  one  perfect  expiation,  and
thereby  brought  in  an  everlasting  redemption,  here  is  artillery  and  gunshot  againsi
all  popery ;  down  go  all  other  satisfactions  for  sin  in  this  life,  down  go  all  satisfac-
tions after  this  life  in  purgatory,  down  goeth  their  doctrine  of  aU  other  merits  save
this  of  Christ.  2.  This  consideration  must  stir  us  up  to  a  love  of  our  Lord  Jesus,
who  hath  discharged  us  of  such  a  debt,  and  ransomed  us  from  such  an  unutterable
thraldom.  3.  It  must  work  in  us  a  detestation  and  watchfulness  against  all  sin,
which  bringeth  such  vassalage  upon  us ;  for  shall  Christ  take  upon  Him  our  debts,
that  we,  like  desperate  prodigals,  should  do  nothing  but  augment  them  ?  Shall  He
ransom  us,  and  give  us  perfect  freedom  that  we,  with  the  unthankful  Israelites,
shoulci  run  back  again  to  our  former  bondage?  Shall  we,  with  Solomon's  fools,
make  but  a  mock  of  sin,  which  cost  Christ  so  dear  to  expiate  ?  3.  Hence  also  is
ministered  no  small  consolation  to  the  faithful ;  for  if  Christ  have  redeemed  us
from  all  iniquity,  who  can  lay  anything  to  our  charge  ?  Seeing  that  Christ  hath
justified,  who  can  condemn?  (T.  Taylor,  D.D.)  A  threefold  description  of
Christiana: — I.  "Redeemed  from  all  iniquity."  We  have  been  brought  out  of
the  dominion  and  thraldom  of  sin  with  the  heart's  blood  of  the  Son  of  God.  What
have  we,  then,  to  do  any  more  with  the  works  of  darkness?     What  has  the  eman-


148  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  vl

cipated  slave  to  do  any  longer  with  his  old  bondage  and  his  old  toil  ?  He  is  a  free
man  now.  The  owner's  lash  is  no  longer  for  his  shoulders  to  bear.  He  and  slavery
have  parted  company  for  ever,  and  he  never  experiences  a  single  moment's  desire
to  return  to  it.  II.  •*  A  peculiar  people."  We  are  God's  own  purchased  posses-
sion ;  we  are  His  sole  property,  and  belong  to  Him  alone.  The  remembrance  of
this  truth  cannot  fail  to  produce  in  us  a  life  that  will  appear  eccentric  to  the  world,
but  there  is  no  warrant  in  it  for  practising  eccentricities.  III.  "  Zealous  o»  oood
W0BK8."  Not  merely  practising  good  works,  but  boiling  in  their  desire  to  do  thivm.
(O.  A.  Sowter,  M,A.)  Christ  the  promoter  of  the  right : — The  supreme  mission  of
Christ  to  this  earth  was  not  so  much  to  give  correct  creeds  as  correct  conduct.
Iniquity  is  the  want  of  equity,  the  negation  of  rectitude.    I.  He  eeveaLs  the

BTANDABD     OF     RECTITUDE.     The   will    of    God.      II.     He     SUPPLIES     THE     MOTIVE     TO

RECTITUDE.  Supreme  love  to  God.  III.  He  presents  the  model  of  RECTiruDB.
He  Himself  is  a  perfect  example  of  what  aU  men  should  be.  {Homilist.)  The
consecrating  Saviour  and  the  consecrated  people : — I.  The  conseoratinq  Saviour.
1.  He  gave  Himself  (John  x.  18).  2.  He  gave  Himself  a  ransom.  3.  The  object  of
this  was  to  purify  men ;  to  save  from  sin.  Note  the  distinction  between  being  saved
from  the  penalties  of  An,  and  from  sin  itself.  II.  The  consecbatbo  people.  1.
Freed  from  the  power  of  sin.  2.  Brought  under  the  Divine  rule.  "From  all  iniquity;
literally,  "from  all  lawlessness."  3.  Specially  devoted  to  good;  "peculiar,"
4.  Ardent ;  *'  zealous."  6.  Diligent,  devoted  to  "  good  works."  {F.  Wagstaff.)
Purify  unto  Himself  a  peculiar  people. — Cleansing  through  Christie  death : — 1.  In
that  the  death  of  Christ  serveth  for  our  continufi  cleansing  while  we  live  in  this
world ;  we  are  to  take  notice  and  acknowledgment  of  much  filtbiness  and  unclean-
ness  even  in  the  best,  it  is  no  slight  soil  or  stain  that  bath  fouled  our  natures,  which
will  easily  be  blown  or  brushed  off,  for  it  sticketh  nearer  us  than  our  skins,  that  the
very  power  of  Christ's  death  itself  doth  not  wholly  destroy  it  while  we  live ;  but  wo
have  cause  to  cry  out  with  the  leper  in  the  law,  I  am  unclean,  I  am  unclean :  nay,
the  godly  see  what  blackamoors  they  are,  and  how  hardly  they  change  their  skins
and  what  leopards  they  are,  hardly  parting  with  their  spots.  And  this  made  the
apostle  take  such  pains  that  he  might  attain  this  fruit  of  Christ's  death  and  resur-
rection after  he  had  been  long  able  to  maintain  his  justification  against  all  challenges,
and  say  who  shall  lay  anything  to  the  charge  of  God's  elect,  and  what  shall  separata
as  from  the  love  of  God  ?  Well  knew  he  how  fast  this  uncleanness  cleaveth  unto
our  natures  (Heb.  xii.  1).  2.  Hence  may  be  noted  that  wheresoever  sin  is  pardoned
it  is  also  purged  (Rom.  viii.  2).  That  is  not  only  from  the  curse  of  the  law,  but  even
that  law  and  the  power  of  sin  itself  which  would  still  hold  us  in  the  service  of  it.
He  shall  die  in  his  sin  that  dieth  not  unto  his  sin,  not  that  sin  can  be  so  dead  as
not  remain  ;  but  if  it  lie  not  bleeding  by  virtue  of  that  stroke  which  Christ  in  His
death  hath  given  it  if  the  force  of  it  be  not  abated,  and  thou  escaped  from  the  rule
of  it  Christ's  blood  doth  thee  no  good.  3.  Let  both  these  considerations  move  us  to
be  ever  washing  and  cleansing  ourselves  from  our  uncleanness,  and  never  to  be  at
rest  till  we  find  ourselves,  although  not  free  from  blackness,  yet  comely,  as  the
Church  oonfesseth  of  herself.  (T.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Why  believers  are  called  a
peculiar  people: — 1.  Because  they  are  the  most  precious  of  men,  even  the  most
noble  persons  of  the  earth,  descended  of  the  blood  of  Christ.  2.  In  regard  of  God
they  are  a  peculiar  people,  distinct  from  others  by  His  grace  of  election  by  which
they  are  chosen  out  of  the  world  and  set  high  in  His  favour  above  all  others.  For
they  lie  before  Him  in  the  righteousness  of  Christ  in  whom  the  Father  is  well  pleased ;
they  are  bought  from  the  earth  and  stand  before  Him  in  the  work  of  His  own
fingers,  namely,  their  new  birth  and  second  creation  in  which  He  also  delighteth  to
behold.  Hence  are  they  called  a  holy  nation,  the  spouse  of  Christ,  the  daughter
of  God,  the  choice  of  God,  and  God's  delight.  3.  They  are  a  peculiar  people  in
regard  of  their  whole  manner  and  condition  of  life,  which  made  Balaam  say  of  Israel
that  it  was  a  people  dwelling  alone  and  numbered  not  himself  among  other  nations,
that  is,  altogether  different  in  laws,  customs,  manner,  and  condition  of  life.  But
let  as  see  this  truth  in  some  instances.  (1)  Their  original  are  not  some  few  families
coming  out  of  some  corner  of  the  earth  ;  but  they  sprung  of  Christ,  of  whom  all  the
families  in  heaven  and  earth  are  called.  (2)  Their  country  is  no  part  of  earth,  for
they  are  here  but  strangers  and  pilgrims,  but  heaven,  to  which  they  tend  and  from
whence  they  look  for  a  Saviour.  (3)  Their  King  is  neither  born  nor  created,  but
the  everlasting  King  of  glory  who  ruleth  not  some  one  country  but  from  sea  to  sea,
yea,  to  the  world's  end,  and  not  for  an  age,  but  as  He  is  a  King  for  ever  and  His
kingdom  an  everlasting  kingdom,  so  He  ruleth  for  ever  and  ever,  and  of  His  king-


CBif.  n.]  TITUS.  149

dom  there  is  no  end.    (4)  Their  laws  are  spiritnal,  to  govern  the  conscience  as  well
as  the  outward  man,  most  perfect,  never  changed,  never  abrogated  as  men's  be.     (5)
Their  war  and  weapons  are  not  carnal,  but  spiritual,  as  their  chiefest  enemies ;  their
Captain  was  never  foiled  nor  can  be,  and  therefore  before  they  strite  a  blow  they  are
•nre  of  victory,  and  for  their  external  enemies  they  conquer  them,  not  by  smiting
(as  others),  but  by  suffering.     (6)  Their  language  is  the  language  of  Canaan,  their
speech  bewrayeth  them  to  be  citizens  of  heaven,  hence  are  they  called  people  of  a
pore  language,  no  filthy,  unsavoury,  or  corrupt  communication  cometh  out  of  their
months,  but  such  as  is  holy,  tending  to  edification,  and  ministering  grace  to  the
hearers.     (7)  Their  apparel  is  devised  and  put  on  by  God  Himself,  even  garments
of  innocency,  long  white  robes  died  red  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.     (8)  T^eir  diet
not  rising  out  of  tiie  earth,  but  descending  from  heaven ;  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Bread  of
Life,  and  that  manna  that  came  down  from  heaven,  and  that  water  which  gusheth
out  of  the  rock,  of  whom  whosoever  feedeth  and  drinketh  he  hath  tasted  of  the  tree
of  life  and  of  the  water  of  life,  he  cannot  but  live  everlastingly.    {Ibid.)        Peculiar
but  not  eecentrie  : — The  phrase  employed  in  our  version,  "  peculiar  people,"  has  no
doubt  tended  to  suggest  and  foster  exceedingly  erroneous  ideas  of  what  God  expects
His  people  to  be.    It  certainly  does  not  mean  a  people  who  affect  all  kinds  of  i>eca-
liarities.    Not  only  is  this  phrase  associated  with  some  of  the  most  extraordinary
exhibitions  of  fanaticism  that  have  been  witnessed  in  modem  times,  but  I  apprehend
that  there  are  not  a  few  earnest  and  even  devoted  Christians  whose  minds  have
been  more  or  less  warped  and  their  lives  distorted  by  a  misapprehension  of  the  troa
significance  of  the  pmase  here  used.    There  are  some  good  people  whose  religion^
to  the  casual  observer  at  any  rate,  seems  mainly  to  consist  in  making  themselvei
very  extraordinary,  and  they  are  disposed  to  claim  that  others  should  copy  their
peculiarities  if   they  desire  to  follow  the  Lord  fuUy.      Such  persons  need  to  be
reminded  that  God  does  not  seek  for  an  eccentric  people,  but  for  a  people  whose
essential  singularity  lies  in  the  fact  that  they  are  His.    Be  true  to  your  calling  as
espoused  to  Christ,  and  this  will  save  you  from  having  to  attempt  the  solution  of
many  otherwise  perplexing  questions.    You  will  not  then  have  to  ask,  as  too  many
Christians  do,  "  How  far  may  I  go  in  the  direction  of  worldly  conformity  withoat
actually  forfeiting  my  religion  ?  "     Can  you  conceive  a  loyal  and  devoted  bride
making  any  such  inquiry,  "  How  far  may  I  go  in  the  way  of  associating  with  those
who  are  the  enemies  and  detractors  of  my  affianced  husband,  who  have  done  all  that
they  could  to  wrong  him,  and  rob  him,  and  injure  him  ?    How  far  shall  I  be  justified
in  choosing  such  persons  for  my  friends  and  companions,  and  in  sharing  in  their
porsnits  and  pleasures  where  his  name  is  never  mentioned  except  in  scorn  ?    What
length  may  I  go  in  this  direction  without  altogether  forfeiting  his  affections,  and
bringing  my  relations  with  him  to  an  abrupt  termination  ?  "    Pity  the  bridegroom
who  has  such  a  bride  in  prospect  1    But  such  a  bride  the  Lord's  will  never  be.    We
need  not  court  peculiarity  ;  without  going  out  of  our  way  to  make  ourselves  ridicoloos
or  absurd,  those  of  us  who  live  right  out  for  Christ  will  make  themselves  peculiar
enough  in  a  world  that  does  not  live  for  Christ  at  all.    The  man  who  counts  all
things  dung  and  dross  that  he  may  win  Christ,  will  be  a  very  peculiar  person  in  a
world  that  counts  Christ  dung  and  dross  so  that  it  may  win  its  own  pleasures  and
gratifications.  {W.  H.  M.  H.  Aitken.)     Zealous  of  good  works. — Thepractical  retxtlt
of  the  teaching  of  grace : — "  Zealous  of  good  works."    Such  is  the  practical  fruit  of
the  training  of  Grace  ;  such  its  effect  upon  the  outward  lives  of  those  who  learn  in
her  school.   Herein  Grace  as  a  teacher  returns  a  triumphant  answer  to  her  traducers,
who  would  fain  represent  her  as  robbing  man  of  his  energies  and  paralysing  his
activities  by  withdrawing  the  legal  motives  for  action.    Who  are  at  this  moment
foremost  in  every  good  work  of  charity  and  benevolence  throughout  our  land,  but
the  very  persons  to  whom  the  doctrines  of  Grace  are  dear  as  their  own  lives,  and  who
have  learnt  most  assiduously  at  her  school  ?    Nor  is  it  diflBcult  to  see  how,  even  on
psychical  grounds,  apart  from  any  reference  to  the  introduction  of  supernatural
power,  such  results  should  follow  from  the  acceptance  of  the  gospel  revelation.  For,
first,  he  who  receives  the  salvation  that  Grace  brings  finds  himself  a  new  creature,
dead  to  his  old  life,  and  cut  off  from  all  connection  with  its  baleful  associations.     He
is  therefore  in  a  position  to  make  a  really  new  start  in  life  without  being  paralysed
in  the  future  by  the  fatal  influence  of  the  past.     Next,  he  is  under  the  influence  of
feelings  of  the  liveliest  gratitude  to  Him  to  whom  he  owes  his  present  happinesi
and  his  hopes  for  the  future  ;  to  Him  he  feels  under  the  deepest  obligation ;  and  his
appreciation  of  the  heroism  that  has  purchased  his  redemption  awakens  within  hin*
a  genuine  and  ardent  enthusiasm  for  the  person  of  his  Benefactor ;  his  feeling  ie


150  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  (CH1».  n.

that  it  is  impossible  to  do  too  mnch  for  One  who  has  done  so  mach  for  him.  Once
again,  he  is  at  ease  in  his  mind  as  to  his  own  personal  salvation,  and  therefore  has
a  mind  sufficiently  "  at  leisure  from  itself  "  to  feel  for  the  miseries  of  those  around
him.  And  further,  he  has  vividly  before  his  mind  the  contrast  between  his  own
byegone  misery  and  his  present  happiness ;  and  the  contrast  speaks  to  all  of  humanity
that  there  is  in  his  nature,  urging  him  to  lay  himself  out  for  the  salvation  of  those
whose  condition  is  as  wretched  as  his  own  once  was,  and  may  become  as  blessed  as
his  is  now.  Undoubtedly  the  enthusiastic  benevolence  of  the  true  believer  may  thus
to  a  great  extent  be  accounted  for  by  the  character  of  the  belief  he  entertains ;  but
whence  came  that  creed  that  reaches  and  moves  so  wondrously  the  subde  mecha-
nism of  our  nature  ?  Would  any  profound  philosopher,  whether  ancient  or  modem,
have  thought  of  framing  a  scheme  that  seems  at  first  sight  so  little  likely  to  produce
the  desired  results  ?  But  when  we  have  spoken  of  these  natural  effects  of  the
acceptance  of  Christian  truth,  we  have  by  no  means  exhausted  our  list  of  the  real
forces  which  generate  this  lofty  enthusiasm.  The  believer  feels  the  mighty  energies
•f  a  new  life  throbbing  within  his  soul.  He  is  now  in  a  position  to  draw  from  the
Divine  Store-house  all  that  he  needs  to  equip  him  for  his  life's  work.  So  it  is  that,
in  spite  of  the  cavil  of  unbelief  and  the  a  priori  conclusions  of  unfriendly  criticism,
Grace  proves  herself  the  most  practical  of  all  teachers  ;  and  the  greatest  benefactors
•f  mankind  are  to  be  found  amongst  her  most  faithful  scholars.  She  does  not  allow
those  who  learn  of  her  to  think  only  of  their  own  spiritual  advantage,  or  to  be
indifferent  to  everything  except  their  own  personal  growth  in  holiness.  Our  Ufe's
work  is  twofold ;  it  lies  without  us  and  vrithin  us ;  and  we  cannot  neglect  either
branch  of  our  work  without  injuring  both.  We  cannot  hope  to  grow  in  grace  while
we  are  leading  lives  of  selfish  indolence  and  uselessness ;  nor  can  we  expect  to  be
really  and  extensively  useful  unless  we  are  fully  consecrated  to  the  Lord.  Grace
trains  us  then  to  be  enthusiasts  or,  to  use  St.  Paul's  word  rn  this  passage,  to  be
zealots,  and  this  is  evidently  quite  in  accordance  with  her  genius  and  customary
mode  of  procedure.  Such  enthusiasm,  if  we  surrender  ourselves  to  it,  will  almost
always  lead  to  self-denial  and  even  self-sacrifice  ;  but  these  will  rather  increase  than
damp  its  ardour.  There  are  some  expansive  forces  in  the  natural  world  that  seem
to  acquire  their  intensity  by  opposition ;  steam,  for  example,  is  only  a  power  when
it  is  compressed.  Even  so  the  mighty  moral  force  which  eighteen  centuries  ago
shook  the  heathen  world  becomes  all  the  mightier  when  obstacles  have  to  be  faced,
apposition  encountered,  sacrifices  endured.  Some  this  holy  enthusiasm  vnll  lead  to
toni  their  backs  on  home  and  country  and  expose  themselves  to  the  hardships  and
risks  of  a  missionary  life.  Others  the  same  enthusiasm  will  lead  to  find  their  work
at  home  amidst  our  perishing  thousands.  Nor  do  we  need  less  but  rather  more
enthusiasm  if  the  same  inward  call  summon  us  to  find  our  field  of  toil  amidst
scenes  of  fashion  and  Inxury,  rather  than  amidst  the  hovels  of  the  poor.  Self-denial
to  preach  Christ  crucified  in  a  drawing-room  than  in  a  cellar ;  where  sin  is  glossed
ever  with  a  varnish  of  respectability  and  refinement,  than  where  it  fiaunts  its  naked
hideousness  before  the  eyes  of  aU  beholders.  But  for  this  most  difficult  of  all  tasks,
which  only  Christian  religion  would  think  of  as  a  possible  task  at  all,  and  only
Christians  would  dream  of  undertaking,  Grace  can  supply  her  disciples  with  a
sufficient  motive-power  in  the  enthusiasm  which  she  inspires.  But  while  Grace
provides  us  with  a  sufficient  motive-power  in  the  form  of  a  holy  enthusiasm,  she  is
also  careful  to  train  us  to  spend  that  zeal  in  the  production  of  really  good  works.
There  seems  to  be  a  prevalent  notion  in  our  day  that  so  long  as  a  man  is  in  earnest
it  matters  little  what  form  his  earnestness  takes ;  but  Grace  teaches  us  to  be
particular  about  the  quality  as  well  as  the  quantity  of  our  work.  Our  object  is  not
to  do  much  work,  but  to  do  good  work — so  good  that  it  will  not  need  to  be  done  over
again.  We  fear  that  this  is  hardly  the  character  of  much  of  the  work  that  is  being
done  in  our  own  busy  day.  "  I  am  painting  for  eternity,"  exclaimed  the  illustrious
Italian,  when  asked  why  he  spent  such  pains  over  his  canvas.  How  many  Chris-
tian labourers  work  with  a  similar  feeling  ?  Are  we  working  for  eternity,  or  only  for
the  passing  hour  7  A  work,  to  be  a  good  work,  should  certainly  be,  according  to  the
apostle's  phrase,  "  for  necessary  uses."  We  are  to  work  for  some  definite  good
purpose,  and  not  merely  for  the  sake  of  keeping  ourselves  employed.  It  is  needful,
therefore,  as  far  as  possible,  to  avoid  unnecessary  labour,  to  use  the  best,  and  not
Heccssarily  the  most  laborious,  means  towards  the  attainment  of  the  end  in  view,  in
•rder  that  we  may  have  the  more  time  and  strength  for  that  which  needs  to  be  done.
Again,  a  work  to  be  good  needs  to  be  done  thoroughly,  not  in  a  superficial  perfunc-
tory manner.    This  will  naturally  be  the  besetting  sin  of  all  mere  legal  serrice.


CHAP,  n.]  TITUS.  151

Onoe  again,  a  work  to  be  good  needs  to  be  done  in  the  power  of  the  H0I7  Ghost.
"  Apart  from  Me,"  our  blessed  Lord  has  taught  us  "  ye  can  do  nothing."  Once
again,  a  work  to  be  really  good  needs  to  be  done  in  the  spirit  of  faith,  with  the  full
assorance  that  the  Lord  who  sends  us  will  use  us  and  work  out  His  own  blessed
purposes  through  us.  He  who  does  not  expect  God  to  use  him  need  express  no
surprise  at  not  being  used  ;  but  rather  the  marvel  would  be  if  he  were  used  at  all.
Yet  once  again,  if  our  work  is  to  be  as  good  as  it  should  be,  it  must  needs  be  "  a
labour  of  love."  This  point  is  amply  illustrated  by  the  career  of  Him  whom  grace
sets  before  us  as  our  Exemplar.  His  career  was  one  long  exhibition  of  that  hidden
love  of  God  which  the  world  was  so  slow  to  believe  in.  If  our  work  is  to  be  really
good  it  must  be  characterised  by  the  patience  of  hope.  Much  work  that  once
promised  fairly  is  marred  and  spoilt  for  lack  of  perseverance.  Christiana  are  not
steadfast,  immovable,  and  therefore  always  abounding  in  the  work  of  the  Lord.
Good  work  is  not  to  be  produced  by  a  series  of  extraordinary  and  spasmodic  efforts.
We  need  that  patient  continuance  in  well-doing  which  shows  that  we  seek  honour,
glory,  and  immortality.  But  here  again  the  teaching  of  Grace  comes  to  our
aid.  Not  only  does  she  set  before  us  an  example  in  One  who  was  no  stranger
to  apparent  failure  in  His  own  ministry,  but  she  also  reminds  us  of  His  great
forbearance  towards  us.  Such  are  some  of  the  characteristics  of  good  work  in
which  we  are  to  be  zealots,  and  in  which  we  are  to  find  our  outward  occupation
whUe  God  leaves  us  here.  Our  day  cannot  at  most  be  very  long;  its  twelve
hours,  how  rapidly  they  slip  away  1  and  the  night  cometh  when  no  man  can  work.
Yes,  the  worker's  life  is  after  all  the  only  happy  life,  even  though  it  may  entail
toil,  hardship,  and  privation.  The  true  labourer  has  Christ  Himself  for  his
companion  in  toil,  and  the  smile  of  His  approval  for  his  dearest  reward.  (Ibid.)
God's  family,  a  school  of  good  works : — A  Christian,  by  God's  ordinance,  is  no
longer  allowed  to  consider  himself  as  standing  alone  in  the  world,  but  as  one  among
many  in  a  holy  family.  And  this  puts  all  his  duties  in  a  peculiar  point  of  view,  not
always  regarded  as  it  ought  to  be,  even  by  serious  and  weU-meaning  men.  This  piece  of
instruction  is  conveyed  in  the  text  by  the  words  •'  peculiar  people."  The  title  was
at  first  applied  to  the  holy  seed,  the  Children  of  Israel,  when  God  had  redeemed
them  to  Himself  by  bringing  them  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt.  The  natural  condition
of  all  mankind  is  no  better,  you  see,  than  a  slavery,  out  of  which  we  needed  to  be
bought  and  redeemed,  before  we  could  be  capable  of  the  mighty  blessings  which
God  in  His  mercy  had  prepared  for  us :  just  as  the  Jews  needed  deliverance  from
Egypt,  before  they  could  be  brought  into  Canaan.  This  slavery  the  whole  world,
both  Jew  and  Gentile,  were  continually  making  worse,  by  the  bad  habits  in  which
they  indulged,  and  the  power  which  they  allowed  evil  spirits  to  gain  over  them.
Christ  died  to  redeem  the  sinner  from  those  chains  of  evil  custom,  which  have
wound  themselves  so  round  him  by  length  of  time,  that  he  feels  as  if  shaking  them
ofif  would  be  losing  a  part  of  himself.  Christ  died  to  redeem  the  drunkard  from
his  drunkenness,  the  impure  from  his  debauchery,  the  unkind  from  his  malice,  the
godless  and  careless  man  from  his  love  of  this  present  world.  Observe  now  to  what
purpose  the  Son  thus  made  us  free.  Not  to  leave  us  in  such  a  condition  as  many
seem  to  delight  in  imagining,  the  moment  they  hear  of  freedom  and  liberty — not  to
turn  us  out  into  the  world,  loose  and  independent  of  all  restraint — but  to  make  us
more  dependent  on  Him,  more  closely  confined  within  His  laws,  for  every  day  and
hour  that  we  live  as  Christians.  In  a  word,  the  peculiar,  chosen  people,  whom
Christ  vouchsafed  to  redeem  to  Himself,  were  meant,  above  all  things  in  the  world,
to  be  always  "  zealous  of  good  works  " ;  not  only  rather  good  than  evil,  such  as
might  pass  well  enough  in  the  world,  but  "  zealous,"  eager,  earnest  in  good  ;  every
man  striving  and  trying  to  be  every  day  better  than  he  was  yesterday.  And  in
order  that  each  particular  Christian  might  answer  the  better  this  intention  of  our
gracious  Redeemer,  He  has  not  left  us  to  stand,  as  it  were,  separate  and  apart  from
one  another,  but  has  appointed  that  all  who  believe  in  Him  should  make  up  one
people,  one  household,  one  body  ;  should  feel  a  deep  interest  one  in  another,  as  if
their  welfare  were  bound  up  together :  so  that  "  whether  one  member  suffer,  all  the
members  should  suffer  with  it ;  or  whether  one  member  be  honoured,  all  the  mem-
bers should  rejoice  with  it."  The  whole  plan  of  the  Christian  Church  is,  in  short,
as  entirely  opposite  to  the  natural  pride  and  self-sufficiency  of  man  as  anything  can
well  be  imagined.  It  will  not  let  you  for  a  moment  dream  that  you  can  stand  alone
and  be  independent.  If  any  be  tempted  to  the  irreligious  fancy  of  saying,  "  they
never  made  the  promise ;  others  made  it  in  their  name,  and  they  cannot  be  bound
by  it "  ;  certainly  it  is  in  their  power,  if  they  will,  to  disavow  and  break  their  word


152  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB,  [cha».  n.

given  to  God  :  bat  let  them  remember  that  at  the  same  time  they  oast  away  all  the
privUegeB  of  their  Christian  calling.     By  the  very  act  of  coming  to  the  Holy  Com-
mnnion,   yon  renounce,  before  God  and  man,  that  proud  unchristian  notion  of
standing  alone,  being  independent.   You  yourself  profess  to  stand  in  continoal  need
of  all  the  means  and  instruments  of  grace ;   the  prayers,  the  intercession,  the  good
example,  of  your  brethren ;  all  the  helps  which  the  Son  of  God  has  so  graciously
provided  in  His  Church  and  household.    And  sorely,  as  to  zeal  in  good  works,  every
one  who  thinks  at  all  on  the  subject  knows  that  one  chief  purpose  of  the  Holy  Com*
munion  was  to  encourage  and  strengthen  men  in  that.    {Plain  Sermon*  by  Contri'
Imtort  to  "  Tractt  for  the  Time$.")      The  zeal  of  God's  people  for  good  work* : — They
are  zealous  because — 1.  The  spirit  of  the  work  is  in  them.  A.  disposition,  a  bias,  a  zeal,
consonant  with  the  nature  of  the  work,  whose  relation  to  God  makes  it  a  good  work,
is  Implanted  in  them,  and  they  have  naturally  a  pleasure  in  its  performance.    2.
Christ's  command  is  that  they  should  so  act  that  they  should  bring  forth  fruit  unto
His  glory.     His  commands  are  precious  to  them  because  they  love  Him.    3.  In  the
performance  of  good  works  the  Christian  finds  his  daily  support.     The  way  of  good
works  is  the  way  of  salvation,  and  there  abound  its  consolations.    4.  In  the  way  of
good  works  the  people  of  God  obtain  fellowship  with  God.     Here  are  the  shinings
of  His  face.     It  is  here  that  darkness  turns  into  light  before  them.    It  is  here  the
Lord  speaks  to  His  people,  and  where  He  strengthens  their  hearts  against  folly.    It
is  in  the  ways  of  holy  exercise  that  "  the  God  of  peace  "  is  with  them.    These  are
the  "  galleries  "  in  which  the  King  is  held.    Truly  here  ' '  our  fellowship  is  with  the
Father  and  with  His  Son  Jesus  Christ."    (D.  Charles.)        Zeal  in  work*  and  wor-
ship : — 1.  Zeal  is  an  intense  earnestness  for  the  accomplishment  of  an  object — not
a  great  excitement  of  feeling,  not  mere  demonstrative  warmth  of  expression,  but
something  far  more  deep  and  enduring.    It  is  a  working,  practical  energy ;  it  is  a
power  which  may  be  directed  to  things  indifferent,  things  good,  or  things  bad  ;  and
accordingly  the  word  is  sometimes  used  in  the  New  Testament  in  a  good  sense,
and  sometimes  in  a  bad  one.    Thus  in  a  good  sense,  "  Yoor  zeal  hath  provoked
Teiy  many  " ;  *'  I  am  jealous  over  you  with  a  godly  jealousy."    And  in  a  bad  sense
where  the  apostle  enumerates  among  the  works  of  the  flesh  "  envyings  and  emula-
tions."   What  zeal  is  we  know  by  experience.    For  instance,  what  zeal  is  shown  by
men  of  science  when  they  explore  the  remotest  bounds  of  the  earth,  from  torrid
Eones  to  the  everlasting  snows  of  the  far  North,  or  when  they  leave  their  bones  to
whiten  in  Australian  wildernesses,  to  settle  a  question  of  geography.    What  zeal  Is
shown  by  them  in  a  nobler  cause  when  they  sacrifice  their  own  Uves — in  some  oases
consciously — in  the  study  of  disease  and  the  result  of  the  battle  with  death.     So  in
things  bad,  what  zeal  is  shown  by  infidels  in  the  propagation  of  their  opinions  on
all  occasions  and  in  every  place.    What  in  the  sacrifices  of  violent  revolutionists,
Ae.    When  I  turn  from  such  illustrations  I  blush  for  the  apathetic  condition  of  oar
Church.   2.  Now,  such  a  zeal  can  only  spring  out  of  a  great  motive,  just  as  the  rush
of  the  limpid  stream  at  the  mountain  side  shows  the  abundance  of  the  water  thai
feeds  it.     Zeal  is  force ;  it  is  the  great  working  force  of  our  world ;  and  force  san
only  arise  from  an  adequate  motive,  just  as  the  great  river  is  not  fed  by  the  scanty
summer  shower,  but  gathers  its  strength  from  rains  that  fall  upon  a  thousand
hills.    Now,  the  motives  furnished  in  this  passage  are  common  to  all  Christian  men,
just  as  the  grace  they  must  produce  must  be  common  to  Christian  men  likewise.
The  ultimate  spring  is  love — love,  purest,  holiest,  sweetest,  most  abiding  of  all
motives — the  very  essence  of  true  reUgion,  the  Alpha  and  the  Omega  of  its  strength,
the  one  thing  which  of  all  earthly  things  approaches  most  to  Omnipotence,  because
it  is  the  reflection  of  God  and  His  peculiar  prerogative.   It  is  love  for  Christ  awakened
by  His  love  for  as — the  deep  echo  of  a  converted  human  soul  to  the  suffering  cries
and  agonising  tears  of  a  dying  Saviour ;  love  quickened  by  the  grateful  experience
of  the  peace  which  fills  the  heart  when  leaning  its  weary  guilt  upon  the  Sin  Bearer,
and  which  feels  itself   redeemed  from  all  iniquity ;   love  deepened  by  profound
obligation  as  it  remembers  that  the  very  purpose  of  that  love  was  to  purify  us  unto
Himself ;  love  strengthened  by  adoring  admiration,  which  has  called  us  to  be  Hia
peculiar  people  and  filled  our  breasts  with  a  world  of  wealth,  of  which  the  oncon-
▼erted  man  has  no  knowledge.    8.  There  is  one  thing  more  by  which  a  habitual
B«al  mast  necessarily  be  characterised.     If  it  be  the  common  grace  of  all  Chris-
tians ;  if  it  springs  from  motives  which  are  abiding  as  the  life  of  a  redeemed  soul ;
If  it  is  taught  by  the  power  of  the  Almighty  Spirit  of  God  then  it  must  be  a  steady,
permanent  force — not  transient,  not  occasional,  not  flickering  up  into  a  vehement
flAme  now  and  then  and  dying  away  again,  but  like  the  son  in  the  midst  of  tht


CHAT.  XL]  TITUa.  153

heavens,  or  like  the  laws  of  nature  which  hold  sun  and  moon  and  stars  revolving
ever  in  tiieir  courses  round  their  central  orb.  {E.  Garbett,  M,A.)  Good  work$  : —
L  What  abx  oood  wobks  ?  1.  No  work  can  be  good  unless  it  is  commanded  of
Ood.  2.  Nothing  is  a  good  work  unless  it  is  done  with  a  good  motive  ;  and  there
is  no  motive  which  can  be  said  to  be  good  but  the  glory  of  God.  3.  Furthermore,
when  we  have  faith  in  God  and  perform  all  our  works  with  the  best  of  motives,
even  then  we  have  not  so  much  as  a  soUtary  good  work  until  the  blood  of  Christ  is
sprinkled  thereon.  II.  Where  do  good  wobes  comb  from  ?  1.  From  a  real  conver-
Bion  brought  about  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  2.  From  union  with  Christ.  III.  What
is  TH>  VSK  OP  GOOD  WOBKS  ?  1 .  They  are  useful  as  evidences  of  grace.  The  Anti-
nomian  says — But  I  do  not  require  evidences  ;  I  can  live  without  them.  This  is
unreasonable.  Do  you  see  yonder  clock  ?  That  is  the  evidence  of  the  time  of  day.
The  hour  would  be  precisely  the  same  if  we  had  not  that  evidence.  Still  we  find
the  clock  of  great  use.  So  we  say  good  works  are  the  best  evidence  of  spiritual  life
in  the  soul.  Is  it  not  written,  "  We  know  that  we  have  passed  from  death  unto  life,
because  we  love  the  brethren  "  ?  Loving  the  brethren  is  a  good  work.  Again,  "  If
any  man  abide  in  Me,  he  shall  bring  forth  fruit."  Fruits  of  righteousness  are  good
works,  and  they  are  evidences  that  we  abide  in  Christ.  If  I  am  living  in  sin  day  by
day  what  right  have  I  to  conclude  I  am  a  child  of  God  ?  2.  They  are  the  witnesses
or  testimony  to  other  people  of  the  truth  of  what  we  believe.  A  sermon  is  not  what
a  man  says,  but  what  he  does.  You  who  practise  are  preaching  ;  it  is  not  preaching
and  practising,  but  practising  is  preaching.  The  sermon  that  is  preached  by
the  mouth  is  soon  forgotten,  but  what  we  preach  by  our  lives  is  never  forgotten.
3.  They  are  of  use  to  a  Christian  as  an  ornament.  The  adornment  of  good  works,
the  adornment  in  which  we  hope  to  enter  heaven,  is  the  blood  and  righteousness
of  Jesus  Christ ;  but  the  adornment  of  a  Christian  here  below  is  his  holiness,  his
piety,  his  consistency.  If  some  people  had  a  Uttle  more  piety,  they  would  not
require  such  a  showy  dress ;  if  they  had  a  Uttle  more  godliness,  to  set  them  off,
they  would  have  no  need  whatever  to  be  always  decorating  themselves.  The  best
earrings  that  a  woman  can  wear  are  the  earrings  of  hearing  the  Word  with  attention.
The  very  best  ring  that  we  can  have  upon  our  finger  is  the  ring  which  the  father
puts  upon  the  finger  of  the  prodigal  son  when  he  is  brought  back  ;  and  the  very  best
dress  we  can  ever  wear  is  a  garment  wrought  by  the  Holy  Spirit — the  garment  of  a
consistent  conduct.  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  An  acquaintance  with  Christ  the  foundation
of  experimental  and  practical  religion : — I.  It  lays  the  foundation  of  Christiamitt

IN   A    PBOPEB    ACQUAINTANCE   WITH   AND   FAITH  IN   THE   KINDNESS   AND   BOUNTY    OF   OUB

obeat  Bedeeuer.  II.  The  experimental  beugion  to  be  built  on  this  foundation.
in.  This  dootbine  inculcates  the  impobtancb  of  Christian  practice.  {J.  Benson.)
Zeal  in  good  works: — I.  Note  that  before  the  apostle  speaks  of  good  works  we
hear  of  redemption,  and  purging,  and  washing,  and  of  a  pecuhar  people  that  must
do  them,  for,  indeed,  the  best  works  are  so  far  from  justifying  and  purging  that
none  can  be  good  before  the  party  be  justified  and  purged.  II.  Note  that  whosoever
are  justified  and  sanctified  they  must  needs  bring  forth  good  works,  for  else  Christ
should  be  frustrate  of  His  end  in  those  for  whom  He  gave  Himself  (Eph.  ii.  10).
m.  Note  that  the  thing  that  God  requireth  in  a  professor  is  zeal,  forwardness,  and
earnestness  in  well-doing,  and  that  his  whole  course  should  be  a  studious  prose-
cuting of  good  works.  The  effects  of  zeal  for  good  are,  1.  It  preserveth  in  the
heart  a  fitness  and  preparedness  to  every  good  work  required  of  every  believer  (2
Tim.  ill.  17).  2.  It  exciteth  to  diligence  and  haste  in  the  things  we  do ;  it  aban-
doneth  idleness,  slothfulness,  and  delays,  by  which  occasions  of  well-doing  are
often  cat  off :  the  zeal  of  David  made  him  prepare  diligently  for  the  temple  ;  seal
in  the  magistrate  causeth  in  him  diligence  throughout  his  government ;  zeal  in  the
minister  maketh  him  like  Apollo,  of  whom  we  read  that  being  fervent  in  spirit  he
taught  diligently  the  way  of  God ;  zeal  and  fervency  in  private  men  causeth  them
to  shake  off  slothfulness  in  their  duties,  and  removeth  in  all  conditions  the  curse
which  is  denounced  against  the  man  that  doeth  the  work  of  the  Lord  negligently  :
most  fitly,  therefore,  doth  the  apostle  combine  those  precepts :  "  Not  slothful  to
do  service,  fervent  in  the  spirit,  serving  the  Lord  "  (Bom.  xii.  11).  3.  Zeal  causeth  con-
tinuance in  well-doing,  which  is  also  required  in  every  good  action  as  well  as  in
prayer ;  it  contenteth  not  itself  with  one  or  two  good  actions,  but  is  plentiful  in
them,  and  bringeth  the  party  professing  it  to  be  rich  in  good  works  and  to  shine
lightsomely  therein  ;  yea,  it  maketh  a  man  hold  out,  and  keep  a  constant  tenor  in
good  courses,  and  that  as  well  in  adversity  as  prosperity,  so  as  he  is  neither  choked
hj  preferments,  as  very  many,  nor  discouraged  by  distresses,  as  not  a  few.    4.


154  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n.

Zeal  Betteth  sach  a  high  price  unto  the  glory  of  God  and  performance  of  consoion-
able  duties,  that  it  cause th  the  party  to  attempt  and  go  through,  though  with  never
so  much  difficulty,  whatsoever  he  seemeth  himself  bound  unto ;  it  hardeneth  the
face  like  brass  against  dangers  and  losses,  the  loss  of  the  world  in  his  judgment
gain,  yea,  all  things  are  loss  and  dung  so  as  he  may  win  Christ ;  this  alone  yieldeth
joy  in  the  spoiling  of  goods,  by  this  can  a  man  hate  father  and  mother  in  com-
parison of  his  obedience,  and  be  contented  to  be  hated  of  all  men  for  well-doing,
in  which  ease  the  loss  of  friends  is  but  light.  This  zeal  for  God  maketh  a  man's
liberty  small  in  his  eye ;  nay,  in  standing  out  in  a  good  cause  his  life  will  not  be  so
dear  unto  him  as  the  finishing  of  his  course  with  joy ;  yea,  he  can  rejoice  to  be
offered  up  npon  the  sacrifice  and  service  of  the  Church's  faith,  as  Paul.  And
which  is  yet  much  more,  the  zeal  of  God's  glory  will  so  burn  in  the  heart  as  it  can
carry  a  man  so  far  beyond  himself  as  that  he  shall  neglect  his  own  salvation  and
wish  to  be  accursed,  yea,  and  blotted  out  of  the  book  of  life,  if  God  may  be  more
honooied  by  the  one  than  by  the  other.  (T.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Tht  necessity  of
positive  duty  or  actual  goodness: — I.  Positive  duty,  ob  the  actuaii  exercise  of
GOODNESS,  IS  iNDispENSABiiT  BEQUiBED  AT  CUB  BANDS.  1.  Thls  wlll  appear  in  a
general  way,  if  we  do  but  turn  a  thought  to  the  state  and  order  of  created  beings
and  the  designs  of  their  Creator.  For  though  no  virtue  or  vice  can  be  ascribed  to
those  beings  which  have  no  understanding,  yet  remiss  and  negligent  man  may
form  a  just  and  useful  reproof  to  himself  upon  this  observation,  that  whilst  he,
who  is  the  glory  of  visible  creatures,  fails  of  exercising  his  powers  and  abilities,
and  of  answering  the  ends  of  his  creations,  all  the  other  parts,  even  of  the  natural
world,  do  exert  themselves  to  their  utmost  capacity  in  promoting  and  fulfilling  the
great  ends  and  purposes  of  nature.  2.  This  will  further  appear  from  that  more
particular  consideration  of  this  point,  which  is  now  to  be  added  to  the  general  one
already  offered.  Where  I  shall  represent  an  obligation  to  good  works,  or,  to  the
actual  exercise  of  goodness,  as  such  good  works  may  be  considered — (1)  In  respect
of  God,  as  we  are  created  and  redeemed  by  Him,  and  subject  to  Him,  and,  there-
fore, obliged  to  contribute  our  utmost  to  His  honour.  (See  1  Cor.  vi.  20 ;  Matt.  v.
16 ;  John  xv.  8.)  (2)  In  respect  of  our  neighbour.  It  is  not  our  keeping  to  the
letter  of  the  Sixth  Commandment  that  fills  up  the  measure  of  duty  to  oar  neigh-
bour in  regard  to  his  life  ;  for,  as  we  must  not  destroy  it,  we  stand  further  obliged
to  protect  it  and  to  crown  it  with  comforts,  by  proper  acts  of  our  own,  to  the
utmost  of  our  power.  (3)  Necessary  to  prove  our  fidelity  in  the  service  of  (Jod.
(4)  An  engaging  recommendation  and  endearment  of  religion  to  others.  (5)
Necessary  to  ih&t  perfection  which  the  gospel  requires.  II.  Zeal  is  the  neoessabt
QTTAiiiFiCATioN  OF  PosiTivB  DUTY,  OB  ACTS  OF  GOODNESS.  When  good  works  are  done
with  a  negligence  and  unconcern,  as  if  it  were  perfectly  indifferent  to  ^e  man,
wb-ather  they  be  undertaken  or  let  alone,  whether  they  succeed  or  miscarry,  they
then  sit  npon  him  with  a  very  ill  grace,  and  he  may  easily  expect  that  what  is
performed  with  so  much  coldness  will  meet  with  a  cold  reception.  It  is  the  life
and  spirit,  the  sprightliness  and  fervonr  of  religious  enterprises,  that  must  re*
commend  them  to  God,  the  discemer  of  spirits.     {W.  Lupton,  D.D.)

Ver.  16.  These  things  speak,  and  exhort,  and  reboke. — The  duties  of  tht  epi$-
copal  function : — In  all  this  Epistle  it  is  evident  that  St.  Paul  looks  upon  Titus  as
advanced  to  the  dignity  of  a  prime  ruler  of  the  Church,  and  intrusted  with  a  large
diocese.  I.  The  doties  of  his  place.  In  a  word,  it  is  every  bishop's  duty  to  teach
and  to  govern  ;  and  his  way  to  do  it  is,  "  not  to  be  despised."  1.  The  first  branch
of  the  great  work  incumbent  upon  a  church  ruler  is  to  teach.  It  is  a  work  of
charity,  and  charity  is  the  work  of  heaven,  which  is  always  laying  itself  oat  npon
the  needy  and  the  impotent :  nay,  and  it  is  a  work  of  the  highest  and  the  noblest
charity ;  for  he  that  teacheth  another  gives  an  alms  to  his  soul :  he  clothes  the
nakedness  of  his  understanding,  and  relieves  the  wants  of  his  impoverished  reason.
Now  this  teaching  may  be  effected  two  ways :  (1)  Immediately  by  himself.  Change
of  condition  changes  not  the  abilities  of  nature,  but  makes  them  more  illastrioas
in  their  exercise ;  and  the  episcopal  dignity,  added  to  a  good  preaching  faoultv,  is
like  the  erecting  of  a  stately  fountain  upon  a  spring,  which  still,  for  all  that,
remains  as  much  a  spring  as  it  was  before,  and  flows  as  plentifully,  only  it  flows
with  the  oiroomstanoe  of  greater  state  and  magnificence.  But  then,  on  the  otiier
hand,  let  me  add  also,  that  this  is  not  so  absolutely  necessary  as  to  be  of  the  vital
constitution  of  this  function.  He  may  teaoh  his  diocese,  who  ceases  to  be  able  to
pr«Mb  to  it ;  for  he  may  do  it  by  appointing  teachers,  and  by  a  vigilant  exacting


CHAP.  n.J  TITU8.  155

from  them  the  oare  and  the  instmotion  of  their  respective  flocks.  He  is  the
spiritual  father  of  his  diocese  ;  and  a  father  may  see  his  children  taught,  though
he  himself  does  not  turn  schoolmaster.  (2)  Mediately,  by  the  subordinate  ministra-
tion of  others ;  in  which,  since  the  action  of  the  instrumental  agent  is,  upon  all
grounds  of  reason,  to  be  ascribed  to  the  principal,  he  who  ordains  and  furnishes
all  his  churches  with  able  preachers  is  a  universal  teacher ;  he  instructs  where  he
cannot  be  present ;  he  speaks  in  every  mouth  of  his  diocese,  and  every  congregation
of  it  every  Sunday  feels  his  influence,  though  it  hears  not  his  voice.  That  master
deprives  not  his  family  of  their  food  who  orders  a  faithful  steward  to  dispense  it.
2.  The  second  branch  of  his  work  is  to  rule.  "Rebuke  with  all  authority."  (1)
It  implies  exaction  of  duty  from  the  persons  placed  under  it :  for  it  is  both  to  be
confessed  and  lamented  that  men  are  not  so  ready  to  offer  it  where  it  is  not
exacted.  (2)  Government  imports  a  protection  and  encouragement  of  the  persons
under  it,  in  the  discharge  of  their  duty.  (3)  Coercion  and  animadversion  upon
such  as  neglect  their  duty;  without  which  sJl  government  is  but  toothless  and
precarious,  and  does  not  so  much  command  as  beg  obedience.  II.  The  means
ASSIGNED  for  the  discharge  of  the  duties  mentioned.  "Let  no  man  despise  thee."
1.  We  will  discourse  of  contempt,  and  the  malign  hostile  influence  it  has  upon
government.  As  for  the  thing  itself,  every  man's  experience  will  inform  him  that
there  is  no  action  in  the  behaviour  of  one  man  towards  another,  of  which  human
nature  is  more  impatient  than  of  contempt,  it  being  a  thing  made  up  of  those  two
ingredients,  an  undervaluing  of  a  man  upon  a  belief  of  his  utter  uselessness  and
inability,  and  a  spiteful  endeavour  to  engage  the  rest  of  the  world  in  the  same
belief  and  slight  esteem  of  him.  He  that  thinks  a  man  to  the  ground  will  quickly
endeavour  to  lay  him  there  ;  for  while  he  despises  him,  he  arraigns  and  condemns
him  in  his  heaii ;  and  the  after  bitterness  and  cruelties  of  his  practices  are  but  the
executioners  of  the  sentence  passed  before  upon  him  by  his  judgment.  Contempt,
like  the  planet  Saturn,  has  first  an  ill  aspect,  and  then  a  destroying  influence.  By
all  which,  I  suppose,  it  is  sufficiently  proved  how  noxious  it  must  needs  be  to
every  governor ;  for,  can  a  man  respect  the  person  whom  he  despises  ?  And  can
there  be  obedience  where  there  is  not  so  much  as  respect  ?  2.  Those  just  causes,
that  would  render  them,  or  indeed  any  other  rulers,  worthy  to  be  despised.  (1)
Ignorance.  A  blind  man  sitting  in  the  chimney  corner  is  pardonable  enough,  but
sitting  at  the  helm  he  is  intolerable.  If  men  will  be  ignorant  and  illiterate,  let
them  be  so  in  private,  and  to  themselves,  and  not  set  their  defects  in  a  high  place,
to  make  them  visible  and  conspicuous.  If  owls  will  not  be  hooted  at,  let  them
keep  close  within  the  tree,  and  not  perch  upon  the  upper  boughs.  (2)  Viciousness
and  ill  morals.  Virtue  is  that  which  must  tip  the  preacher's  tongue  and  the  ruler's
sceptre  with  authority :  and  therefore  with  what  a  controlling  overpowering  force
did  our  Saviour  tax  the  sins  of  the  Jews,  when  He  ushered  in  His  rebukes  of  them
with  that  high  assertion  of  Himself,  "  Who  is  there  amongst  you  that  convinces
Me  of  sin?  "  (3)  Fearfulness  of,  and  mean  compliances  with,  bold,  popular  offen-
ders. (4)  A  proneness  to  despise  others,  (il.  South,  D.D.)  Hints  to  ministers :
— The  Christian  teacher  should  always  act  with  mildness,  yet  with  firmness.  There
are  gradations  to  be  observed.  1.  Instruction :  "  these  things  speak."  2.  Ex-
postulation: "exhort."  3.  Eeproof:  "Rebuke  with  authority."  (F.  Wagstaff.)
Teaching  out  of  the  Scriptures  : — These  things,  saith  our  apostle  :  for  this
purpose  hath  the  Lord  in  great  wisdom  furnished  the  Scriptures  to  make  the
man  of  God  able  both  to  teach,  instruct,  and  improve,  so  as  he  need  go
no  farther  to  seek  for  profitable  things.  Which  teacheth  such  as  will  stand
in  God's  counsel,  to  fetch  from  hence  all  their  doctrines,  all  their  proofs,  aU
their  exhortations,  and  all  their  reproofs;  for  so  shall  they  be  just,  so  shall
they  be  powerful  to  work  a  work  of  edification,  and  so  shall  they  be  unresistible
in  the  consciences  of  men.  These  things  if  men  would  tie  themselves  unto,  they
should  increase  men  with  the  increasings  of  God  in  spiritual  wisdom,  watch-
fulness, and  the  fear  of  God.  Then  should  we  not  meet  with  so  many  pretors  for
Bin  and  liberty  to  the  fiesh,  straining  their  wits  to  legitimate  bastardly  broods  of
opinions,  which  the  Scriptures  never  acknowledged  here.  Nor  so  many  who  in
their  reproofs  glad  the  hearts  of  the  impenitent,  and  make  heavy  the  hearts  of
those  to  whom  the  Lord  hath  spoken  peace ;  who  strike  at  the  best  things  and
men ;  and  so  as  soon  as  ever  they  have  delivered  a  truth  in  these,  lest  they  should
leave  it  while  it  is  true,  misapply  it  in  the  hypothesis ;  girding  at  godliness  as  too
much  scrupulosity  and  preciseness;  accounting  conscience  a  hypocrite,  and  the
fear  of  God  dissembling  before  men.     Hence  are  discovered  as  sinful  all  reproofs


156  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n.

of  sill  by  jesting,  interluding,  and  stage  representations,  in  which  fools  make  a
mock  of  sin,  and  open  a  public  school  of  all  lewdness  and  iniquity ;  and  if  any
devil  or  sin  be  cast  out  there,  it  is  by  Belzebub,  the  prince  of  the  devils.  Further,
all  reproofs  by  satirising,  and  by  slanderous  libels,  and  secret  calumniations  (all
which  commonly  wreck  themselves  rather  upon  the  persons  than  sins  of  men)  are
here  reproved ;  which,  although  thej  be  indeed  sharp  and  biting  means,  yet  hath
the  Lord  appointed  fitter  and  sharper  arrows  to  smite  His  enemies  withal,  even
sound  and  sufficient  convictions  out  of  the  Word,  which  is  able  to  wound  and  daunt
kings  themselves ;  and  prescribed  them  also  to  be  publicly  drawn,  and  shot  in  such
grave,  reverent,  and  seemly  sort,  as  is  befitting.  1.  Both  the  person  and  calling
of  the  reprover.  2.  The  things  themselves,  which  are  weighty  and  serious :  as  also
3.  The  presence  of  God  and  His  congregation,  whose  matters  are  debated,  and
whose  sentence  against  sin  is  in  denouncing  and  executing.  Small  wisdom,  ^ere-
fore,  it  is,  for  men  in  these  cases  of  the  salvation  and  damnation  of  men  to  suffer
their  wits  to  play  upon  sin  so  lightly  and  jestingly  as  becometh  rather  some  vain
spectacle,  or  professed  jester ;  then  either  the  errand  of  the  Lord,  or  a  messenger
from  the  Lord  of  hosts.  (T.  Taylor,  D.D.)  A  tummary  of  the  "  thingt  "  Titiu
wot  to  "speak  " : — 1.  The  central  idea  of  the  passage  appears  to  be  a  Hfe  of  sobriety,
righteousness,  and  godliness,  issuing  in  and  sustaining  the  practical  advice  pre-
viously offered  to  old  men  and  maidens,  to  matrons,  aged  and  young,  to  youths,
and  slaves  of  all  degrees.  2.  The  subjective  condition  of  this  heavenly  life  on
earth  is  explicitly  stated — a  denial  of  all  godliness  and  worldly  passions.  8.  This
"  life  "  and  its  "  conditions  "  are  originated  and  promoted  by  a  process  of  Divine
discipline.  Here  are  processes,  mental  and  disciplinary,  which  augment  and
stimulate  this  life  of  godliness.  4.  This  entire  subjective  process  rests  upon  two
groups  of  sublime  objective  realities:  (1)  The  historic  epiphany  of  the  grace  of  God
in  the  Licamation  ;  (2)  the  anticipated  and  prophetic  epiphany  of  the  glory  of  our
great  God  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  Thus  it  calls  for  the  exercise  of  the  twofold
energy  of  "  faith"  and  "hope."  5.  The  "grace"  and  the  "glory  of  God,"  received
and  appropriated  in  Christian  faith  and  hope,  attain  their  highest  expression  in  the
redemptive  self-sacrifice  of  the  God-man.  6.  By  way  of  closing  the  circle  of  the
thought,  it  is  expressly  stated  that  the  end  of  the  redemptive  work  is  the  creation  of
"  a  holy  people,"  who  are  not  only  His  "peculiar  treasure "  and  inheritance,  but  who
have,  as  the  law  and  charter  of  their  incorporation,  this  grand  distinction,  that  they
are  charged  vyith  the  genius  of  goodness — the  passion  for  godliness.  They  are  the
very  "  zealots  of  goodness,"  passionately  eager  for  all  that  will  help  and  move  them
to  realise  the  ideal  of  the  Divine  life.  {H.  R.  Reynolds,  D.D.)  Care  in  present-
ment of  Divine  truth : — Philopoeman,  a  Grecian  general,  was  so  enamoured  of
military  tactics,  that  when  he  travelled  he  used  to  be  pointing  out  to  his  friend  the
difficulties  of  steep  or  broken  ground,  and  how  the  ranks  of  an  army  must  be  ex-
tended or  closed,  according  to  the  difference  made  by  rivers,  ditches,  and  defiles.
By  such  observations,  and  acting  upon  them  in  real  warfare,  he  became  one  of  the
most  skilful  and  successful  generals  in  his  time.  Were  Christian  ministers  to
attend  with  as  much  care  to  tiie  arrangement  of  Divine  truth  in  their  public  in-
structions ;  were  they  to  consider  with  as  much  attention  what  plans,  all  things
considered,  are  most  proper  to  be  adopted  in  order  to  extend  their  usefulness,  it
might  be  expected  their  lives  would  be  more  useful  than  they  often  are.  Let  no
man  despise  thee. — The  causes  of  disrespect  in  the  character  of  a  clergyman : — The
esteem  of  mankind,  especially  that  of  the  wise  and  good,  who  are  competent  judges
of  moral  excellence,  is  certainly  a  valuable  blessing.  It  confirms  the  testimony  of
conscience,  gives  a  hvely  satisfaction  to  the  mind,  procures  the  respect  and  services
of  mankind,  extends  the  sphere  of  our  own  utility,  and  increases  the  opportunities
of  doing  good.  If  a  respectable  character,  in  the  opinion  of  the  best  judges,  was
thought  so  necessary  to  an  orator  to  conciliate  the  favour  of  his  audience,  and  give
weight  to  his  speech,  must  it  not,  for  the  siime  reasons,  be  infinitely  more  requisite
in  a  preacher  of  the  everlasting  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ?  Esteem  is  the  natural
ground  of  confidence  and  respect ;  and  in  proportion  as  we  sink  in  the  opinion  of
mankind,  they  will  suspect  our  integrity,  contemn  our  authority,  and  disregard  our
instructions.  In  pointing  out  the  causes  of  disrespect  in  the  character  of  a  clergy-
man, I  do  not  allude  to  those  grosser  vices  which  are  an  outrage  against  religion,
and  would  expel  men  from  the  sacred  oUice.  I  would  point  to  those  inconsistencies
of  conduct,  or  defects  of  accomplishment,  which  fall  not  under  the  lash  of  discip-
line, but  tarnish  the  reputation,  and  lessen  the  utility  of  a  minister  of  the  gospeL
1.  In  the  character  of  a  minister  of  the  gospel,  ignorance  is  both  a  derogatory  and


flBAY.  n.]  TITUa.  167

a  hortfol  quality.  2.  Another,  and  a  still  jnster,  cause  of  contempt  is  negligence
in  discharging  the  duties  of  his  oflSce.  Ignorance,  although  always  a  honiiliating
circumstance,  may  sometimes  proceed  from  defect  of  understanding ;  and  whenever
it  arises  from  that  cause,  however  deserving  it  may  be  of  pity,  it  is  neither  the
ground  of  censure,  nor  the  proper  object  of  contempt.  But  wilful  negligence,  as  it
proceeds  entirely  from  ourselves,  and  always  implies  a  defect  of  principle,  justly
lays  us  open  to  reproach,  and  must  bring  us  down  in  the  estimation  of  mankind.
8.  Another  ground  of  disrespect  is  bigotry  and  imprudence.  As  by  neglecting  the
duties  of  our  office  we  may  suffer  pfety  fc  decline  and  immorality  to  increase,  so
by  an  ignorant  and  furious  zeal  we  may  sow  the  seeds  of  superstition  and  folly,  or
promote  a  spirit  of  rancour,  to  the  great  prejudice  of  holiness  and  virtue.  From
the  same  rash  and  precipitate  temper,  by  reproving  vice  at  an  unseasonable  time,
or  in  an  imprudent  manner,  we  may  exasperate  rather  than  reclaim  offenders ;  or,
by  an  unnecessary  severity  of  discipline,  we  may  drive  men  on  to  obstinacy,  and
confirm  them  in  impenitence  and  opposition.  4.  Another  cause  of  contempt  in  a
minister  is  servility.  From  false  modesty,  or  from  interested  policy,  from  a  desire
of  vain  glory  or  a  fear  of  reproach,  we  may  be  tempted  to  descend  beneath  the
dignity  of  our  character,  and  to  be  drawn  into  servile  compliances.  From  an  undue
attachment  on  the  one  hand,  or  from  a  secret  resentment  on  the  other,  we  may  be
led  into  unbecoming  partialities  of  conduct,  treating  the  same  offence  with  lenity
in  some,  and  with  severity  in  others.  From  a  vain  desire  to  ingratiate  ourselves
with  the  great,  or  a  servile  dread  of  incurring  their  displeasure,  we  may  comply
with  their  follies,  assent  to  their  opinions,  enter  into  their  licentious  conversations,
and  even  connive  at  their  vices.  Such  abject  servility  must  be  universally  detested.
Even  those  to  whom  we  hope  to  recommend  ourselves  by  our  unworthy  complaisance,
though  they  may  behave  with  civiUty  to  us,  will  despise  us  in  their  hearts  as
unworthy  of  our  sacred  office,  and  a  disgrace  to  our  profession.  For  however  men
may  practise  vice  themselves,  or  be  pleased  with  it  in  others,  yet  they  universally
detest  it  in  a  teacher  of  religion  on  account  of  its  gross  inconsistency.  {A.  Dannan.)
Detpising  the  preacher : — 1.  Men  will  despise  a  preacher  when  his  life  and  his  doctrine
do  not  agree.  2.  When  he  delivers  his  message  with  half-heartedness,  as  one  who  does
not  really  believe  it  himself.  3.  When  it  is  evident  he  has  bestowed  no  pains  or  labour
on  preparation  for  his  work.  4.  When  by  his  manner  he  makes  it  plain  that  he
desires  to  give  prominence  to  himself,  and  excite  admiration.  5.  When  he  is  evi-
dently influenced  by  other  motives  than  God's  glory  and  man's  good.  {F.  Wagstaff.)
Lessons : — 1.  Let  no  man  despising  thee  prevent  the  full  discharge  of  certain  duty.
"  He  that  despiseth  you,  despiseth  Me,  and  he  that  despiseth  Me,  despiseth  Him
that  sent  Me."  2.  K  men  will  despise  God  and  Christ,  the  human  messenger  may
well  consent  to  be  despised  along  with  them.  Let  them  despise  thee,  but  let  not
the  effect  be  caused  by  cowardly  suppression,  or  disingenuous  corruption  of  the
truth  on  your  part.  As  a  faithful  messenger  of  God  and  an  ambassador  of  Christ,
let  men  despise  you  if  they  will,  or  if  they  must — let  them  despise  you  at  their
periL  But  as  a  traitor  to  the  truth  and  to  its  Author,  let  no  man  despise  thee.
(J.  A.  Alexander,  D.D.)  Ministers  to  he  preserved  from  contempt : — 1.  First,
now  people  and  hearers  should  entertain  the  ministers  sent  them  of  God,
seeing  they  cannot  without  great  sin  despise  them ;  for  seeing  the  Lord,  who
could  by  EUmself  work  the  salvation  of  men,  yet  is  pleased  to  use  as  His
helpers  herein  weak  and  base  men,  whom  He  assumeth  into  fellowship  with
Himself,  to  become  co-workers  with  EQm,  although  not  in  the  act  of  conversion.

Jet  in  the  ministry  of  it.  Who  dare  despise  such  whom  the  Lord  so  far
ononreth?  And  therefore  calleth  them  His  white  horses — ^horses,  in  that  He
useth  them  in  His  battles  against  sin,  the  world,  and  wicked  ones ;  and  white,
for  the  purity  of  their  doctrine  and  integrity  of  their  Uves.  Yea,  BQs  angels,
namely,  such  as  by  whom  He  revealeth  His  good  pleasure  onto  us ;  and  His  own
voice,  by  whom  He  beseecheth  men  to  be  reconciled.  2.  Secondly,  how  careful  is  the
Lard  to  preserve  His  ministers  from  contempt,  when  He  affirmeth  that  such  as
despise  them,  despise  Himself  that  sent  them.  In  which  sense  we  read  that  the
posterity  of  Cain,  contemning  the  preaching  of  Noah,  despised  and  contended
against  God's  spirit ;  so  Israel,  murmuring  against  Moses  and  Aaron,  Moses  saith,
*•  He  hath  heard  your  murmurings  against  the  Lord,  for  what  are  we  that  ye  have
murmured  against  us  ?  "  3.  Thirdly,  how  unnatural  a  part  were  it  for  children  to
despise  their  fathers :  and  what  severity  hath  the  Lord  showed  against  it  in  His
law.  But  godly  ministers  are  the  fathers  of  their  people.  "I  am  your  father,"  saith
Paul;  and  0ne8imas,yea,  and  Titus  here  begotten  by  him  unto  the  faith,  he  ciJleth


158  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  a.

his  sons.  Let  no  cursed  Cham  presume  to  scorn  them,  which  is  not  so  hurtful  to
them  as  dangerous  to  themselves,  being  the  next  way  to  bring  themselves  under
the  curse.  On  the  contrary,  let  the  natural  children  of  the  Church — 1.  "  Know
them  "  (1  Thess.  v.  12),  that  is,  both  in  heart  acknowledge  them  the  ministers  of
Christ,  and  in  affection,  love  them  as  His  ministers,  accounting  their  feet  beautiful.
2.  Render  then  double  honour  (1  Tim.  v.  17),  in  which  precept  the  Holy  Ghost
hath  made — (1)  reverence,  (2)  obedience,  (3)  thankfulness,  (4)  comfortable  main-
tenance, their  due  from  their  people.  Ministers  are  hence  taught  so  to  order  their
Uves  and  doctrine,  as  they  lay  not  their  persons  open  to  reproach,  nor  prostitute
their  authorities  unto  contempt,  and  so  lose  it  both  from  themselves  and  others.
For  this  is  the  way  for  ministers  to  win  authority  and  reverence  in  the  hearts  of
men  by  their  hves  and  doctrine,  to  become  examples  unto  the  flock.  And  thus
shining  in  the  purity  of  doctrine  and  conversation,  they  show  themselves  stars  in
the  right  hand  of  Christ.  (T.  Taylor,  D.D.)  A  sermon  to  ministeri  of  the
gospel : — It  is  impossible  for  any  man  to  keep  himself  from  being  hated.
Hatred  may  exist  without  cause.  There  is  another  strange  trait  in  human
nature.  Whenever  injury  has  been  done  it  is  usually  the  injurer  who  hates.
In  general  the  ignorant  hate  the  wise  and  the  intelhgent.  This  superior  know-
ledge in  others  is  like  the  sun's  light  to  bats  and  owls  and  moles,  painfully
blinding— and  they  hate  at  once  the  knowledge  and  the  man  who  knows.  In
general  the  bad  hate  the  good,  because  goodness  is  always  a  most  impressive  and
powerful  rebuke  of  badness,  even  when  good  men  are  silent.  But  a  man  oan  keep
himself  from  being  despised.  The  rule  is  that  only  the  despicable  are  despised.
The  exception  is  when  a  man,  not  in  himself  despicable,  is  despised  by  some  one
who  does  not  know  him.  In  that  case  it  is  not  the  real  individual  who  is  despised,
but  some  ideal  person.  It  is  a  greater  misfortune  to  be  despised  than  to  be  hated.
A  man  may  hate  you  now  who,  when  his  own  character  is  changed,  may  come  to
love  you  with  a  passion  strong  and  ardent  as  his  former  hatred.  But  if  one  despise
yon,  even  when  he  comes  to  know  you  better  he  will  find  it  difficult  to  discriminate
between  you  and  the  idea  he  has  had  of  you.  "  Let  no  man  despi&^e  thee."  The
plain  meaning  is — live  in  the  ministry  so  that  no  man  can  despise  you,  however
much  he  may  hate  and  oppose  your  person  and  your  ministry.  A  minister  of  the
gospel  makes  himself  despicable  whenever  he  does  anything  which  is  proof  that  he
himself  does  not  believe  the  message  he  proclaims  to  others.  No  lie  is  noble.  I.
In  the  flrst  place  re  m&y  apfeab  in  a  mimisteb'b  assuuimo  what  does  not  of  biqht
BELONO  TO  HIM.  To  hold  a  position  for  which  one  is  evidently  not  capacitated  by
nature  or  grace  or  education,  is  to  make  one  appear  badly  m  the  eyes  of  one's
fellows.  A  man  who  undertakes  small  things  and  does  them  well,  appears  much
better  than  a  larger  and  stronger  man  who  undertakes  what  he  is  obviously  not  able
to  accomplish,  and  what  he  should  have  done  was  beyond  his  depth.  A  minister  of
the  gospel  ought  to  know  just  what  it  is  his  position  demands  of  him,  and  assume
nothing  beyond.  He  is  a  servant  of  the  souls  of  men,  to  wait  on  those  souls,  bring-
ing all  spiritual  help  from  the  gospel  to  those  souls.  He  is  no  more.  H.  Another
cause  of  contempt  for  some  ministers  may  be  found  in  theib  OLAnnNO  cbbtaim

lUMUNITIES   WHICH   DO   NOT   IN    EIGHT   BEA80N  BELONG   TO   THEM   80   PAB  AS  OTHEB  MEN

CAN  SEE.  Age,  position,  attainments,  usefulness,  are  claims  to  respect,  but  the  minister
should  share  them  with  men  of  other  professions.  He  should  expect  to  be  honoured
simply  in  proportion  to  his  abilities  and  his  usefulness.  A  man  who  really  is  not
respectable  in  his  character  cannot  be  rendered  honourable  by  any  office  or  position.
m.  Again :  a  minister  may  render  himself  despicable  by  belying  upon  wobldly  means
Ai<ONE  IN  ORDEB  TO  BBC0RE  8PIBITUAL  ENDS.  When  men  dctcot  that  in  a  minister,
it  seems  at  once  to  convince  them  that  the  man  never  had  a  true  faith  in  the
existence  of  a  spiritual  world,  and  in  the  existence  and  offices  of  that  Holy  Ghost
of  whom  the  Bible  speaks  and  of  whom  he  must  sometimes  preach.  When  a
minister  makes  his  Church  a  mere  secular  establishment,  which  shall  gratify  and
even  in  some  sense  educate  the  people  in  architecture,  ecclesiastical  decoration,
classic  music,  oratory,  liberal  views,  and  polite  manners — when  he  shall  work  as  if
the  aim  were  simply  to  crowd  the  house  with  a  large  select  audience,  who  should
generate  the  necessary  animal  and  mental  magnetism  to  make  all  things  pleasant,
and  whose  pew-rents  should  produce  a  large  financial  exhibit — when  he  shall  have
even  succeeded  in  all  that,  as  a  lyceum  manager  he  is  splendid,  but  as  a  minister  of
Jesus  he  is  despicable.  The  obverse  fault  is  the  use  of  one's  position  as  a  spiritual
teacher  to  gain  worldly  ends,  whether  personal  or  partisan.  A  fair  use  of  secular
instrumentalities  for  the  accumulation  of  money  or  fame  perhaps  no  reasonable


esur.  m.]  TITUS*  159

mind  would  cenanre.  Bat  when  a  man  who  professes  to  have  devoted  himself  to
the  spiritaal  improvement  of  mankind  clearly  employs  his  place  to  enrich  himself,  he
is  despicable.    IV.  Again  :  a  minister  may  make  himself  disreputable  bt  neolbct-

INO  TO  PREPABE   HIM6EU   FOB    THE    PBOFEB    DISCEAKOE     OP    THE     PUNOTIONS    OP    HIS

OFPicB.  He  has  to  deal  with  the  most  complex  and  profound  questions  of  life  and
destiny ;  and  he  has  to  conduct  these  disoassions  not  so  as  to  merely  entertain  or
even  satisfy  the  intellects  of  his  hearers.  He  is  an  utter  failure  if  he  do  not  make
all  those  discussions  profitable  to  their  souls.  A  lawyer  is  a  failure  if  he  never
carries  a  case,  however  much  he  may  entertain  the  court  and  the  jury.  The
world  makes  rapid  progress  in  all  science.  No  chemist  expects  a  minister
to  be  up  in  chemistry  as  he  is;  no  political  economist  expects  him  to  be
"posted"  on  all  the  minutis  which  go  to  solve  the  great  problems  of  oivil
and  social  advancement.  But  they  do  expect  him  to  know  something  beyond
a  few  dry  theological  propositions  and  a  few  dry  jokes.  They  do  expect  him  to  be
a  worker.  They  work.  Y.  Again :  there  is  much  to  be  learned  from  what  Paul
teaches  Timothy  in  connection  with  the  precept,  ••  Let  no  man  despise  thy  youth,"
when  he  adds,  "  Be  thou  an  example  op  the  believebs,  in  wobd,  in  oonvebsation,
IN  ohabitt,  in  flPiBiT,  IN  PAiTH,  IN  PURiTT."  What  will  save  a  minister  from  loss
of  respect  in  his  youth  will  keep  him  in  honour  through  all  his  ministry.  1.  If
other  men  spoil  their  reputation  by  loose  tongues  and  careless  and  corrupt  speech,
how  very  careful  of  his  speech  must  be  a  minister  of  the  gospel,  who  is  supposed  to
be  always  holding  close  to  his  own  heart  and  conscience  and  to  his  fellow-men  the
realities  of  a  world  which  fleshly  eyes  do  not  behold.  Nor  do  sensible  men  like
canting  parsons.  Words  are  things.  To  him  who  uses  them  they  may  be  empty
things,  and  he  is  despicable  who  employs  the  divine  gift  of  speech  to  scatter  empti-
ness over  the  world.  2.  Then  the  apostle  holds  that  a  minister's  intercourse  with
society  may  make  him  despicable.  A  grasping,  stingy,  mean  minister  is  oon-
temptible.  And  so  is  a  minister  who  allows  others  to  cheat  him  just  because  he  is
"  a  parson."  He  ought  to  know  his  rights  and  dare  maintain  them.  He  who  is
not  aiming  to  be  a  gentleman  is  not  fit  to  be  a  minister.  8.  The  apostle  instanoes
charity  also.  He  who  preaches  the  gospel  of  love  cannot  be  respected  if  men  per-
ceive that  he  is  not  animated  by  a  real  and  deep  love  for  God,  and  an  earnest
brotherly  affection  for  all  the  race  for  which  Christ  died.  And  this  temper  most
pervade  his  intercourse  with  society.  4.  The  apostle  next  instances  spiritual-
mindedness ;  which  does  not  mean  a  neglect  of  the  things  which  are  seen  and  a
contempt  for  them,  a  voluntary  humiliation  and  castigation  of  one's  self.  5.  The
apostle  enjoins  fidelity,  entire  faithfulness  to  every  trust,  faithfulness  toward  Ch>d
and  man,  faithfulness  in  allowing  no  evil  to  spread  in  the  Church  because  it  is  the
besetment  of  his  special  friends.  He  must  deal  honestly  in  the  preaching  of  the
Word  and  in  the  administration  of  the  discipline  of  his  Church.  He  must  not  be
drawn  from  the  discharge  of  any  duty  by  fear,  favour,  affection,  reward,  or  the
hope  of  reward.  6.  The  last  thing  mentioned  by  the  apostle  is  purity ;  and  no  one
can  confine  this  to  mere  chastity,  a  perfectly  apparent  indispensable  to  (he  ministeriri
position  {  it  most  cover  his  whole  life.    {C.  F.  Deenu,  DJ),)


CHAPTER  m.

T>B8. 1,  S.  Pat  them  la  mind  to  be  subject. — Obedience  to  etvd  magt*trate$  :'-'l.
Who  abs  to  bb  understood  bt  civni  bulebs.  All  those  who  are  in  the  peaceable
possession  of  civil  power.  11.  It  is  the  ddtt  op  subjects  to  obby  theib  oivii«
BULEBS.  1.  The  Scripture  expressly  enjoins  this  duty  upon  subjects.  2.  The  duty
of  submission  naturally  results  from  the  relation  which  subjects  bear  to  their  rulers.
There  would  be  no  propriety  in  calling  the  body  of  the  people  subjects,  unless  they
were  under  obligation  to  obey  those  in  the  administration  of  government.  3.  All
subjects  ought  to  obey  their  rulers  for  the  sake  of  the  public  good.  III.  Ministebs
OUGHT  TO  INCULCATE  SUCH  SUBMISSION  TO  CIVIL  MAGISTRATES.  1.  Prcachers  are
expressly  required  to  press  this  plain  and  important  duty  upon  the  people  of  their
charge.     2.   It  becomes  the  preachers  of  the  gospel,  in  this  case,  to  follow  the


160  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap,  m,

example  of  the  inspired  teachers — John  the  Baptist,  Christ,  <fco.  8.  It  no  less
belongs  to  the  office  of  gospel  ministers  to  teach  men  their  duty  towards  oivil
ralers  than  to  teach  them  any  other  moral  or  religioas  duty.  4.  There  are  some
peculiar  reasons  why  the  duty  of  submission  to  civil  authority  should  be  more
especially  inculcated  upon  the  minds  of  subjects,  (1)  Men  are  extremely  apt  to
forget  that  they  are  under  any  moral  obligation  to  obey  the  rulers  of  the  land.  (2)
There  is  scarcely  any  duty  more  disagreeable  to  the  human  heart  than  submission
to  civil  government.  (3)  The  safety  and  happiness  of  the  whole  body  politic  more
essentially  depend  upon  each  member's  performing  this,  than  any  other  duty.
Where  there  is  no  subordination,  there  can  be  no  government ;  and  where  there  is
no  government,  there  can  be  no  pubho  peace  nor  safety.  Concluding  reflections :
1.  There  is  no  ground  to  complain  of  the  ministers  of  the  gospel  for  iuculcating
political  duties.  2.  There  appears  to  be  no  more  difficulty  in  determining  the
measure  of  submission  to  civU  government  than  the  measure  of  submission  to  any
other  human  authority.  8.  It  is  extremely  criminal  to  disobey  civil  rulers,  and
oppose  the  regular  administration  of  government.  4.  It  is  criminal  not  only  to
disobey  and  resist  oivil  authority,  but  also  to  countenance,  cherish,  and  inflame  a
spirit  of  disobedience  and  rebellion.  5.  Those  in  executive  authority  are  under
indispensable  obligation  to  give  rebels  and  traitors  a  just  recompense  of  reward.
They  are  God's  ministers  to  execute  wrath  upon  them  that  do  evil ;  and  they  ought
not  to  hold  the  sword  of  justice  in  vain.  {N.  Emmons,  D.D.)  The  Chri»tian'$
loyalty  to  secular  government : — I.  Its  natubb.  1.  Subjection  to  the  general  govern*
ment.  2.  Obedience  to  the  local  authorities.  3.  Beadiness  to  help  the  government
in  times  of  emergency.  4.  Carefulness  in  respect  to  the  reputation  of  their  fellow-
citizens,  fi.  Peaceful  and  order-loving.  II.  Its  reasons.  1.  The  spiritual  change
wrought  upon  believers.  2.  Some  blessed  features  of  the  source  of  this  change.
(1)  Its  graciousness.  (2)  Its  method.  (8)  Its  abundance.  (4)  Its  justifying  power.
(5)  Its  benefits  and  tendency.  Lessons :  1.  The  superiority  of  Christianity.  (1)
The  best  thmg  for  the  State.  (2)  The  best  thing  for  individuals.  (3)  The  beat
thing  for  the  family.  2.  The  unmistakable  evidences  of  the  Divine  origin  of
Ohristianity.  (1)  In  its  love  of  man.  (2)  In  its  legitimate  effects  on  man  and  on
Bociety.  {D.  C,  Hughes,  M.A.)  The  subject's  duty : — ^I.  Thb  hanneb  of  pbo-
rouNDiMO  THB  COUNSEL.  Titus  is  here  enjoined  two  things :  1.  To  call  back  into
their  minds  an  old  doctrine — not  what  they  had  newly  learned  since  their  becoming
Christians,  but  what  nature  and  reason  had  taught  them  long  before.  2.  To  incul-
cate, or  beat  often  upon  this  point.  (1)  Because  men  generally  are  ambitionsof  liberty,
nnwUling,  if  lust  or  pride  of  heart  be  Ustened  to,  to  be  subject  to  any  yoke,  whether
of  God  or  man ;  ever  ready  to  think  one  man  as  good  as  another,  and  with  Eorah
to  suggest  that  every  Moses  and  Aaron  takes  too  much  upon  him.  (2)  Because  the
dispersed  Jews  (of  whom  there  was  no  small  number  at  that  time  in  Crete)  stood
very  much  upon  temporal  privileges ;  as  upon  Abraham,  the  temple,  the  law,  &c.
And  ever  loath  they  were  to  stoop  to  the  authority  of  the  Gentiles.  (3)  Because  the
Christians  at  that  time,  both  of  Jews  and  Gentiles,  stood  as  much  upon  spiritual
privileges,  not  thinking  it  sufficient  to  be  set  free  from  the  thraldom  of  Satan,  and
bondage  of  sin,  and  so  to  be  made  spiritual  kings  unto  God  and  the  Lamb  ;  unless
by  a  boundless  (Christian)  liberty,  as  they  supposed,  they  might  be  at  their  own
hands  to  do  as  they  listed.  II.  The  substance  of  the  pbeoept  itself.  1.  The
duties  required.  (1)  By  subjection  is  meant  honour,  reverence,  and  respect  to  the
persons  whom  God  has  set  in  authority  over  us.  (2)  By  obedience  is  meant  a  free
voluntary  readiness  of  mind  to  yield  to,  and  to  execute  whatsoever  lawful  command
of  a  superior.  Where  there  is  conscience  of  subjection,  there  will  be  cheerfulness
in  obedience.  2.  The  second  considerable  in  the  substance  of  the  precept  is — (1)
The  persons  to  whom  tbese  duties  belong,  namely,  to  all  magistrates,  which  are  here
distributed  into  two  ranks,  principalities,  powers.  By  the  former  we  understand
such  who  have  primary  and  plenary  power  under  God,  and  by  this  their  proper
power  and  authority  have  an  absolute  command  within  their  several  dominions;
such  are  Gessars,  kings,  and  chief  governors  in  free  states.  The  latter  signifieth
such  as  exercise  delegated  authority,  that  is,  hold  from  those  higher  powers ;  and
such  are  all  inferior  officers,  whether  in  Church  or  State,  who  have  no  authority  to
act  in  any  public  business,  but  what  they  receive  from  the  supreme  magistrate.  3.
The  persons  from  whom  these  dues  are  to  be  paid.  This  is  soon  decided.  The
persons  solvent,  are  all  Christians  in  general,  without  any  exception,  but  of  the
supreme  magistrate  himself,  clergy  as  well  as  laity — all  who  are  under  authority.
The  apostle  includes  all  in  the  word  avrovt,  put  them  in  mind,  that  is,  all  inferiors.


OHAP.  in.]  TITUS,  161

Every  soul  mast  be  subject  to  the  higher  powers.  Having  thus  far  explained  the
subject  matter  of  the  apostle's  command,  I  proceed  to  the  observations  arising  out
of  it.  1.  Christian  religion  destroys  not  government  or  civil  authority  but  ratifieth
and  confirmeth  it.  2.  The  kingdom  of  Christ  is  not  of  this  world,  His  authority
divideth  not  civil  inheritances,  His  sceptre  swalloweth  not  up  (as  did  Aaron's  rod
the  others)  the  sceptre  of  worldly  monarchs.  His  weapons  are  not  carnal ;  the  keys
of  His  kingdom  are  no  temporal  jurisdiction.  3.  One  ordinance  of  God  doth  not
abolish  another.  The  laws  of  Christ  in  His  Church  bring  not  in  lawlessness  into
the  Commonwealth ;  nor  is  God  the  God  of  order  in  the  first,  and  the  Author  of
confusion  in  the  latter.  For  one  ordinance  of  God  to  destroy  another  would  argue
want  of  wisdom  in  God,  the  Ordaiuer.  The  very  thought  thereof  is  blasphemous.
Nay,  on  the  contrary,  for  the  Church's  sake  (which  He  loveth)  He  keepeth  order,
and  maintains  government  in  commonwealths,  that  His  Church,  whilst  it  is
a-gathering  in  the  world,  might  find  safe  harbour  therein  ;  that  this  dove  of  Christ
might  have  a  place  where  to  set  without  danger  the  sole  of  her  foot.  {John  Cleaver,
M.A.)  Ministers  remembrancers : — 1.  The  scope  of  the  ministry  is  to  put  men  in
mind,  and  keep  in  them  the  remembrance  of  every  Christian  duty.  Thus,  ministers
may  be  called  the  Lord's  remembrancers,  not  only  for  putting  the  Lord  in  mind  of  His
covenant  towards  His  people,  and  of  the  people's  wants,  but  also  that  they  must  not
be  silent,  but  restless  in  whetting  the  doctrine  of  God,  legal  and  evangelical  upon  the
people,  and  so  be  ever  putting  them  in  mind  of  their  covenant  and  duty  unto  God.
Paul  acknowledged  himself  such  a  remembrancer  (Bom.  zv.  15).  2.  None  is  so  far
instructed,  but  is  wanting  much  in  knowledge,  and  much  more  in  the  cheerful  prac-
tice of  that  which  he  knoweth ;  and  therefore  every  one  hath  need  of  quickening
\iaxd  stirring  up.  3.  None  are  so  strong  but  they  stand  in  need  of  this  confirmation,
as  well  as  the  former  quickening,  neither  can  any  caution  or  any  admonition  be  too
much  in  things  of  such  moment.  4.  No  man's  memory  is  so  sound,  but  as  out  of  a
leaking  vessel  good  things  are  ever  running  out ;  and  when  such  things  are  slipt
away,  they  had  need  be  renewed  and  recalled  again.  (1)  Ministers  must  not  desist
from  teaching  and  exhorting,  as  many  that  think  a  little  enough ;  nor  discouraged
when  people  forget  their  wholesome  doctrine ;  but  encourage  themselves  in  their
duty,  which  is  to  keep  in  men's  memories  the  mindfulness  of  their  duties.  (2)
When  they  come  to  teach,  they  may  not  seek  out  vain  and  strange  speculations,
which  were  never  heard  of  before,  but  teach  plain  things,  yea,  and  deep  mysteries
in  plain  manner,  as  such  who  respect  the  weakness  both  of  the  apprehension  and
memory  of  their  hearers.  (3)  An  wholesome  thing  it  is  to  teach  the  same  things
often,  whereby  things  delivered  are  recalled  into  the  memory.  Curious  men  cannot
abide  repetitions,  nor  hear  common  things,  notwithstanding  these  be  excellent  helps
of  memory,  which  is  the  cause  of  such  gross  and  everywhere  palpable  ignorance  in
the  most  familiar  principles  of  religion.  But  the  wisdom  of  godly  teachers  will  be
not  too  much  to  yield  unto  the  niceness  of  their  hearers ;  nor  to  fear  to  do  that
which  is  the  safest  for  them,  as  Paul  speaketh ;  which  if  it  be,  let  it  be  to  us  what
it  will  or  can,  it  will  be  our  part  that  by  our  practice  they  may  find  the  profit.
We  learn  hence,  also,  what  it  is  that  should  profess  and  take  up  the  memories  of
Christians,  namely,  those  lessons  of  Christianity  which  they  hear  in  the  ministry.
For — 1.  The  commandment  must  be  bound  up  upon  our  hearts,  and  we  ought  to
make  our  memories  the  statute  book  of  our  souls,  and  by  diligent  meditation,  chain
this  book  unto  ourselves  (Prov.  iv.  21).  2.  Herein  standeth  the  sanctity  of  the  memory,
partly  by  retaining  the  rules  of  life,  and  partly  in  presenting  and  offering  them  unto
the  mind  upon  occasion  of  practice,  both  to  direct  and  urge  the  conscience  to
obedience.  Thus  David  hid  the  Word  in  his  heart,  the  blessed  fruit  of  which  was
that  he  did  not  sin  against  God  ;  and  indeed  holy  memory  preserveth  the  holiness
of  the  whole  man.  3.  Forgetfulness  of  the  Word  is  everywhere  in  the  Scriptures
taxed  as  a  grievous  and  hateful  sin :  "Be  not  forgetful  hearers,  deceiving  your  own
selves,"  saith  James ;  "  Have  you  forgotten  how  I  fed  so  many  thousand,"  &c.,  saith
Christ  to  the  disciples ;  and  the  autidor  to  the  Hebrews,  "  Have  ye  forgotten  the
exhortation  ?  "  (T.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Subjection  to  civil  rulert : — I.  Public  aothobitt
pfiESUPPOBED.  U.  Subjection  and  obedienob  enjoined.  Put  them  in  mind  to
obey  magistrates,  to  be  ready  to  every  good  work — intimating  to  us  that  we
must  show  our  obedience  by  our  ready  compliance  in  good  works ;  for  if  the
magistrate  command  what  is  evil,  there  is  no  obligation  to  perform  it,  becanse
nothing  can  oblige  us  to  do  evil.  But  what  if  the  thing  commanded  be  neither  good
nor  evil,  but  of  an  indifferent  nature ;  what  must  we  do  in  that  case  ?  Why  then  we
mast  undoubtedly  obey  it;  for  otherwise  there  will  be  nothing  left  wherein  the

11


169  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cbap.  m.

magiBtrate  ma;  ase  his  power.  What  is  good  or  evil  in  itself  mast  b«  done  or
avoided  for  God's  sake.  What  is  not  so  in  itaelf,  but  only  in  regard  of  the  end  for
which  it  is  enacted,  being  judged  so  by  the  magistrate  for  the  good  of  the  com-
mnnity,  this  must  be  observed,  both  for  God's  sake  and  his  too,  because  God  requires
oar  obedience  to  Him  in  these  things,  Bat  what  then  becomes  of  our  Uberty,  if
another  must  judge  for  us  ?  It  is  where  It  was  before ;  we  must  obey,  and  yet  we
are  as  free  as  Christ  hath  made  as ;  nay,  I  doubt  not  to  add,  we  are  most  Christ's
freemen  when  we  duly  obey  oor  governors'  just  laws ;  for  seeing  Christ  hath  com*
manded  us  to  be  subject  not  only  for  wrath,  but  for  conscience  sake,  that  so  we  may
avoid  the  guilt  of  sin,  that  obedience  which  keeps  as  from  sin  (which  is  the  only
vassalage  of  a  Christian)  can  by  no  means  infringe,  bat  does  rather  advance  oar
Christian  liberty.  HI.  The  ddty  of  pastors  and  teachebs  inculcated.  Put  them
in  mind,  admonish  them  often  of  it,  and  bring  it  to  their  remembrance,  as  St.  Peter
does  twice  together  in  another  case  (2  Pet.  i.  12,  13).  1.  Let  us  consider  that
obedience  to  magistrates  is  a  prime  doty  of  piety  and  religion,  wherein  the  honour
and  authority  of  God  are  particularly  concerned ;  not  only  because  He  requires  it  by
manifold  precepts,  but  because  magistrates  are  His  ofiScers  and  ministers,  by  whom
He  governs  the  world  and  administers  His  providence  towards  men,  and  to  whom  He
has  given  part  of  His  own  power  for  that  purpose.  2.  The  exigence  of  our  civil
affairs,  and  the  preservation  of  the  public  does  exact  this  duty  from  us.  For  the
execution  of  justice  between  man  and  man,  the  safe  and  quiet  enjoyment  of  God's
blessings,  and  the  welfare  and  peace  of  the  whole  commimity,  are  extremely  con-
cerned and  advanced  by  it.  8.  Obedience  to  our  governors  is  founded  on  the  highest
equity  and  reason ;  for  day  by  day  we  receive  invaluable  benefits  by  the  influence  of
their  government  and  conduct ;  protection  of  our  lives  and  estates,  of  our  privileges,
properties,  and  religion ;  secure  possession  of  the  gifts  of  God,  and  liberty  to  increase
oar  substance  by  trade  and  trafSc,  and  to  eat  the  fruit  of  our  labour,  Sco.  4.
Obedience  to  our  governors  is  a  duty  incumbent  on  us  in  point  of  iugenuity  and
gratitude.  For  in  preserving  the  peace  and  prosperity  of  the  nation,  they  do  not
only  preserve  ours,  but  for  our  advantage  also  they  undergo  many  cares  and  troubles,
great  toil  and  labour,  attending  continually  for  this  very  thing  (Bom.  xiii.  6).  5.
No  man  can  disobey  his  governors  without  breaking  the  most  sacred  laws  of  justice
and  honesty ;  without  downright  perjury  towards  God,  and  perfidionsness  towards
man.  (Henry  Dove,  D.D.)  Duty  : — I.  In  relation  to  civUi  oovebnment.  1.
Man's  social  tendencies  indicate  it.  2.  Man's  social  exigencies  indicate  it.  II.  In
relation  to  oenebal  society.  1.  Usefulness.  2.  Charitableness.  3.  Gourteousness
in.  In  relation  to  our  hobal  self.  It  is  a  duty  which  every  man  owes  to  himself,
to  remember  all  the  wrong  of  his  past  life — 1.  That  he  may  be  charitable  towardB
others.  2.  That  he  may  be  stimulated  to  efforts  of  self-improvement.  3.  That  he
may  adore  the  forbearance  of  God  in  His  past  dealings.  4.  That  he  may  devoutly
appreciate  the  morally  redemptive  agency  of  Christ.  5.  That  he  may  realise  the
necessity  of  seeking  the  moral  restoration  of  others.  Lessons  :  1.  The  possibility
of  the  moral  improvement  of  souls.  2.  The  obligation  to  the  moral  improve-
ment of  souls.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  authority  of  law : — I.  Law  is
OF  God.  Therefore  godly  men  are  obedient  to  human  laws,  when  not  inconsistent
with  the  dictates  of  conscience,  as  being  ordinances  of  God.  II.  Authobitt
IS  DBBivED  FBOM  (JoD.  Therefore  righteous  lawgivers  and  just  judges  are  to  be
esteemed  as  God's  gifts  to  a  nation.  III.  OBEcrENOE  to  law  an  essentiai.  pbepaka-
TioN  FOE  GOOD  WORKS.  No  amouut  of  religious  profession,  and  no  degree  of  activity
in  the  performance  of  Christian  duties,  can  compensate  for  the  neglect  of  social
duties  or  disregard  of  the  claims  of  citizenship.  {F.  Wagstaff.)  The  Christian
citizen: — 1.  Individual  excellence  is  what  makes  national  strength.  St.  Paul  tells
Titus  that  he  must  preach  personal  purity,  obedience,  and  peace  to  all  the  citizens
around  him.  2.  Charity  to  others  is  best  promoted  by  an  honest  consideration  of
what  we  are  ourselves.  No  man,  who  is  conscientious,  can  fail  to  remember  many
a  mean  act  he  has  during  his  life  committed.  3.  The  apostle  tells  Titus  that  he
will  make  the  better  citizen  the  oftener  he  recalls  to  mind  how  much  he  owes,  and
must  for  ever  owe,  to  sovereign  grace,  as  a  child  of  God  and  an  heir  of  heaven.
People  nowadays  are  excessively  diffident  in  attributing  their  successes  or  their
virtues  to  their  piety.  Yet  now  and  then  the  world  will  find  it  out  for  itself.
"  Havelock's  men  "  in  campaigns  wrote  their  record  by  their  prayers  as  well  as  by
their  prowess.  4.  The  apostle  adds  a  lefison  for  Titus  about  his  preaching,  which
every  Christian,  trying  to  instruct  others,  might  lay  well  to  heart ;  namely,  that
the  best  of  all  teaching  in  truth  is  the  teaching  of  a  true  life.    He  tries  to  lead  hinc


OBAY.  m.)  TITUS.  let

away  from  mere  formulas,  and  force  him  to  deal  with  real  things  in  a  real  way  for
greatest  good.  "After  the  first  phase  of  Christian  life,"  remarks  Merle  d'Aubigne,
"  in  which  a  man  thinks  only  of  Christ,  there  asually  ensues  a  second,  when  the
Christian  will  not  voluntarily  worship  with  assembhes  opposed  to  his  personal  con-
victions." That  is  a  gentle  way  of  saying  that,  after  a  new  convert  cools  a  little  in
piety,  he  takes  a  time  of  becoming  denominational  and  belligerent.  Perhaps  the
Apostle  Paul  imagined  Titus  was  going  to  do  that,  and  so  told  him  he  had  better
not.  If  there  be  any  truth  in  the  Une,  "  The  child  is  father  of  the  man,"  it  is
manifest  most  plainly  in  religious  life.  The  young  believer  perpetuates  himself  in
the  old.  Maurice,  son  of  William  the  Silent,  at  the  age  of  seventeen,  took  for  his
device  a  fallen  oak,  with  a  young  sapling  springing  from  its  root ;  to  this  he  gave
the  motto.  Tandem  Jit  $urculu»  arbor,  "  The  sapling  will  by  and  by  become  a  tree."
It  seems  very  trite  to  write  all  that  oat  soberly  ;  but  reaUy  it  is  a  thing  most  un-
fortnnately  forgotten.  (C.  S.  Robingon,  D.D.)  Civil  duties : — The  rule  of  Bome,
which  then  lay  upon  all  those  lands  in  which  the  gospel  was  being  preached,  was
a  rule  which  rested  on  the  sword.  Everywhere  ancient  nations  had  been  sub>
jngated,  venerable  thrones  had  been  overturned,  the  freedom  of  commonwealths,
jealous  of  their  independence,  had  been  ruthlessly  suppressed ;  and,  although  it  was
the  policy  of  Home  to  leave  the  old  forms  of  administration  untouched  wherever
possible,  it  was  of  course  as  impossible  to  conceal  from  the  conquered  peoples  the
degrading  tokens  of  their  subjection,  as  it  is  for  us  to  do  so  in  our  Indian  Empire.
Roman  troops  sentinelled  the  palaces  where  Boman  proconsuls  sat  in  the  seats  of
dethroned  kings;  Boman  judges  administered  the  law;  writs  ran  in  the  Boman
tongue  ;  oaths  were  sworn  to  the  Boman  Caesar  ;  taxes  were  paid  in  Boman  coin.
The  military  power  which  imposed  such  subjection  upon  haughty  and  once  mighty
nations  was  at  the  best  a  heavy  yoke.  The  imperial  laws  were  on  the  whole  just,
but  they  were  stem  and  could  be  mercilessly  enforced.  Nor  were  the  imperial
courts  above  the  imputation  of  corruption.  The  imposts  were  very  heavy.
Provincial  governors  were  usually  rapacious.  The  provincial  revenues  were
drained  off  to  feed  the  monstrous  dissipation  of  the  capital  For  the  most  part,
therefore,  the  provinces  groaned  beneath  a  burden  which  the  strongest  of  them
was  unable  to  shake  off,  but  which  was  enough  to  goad  the  most  passive  into
turbulence.  It  was  into  a  society  thus  honeycombed  with  political  disaffection,
and  ready  at  every  point  to  burst  into  revolt,  that  Christianity  entered  with  its  new
conceptions  of  human  dignity  and  spiritual  freedom.  Its  entrance  could  not  fail
to  add  to  the  ferment.  It  quickened  in  men's  minds  that  sense  of  injustice  which
oppression  breeds.  It  deepened  their  irritation  at  the  insolence  and  wrong-doing  of
the  dominant  race.  It  produced  a  longing  for  the  happier  era  when  the  kingdom
of  God,  which  they  had  received  into  their  hearts,  should  be  also  a  kingdom  of
social  equity  and  brotherhood.  Hence  it  became  an  urgent  duty  with  the  leaders  of
the  young  society  to  warn  their  converts  against  political  restlessness.  Do  as  they
might,  the  Christians  coold  hardly  hope,  under  a  government  Uke  Nero's,  to  escape
suspicion.  They  were  pretty  certain  to  be  reckoned  among  the  dangerous  forces  in
a  conuuunity  which  heaved  with  discontent.  But  to  do  anything  to  encourage
such  suspicion,  or  afford  the  authorities  a  pretext  for  repression,  would  have  been
foolish  as  weU  as  wrong ;  for  it  would  have  compromised  the  gospel  at  its  outset  by
mixing  it  up  in  matters  with  which  the  gospel  has  nothing  directly  to  do.
Indirectly,  no  doubt,  the  new  faith  was  sure  to  affect  in  the  long  run  political
affairs,  as  it  affects  every  province  of  human  hfe.  No  community  of  brave  men  who
are  animated  by  the  lessons  of  Christianity  will  always  sit  still,  contented  in  a  con-
dition of  vassalage.  The  gospel  has  proved  herself  the  mother  of  freedom.  Th«
most  resolute  and  successful  resistance  that  has  ever  been  offered  to  arbitrary  power
has  been  offered  by  men  whom  the  truth  had  made  free,  and  who  carried  their  Bible
beneath  the  same  belt  to  which  they  buckled  their  sword.  But  personal  and
political  hberty  is  a  secondary  effect  of  the  gospel,  after  it  has  penetrated  the
structure  of  society  and  has  had  time  to  reform  nations  on  its  own  lines.  For  the
individual  convert  in  the  age  of  Paul  to  revolt  against  the  emperor  or  to  run  away
from  his  master,  would  have  been  to  misrepresent  his  faith  to  his  contemporaries.
The  question  at  what  time  or  in  what  way  a  Christian  state  is  justified  in  deposing
its  tyrant,  in  order  to  organise  itself  as  a  free  commonwealth,  is  a  question  which,  as
it  concerns  the  Christian  community  and  not  the  individual  merely,  so  it  can  only
arise  under  a  different  condition  of  things  altogether.  What  the  gospel  enjoins
upon  private  citizens,  so  loug  as  governments  stand  and  a  successful  resistance  by
the  people  at  large  is  out  of  the  question,  is — submission.     They  are  to  diacen


164  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  in.

underlying  all  authority,  so  long  as  it  is  legitimate,  a  Divine  ordinance,  and  to
render  such  obedience  as  is  due  to  the  magistrate  within  his  proper  sphere,  not
merely  through  dread  of  consequences,  but  still  more  for  the  sake  of  a  good  con-
science towards  God.  {J.  0.  Dykes,  D.D.)  Christians  should  be  taught  good
citizenship  : — The  schools  should  teach  the  children  that  their  first  duty  and  highest
privilege  is  to  become  good  citizens ;  and  a  good  citizen,  be  he  cobbler  or  manu-
facturer, tailor  or  senator,  upholsterer  or  cabinet  officer,  will  never  condescend  to
iecome  an  incompetent  or  unworthy  member  of  the  community.  Were  all  the  boys
and  girls  to  leave  school  fully  imbued  with  this  knowledge,  the  country  would  be
safe ;  the  political  firmament  would  be  sustained  upon  shoulders  firmer  than  those
of  Atlas,  and  its  stars  would  shine  with  ever-increasing  number  and  brilliancy.
The  third  and  highest  form  of  spiritual  power  is  moral  and  religious.  Give  me
leave  simply  to  state  my  belief  that  the  only  solid  basis  for  an  enduring  nation  is
the  Bock  of  Ages.  Any  other  foundation  is  unstable  and  insecure  as  the  sands  of
the  seashore.  Let  the  tower  be  built  in  obedience  to  God's  laws,  and  it  will  reach
unto  heaven,  the  children  of  men  will  re-unite  in  permanent  harmony,  science  and
religion  will  coincide,  and  the  one  universal  speech  will  be  of  God's  Word  written  on
the  sun,  moon,  and  stars,  on  the  solid  earth  itself,  and  in  the  gospel.  {Professor
B.  Peirce.)  Honouring  authority  .-—It  was  held  in  the  olden  time,  but  is  not
now,  that  authority  came  from  God  to  the  king,  and  then  descended,  in  the  form  of
law,  from  the  king  to  the  people.  We  have  turned  that  theory  bottom-side  up,
although  there  are  texts  of  Scripture  which  run  that  way.  Now  we  find  no  difficulty
in  this  land,  since  we  are  republicans,  in  jumping  those  texts.  "  Honour  the
king,"  meant  honour  the  king  ;  but  we  say,  "  Yes,  honour  authority ;  and  the  king
represents  authority."  So  we  bridge  the  difficulties  without  mnch  trouble.  When
the  people  have  committed  their  interests  to  the  hands  of  individuals,  they  are
justly  jealous,  because  they  have  seen  that  human  nature  is  fragile  timber,  like  the
glender  supports  of  a  bridge  over  which  too  much  must  not  go,  or  it  will  break  down
vnder  the  pressure  ;  properly,  there  is  a  wise  watchfulness  of  those  who  are  em-
powered to  execute  the  law,  and  to  represent,  in  the  various  spheres  of  magistracy,
m>m  the  lowest  to  the  highest,  the  will  and  interests  of  a  great  people;  but  the
untaught  and  unbalanced  way  in  which  men  exercise  this  proper  watchfulness
leads — somewhat  in  connection  with  the  other  things  of  which  I  have  spoken — to
what  amounts  to  almost  a  universal  suspicion.  If  there  is  one  corrupt  judge  on  the
bench,  ten  judges  suffer.  If  there  is  one  bad  senator,  the  whole  senate  suffers.  If
there  are  a  score  of  purchaseable  legislators,  then  the  whole  legislature  suffers.
There  is  no  discrimination  made  in  that  matter.  Our  people  have  come  to  look
upon  those  who  are  entrusted  with  power  as  being  suspicious  persons.  The  way
men  get  that  power  rather  tempts  to  this  injustice.  The  rude  and  mischievoufl
ways  of  partisans  tend  to  inimical  feeling  in  this  same  sphere.  Men  and  brethren,
do  you  ever  reflect  that  he  that  hauls  down  a  magistrate,  except  where  there  is
absolute  and  assignable  evidence  of  corruption;  that  he  that  deteriorates  the
authority  of  a  judge ;  that  he  that  takes  from  the  responsibiUty  and  respectability
•f  the  representatives  of  the  people,  or  of  the  members  of  the  general  government,
•r  of  governors ;  that  he  that  makes  an  assault  upon  them  which  shall  lower  the
respect  and  confidence  of  the  community  for  them,  is  striking  at  the  whole  system
of  law  and  government?  Worse  than  that,  it  is  a  blow  aimed  at  the  faith  of
whole  classes  of  men  in  virtue,  in  patriotism,  and  in  integrity.  A  class  of  men  has
grown  up — and  is  growing  up  continually,  with  the  spectacle  before  them,  on  every
side,  of  rude  and  unjust  criticisms  and  depreciations — who  say  that  everybody  is
selfish,  and  that  nobody  but  illusionists  suppose  that  there  is  any  such  thing  as  a
disinterested  service  of  one's  country.  I  am  ashamed  to  see  so  many  young  men
growing  up  with  the  feeling  that  heroism  of  patriotism  is  unknown  except  as  a  poetic
adornment,  or  a  mere  spangle  on  the  dress  of  pretentious  patriots.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)
The  Christian  citizen : — The  civic  virtues  planted  and  fostered  by  Christianity  are
a  theme  interesting  and  profitable  for  study.  One  of  the  credentials  of  its  Divine
origin  is  its  usefulness  for  this  world.  Finding  mankind  individually  and  socially
disordered,  and  full  of  painful  suffering  in  consequence,  it  is  an  antiseptic,  arresting
deadly  processes,  a  balm,  full  of  gentle  healing,  and  a  tonic  which  strengthens
every  manly  purpose,  and  enters  integrally  into  all  true  life  of  the  state.  It  first
purifies  and  exalts,  then  it  directs,  though  using  only  moral  forces.     I.  Christians

MUST  BE  LOYAIi  SUBJECTS  TO  GOVERNMENT,  BEADY    FOR   EVERY  GOOD  WORK.       They  niUSt

fce  often  reminded  of  the  obedience  due  to  principalities,  powers,  and  magistrates.
Ihe  essential  excellence  and  authority  of  human  law  can  best  be  understood  and


CHAP,  m.1  TITUS.  165

appreciated  by  those  who  know  the  worth  and  heed  the  claims  of  the  Divine.  Thej
know  that  the  fabric  of  society  is  in  some  trae  sense  a  Divine  institution.  Bat,  yoa
eay,  government  is  corrupt,  and  God  cannot  be  the  aathor  of  political  corruption.
Very  true,  bat  the  whole  idea  and  framework  of  government  is  not  corrupt.  There
is  a  Bom  of  truth  underlying  the  simple  fact  of  government  which  is  entitled  to
respect.  Abuses  should  be  keenly  recognised,  bat  remedies  should  be  sought  for
them  not  by  angry  assault  or  disgusted  contempt  or  sullen  neglect.  In  healing  the
body  politic,  the  laws  of  life  must  be  respected,  and  employed  as  patiently  and
intelligently  as  when  the  physical  body  is  to  be  healed.  The  practical  side  of
Christianity  in  such  teaching  is  specially  timely  and  important  to-day.  Monetary
values,  domestic  peace  and  security,  time-honoured  institutions,  received  ideas  and
principles,  are  assailed  by  influences  and  methods  before  which  the  wise,  the  good,
and  the  strong  well  may  stand  somewhat  in  dread,  if  not  in  awe.  What  shall  save
the  fairest  portions  of  earth  from  such  refluent  waves  of  barbarism  ?  The  gospel
is  the  only  complete  remedy.  Bayonets  and  grape-shot  may  quell  a  temporary
demonstration  ;  but  the  only  effectual  cure  is  in  that  respect  for  government  which
Paul  learned  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  which  Christian  experience  alone  can  fully  under-
stand. Then  faithful  reconstruction  ia  possible  by  methods  constructive,  not
destructive,  in  a  spirit  reverent  to  the  essential  dignity  and  claims  of  government.
The  Christian  is  not  unmindful  of  the  ills  of  the  world,  nor  is  he  careless  about
their  remedy.  He  is  a  man  of  affairs.  He  neither  ignores  nor  scorns  nor  idly
dreams  about  the  ravages  of  sin  wherever  manifest.  He  deliberately  and  boldly
grapples  with  them,  but  he  uses  methods  which  respect  the  laws  of  life  and  healing,
laws  written  in  the  nature  of  things  and  the  will  of  God.  He  knows  meekness  is
compatible  with  manliness.  The  meek  man  thrusts  no  one  aside,  frowns  not  upon
the  humblest,  but  lives  in  abiding  consciousness  of  the  wants,  powers,  and  claims
of  others.  Wlien  this  is  the  spirit  of  the  world,  there  will  be  no  more  riots,  forcible
levies,  assassinations ;  and  it  is  only  by  cultivating  this  and  kindred  virtue,  in  the
spirit  of  the  gospel,  that  the  world's  peace  will  be  secured.    II.  What  abb  thb

UOTIVES   and   CONSIDEKATIONS   upon     which     the    apostle     bests   these   tJBOENT   IN-

BTBUcnoNs  ?  Not,  as  we  might  have  expected,  because  such  walk  and  conversation
were  useful  and  becoming,  but  he  points  (vers.  3-7)  to  the  sad  degradation  of  their
own  past  lives,  fall  of  the  opposites  of  all  Christian  virtues — foolishness,  dis-
obedience, lustful  pleasures,  malice,  envy,  and  hatreds.  From  these  they  have
jast  escaped ;  they  must  pity  the  moral  ruin  which  stains  and  disables  those  yet
blinded.  He  adduces  a  yet  stronger  consideration — their  difference  is  all  a  pure
gift,  through  "  the  kindness  and  love  of  God  our  Saviour."  Out  of  such  experience,
all  the  more  because  it  is  exalted  and  reflned,  Paul  admonishes  to  the  most
practical  and  assiduous  performance  of  Christian  duty  under  the  general  name  of
"  good  works."  In  these  instructions  to  Titus,  Paul  was  in  full  sympathy  with  the
gospel  in  oar  Lord's  time,  in  all  time.  Let  us  note  the  practical  workings  of
Christianity  for  the  individual  and  the  state.  1.  Christianity  is  the  only  source
and  safeguard  of  lasting  patriotism.  Patriotism  is  more  than  aroused  sensibility,
or  quickened  emotions,  however  worthy.  There  must  be  loyalty  to  principles,  and
those  principles  take  root  in  the  teachings  of  Him  who  valued  humanity  not  by  its
degradation,  but  by  its  possibilities,  who  revealed  the  law  of  self-sacrifice,  and  who
enforced  all  his  precepts  by  a  corresponding  life  of  voluntary  humiliation  and  un-
failing service.  2.  Organised  and  efficient  philanthropy  is  unknown  apart  from
Christianity.  Man  is  not  by  nature  wholly  regardless  of  the  sufferings  and  wants
of  his  fellow  men  ;  but  sinful  practices  soon  blunt  and  disable  humane  promptings.
3.  Christianity  promotes  harmony,  and  the  best  conditions  of  growth  in  society  and
the  state.  Intelligence  is  also  an  incident  to  the  prevalence  of  the  gospel ;  and
before  it,  the  dark  vagaries  of  demagogues  and  fanatics  appear  in  their  repulsive
deformity.  Patience  and  forbearance  with  those  who  oppose  themselves  are
essential  conditions  of  prosperous  life  in  all  circles  from  the  neighbourhood  to  the
republic.  These  virtues  are  permanently  active  only  when  inspired  by  Christian
benevolence.  "  Charity  suffereth  long  and  is  kind."  In  short,  Christian
doctrines  and  institutions  are  the  foundation  of  all  public  utilities  and
perpetaity.  {Monday  Club  Sermons.)  Keady  to  every  good  work. — Christian
duty: — I.  EvEBY  Chbistian  must  make  account  with  himself  that  etkbt
Chbistian  dutt  bklonos  to  him.  1.  This  doctrine  first  teacheth  as  to  learn
the  rale  of  every  good  work,  legal  or  evangelical.  Content  not  thyself  that
thott  eanst  say  the  commandments,  nor  if  thoa  canst  say  that  thoa  hast  kept
Um  whole  letter  of  the  law  from  thy  youth ;   but  study  the  whole  Scripture,


IM  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  m.

Trhieh  ig  an  exposition  and  large  oommentary  of  those  ten  words  ;  hear  it,  read
it  diligently,  meditate  upon  it,  apply  it  to  thy  heart  and  life,  else  knowest  thoa  not
how  to  begin  any  good  work.  2.  If  every  good  work  belong  to  every  Christian
then  may  not  men  post  over  the  matter  to  the  minister.  The  common  conceit  is,
that  the  clergy  shoald  be  holy,  hospitable,  and  so  qualified  as  we  have  heard  in  the
first  chapter ;  bat  for  common  men  and  onleamed  it  will  be  acceptable  enongh  if
they  be  almost  Christians,  that  is,  as  good  as  never  a  whit ;  whereas  the  Lord  bindeth
upon  every  Christian,  of  what  condition  soever,  the  practice  of  every  good  work
which  is  offered  him  within  the  compass  of  his  calling.  8.  If  a  Christian  mast
employ  himself  in  every  good  work,  then  must  men  so  cast  and  contrive  their
courses,  and  neither  duties  of  piety  hinder  the  duties  of  their  calling,  nor  these
stand  in  the  way  of  the  other.  And  he  that  hath  the  heart  of  the  wise  to  know
time  and  judgment,  forecasteth  both  wisely,  and  knowcth  one  of  these  to  be  sub-
ordinate, but  not  opposite  nnto  the  other.  Hence  must  Christians  forecast,  and
remember  the  Sabbath  beforehand,  and  so  order  and  husband  their  times  and
seasons,  that  there  may  be  place  tind  time  and  opportunity  for  every  good  work  in
the  week-day,  and  especially  for  the  best  works,  whether  public  exercises  of  religion
or  private  prayers  and  exercises  in  the  family.     II.  That  every  Chbistun  ouoht

TO  SKEP   IN   HIMSELr   A   FITNESS  AMD  READIMEBS  TO  EVEBT  GOOD  WOBE   IS    PLAIN   IN   THE

ScBiPTUBES.  For — 1.  In  duties  of  piety,  we  are  enjoined  not  only  to  come  to  the
hoQse  of  God,  but  to  take  heed  to  onr  feet,  and  to  wash  our  hands  in  innocency
before  we  compass  the  altar,  and  first  to  sanctify  ourselves  before  God  and  reconcile
•urselves  to  men,  and  then  bring  our  gift.  If  we  preach,  we  must  do  it  readily,  and
mi  a  ready  mind,  and  then  we  have  reward.  If  you  hear,  you  must  be  wise  to  hear,
«nd  ready  to  hear,  rather  than  to  offer  a  sacrifice  of  fools.  2.  In  performance  of
inties  of  love  and  mercy  unto  men,  we  are  called  to  readiness  in  distributing
(1  Tim.  vi  18),  and  mindfulness  to  distribute  (Heb.  xiii.  16).  3.  In  private  duties,
when  God  giveth  as  peace  and  opportunity,  we  mast  serve  Him  with  obeerfuhieBS
and  good  hearts  (Dent,  xxviii  47).  4.  In  private  injuries,  we  must  be  ready  to
receive,  yea,  to  offer  reconciliation,  and  to  forgive,  which  is  another  good  work,  and
so  in  the  rest.  Reasons— 1.  We  herein  become  like  unto  God,  whose  nature  is  to
accommodate  Himself  to  our  good  ;  whose  readiness  to  give  bountifully  and  forgive
freely  is  hereby  shadowed.  2.  Hereby  we  also  beautify,  and  as  it  were  gild  our
duties,  when  they  come  off  without  delays,  without  grudging,  murmuring,  or  heavi-
ness, but  as  from  men  inured  to  well-doing.  8.  Hereby  we  may  lay  hold  of  Christian
consolation,  in  that  this  ready  and  willing  mind  is  accepted,  where  often  power  of
doing  good  is  wanting,  and  indeed  the  regenerate  often  want  power  and  ability  unto
good,  but  to  want  will  and  desire  is  dangerous.    IIL     Some  boi^b  or  pbactiob

rOB  THE   BETTEB    SETTIKO   V8   FOBWABD    IN    THIS   DTTTT.         1.    Get   intO    thy    SOUl    the

conscience  of  this  commandment,  accounting  it  worthy  of  all  thine  obedience,
being  BO  often  urged  in  the  Scriptures,  and  made  in  the  end  of  the  former  chapter,
the  end  of  Christ's  purchasing  of  as.  This  reason  drawn  from  the  fear  of  God
prevailed  so  far  with  Job,  that  thence  he  was  moved  to  use  mercifulness  to  all  sorts
of  men ;  for  God's  "  punishment  was  fearful  unto  me,  and  I  could  not  escape  His
highness."  2.  Take  every  opportunity  of  well-doing  while  it  is  offered,  for  else  the
opportunity  may  be  cut  off  from  thee,  or  thoa  from  it.  This  is  the  apostle's  rule,
"  While  we  have  time  do  good  nnto  all "  (Gal.  vi  10),  that  is,  take  the  present
eceasion  of  doing  all  the  good  thoa  canst.  (1)  In  regard  of  thyself,  perform  the
principal  and  main  duty,  know  the  day  of  thy  visitation  ;  slack  not  this  thy  term-
time,  but  get  the  oil  of  faith,  knowledge  of  God,  and  obedience  to  His  Word,  that
thy  lamp  may  ever  be  shining  to  the  glorifying  of  the  Father  which  is  in  heaven  ;
in  one  word,  forget  not  while  thoa  hast  time  to  give  all  diligence  to  make  thine
election  sure.  (2)  In  regard  of  others,  if  now  thoa  canst  do  them  good  in  soal  or
body,  delay  it  not.  "  Say  not  unto  thy  neighbour,  go,  and  come  again  to-morrow,  and
I  will  give  thee,  if  now  thou  hast  it "  (Prov.  iii.  28) ;  and  what  knoweth  any  man,
whether  this  may  be  the  last  day  wherein  he  can  do  good  to  himself  or  others  *
8.  GK>  yet  one  step  farther,  to  seek  and  watch  occasions  of  doing  good,  and  be  glad
when  thoa  hast  obtained  them,  that  so  thou  mayest  ever  be  farthering  thy  reckon-
ing. We  read  of  the  patriarchs,  Abraham  and  Lot,  how  they  sat  at  their  doors
watching  to  entertain  strangers,  that  they  espied  them  afar  off,  ran  out  to  meet
them,  and  most  earnestly  entreated  them  to  abide  and  refresh  themselves ;  show
thyself  herein  the  son  of  Abraham.  {T.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Chrittian  usefulness: —
L  The  coumsB  specitied.  "Every  good  work."  Every  department  of  religion
Bi^  b«  so  denominated,  repentance,  faith,  restitation,  obedience,  prayer,  piaiss.


OHi».  m.]  TITUS.  167

1.  There  ia  the  work  of  mercy  to  the  bodies  of  oar  fellow-men.  Our  fires  will  burn
brigbier,  our  clothes  be  warmer,  our  food  sweeter,  oar  slumbers  more  refreshing,  if
we  tread  in  the  steps  of  the  blessed  Jesus,  who  went  about  doing  good.  2.  There
is  the  good  work  of  compassion  to  the  souls  of  onr  fellow-men.  How  many  are
ignorant  and  out  of  the  way.  What  can  we  do  to  win  souls  to  Christ  ?  S.  There
is  the  good  work  of  affection  and  kindness  to  the  household  of  faith.  II.  The
DiBBCTiON  oivBN.  1.  The  qualification.  *•  Be  ready."  (1)  That  we  have  the  dis-
position. Naturally,  we  have  not  the  disposition.  But  the  grace  of  God  always
imparts  it.  If  the  heart  be  good,  then  we  shall  have  dispositions  of  goodness.  (2)
That  we  do  good  cheerfully.  That  it  is  not  our  burden.  Not  a  sacrifice.  Not  a
painful,  but  easy  yoke.  (3)  It  is  to  do  good  promptly.  "  To  be  ready."  To  be  at
the  call.  Everything  nearly  depends  upon  being  in  season.  (4)  Includes  persever-
ance. Never  to  wish  to  cease,  till  the  Saviour  says  it  is  enough.  2.  The  extent  of
the  direction.  "  Be  ready  to  every  good  work."  As  you  have  ability  and  oppor-
tunity. 3.  The  motives  which  should  influence  us.  (1)  Our  religion  is  emphatically
one  of  goodness.  It  allows  of  nothing  malignant,  or  malevolent,  even  to  enemies.
(2)  Our  spiritual  improvement  is  connected  with  it.  It  is  by  acting  that  we  are  con-
formed to  Christ.  (3)  Our  happiness  is  inseparably  connected  with  it.  It  is  heaven
on  eavth.  The  joy  of  angels,  felt  and  realised  by  man.  (4)  Oar  future  amount  of
glory  is  connected  with  it.  We  are  to  be  judged  by  our  work,  not  by  our  faith,  gifts,
Ac.  Application. — 1.  Urge  on  the  unregenerate  the  work  of  repentance.  2.  Urge
believers  to  be  ready,  <6c.  (J.Burnt,D.D.)  To  the  active  Christian: — I.  The
00UB8B  OF  ACTION  ENJOINED.  1.  Good  works  to  the  bodies  of  others.  2.  Good
works  to  the  souls  of  others.  3.  Good  works  to  the  Christian  Church.  II.  The
QUAUTiCATioNS  SUPPOSED.  1.  Chccrfulness.  2.  Promptitude.  3.  Perseverance.
4.  Catholicity.  III.  The  MorrvES.  1.  The  genius  of  our  religion.  2.  The  example
of  Christ.  3.  Personal  improvement.  4.  Future  reward  of  grace.  (6.  Brooks.)
Readiness  to  good  works  explained  and  recommended : — I.  What  this  advice  otpiiIes.
To  "  be  ready"  is  to  be  prepared,  by  laying  a  proper  foundation  in  ourselves  for
doing  good  works.  And  this  must  be  by  the  attainment  of  Divine  knowledge  and
grace.  1.  Knowledge  is  first  necessary.  Ignorance  unfits  and  hinders  many  from
doing  good  works.  They  know  not  the  nature  of  good  works,  their  necessity,  that
without  them  "faith  is  dead,"  their  utility,  amiable  character,  the  will  of  God  on
this  subject,  nor  how  they  may  perform  their  duty  in  this  respect.  2.  By  the
attainment  of  grace  (2  Cor.  ix.  8),  pardoning  grace  ;  a  conscioascess  of  guilt  burden-
ing and  discouraging  the  mind,  and  hindering  good  works ;  renewing  grace ;  only  a
good  tree  bringeth  forth  good  fruit ;  strengthening  grace ;  enabling  as  to  break,  or
shake  off,  the  fetters  of  sin,  which  incapacitate  us  to  do  the  will  of  God.  II.  The
impobtance  of  beino  thus  beady.  The  glory  of  God  is  herein  greatly  concerned
(Matt.  V.  16 ;  John  xv.  8 ;  Phil.  i.  11).  God  is  glorified  by  our  holy  tempers  and
heavenly  affections,  bat  especially  by  our  substantial,  good,  and  useful  works.
Great  credit  and  honour  is  thus  brought  to  the  gospel.  "  These  things  are  profit-
able to  men,"  by  lessening  their  miseries,  or  preventing  or  enabling  them  to  obtain
happiness.  Oar  own  good  is  involved  herein.  It  is  an  evidence  of  our  sincerity,
and  of  the  genuineness  of  oar  religion,  to  ourselves  and  others  ;  an  evidence  of  our
repentance,  faith,  hope,  love,  our  justification,  regeneration,  and  growth  in  grace.
Oar  own  peace  of  mind,  as  well  as  our  religious  character,  is  involved  in  this  point.
It  is  the  means  of  exercising  our  grace  and  gifts,  and  thereby  retaining  them
(Matt.  xiii.  12;  John  xv.  2).  III.  The  ueans  to  be  used  in  order  that  this
advice  mat  be  complied  with.  The  Word  of  God  is  the  chief  means  of  knowledge
and  of  grace,  whereby  we  may  have  the  preparation,  inclination,  and  ability  men-
tioned above  for  every  good  work  (2  Tim.  iii.  16-17).  This  must  be  heard,  read,
searched,  and  diligently  studied.  It  must  also  be  received  in  faith  and  love,  be
obeyed  in  an  humble  and  submissive  spirit,  through  the  influence  and  succour  of
the  Holy  Spirit  (2  Cor.  ix.  8).  This  Spirit  must  be  sought  in  sincere,  fervent,  and
importunate  prayer,  without  which  we  shall  not  possess  either  the  right  disposition,
or  sufficient  ability  to  do  good  works.  Christian  fellowship  is  a  further  means.
We  must  "  exhort  one  another  "  daily  (Heb.  x.  25),  and  take  example  from  such  as
appear,  or  have  appeared,  eminent  in  usefulness.  (J.  Benson.)  To  speak  evil
of  no  man.  — On  evil-speaking : — I.  There  are  several  reasons  fob  which  Chris-
tians OUOHT  to  be  exhorted  TO  REFRAIN  FROM  EVIL-SPEAKINO.      1.   It  is  UOt  Only  a

mean  and  shameful,  but  a  pernicious  fault ;  it  produces  much  harm  in  society,  and
is  a  cause  why  many  live  hateful  and  hating  one  another,  and  die  in  the  same
unfriendly  disposition.     2.  It  is  a  common  and  widespread  fault,  and  few,  rery


168  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [chaf.  in.

few,  are  entirely  free  from  it.  It  is  not  confined  to  wicked  and  profane  persons ;
it  is  to  be  found  in  some  measure  even  in  those  who  have  their  virtues,  their  good
and  useful,  and  amiable  qualities  and  accomplishments,  who  live  soberly  and
honestly,  who  love  their  friends  and  are  active  to  serve  and  oblige  them,  who  are
not  uncharitable  to  the  poor,  who  have  a  sense  of  religion,  and  worship  God  both
in  pabhc  and  in  private.  3.  They  who  are  addicted  to  it,  either  seldom  reflect  upon
its  odious  nature,  or  are  not  sensible  when  and  how  often  they  thus  offend,  or  have
several  plausible  though  vain  excuses  to  justify  themselves.    II.  EviL-sPEAKrNo

C0NBIST8   IN   SFBEADINO   BBPOBTS  TO   THE   DISADVANTAOB    OF    OCR   NEIQHBOOB  ;    and   Of

this  fault  there  are  three  distinct  kinds  or  degrees.  1.  The  worst  kind  of  it  is  to
spread  lies  of  our  own  invention  concerning  others.  2.  The  next  is  to  report  things
to  their  disadvantage,  of  the  truth  of  which  we  are  not  sufficiently  assured.  3.
The  lowest  degree  is  to  say  of  them  that  evil  which  we  know  to  be  true.  HI.  There
is  no  occasion  to  prove  and  expose  the  folly  and  dishonesty  of  the  two  former  kinds.
It  would  be  losing  time  and  words.  I  shall,  therefore,  chiefly  discourse  of  the  latter,
and  SHOW  how  blamablb  even  this  is  fob  the  most  pabt.  1.  We  should  not
be  too  forward  to  publish  the  faults  of  others,  because  it  is  no  sufficient  excuse  for
ufl,  that  what  we  say  is  true,  and  that  they  against  whom  we  speak  deserve  such
usage.  2.  Another  argument  against  censoriousness  is  contained  in  this  plain
precept  of  the  gospel — '•  Whatsoever  ye  would  that  men  should  do  unto  you,  do  ye
so  onto  them."  3.  We  should  not  accustom  ourselves  to  discourse  about  the  faults
of  our  neighbour,  because  it  may  betray  us  by  degrees  into  a  worse  kind  of  evil-
speaking.  4.  We  should  not  be  forward  to  expose  the  faults  of  others,  because  by
BO  doing  we  may  bring  upon  them  a  punishment  too  heavy  for  the  offence.  5.  We
should  be  cautious  how  we  censure  others,  because  we  may  misrepresent  them,  and
yet  say  nothing  of  them  that  is  not  true.  6.  To  disclose  the  faults  and  indiscre-
tions of  others  is  often  very  pernicious  to  society,  raises  infinite  variances  amongst
men,  and  tends  to  destroy  the  slender  remains  of  love  and  charity  which  subsist  in
the  Christian  world.  7.  Since  for  the  most  part  we  cannot  discern  the  exact  nature
and  degree  of  other  men's  faults,  we  may  easily  think  too  hardly  and  judge  too
severely  of  them.  Their  faults,  when  we  know  not  the  circumstances  attending
them,  are  like  objects  seen  by  us  at  a  great  distance,  or  at  twilight :  we  see  them
neither  in  shape,  nor  in  size  or  colour,  such  as  they  really  are.  8.  That  we  may
restrain  ourselves  from  talking  of  the  faults  of  others,  we  should  also  consider  that
such  discourse  is  produced  by  bad  causes,  and  proceeds  from  a  corrupted  heart ;
and  that  all  good  and  wise  persons  who  hear  us  will  judge  of  as  accordingly.
Speech  is  the  child  of  thought ;  and  a  child  it  is  which  greatly  resembles  its  parent.
When  the  discourse  is  censorious  and  malicious,  the  mind  which  conceives  it  is
no  better.  9.  Besides,  this  is  an  offence  which  seldom  escapes  correction.  If
human  laws  cannot  chastise  it,  except  in  some  few  cases,  the  persons  who  are
ridiculed  or  censured  will  fully  supply  that  defect.  10.  Lastly,  we  should  be  cautious
not  to  give  way  to  this  inclination,  because  if  we  be  once  accustomed  to  it  there  is
no  probability  that  we  shall  ever  leave  it  off.  Of  all  bad  habits,  those  of  the  tongue
are,  perhaps,  the  hardest  to  be  cured.  The  reason  is  this :  We  deceive  ourselves
in  thinking  that  words  can  do  little  or  no  hurt,  and  that  the  guilt  of  them  is  incon-
siderably small,  and  consequently  we  speak  at  random  what  comes  uppermost.
(J.  Jortin,  D.D.)  Evil-speaking: — I.  The  natube  of  this  tick.  It  consists  in
saying  things  of  others  which  tend  to  their  disparagement  and  reproach,  to  the
taking  away  or  lessening  of  their  reputation  and  good  name ;  and  this  whether  the
things  said  be  true  or  not.  If  they  be  false,  and  we  knew  it,  then  it  is  downright
calumny;  and  if  we  do  not  know  it,  but  take  it  upon  the  report  of  others,
it  is,  however,  a  slander ;  and  so  much  the  more  injurious  because  really  ground-
less and  undeserved.  If  the  thing  be  true,  and  we  know  it  to  be  so,  yet  it
is  a  defamation,  and  tends  to  the  prejudice  of  our  neighbour's  reputation ;
and  it  is  a  fault  to  say  the  evil  of  oUiers  which  is  true,  unless  there  be  some
good  reason  for  it;  besides,  it  is  contrary  to  that  charity  and  goodness
which  Christianity  requires,  to  divulge  the  faults  of  others,  though  they  be  really
guilty  of  them,  without  necessity  or  some  other  very  good  reason  for  it.  Again,
it  is  evil-speakiug,  and  the  vice  condemned  in  the  text,  whether  we  be  the  first
authors  of  an  ill-report  or  relate  it  from  others  ;  because  the  man  that  is  evil
spoken  of  is  equally  defamed  either  way.  Again,  whether  we  speak  evil  of  a  man
to  his  face,  or  behind  his  back :  the  former  way  indeed  seems  to  be  the  more
generous,  but  yet  is  a  great  fault,  and  that  which  we  call  reviling :  the  latter  is
more  mean  and  base,  and  that  which  we  properly  call  slander,  or  backbiting.     A'ld


CHIP,  m.]  TITUS.  169

lastly,  whether  it  be  done  directly  and  in  express  terms,  or  more  obscurely  and  by
way  of  obliqae  insinuation ;  whether  by  way  of  downright  reproach,  or  with  some
crafty  preface  of  condemnation ;  for  so  it  have  the  effect  to  defame,  the  manner  of
address  does  not  much  alter  the  case :  the  one  may  be  more  dexterous,  but  is  not
one  jot  less  faulty.    11.  The  extent  or  this  pbohibition.     In  what  cases,  by  the
general  rules  of  Scripture  and  right  reason,  are  we  warranted  to  say  the  evil  of
others  that  is  true  ?     1.  It  is  not  only  lawful,  but  very  commendable,  and  often  oar
duty,  to  do  this  in  order  to  the  probable  amendment  of  the  person  of  whom  evil  is
spoken.     But  then  we  must  take  care  that  this  be  done  out  of  kindness,  and  that
nothing  of  our  own  passion  be  mingled  with  it ;  and  that  under  pretence  of  reproving
and  reforming  men  we  do  not  reproach  and  revile  them,  and  tell  them  of  their
faults  in  such  a  manner  as  if  we  did  it  to  show  our  authority  rather  than  our
charity.     2.  This  likewise  is  not  only  lawful,  bat  our  duty,  when  we  are  legally
called  to  bear  witness  concerning  the  fault  and  crime  of  another.     3.  It  is  lawful
to  publish  the  faults  of  others  in  our  own  necessary  defence  and  vindication.    4.
This  also  is  lawful  for  caution  and  warning  to  a  third  person  that  is  in  danger  to  be
infected  by  the  company,  or  ill  example  of  another ;  or  may  be  greatly  prejudiced
by  reposing  too  much  confidence  in  him,  having  no  knowledge  or  suspicion  of  his
bad  qualities:    bat  even  in  this  case  we  ought  to  take  great  care  that  the  ill
character  we  give  of  any  man  be  spread  no  farther  than  is  necessary  to  the  good
end  we  designed  in  it.    III.  The  evil  of  this  pbaotice,  both  in  the  causes  and  the
consequences  of   it.     1.  We  will  consider  the  causes  of  it.     And  it  commonly
springs  from  one  or  more  of  these  evil  roots.     (1)  One  of  the  deepest  and  most
common  causes  of  evil-speaking  is  ill  nature  and  cruelty  of  disposition :  and  by  a
general  mistake  ill  nature  passeth  for  wit,  as  cunning  doth  for  wisdom ;  though  in
troth  they  are  nothing  akin  to  one  another,  but  as  far  distant  as  vice  and  virtue.
And  there  is  no  greater  evidence  of  the  bad  temper  of  mankind  than  the  general
proneness  of  men  to  this  vice.    (2)  Another  cause  of  the  commonness  of  this  vice
is,  that  many  are  so  bad  themselves  in  one  kind  or  other.    For  to  think  and  speak
ill  of  others  is  not  only  a  bad  thing,  but  a  sign  of  a  bad  man.     (3)  Another  source
of  this  vice  is  malice  and  revenge.    When  men  are  in  heat  and  passion  they  do  not
consider  what  is  true,  but  what  is  spiteful  and  mischievous,   and  speak  evil  of
others  in  revenge  of  some  injury  which  they  have  received  from  them ;  and  when
they  are  blinded  by  their  passions,  they  lay  about  them  madly  and  at  a  venture,
not  much  caring  whether  the  evil  they  speak  be  true  or  not.    (4)  Another  cause  of
evil-speaking  is  envy.     Men  look  with  an  evil  eye  upon  the  good  that  is  in  others,
and  think  that  their  reputation  obscures  them,  and  that  their  commendable  quali-
ties do  stand  in  their  light ;  and  therefore  they  do  what  they  can  to  cast  a  cloud
over  them,  that  the  bright  shining  of  their  virtues  may  not  scorch  them.    (5)
Another  cause  of  evil-speaking  is  impertinence  and  curiosity ;  an  itch  of  talking
and  meddling  in  the  affairs  of  other  men,  or  any  bad  thing  that  is  talked  of  in
good  company.     (6)  Men  often  do  this  out  of  wantonness  and  for  diversion.    But
what  can  be  more  barbarous,  next  to  sporting  with  a  man's  life,  than  to  play  with
his  honour  and  reputation?    2.  The  ordinary,  but  very  pernicious  consequences
and  effects  of  it,  both  to  others  and  to  ourselves.     (1)  To  others;  the  parties
I  mean  that  are  slandered.    To  them  it  is  certainly  a  great  injury,  and  commonly  a
high  provocation,  but  always  matter  of  no  small  grief  and  trouble  to  them.     (2)
The  consequences   of    this  vice  are   as   bad  or  worse   to  ourselves.     Whoever
is  wont  to  speak  evil  of  others  gives  a  bad  character  of  himself,  even  to  those
whom  he  desires  to  please,  who,  if  they  be  wise  enough,  will  conclude  that  he
speaks  of  them  to  others,  as  be  does  of  others  to  them.     But  there  is  an  infinitely
greater  danger  hanging  over  us  from  God.     If  we  allow  ourselves  in  this  evil  prac-
tice, all  our  religion  is  good  for  nothing.     IV.  Some  eubtheb  abocments  and
coNsn>£BATiONS  to  take  men  off  from  this  vice.     1.  That  the  use  of  speech  is  a
peculiar  prerogative  of  man  above  other  creatures,  and  bestowed  upon  him   for
some  excellent  end  and  purpose  ;  that  by  this  faculty  we  might  communicate  our
thoughts  more  easily  to  one  another,  and  consult  together  for  our  mutual  comfort
and   benefit,  not   to  enable  us   to  be  hurtful   and   injurious,  but   helpful  and
beneficial  to  one  another.     2.  Consider  how  cheap  a  kindness  it  is  to  speak
well,  at  least  not  to  speak  ill  of  anybody.    A  good  word  is  an  easy  obligation,
but  not  to  speak  ill  requires  only  our  silence,  which  costs  us  nothing.     3.  Con-
sider that  no  quality  doth   ordinarily  recommend  one   more  to  the  favour  and
goodwill  of  men,  than   to   be  free  from  this  vice.     4.  Let  every  man  lay  his
hand  upon  his  heart,  and  consider  how  himself  is   apt  to  be  affected  with  tblg


170  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  ioha».  m.

Qsage.  6.  When  yoa  are  going  to  speak  reproaohfally  of  others,  consider
whether  yon  do  not  lie  open  to  just  reproach  in  the  same,  or  some  other
kind.  Therefore  give  no  occasion,  no  example  of  this  barbarous  nsage  of  on«
another.  6.  CJonsider  that  it  is  in  many  cases  as  great  a  charity  to  conceal  the
evil  yon  hear  and  know  of  others,  as  if  you  relieved  them  in  a  great  necessity.
And  we  think  him  a  hard-hearted  man  that  will  not  bestow  a  small  alms  npon  one
in  great  want.  Y.  Soms  bitleb  and  dibbctioks  fob  ths  pbevention  and  cube
OF  THIS  OBEAT  evu..  1.  Ncvcr  say  any  evil  of  any  man,  but  what  you  certainly  know.
2.  Before  you  speak  evil  of  any  man  consider  whether  he  hath  not  obliged  yoa  by
some  real  kindness,  and  then  it  is  a  bad  return  to  speak  ill  of  him  who  hath  done
us  good.  3.  Let  us  accustom  ourselves  to  pity  the  faults  of  men,  and  to  be  truly
sorry  for  them,  and  then  we  shall  take  no  pleasure  in  publishing  them.  4.  When-
ever we  hear  any  man  evil  spoken  of,  if  we  know  any  good  of  him  let  us  say  that.
5.  That  you  may  speak  evil  of  any,  do  not  delight  to  hear  ill  of  them.  6.  Let
every  man  mind  himself,  and  his  own  duty  and  concernment.  Do  but  endeavour
in  good  earnest  to  mend  thyself,  and  it  will  be  work  enough  for  one  man,  and  leave
thee  but  little  time  to  talk  of  others.  7.  Lastly,  let  as  set  a  watch  before  the  door  of
our  lips,  and  not  speak  but  upon  consideration ;  I  do  not  mean  to  speak  finely,  but
fitly.  Especially  when  thou  speakest  of  others,  consider  of  whom  and  what  thou
art  going  to  speak  :  use  great  caution  and  circumspection  in  this  matter :  look  well
about  thee ;  on  every  side  of  the  thing,  and  on  every  person  in  the  company,
before  thy  words  slip  from  thee,  which  when  they  are  once  out  of  thy  lips  are  for
ever  out  of  thy  power.     {Archbishop  TilloUon.)        Detraction : — L  Consider  that

BASH  AMD  INC0N8IDEBATE   OBNBUBES  ABB  tNCONSISTBNT   WITH  THB  JUSTICK  WHICH  TOV

OWB  TO  TOUB  BBBTHBEN.  The  Author  of  our  nature  hath  wisely  ordained  that
approbation  should  follow  virtue  as  its  natural  reward.  This  the  virtuous  are
allowed  to  propose  to  themselves  as  an  inferior  motive  of  conduct ;  and  this  they
expect  as  what  belongs  to  them  of  right.  The  esteem  which  a  man  hath  merited
by  his  integrity  and  usefulness  may  be  considered  as  a  property  of  which  he  cannot
innocently  be  deprived ;  and  the  extent  of  the  injury  done  by  detraction,  is  pro*
portioned  to  the  value  of  the  possession  which  it  invades.  Now,  what  interest  is
dearer  to  the  ingenuous  than  the  preservation  of  their  good  name  ?  You  detest
the  villain  who  robs  the  industrious  of  their  well-earned  store ;  yoa  abhor  the
oppressor  who  plunders  the  innocent  tmd  the  deserving  of  the  means  of  their
support ;  yet  how  light  and  trivial  are  such  injuries  as  these  in  comparison  of  the
ruin  of  their  virtuous  name,  which,  even  in  the  midst  of  poverty,  would  ensure
them  respect.  Would  men  weigh  duly  the  mischiefs  which  detraction  occasions,
that  pernicious  humour  would  be  less  frequently  indulged ;  for  it  is  not  always
from  malice  and  cruelty  of  nature  that  detraction  proceeds :  it  arises,  often,  from
an  inconsiderate  gaiety  of  mind,  and  means  not  to  rain  the  character  which  it
.  delights  to  expose.  The  effects  of  such  conduct  are  not,  perhaps,  obvious,  be-
cause they  are  not  immediate  ;  but  they  are  not,  on  this  account,  the  less  certain,
or  the  less  direfuL  With  a  man's  reputation  his  usefulness  and  success  ate  closely
connected ;  and  one  unguarded  expression  may  involve  a  deserving  family  in  want
and  wretchedness.  The  only  compensation  which  you  can  possibly  make  is  to
vindicate  the  violated  character  at  the  expense  of  yonr  own ;  and  this  is  an  atone-
ment most  humiliating  to  yourselves,  yet  to  the  unhappy  sufferer  often  of  little
avail ;  for  many  listen  with  avidity  to  the  tale  of  slander,  who  will  lend  to  yoar
exculpation  an  indifferent  ear ;  nor  will  your  influence  be  sufficient  to  repair  the
reputation  which  your  levity  or  your  baseness  hath  ruined.  II.  That  a  censobious
rvKS  OF  KIND  is  destbuctivb  also  of  toitb  own  felicitt.  The  man  who  is
addicted  to  this  odious  vice,  acquires,  by  degrees,  an  onhappy  acuteness  in  mark-
ing the  imperfections  of  his  brethren.  To  him,  therefore,  the  society  of  men  can
have  no  charms ;  for  he  beholds  in  every  human  being  an  object  of  dislike.  Is  not
that  man's  mind  ill-formed  for  happiness,  who,  amidst  the  various  appearances
which  nature  exhibits,  dwells  always  on  such  as  are  dismal  and  destructive ;  who
observes  only  the  inhospitable  desert,  the  blasting  lightning,  and  the  wintry  storm ;
but  marks  not  the  beauties  which  adorn  the  spring,  the  riches  which  descend  in  the
shower,  or  the  stores  with  which  autumn  gladdens  the  earth  ?  Nor  does  his  happiness
suffer  merely  from  the  effect  of  detraction  on  his  own  disposition.  His  conduct
renders  him  an  object  of  general  aversion.  Even  his  gay  companions,  whom  his
destructive  pleasantry  may  entertain  for  a  season,  despise  and  ^ead  the  promoter
of  their  mirth.  They  know  that  the  edge  of  his  satire  will  soon  be  turned  against
themselves ;  and  that  their  own  characters  are  destined  to  bleed  by  the  very  same


•BA7.  m.]  TITUS.  171

weapons  bj  which  others  have  been  assailed.  Those  who  have  Buffered  hj  hia
calomny,  are  entitled  to  vindicate,  at  his  expense,  their  injured  reputation ;  and
every  friend  of  innocence  wUl  aid  them  in  the  attempt.  Merely  to  refute  his
slander,  implies  a  reproach  to  which  no  prudent  man  would  choose  to  expose  him-
self. But  how  rarely  doth  human  resentment  confine  itself  within  such  moderate
bounds.  The  rage  of  the  injured  will  probably  prompt  them  to  retaliate.  Tha
security  of  others  will  seemed  to  be  concerned  in  the  cause.  It  will  not  appear
sufficient  that  the  aspersion  be  removed.  The  character  of  the  detractor  is  devoted
to  ruin.  In  the  snare  which  he  hath  laid  for  others,  his  own  feet  are  entangled,  and  he
falls  by  the  sword  which  he  hath  whetted  against  his  brethren.  (W.  Moodie,  D.D.).
Evil-speaking : — I.  All  evil  speaking  hat  be  befebbed  to  two  heads,  fob  n  is

(1)  BITHEB  THE  UTTEBINO  OF  FALSE  AND  EVIL  THTNTOS,  OB  (2)  OF  TBUE  THINOS  FALSELY  AMD

BViLLT.  1.  The  former.  (1)  When  men  speak  upon  no  ground,  as  when  men,
present  or  absent,  are  accused  of  the  evils  which  they  never  did  (2  Sam.  xvL  3).

(2)  When  men  speak  some  evil  of  others  upon  weak  and  insufficient  grounds,  as
when  any  either  publicly  or  privately  chargeth  some  other  man  before  his  face  or
behind  his  back  with  evil  upon  suspicions  (2  Sam.  z.  3).  (3)  When  men  cast
raihng,  cursing,  or  reviling  speeches  upon  another,  present  or  absent,  openly  or
secretly,  and  covertly  by  insinuation  (2  Sam.  xv.  3)  2.  The  latter  kind  of  evil-
speaking  is  in  true  things,  as — (1)  When  a  man  speaketh  of  something  done  or
spoken,  but  destroyeth  the  sense  (Matt.  xxvi.  61 ;  John  ii.  19).  (2)  In  uttering
nothing  but  truth,  but  with  wicked  insinuations  and  collections  of  evil  (1  Sam.
xxii.  9, 10).  (3)  In  speaking  of  good  things,  but  either  lessening  them  or  depraving
them,  as  done  of  bad  intent  for  bad  ends  in  hypocrisy.  (4)  In  speaking  of  things
evil  and  not  so  well  done,  (a)  By  uncovering  infirmities,  which  is  the  guise  of
cursed  Chams,  who  are  ever  revealing  to  their  brethren  other  men's  nakedness,
which  an  ingenious  disposition,  yea,  humanity  itself  (if  there  were  no  religion),
would  cover  and  hide  (Prov.  xi.  13).  (6)  Whereas  we  can  excuse  our  own  faults
twenty  ways,  by  amplifying  the  faults  and  offences  of  others,  be  they  never  so
apparent,  we  become  evil  speakers  in  a  high  degree,  as  sycophants  who  make  the
scapes  of  men  far  greater  than  they  are,  affirming  often  that  to  be  done  of
deliberation  which  was  done  rashly  and  in  hot  blood,  or  presumptuously  when  it  was
perhaps  done  but  weakly,  and  imputing  that  to  want  of  conscience  which  perhaps  was
want  of  heedfulness  and  foresight ;  and  thus  the  sin  is  heightened  when  men  so
wickedly  speak  of  that  which  they  ought  altogether  to  be  silent  in  and  not  to  speak
at  all.  II.  Now,  because  of  all  sins,  there  is  not  a  more  manifest  and  general
mischief  in  all  the  life  of  man,  whebein  even  Chbistianb  themselves  abb  not
EXEMPTED,  who  Carry  a  very  world  of  wickedness  about  with  them,  and  yet  wipe
their  mouths  as  though  all  were  well  with  them  ;  therefore  will  it  not  be  amiss  to
take  a  little  pains  with  this  sin,  scarce  so  accoimted  of,  and  to  show — 1.  How
imseemly  it  is  for  a  Christian.  2.  How  dangerous  in  itself.  3.  The  means  to
repress  and  avoid  it.  1.  For  the  first — (1)  To  utter  slander,  saith  Solomon,  is  a
note  of  a  fool ;  and  the  slander  itself  is  a  fool's  bolt,  which  is  soon  shot.  And  the
apostle  in  so  many  places  affirming  it  to  be  the  practice  of  the  old  man,  which
must  be  cast  off,  maketh  it  hence  an  unbeseeming  thing  for  Christians  that  profess
new  life  to  walk  in  such  heathenish  courses.  (2)  This  cursed  speaking,  whereby
our  brethren  are  hurt  in  their  names,  is  the  devil's  language,  who  thence  hath  his
name,  and  argueth  a  venomous  and  hateful  disposition  not  becoming  the  children
of  Ood.  (3)  True  religion  will  not  stand  with  such  a  tattling  course  as  many
Christians  take  up,  who,  like  the  Athenians,  deUght  in  nothing  more  than  hearing
and  telling  news  ;  and  once  getting  a  tale  by  the  end,  they  are  in  travail  till  they
have  delivered  it  to  others,  and  with  these  all  opportunity  of  good  and  edifiable  speech
perishetb.  (4)  Were  it  not  most  disgraceful  for  a  Christian  to  be  counted  a
thief,  or  a  continual  robber  in  the  highway,  or  a  continual  breaker  of  the  peace  ?
and  yet  this  sin  is  a  greater  breach  of  love  than  theft  or  spoiling  of  the  goods,  for
a  good  name  is  more  precious  than  gold,  more  sweet  than  the  sweetest  ointment.
2.  The  second  point  is  the  danger  of  this  sin,  which  cannot  but  attend  it,  unless
we  conceive  no  danger  in  breaking  such  express  commandments  as  we  have  (Lev.
zix.  16;  James  iv.  11).  The  defence  of  many  a  man  is,  I  speak  nothing  but  the
truth,  and  so  long  I  may  speak  it.  But  if  that  thou  speakest  be  a  tale  true  or
false  (as  it  is  if  without  a  calling  thou  playest  the  pedlar,  and  settest  to  sale  the
name  of  thy  brother),  these  commandments  cast  and  condemn  thee.  Others  think
It  is  a  fault  indeed,  but  not  so  great  a  fault  to  speak  the  thing  we  know  by  another ;
but  look  upon  it,  not  as  it  may  seem  in  thine  eye,  but  in  the  penalty  the  Scripture


17a  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [osap.  in.

bath  set  apon  it ;  (Psa.  zv.  3)  it  hindereth  the  entrance  into  the  holy  mountain
of  God,  and  (1  Cor.  vi.  10)  railers  and  revilers  shall  not  enter  into  the  kingdom  of
heaven ;  and  therefore  it  is  no  such  small  matter  as  many  take  it  for.  Others
reply,  What  are  words  but  wind  ?  and  God  is  not  so  strait-laced ;  if  a  man  should
go  to  hell  for  every  word,  who  shall  come  to  heaven  ?  This,  indeed,  is  an  ancient
natural  conceit  that  outward  profession  and  ceremony  wiU  carry  a  man  to  heaven,
although  in  the  particulars  of  the  life  the  power  of  godliness  be  never  expressed.  But
mark  how  the  Lord  answereth  such  vain  conceits  (Psa.  1.  19,  20).  God  hath  Hia
time  then  to  call  upon  old  reckonings,  and  then  thou  shalt  not  thiuk  words  wind,
but  know  to  thy  cost  that  life  and  death  was  in  the  power  of  thy  tongue.  Others
yet  see  no  such  danger,  or,  if  any  be,  it  is  far  off.  But  this  sin,  beside  the  jast  hire
of  it  hereafter,  carrieth  a  secret  plague  with  it  for  the  present,  for  look,  as  thou
dealest  with  another  man's  name,  so  shall  thine  be  dealt  with,  and  with  what
measure  thou  metest  to  others  shall  men  measure  to  thee  again.  3.  The  third
thing  to  be  considered  is  the  means  to  avoid  this  sin  of  evil-speaking,  which  may
be  reduced  to  five  rules.  (1)  Look  to  thine  heart,  for  if  it,  being  the  fountain,  be
corrupted,  the  issues  and  streams  cannot  but  be  bitter;  and  if  thon  giveth  thyself
leave  to  think  evil  of  any  man,  as  accounting  the  thought  free,  thou  canst  not  but
one  time  or  other  utter  it.  Purge  well  thine  heart,  therefore — (a)  Of  pride,  which
maketh  a  man  speak  disdainfully  of  those  who  want  the  things  which  themselves
seem  to  have,  and  liberally  take  up  any  language  if  he  can  make  the  detraction  of
another  a  ladder  for  himself  to  climb  upon.  (6)  Of  envy,  which,  grieving  at  the
graces  and  good  things  in  another,  seeketh  to  darken  them,  as  Satan,  envying
Job's  prosperity,  said,  "  He  serveth  not  God  for  nought."  (c)  Of  flattery,  which
for  favour  or  reward  will  tune  the  tongue  to  any  ear.  (2)  Be  careful  to  contain
thyself  within  thine  own  calling ;  foUow  thine  own  plough ;  beware  oi_  the  sin  of
busybodies,  who  love  to  play  the  bishops  in  other  men's  dioceses,  who,  if  they  had
not  with  the  witch  in  the  fable,  put  oS  their  own  eyes  at  home,  they  might  find
foul  comers  enough  well  worthy  of  reformation  in  themselves  ;  but  therefore  load
they  others,  because  they  spare  themselves ;  they  throw  no  stones  at  their  own
faults  first,  and  therefore  they  are  at  good  leisure  to  pry  into  other  men's,  and  so
become  the  devil's  gunpowder  for  want  of  better  employment.  (3)  Beware  in  all
thy  speeches  with  men  of  strife  of  words,  for  from  hence  evil  speeches  arise,  and
many  words  want  not  iniquity.  (4)  In  all  companies  pray  to  the  Lord  to  set  a
watch  before  thy  mouth,  and  to  keep  the  door  of  thy  lips,  for  the  tongue  can  no
man  of  himself  tame,  being  such  an  unruly  eviL  (5)  Beware  of  consenting  to
this  sin  in  another,  for  as  thou  art  bound  not  to  relate,  so  not  to  receive,  any  evil
speeches  of  thy  brother.  Solomon  counselleth  not  to  meddle  with  the  slanderer  and
flatterer ;  wise  chapmen  must  beware  of  such  base  pedlars.  (T.  Taylor,  D.D.)
Evil-tpeaking : — I.  Thb  precept.  1.  We  should  never  in  severe  terms  inveigh
against  any  man  without  reasonable  warrant,  or  presuming  on  a  good  call  and
commission  for  the  purpose.  2.  We  should  never  speak  so  of  any  man  without
apparent  just  cause :  we  must  not  reproach  men  for  things  innocent  or  indifferent,
for  not  complying  with  our  humour  or  interests.  S.  We  should  not  cast  reproach
on  any  man  without  some  necessary  reason :  in  that  charity  which  covereth  a
multitude  of  sins,  we  are  bonnd  to  extenuate  and  excuse  the  faults  of  our  brethren,
so  far  as  truth  and  equity  permit.  4.  We  should  never  speak  ill  of  oar  neighbour
beyond  measure,  be  tixe  cause  never  so  just,  the  occasion  never  so  necessary.  5.
We  should  never  speak  ill  of  any  man  out  of  bad  principles  or  for  bad  ends ;  from
no  sudden  anger,  inveterate  hatred,  revengeful  disposition,  contempt,  or  envy ;  to
compass  any  design  of  our  own,  to  cherish  any  malignity  or  ill-humour ;  neither
out  of  wantoimess  nor  out  of  negligence  and  inadvertency ;  in  fine  from  no  other
principle  but  that  of  charity,  and  to  no  other  intent  but  what  is  charitable.  IL
Inducements  to  its  obsebvance.  1.  Let  as  consider  that  nothing  more  than
railing  and  reviling  is  opposite  to  the  nature,  and  inconsistent  with  the  tenor  of  oar
religion.  2.  It  is  therefore  often  expressly  condemned  and  prohibited  as  eviL  8.
Against  no  practice  are  severer  punishments  denounced.  St.  Paul  adjudges  tho
tfuler  to  be  banished  from  good  society  (1  Cor.  t.  11),  and  from  heaven  (1  Oor.
vi.  10).  4.  Such  language  is  in  its  nature  the  symptom  of  a  weak  and  distempered
mind :  a  stream  that  cannot  issue  from  a  sweet  spring.  5.  This  practice  plainly
signifies  low  spirit,  ill-breeding,  and  bad  manners,  and  is  thence  anbeooming  to
any  wise,  honest,  or  honoarable  person :  all  such  have  an  aversion  to  it,  and  can-
not entertain  it  with  complacency.  6.  He  that  nses  this  kind  of  speech,  as  ha
harmi  and  troubles  others,  so  does  he  create  thereby  great  inoonveniauoM  and


CHAT,  m.]  TITUS.  173

mischiefs  to  himself.  7.  Hence  with  evidently  good  reason  is  he  that  uses
Buch  language  called  a  fool;  and  he  that  abstaineth  from  it  is  commended  as
wise  (Prov.  xviii.  6,  7).  8.  Lastly,  we  may  consider  that  it  is  a  grievous  perversion
of  the  design  of  speech,  which  so  much  distinguishes  us  above  other  creatures,  to
use  it  in  defaming  and  disquieting  our  neighbour :  far  better  were  it  that  we  could
say  nothing  than  that  we  should  speak  ill.  {Isaac  Barrow,  D.D.)  Avoiding
evil-speaking : — Philip  Henry  used  to  remind  those  who  spoke  evil  of  people  behind
their  backs  of  that  law,  "  Thou  shalt  not  curse  the  deaf."  Those  that  are  absent
are  deaf ;  they  cannot  right  themselves ;  therefore  say  no  ill  of  them.  A  friend  of
his,  inquiring  of  him  concerning  a  matter  which  tended  to  reflect  upon  some  people,
he  began  to  give  him  an  account  of  the  story,  but  immediately  broke  off,  and
checked  himself  with  these  words,  "But  our  rule  is  to  speak  evil  of  no  man,"  and
would  proceed  no  further  in  the  story.  The  week  before  he  died  a  person  requested
the  loan  of  a  particular  book  from  him.  "  Truly,"  said  he,  ••  I  would  lend  it  to
yoa,  but  that  it  takes  in  the  faults  of  some  which  should  rather  be  covered  with  a
mantle  of  love."  {W.  Baxendale.)  Sin  of  evil-speaking : — ^Remember,  this
contradicts  yoor  nature  and  your  destiny;  to  speak  ill  of  others  makes  yon  a
monster  in  Ood's  world.  Get  the  habit  of  slander,  and  then  there  is  not  a  stream
which  bubbles  fresh  from  the  heart  of  nature — there  is  not  a  tree  that  silently
brings  forth  its  genial  fruit  in  its  appointed  seasons,  which  does  not  rebuke  and
proclaim  you  a  monstrous  anomaly  in  God's  world.  {F.  W,  Robertson,  M.A.)
Cure  for  evil-speaking : — When  will  talkers  refrain  from  evil-speaking  ?  When
listeners  refrain  from  evil-hearing  ?  At  present  there  are  many  so  credulous  of
evil,  they  will  receive  suspicions  and  impressions  against  persons  whom  they  don't
know,  from  a  person  whom  they  do  know — an  authority  to  be  good  for  nothing.
{A.  W.  Hare,  M.A.)       No  brawlers. — Contention  to  be  avoided : — I.   Not  that

EVBBT  STRIKING  AND  FIOHTINO   IS   HEBEBT  FOBBIDDEN.      For — 1.   EvCiy  man  IB  bOUUd

to  contend  in  his  place  for  the  truth— for  religion,  truth,  and  sound  doctrine  against
falsehood,  error,  heresy,  and  superstition.  2.  The  ruler  and  people  may  by  lawful
war  repel  openly  either  idolatry  or  injury  from  Church  or  commonwealth,  for  if  it
had  been  altogether  unlawful,  John  Baptist  would  have  advised  the  soldiers  rather
to  have  given  over  their  calling  and  taken  no  wages  at  all  than  to  have  been  con-
tent with  their  wages.  3.  Private  men  may  seek  the  face  of  the  ruler  to  prevent  or
redress  an  injury,  and  thus  contend  in  judgment,  which  is  no  sin  unless  it  be  for
trifles  or  of  revenge :  so  Paul  appealed  to  Csesai,  and  helped  himself  by  the  benefit
of  law.  4.  It  is  lawful  for  every  Christian,  in  defect  of  the  magistrates'  aid,  in  the
lawful  defence  of  themselves,  lives,  and  goods,  to  become  magistrates  unto  them-
selves, in  which  case  they  may  without  sin  both  strike  and  slay,  so  as  desire_  of
revenge  and  intent  of  bloodshedding  be  absent.  6.  Neither  is  domestical  discipline
excluded  by  this  precept,  whereby  fathers  and  masters  may,  if  the  fault  require,  put
on  severity  in  tiieir  just  corrections  of  their  servants  and  children.  II.  But
the  sin  here  condemned  is  when  men  suffer  their  lusts  so  far  to  sway,  as  they  not
only  follow  the  things  which  make  to  Christian  peace,  but  ake  enemies  unto
CONCOBD  AND  BBOTHEBLV  LOVE — men  of  such  vlolent  affections  as  are  ready,  not
only  to  return  injury  with  injury,  but  with  seventy-fold  revenge ;  right  Lamechs  and
rough  Ismaels,  whose  hand  is  against  every  man ;  men  of  a  word  and  a  blow,  fitter
for  the  camp  than  the  congregation  of  Christian  men.  Now,  what  an  hateful  thing
is  it  that  a  Christian  should  be  indited  at  the  Lord's  bar  for  a  common  barrator
and  quarreller  ?  How  unlike  should  he  be  to  God,  who  is  a  God  of  peace,  and
loveth  peace  and  the  sons  of  peace  ?  How  far  from  having  any  part  in  the  merit
of  Christ,  who  hath  dearly  by  His  precious  blood  bought  the  reconcilement  of  all
things  ?  How  unanswerable  were  it  unto  this  profession  of  Christianity,  which
cannot  become  a  kingdom  divided  against  itself?  How  prejudicial  to  Christian
duties,  both  interrupting  prayers  and  withstanding  the  acceptation  of  them,  when
the  gift  is  brought  without  a  reconcilable  mind  ?  How  doth  this  course  in  Cain's
way  violate  aU  bonds  both  of  nature  and  grace  ?  signing  a  man  to  be  out  of  the
commission,  out  of  the  natural  fraternity  in  the  first  Adam,  and  much  more  out  of
the  spiritual  in  the  second,  yea,  arguing  such  fierce  men  to  be  rather  of  the  serpents'
and  crocodiles'  seed,  between  which  and  man  God  hath  put  an  enmity,  than  of  men,
seeing  they  have  put  off  all  respect  of  creation,  of  adoption,  of  flesh,  and  of  faith,
in.  If  any  ask,  But  by  what  means  shall  I  avoid  this  sin  of  contention  and
QUAEBELLiNG?  1.  Bridle  the  toogue,  for  this  is  an  immediate  follower  of  evil-
speaking,  and  it  runneth  fi  jm  the  tongue  into  the  hand.  2,  Let  the  consideration
of  oor  common  brotherhood  be  a  means  to  cut  off  contention  (Gen.  xiii.  8).    3.


m  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m.

Consider  what  a  scandal  it  is  to  profane  soomers  of  religion  that  such  as  profess
themselves  scholars  of  Christ  shonld  live  together  like  dogs  and  cats  (as  we  say),
and  by  angodly  quarrels  and  heartburns  be  still  building  up  the  works  of  the  devil
which  Christ  hath  destroyed ;  why  should  such  a  thing  be  heard  in  Gath  and
Askelon  7  why  should  Priamus  and  his  son  laugh  us  to  scorn  ?  4.  Get  a  low  con-
ceit of  thyself  and  be  small  in  thine  own  eyes,  for  whence  riseth  contention  and
strife  but  from  the  lust  in  the  members,  namely,  the  inordinate  bearing  of  a  man's
self  above  that  which  is  meet  ?  Only  by  pride  (saith  Solomon)  man  maketh  con*
tention,  and,  indeed,  experience  showeth  that  the  most  suits  at  this  day  are  not  so
much  for  right  and  equity  as  for  victory.  6.  Because  some  in  their  own  temper
are  of  more  mild  and  quiet  spirits,  and  rather  lie  open  to  this  sin  by  others'  instiga*
tion  than  their  own  propensity  and  disposition.  That  rule  of  Solomon  is  worth
noting,  to  take  heed  of  part-taking,  of  meddling,  and  mingling  oneself  in  other
men's  strifes  and  contentions,  for  this  were  to  take  a  dog  by  the  ears  or  a  bear  by
the  tooth.  {T.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Gentle. — Christian  gentleness  : — ^We  are  called  to
the  practice  of  that  property  of  wisdom  which  is  from  above,  which  is  peaceable
and  gentle,  and  to  buckle  unto  us,  as  the  elect  of  God,  tender  mercy,  kindness,
humbleness  of  mind,  meekness,  longsufferlng,  forbearing  one  another,  and  forgiving
one  another.  The  benefit  will  be  exceeding  great.  For — 1.  This  wisdom  teacheth
as  to  be  soft  in  onr  speeches,  as  they  that  know  how  a  soft  answer  breaketh  wrath,
a  rare  example  whereof  we  have  in  Judg.  viii.  2.  2.  It  teacheth  us  softness  in  our
whole  conversation  and  exercise  of  our  personal  and  general  callings.  It  suffereth
not  the  magistrate  to  be  so  stern  that  an  inferior  should  come  to  him  as  a  man
that  were  to  bring  a  bottle  to  an  elephant,  which  he  is  afraid  of,  which  timidity
Augustus  reproved  in  a  petitioner.  It  suffereth  not  the  minister  to  be  lordly  in  ma
doctrine  or  discipline,  but  compassionate  and  tender  in  both.  It  suffereth  not  the
father  or  master  to  be  a  lion  in  his  house,  but  causeth  them  to  govern  sweetly  and
to  dispense  severity,  and  weigh  out  correction  as  physic  to  the  children  and  servants.
8.  It  teacheth  even  the  superior  to  yield  some  part  of  his  right  to  his  inferior,  as
Abraham  to  Lot,  "  If  thou  take  the  right  hand,  I  will  turn  to  the  left,"  nay,  as
Christ  Himself  being  God  and  Lord  of  all,  yet  for  peace'  sake,  and  to  avoid  offence,
did  pay  tribute  unto  Csesar.  4.  Further,  how  necessary  a  virtue  this  is  cannot  bat
appear  to  him  that  considereth  how  frail  our  flesh  and  blood  is,  how  full  of
h[ifirmities,  how  lying  open  to  offences,  how  needful  of  much  forgiveness  at  God's
hand  and  man's;  and  yet  no  forgiveness  at  God's  hand,  but  on  condition  of  our
forgiveness  of  men,  for  so  is  the  petition  in  the  Lord's  Prayer ;  nor  at  man's,  for
what  measure  ye  mete  out  to  men  shall  men  measure  to  you  again.  5.  How  sweet
a  grace  it  is  appeareth  also  in  that  it  preserveth  the  outward  peace  of  a  man,  and
especially  the  peace  of  a  good  conscience.  (Ibid.)  Gentleman  defined : — A
Christian  is  God  Almighty's  gentleman.  The  real  gentleman  should  be  gentle  in
everything  ;  at  least  in  everything  that  depends  on  himself — in  carriage,  temper,
constructions,  aims,  desires.  He  ought,  therefore,  to  be  mild,  calm,  quiet,  even,
temperate:  not  hasty  in  judgment,  not  exorbitant  in  ambition,  not  overbearing,
not  proud,  not  rapacious,  not  oppressive :  for  these  things  are  contrary  to  gentleness.
{J.  C.  Hare.)  Stowing  all  meekness  unto  all  men. — Christian  meekness : — I.  The
HATTJBB  OP  THIS  GRACE  wiU  appear  in  the  description  of  it.  Meekness  is  a  grace  of
God,  whereby  the  heart  and  affections  are  inclined  unto  a  mUd  and  loving,  a  kind
and  courteous  carriage  towards  our  neighbour,  even  then  when  they  might  be  pro-
voked to  anger.  Where  three  things  are  laid  down  to  be  further  opened  to  the
better  knowledge  of  this  virtue — 1.  That  it  is  a  grace  of  God,  for  the  next  verse  will
teach  us  that  we  are  bom  as  rough  as  Esau  in  our  corrupted  nature ;  and  therefore
this  strippeth  and  goeth  beyond  the  best  nature,  being  a  fruit  of  the  Spirit,  and  is
called  the  spirit  of  meekness,  because  it  is  such  a  peculiar  work  of  the  Spirit,  and
proceedeth  not  of  the  flesh.  2.  The  work  of  it  is  properly  to  preserve  Christian
affection,  in  moderating  all  revengeful  passions,  not  suffering  the  heart  to  be  easily
overcome  with  bitterness,  but  is  as  a  wall  or  fence  of  the  soul,  receiving  all  the  shot
of  injurious  and  hostile  actions  and  speeches,  and  yet  keeping  all  safe  within,  not
permitting  the  possessor  hastily  or  violently  either  to  offer  to  another  or  remove
from  himself  such  injuries.  'The  mother  of  it  is  humility,  the  daughter  is  long-
suffering,  and  therefore  we  read  it  set  between  these  two  in  diverse  places.  It
preserveth  peace  within  when  it  is  provoked  to  war,  to  anger,  and  return  of  wrongs,
for  then  is  the  chief  use  of  this  grace,  which  is  therefore  added,  because  many  men
seem  to  have  attained  this  virtue,  when  it  is  never  a  whit  so.  Let  them  alone,
offend  them   not,  you  shall  have  them   gentle,  courteous,  affable,  and  tractable


CRAP,  m.]  TITUS,  176

enough ;  bat  cross  them  a  little,  and  stir  their  blood,  oh,  now  you  must  pardon
them ;  ihey  have  their  affections,  and  you  shall  know  they  can  be  passionate  and
angry  as  well  as  others ;  here  shall  you  see  the  best  nature  betraying  her  meekness.
But  Christian  meekness  must  step  in  to  overcome  evil  with  good  when  it  is  pro-
voked to  return  evil,  or  else  what  great  thing  doest  thou  ?  It  is  no  hard  thing  for
the  very  Infidel  and  Turk  to  be  kind  to  the  kind,  nay,  the  wild  beast,  if  thou  goest
no  further,  will  be  as  meek  as  thou,  who  the  most  of  them  hurt  not  unprovoked.
II.  This  meekness  must  be  showed  forth,  not  hid  with  ourselves,  but  it  must
be  brought  into  the  light,  that  others  may  have  the  benefit  of  it,  for  as  tiiis  grace
is  a  sign  and  pawn  of  our  election,  which,  as  the  elect  of  God,  we  must  put  on  and
array  ourselves  withal  (Col.  iii.  12),  so  also  must  it  be  the  ornament  of  our  voca>
tion,  whereby  we  glorify  God,  adorn  our  profession,  and  win  others  unto  the  liking
of  it.  Hence  the  apostle,  praying  the  Ephesians  to  walk  worthy  of  their  high
calling,  teacheth  them  that  this  they  shall  do  if  they  put  on  humbleness  of  mind,
meekness,  longsuffering,  &o.  (Eph.  iv.  2),  for  otherwise,  if  men  partake  not  in  these
graces,  the  unity  of  the  spirit  in  the  bond  of  peace  cannot  long  last  undissolved.
in.  This  meekness  must  be  showed  to  all  men — believers,  unbelievers,  friends,
enemies,  the  better  and  the  worse,  which  is  a  special  point  not  to  be  neglected,^
because  it  is  the  ground  of  the  verses  following.  (T.  Taylor,  D.D.)  The
might  of  meekness: — Conversing  the  other  day  with  a  friend  on  some  point  of
domestic  difficulty,  it  was  replied  by  the  latter,  "  Should  I  give  up  in  that  way,
and  be  as  meek  as  a  lamb,  I  should  be  good  for  just  nothing  at  all."  "  No,"  I
answered,  "  there  is  nothing  mightier  than  meekness."  This  sentiment,  which,  at
the  time,  flashed  upon  my  mind  like  a  gleam  of  new  truth,  I  have  found,  by  subse>
quent  reflection,  to  rest  on  a  broad  basis.  I.  In  the  first  place,  meekness  involves
THE  LABOEST  SELF-CONTBOL.  1.  Mcckuess  Is  uot  mental  indolence.  A  person  may
be  too  lazy  to  resent  a  wrong,  too  intellectually  lazy — ^like  some  big  house-dog  in
the  fanner's  kitchen,  submitting  with  marvellous  resignation  to  be  kicked  or  piSled
by  the  ears,  if  only  he  may  be  left  in  his  snug,  warm  corner,  and  meeting  it  all
with  a  most  humble  and  beseeching  whine.  If  this  were  meekness,  we  would  not
hesitate  to  pronounce  it  the  weakest  thing  on  earth.  2.  It  is  not  impassibility.
Some  are  natural  stoics.  In  some  respects  they  are  fortunate  beings ;  utter  strangers
to  that  red-hot  sense  of  injustice  which  sometimes  bursts  forth  in  words  of  heaven*
lit  prophecy — sometimes  in  words  set  on  fire  of  hell.  They  escape  that  terrible
knowledge — the  soul's  capacity  to  suffer.  And  yet,  doubtless,  they  are  not  to  be
envied ;  for  the  words  of  the  poet  are  equally  true  when  reversed:—

*'  Chords  that  vibrate  sweetest  pleasure
Thrill  the  deepest  notes  of  woe."

8.  Nor  Is  It  dolness  of  perception.  Some  seem  not  to  know  when  they  are  ill*
treated.  They  are  ignorant  of  the  proprieties  of  life,  of  what  is  due  to  position ;
there  is  an  entire  lack  of  native  dignity  of  character.  True  meekness,  on  the  con-
trary,  achieves  its  highest  triumphs  where  the  perceptions  are  most  quick-sighted,
the  sensibilities  keenest,  and  the  mind  most  active  and  vigorous  in  all  its  operations.
It  is  just  here  that  we  can  best  discern  its  true  nature,  its  inherent  might,  the
hiding  of  its  power.  So  far  from  being  a  mere  passivity,  it  is  activity  in  its  highest
form.  It  is  self-control  in  its  broadest  sway  when  girding  itself  in  its  full  strength.
It  is  victory  over  all  that  is  mightiest  in  pride  and  passion,  attained  by  the  full
and  conjoint  action  of  all  the  nobler  powers  of  the  soul.  It  is  man  in  his
sovereignty,  ruling  within  the  realm  of  his  spirit,  as  the  prince-subject  of  Jehovah.
Its  highest  embodiment  was  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  II.  Again,  meekness  is  miohtt
ra  God's  might.  He  loves  the  meek.  They  are  the  most  like  His  Son — resembling
Him  in  just  that  quahty  which  was  His  most  prominent  characteristic.  StUl
again,  the  might  of  meekness  is  seen  in  its  power  to  secure  happiness.  Life  is  a
perpetual  wild  chase  after  happiness.  Who  are  winners?  Pride?  Passion?
Ambition  ?  Wealth  ?  "  Nay,  nay,  not  yet,"  they  each  exclaim  as  they  rush  by,
dripping  with  sweat ;  and  catching  breath,  they  add,  "  but  the  goal  is  just  ahead,
and  then  the  prize  is  ours."  The  result  is  "  even  as  when  a  hungry  man  dreameth,
and  behold  he  eateth ;  but  he  awaketh,  and  his  soul  is  empty."  Yet,  far  off,  away
from  the  bustling  and  anxious  crowd,  I  behold  the  meek  man  already  inheriting  the
earth,  in  sweet  fruition  of  the  world  that  now  is,  and  in  joyous  expectancy  of  that
which  is  to  come.  The  reign  of  passion  is  over.  He  has  learned  to  recognisQ,  in
all  events  that  affect  him,  not  accidents,  but  Providence ;  not  a  stern  anfl  jBllftd  fate,


i  ^-


176  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  la

bot  a  kind  and  wise  Father ;  not  the  present  means  and  instrtiments  merely,  bnt
the  aim  of  final  result.  The  peace  of  God  that  passeth  understanding  keeps  his
heart.  The  whole  world  has  become  a  Beulah  ;  and  while  meekly  performing  its
duties,  its  eye  catches  sweet  glimpses  of  the  far-off  land ;  his  heart  leaps  betimes
at  snatches  of  the  distant  music,  and  his  temples  are  fanned,  ever  and  anon,  by  the
refreshing  breezes  that  are  wafted  thitherward.  He  has  an  antepast  of  heaven  ;  a
joyous  earnest  of  his  inheritance.  Here,  then,  I  say,  is  might.  He  gains  what
worldlings  of  every  class  toil  and  tug  for,  but  always  lose ;  or,  as  Cicero  says,
respecting  another  point,  "  They  desire  it,  he  has  it."  Once  more :  there  is  nothing
like  meekness  to  overcome  the  resistance  of  passion  and  pride  in  others.  And
yet  it  is  just  here  that  the  worldly-wise  despise  it  most.  I  am  assailed.  I  erect
myself  in  proud  might.  I  bid  defiance  to  wrath.  I  mock  at  the  deadliest  threats
of  my  enemy.  I  dare  him  to  do  his  worst.  Like  AchiUes  before  Agamemnon,  I
fling  at  his  feet  the  oath-pledge  of  battle.  By  all  that  is  most  fearful  I  swear  to
stand  him  foot  to  foot  to  the  death.  And  what  is  the  result  of  all  this  ?  Why,
Greek  meets  Greek.  Words  fly  back  to  words,  wrath  flashes  to  wrath,  threats  are
hurled  to  threats,  and  pride  towers  aloft  to  pride.  But  what  boots  it  all  ?  You
turn  from  the  encounter,  leaving  your  enemy  never  stouter  in  his  resistance,  while
the  tiger  passions  tear  your  own  bosom,  or  react  in  paroxysms  of  futile  tears.  Now,
what  has  meekness  accomplished  in  just  such  cases?  Silenced  the  proud  words  of
the  enemy ;  extinguished  his  raging  wrath ;  roused  up  the  elements  of  his  better
nature,  and  turned  them  against  himself.  It  has  completely  subdued  him ;  and
the  proud  Greek  has  sat  at  the  feet  of  bis  foe  a  weeping  chUd.  I  say,  then,  let
passion  exhaust  all  its  resources — let  it  tower  to  very  sublimity,  let  it  be  a  fit
subject  for  an  epic,  let  a  Homer  immortalise  its  deeds.  Meekness  is  mightier ;  it
will  accomplish  what  passion  shall  labour  for  in  vain.  Meeknesa : — Meekness  is  the
quality  which  heathenism  everywhere  has  scouted  as  meanspiritedness,  but  which
tile  gospel  of  Christ  has  canonised.  It  is  that  one  condition  of  soul  which,  springing
oat  of  genuine  penitence  for  sin,  a  profound  sense  of  personal  unworthiness,  and  a
profound  appreciation  of  the  Divine  mercy,  predisposes  a  man  to  forbearance  under
provocation  and  forgiveness  for  injury.  It  has  nothing  in  common  with  pusilla-
nimity, but  it  has  its  origin  in  the  religious  experience  which  we  call  conversion ;  for
it  is  when  the  sap  root  of  human  pride  is  broken  by  a  thorough  crushing  down  of
the  soul  under  the  discovery  of  its  sinfulness  before  God ;  it  is  when  the  strong
man,  reduced  to  cry  for  mercy  at  the  hands  of  Infinite  Justice,  is  fain  to  receive
forgiveness,  and  hope,  and  peace  with  God  as  vmmerited  gifts  from  the  very  grace
of  his  Bedeemer;  it  is  then,  and  through  that  religious  change,  that  the  heart
grows  susceptible  of  true  meekness.  Then  humbleness  enters — humbleness,  the
child  of  penitence,  and  mild  charity  too,  for  all  men,  and  a  tender  feeling — a  feeling
that  one  who  has  himself  done  so  much  evil  in  his  day  ought  to  bear  with  the  evil-
doing  of  other  men,  that  one  who  owes  everything  to  mercy  should  be,  above  all
things,  merciful.  (J.  0,  Dykes,  D.D.)  Meekness : — A  little  lad  on  being  asked,
"What  is  meekness?"  repUed,  "Mary  is  meekness."  "Mary?"  "Yes,  my
sister  Mary,  for  she  always  gives  smooth  answers  to  rough  questions."

Ver.  3.  We  ourselves  also  were  sometimes  foolish. — The  transforming  power  of
the  gospel : — I.  What  evbn  Chbistians  webe.  Their  lives  and  characters  were
distinguished  by — 1.  Folly ;  2.  Disobedience ;  3.  Liability  to  deception ;  4.
Sensuality ;  5.  Passion ;  6.  Unloveliness ;  7.  Unbrotherliness.  II.  What  Chbistians
BECOME.  Their  lives  display — 1.  Humility  of  spirit;  2.  Gentleness  in  action;
8.  Truthfulness  in  word.  (F.  Wagstaff.)  Before  conversion  and  after: —
This  verse  layeth  down  a  weighty  reason  whereby  our  apostle  would  bow
and  bend  the  minds  of  Christian  men  to  the  practice  of  the  former  virtues,
namely,  of  equity,  lenity,  long-suffering,  and  meekness  towards  all  men,
foes  as  well  as  friends,  yea,  the  worst  as  well  as  the  best.  The  reason  is
drawn  from  the  consideration  of  the  present  condition  of  converted  Christians,
compared  with  that  estate  they  were  in  before  their  conversion  and  calling
to  the  faith,  to  which  purpose  he  is  very  large  in  describing.  1.  Our  estate  of
corruption  (ver.  3).  2.  Our  estate  after  conversion  (vers.  4-6),  from  both  which
the  apostle  thus  concluded  the  same  thing  thus :  First,  the  former ;  if  we  our-
■elves  were  in  times  past  in  the  self-same  condition,  which  other  men  are  not
called  out  of,  then  ought  we  to  be  meek  and  merciful  even  to  thoxe  who  are
not  yet  converted.  But  we  ourselves  were  in  times  past  as  they  are  ;  we  lay  in  the
nme  puddle  of  corruption,  were  hewn  out  of  the  same  pit,  and  though  we  may


OHAP.  m.]  TITUS.  177

think  we  were  never  so  graceless,  as  we  see  some  others,  yet  we  cannot  charge
them  80  deeply  for  time  present,  hot  they  may  come  over  ns  with  the  same  in  timeg
past,  as  this  third  verse  will  teach  as,  and  therefore  we  onght  to  show  all  lenity  and
meekness  to  all  men.  Secondly,  from  our  latter  condition  of  conversion,  thus  our
apostle  frameth  his  reason.  If  God  have  been  so  bountiful  a  benefactor  unto  ns,  when
we  were  so  unworthy,  as  the  former  verse  describeth,  that  His  mere  and  alone  mercy
saved  us ;  then  must  we  in  imitation  of  our  heavenly  Father  do  the  like  to  oar
brethren.  But  God  hath  done  thus  (vers.  4, 5)  so  as  from  both  we  may  well  reason
that  a  new  condition  requireth  a  new  conversation;  new  men  must  have  new
manners ;  we  being  Christians  may  not  carry  ourselves  so  crookedly  as  in  times
past,  nor  sc  roughly  towards  those  who  now  do  the  same  things  which  then  we  did,
considering  our  own  selves.  (T.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Tlie  difference  between  the
present  and  the  past  of  life: — 1.  The  consideration  of  the  common  condition
is  a  notable  ground  of  meekness  and  moderation  towards  those  who  are  yet
uncalled  to  the  faith.  For — (1)  Whereas  pride  maketh  the  heart  to  swell  against
the  brother,  Euid  is  a  root  whence  these  bitter  fruits  arise,  this  consideration
pulleth  those  peacock  feathers,  and  humbleth  the  heart,  so  as  when  it  can  find
no  other  reason  of  forbearance,  here  it  never  wanteth  a  most  effectual  one.  2.
This  consideration  not  only  subdueth  that  violent  affection  of  pride,  but  worketh
the  heart  to  such  affections  as  not  only  beseem  ourselves  but  befit  the  offender,  and
these  are  two — (1)  For  time  present  pity  and  compassion.  (2)  Hope  for  time  to
come.  3.  Whosoever  are  called  unto  the  faith  have  experience  of  a  doable  estate
in  themselves,  one  in  time  past,  another  for  the  present,  the  one  of  nature,  the
other  of  grace.  Our  apostle  afSrmeth  it  of  all  believers,  of  which  there  is  none
but  he  had  his  once,  his  time  past,  in  regard  of  which  he  may  now  be  said  to  be
changed  into  another  man  (Bom.  vii.  5,  6).  The  time  was  when  the  Bomans  were
in  the  fiesh,  when  sinful  motions  had  force  in  them  onto  death ;  and  there  was  an
aftertime  when  they  were  delivered  from  the  law,  and  served  God  not  in  the  old-
ness  of  the  letter,  but  in  the  newness  of  spirit  (Eph.  ii.  3).  Among  whom  the
Gentiles  we  believers  had  our  conversation  in  time  past.  '•  Wherein  ye  walked
also  once,  but  now,"  &c.  (1  Cor.  vi.  11).  "  And  such  were  some  of  you,  but  ye  are
washed."  And  good  reason  there  is  that  he  that  is  now  beloved  should  see  that
once  he  was  not  beloved,  and  that  he  who  now  is  in  the  state  of  grace  should
see  that  he  was  once  in  the  state  of  wrath  as  well  as  others,  which  will  cause  him
to  love  much ;  and  indeed  the  elect  could  not  be  elect,  nor  justified,  nor  washed,  if
they  were  always  the  children  of  God,  and  were  it  not  for  this  once,  and  time  past,
wherein  there  was  no  difference  between  them  and  the  reprobate,  but  only  in  God's
counsel  and  possibility  of  calling.  I  add,  farther,  that  the  converted  may  and  must
have  experience  of  this  change,  for  the  conversion  of  a  sinner  is  a  miracle  above
all  natural  wonders ;  and  therefore,  except  in  some  Jeremiah,  John  Baptist,  and
some  few  sanctified  from  the  womb,  is  no  such  insensible  thing  as  cannot  be  per-
ceived. It  is  no  such  natural  change  as  is  effected  by  insensible  degrees,  as  when
he  that  was  a  child  is  now  become  a  man  ;  but  a  supernatural  change  by  the  Spirit
of  grace,  such  as  when  a  man  is  bom  into  the  world,  or  when  a  blind  man  is
restored  to  his  sight,  or  rather  a  dead  man  unto  lite,  which  are  things  of  much  note
and  manifest  alteration,  and  that  of  the  whole  man.  Again,  faith  it  is  which  as  an
internal  instrument  purgeth  the  Augean  Stable,  and  purifieth  the  foul  cage  of  the
heart.  Now  this  we  may  know,  and  must  examine  whether  we  be  in  the  faith  or
no ;  know  ye  not  that  Christ  is  in  you,  unless  ye  be  reprobates.  "  Know  ye
not  that  ye  are  the  temple  of  God,  and  that  the  Spirit  of  God  dwelleth  in  you  ?  "
(1  Cor.  iii.  16).  "  Know  ye  that  ye  are  dead  to  sin,  but  are  alive  to  God  in  Jesus
Christ  our  Lord  "  (Rom.  vi.  11).  Labour  to  find  this  change  in  thyself  and  examine
whether  thoa  canst  put  difference  between  time  past  and  time  present,  for  otherwise
I  see  not  but  thou  must  set  thyself  down  without  comfort,  as  one  that  hath  no  sound
proof  of  thy  conversion.  Hence  may  many  a  one  learn  what  to  think  of  himself.
Some  profess  they  love  God  with  all  their  hearts  and  have  ever  so  done  since  they
can  remember ;  they  alwaj  s  believed  in  Christ  and  never  doubted  but  they  were
ever  dear  unto  God.  But  all  this  is  nothing  but  a  deceitful  skinning  over  the  sores*
of  their  souls  with  peace,  peace,  whereas  the  case  that  was  ever  so  good  was  never
good  at  all ;  no,  if  thou  canst  not  remember  the  time  past,  when  thy  state  was
worse  than  nought,  I  can  never  be  persuaded  that  it  is  good  for  the  present.  Every
Christian  learn  hence — 1.  If  we  see  a  change  in  ourselves  or  others  to  bless  God
that  hath  made  this  sej^aration  (Rom.  vi.  17).  God  be  thanked  that  ve  were  such,
bat  now  ye  obey  the  form,  and  blessed  be  God  for  this  unspeakable  gift.     2.  Not  t«

12


178  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oHU.  m.

deem  of  men  as  they  were  once  in  time  past,  when  once  this  change  is  come,  the
Lord  esteemeth  of  men  according  to  the  present  grace  received,  and  never  casteth
them  in  the  teeth  with  that  they  were  in  time  past ;  and  why  shonld  we  upbraid
men  with  sins  or  infirmities  past,  which  the  Lord  hath  covered  7  Paul  accounted
not  James,  John,  Peter,  fishermen,  as  they  had  been  in  times  past,  but  highly
esteemed  of  them  as  apostles  of  Christ,  being  called  thereunto.  {Ibid.)  Fooli$h  :
— 1.  The  main  property  of  fools  and  silly  bodies  is  that  they  know  not  the
end  of  their  lives,  why  God  made  them  and  put  them  into  this  world ;  even  to
ask  many  men  why  God  did  inspire  the  breath  of  life  on  their  faces,  how  few
would  give  this  direct  answer,  that  by  glorifying  God  in  my  calling  I  might  be  led
to  a  better  life  hereafter.  Ask  many  a  man  concerning  heaven,  and  earth,  and  sea,
and  other  sensible  things,  and  they  will  give  some  sensible  answers,  as  that  the
earth  was  made  for  man  and  beast  to  live  upon ;  the  sea  for  fish  and  navigation  ;
the  air  for  man  and  beast  to  breathe  in  ;  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars  for  light,  heat,
and  comfort ;  the  beasts,  fishes,  fowls,  Ac,  for  man ;  but  why  thyself?  Fewest  would
say  for  God ;  but  if  they  speak  true,  some  for  themselves,  some  for  their  family,
some  for  their  pleasures,  some  for  wealth,  or  some  baser  end,  to  which  such  a  noble
creature  as  man  is  should  be  destinated.  2.  As  fools  live  for  the  present  time  if  they
can  get  meat,  drink,  clothes,  and  necessaries  for  the  present,  they  forecast
nothing  to  come ;  even  so  ungodly  men,  if  they  can  get  wealth,  and  lay  up  things
present  for  many  years  to  come,  they  dream  of  no  other  heaven,  they  forecast  no
day  of  death,  nor  judgment ;  but  oh,  fool,  what  if  thy  soul  be  taken  away  this  night  7
This  was  that  which  that  fool  thought  not  of  ;  and  as  of  their  own,  so  they  judge
of  all  other  men's  felicity  by  things  present,  into  which  folly  David  himself
was  sliding  when  he  confesseth  himself  as  ignorant  as  a  beast  in  this  point,
nntil  he  went  into  the  sanctuary.  3.  Fools  are  indocible  and  incorrigible;  bo
the  natural  man  put  him  to  school,  he  learneth  nothing  by  the  book  of  the
creatures,  nor  of  the  Creator  in  the  Scriptures.  Let  God  the  great  schoolmaster
whip  him,  and  bray  him  in  the  mortar  of  His  judgments.  He  is  a  fool  stiU,  he
leaveth  not  his  old  wonts.  4.  Fools  are  so  wise  in  their  own  conceits  as  they  will
abide  no  counsel ;  the  natural  man  is  wiser  in  his  own  eyes  than  seven  men  that  can
give  a  reason.  (Ibid.)  A  significant  contrast : — The  whole  sentence  is  in  form  a
contrast.  It  reminds  the  Cretans  of  what  they  had  been  in  their  unconverted  con-
dition. Against  that  it  sets  their  present  position  as  Christians.  It  grandly
magnifies  the  Divine  grace  which  had  made  tbem  to  differ.  Out  of  this  little
biographical  sketch  there  sprang  two  arguments  for  a  meek  behaviour.  In  the  first
place,  these  heathen  neighbours,  whose  abusive  attitude  is  so  irritating,  are  not
at  all  different  from  what  you  used  to  be.  Eecall  what  you  were  before  God's  grace
changed  you  :  precisely  such  as  they  are  to-day.  You  did  not  then  see  your  own
foulness — not  then,  before  the  light  came  ;  neither  do  they  see  theirs  now.  Yet  con-
template the  hateful  picture  1  What  is  pagan  life  7  1.  So  dark  on  religious  matters
as  to  possess  no  true  acquaintance  with  God  nor  any  just  apprehension  of  spiritual
truth  at  all.  2.  As  a  result  in  part  of  this  ignorance,  disobedient  in  practice  to  all
the  requirements  of  Divine  law.  3.  Deluded  indeed  and  misled  to  false  conceptions
of  duty  and  false  superstitions  in  worship.  4.  Worse  than  that,  enslaved  to  the
desire  for  enjoyment,  given  over  to  indulgence  in  what  seems  most  pleasant,  no
matter  how  immoral.  5.  Socially  leading  a  Ufe  too  selfish  to  be  either  just  or
generous  to  others,  cherisbing  rancour  against  one  another  for  imagined  slights  and
jealousy  on  account  of  superior  fortune.  Is  this  a  just  picture  of  the  natural  life  as
it  mirrors  itself  in  the  enlightened  Christian  conscience?  Sum  it  up  in  a  single
word  :  Are  not  such  men  repulsive  as  well  as  repellant — hateful  as  well  as  hating  ?
Yet  such  were  you.  By  the  recollection  of  your  former  state,  remembering  the  old
darkness  out  of  which  you  indeed  have  been  rescued  but  not  they,  bear  with  them
tenderly,  think  of  them  kindly  I  To  this  argument,  a  second  joins  itself :  Out  of
that  universal  degradation  of  unregenerate  nature,  how  is  it  that  you  have  been
rescued  ?  By  an  effort  of  your  own,  or  by  Another's  favour  ?  Nay ;  not  through
any  righteous  actions  or  meritorious  struggles  to  grow  better,  as  you  very  well  know ;
but  through  the  mere  mercy  and  cleansing  and  renewing  power  of  •'  God  our
Saviour  "  ;  by  a  salvation  which  came  to  you  unsought,  found  you  helpless,  surprised
you  with  its  benefits,  and  by  its  own  virtue  made  new  men  of  you  in  that  day  when
you  turned  from  your  idols  to  become  through  Jesus  Christ  the  heirs  of  life  eternal  I
Saved  thus  by  the  sheer  philanthropy  of  Heaven,  have  you  none  for  your  unsaved
brothers  ?  Changed  by  Divine  mercy  from  a  state  like  theirs,  where  is  your  mercy
to  them  ?     They  are  as  you  were :  treat  them,  then,  as  God  treated  you  I     How  if


<n4*.  m.]  TITUS.  171

He  had  been  as  resentful  against  as,  as  qnick  to  take  offence  and  ready  to  strike?
Ah,  how  ill  it  becomes  a  Christian  to  speak  evil  of  others,  to  brawl,  to  give  back
word  for  word  and  blow  for  blow !  By  the  kindness  your  Saviour  has  returned  for
your  wrong,  show  to  your  still  wrongful  fellows  what  is  that  love  of  God  to  man
which  has  been  manifested  unto  you ;  that  they  too  may  be  won  to  taste  that  God
is  good  I  {J.  0.  Dykei,  D.D.)  Transforming  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit : — Many
years  ago  tiie  people  of  Paris  used  to  throw  out  ihe  offal  of  fish  and  other  garbage
into  the  streets  to  be  carted  away  as  useless,  but  a  clever  man  found  out  a  way  to
extract  from  this  filth  a  sweet  scent,  so  pleasant  and  good  that  the  Queen  on  her
throne  has  it  in  her  boudoir.  This  is  an  example  of  what  men  can  do  with  vile
materials ;  but  God  can  do  greater  and  mightier  things  with  man  than  this,  He  can
and  will  take  the  vilest  person  out  of  the  mire  and  slime  of  sin's  foul  gutter,  and
make  him  glorious  like  His  own  Son  by  the  transforming  power  of  the  Holy
Spirit.  {J.  Lawson.)  Disobedient. — Frowardness : — This  second  degree  of  corruption
of  mind  showeth  that  we  are  not  only  ignorant  but  froward  in  the  things  of  God,  and
such  as  will  not  be  persuaded,  as  the  word  in  the  original  sounded ;  and  this  is  nothing
else  but  a  perverse  disposition  which  fighteth  against  the  truth.  Which  a  httle
better  to  understand,  we  must  know  that  before  our  fall  the  mind  of  man  had  two
faculties  about  the  truth  of  God.  1.  The  knowledge  of  it  bo  far  as  was  meet.  2.
An  assent  approving  that  knowledge.  Instead  of  which  are  succeeded  two  contrary
corruptions  since  the  fall.  1.  Darkness  instead  of  that  light  of  knowledge.  2.
Frowardness  or  reasoning  against  it.  For  example  :  when  the  understanding  of  man,
unconverted,  conceiveth  something  of  that  we  deliver  out  of  the  Word,  whereas  it
should  assent  unto  the  law  that  it  is  good,  and  the  gospel  that  it  is  the  arm  of
God  unto  salvation,  the  wisdom  of  the  flesh  on  the  contrary,  it  becometh  enmity
to  all  this ;  it  can  find  evasions  to  shift  off  the  curse ;  it  can  covenant  with  hell  and
death.  And  for  the  gospel,  it  is  to  one  foolishness,  to  another  offence.  Paal'B
preaching  shall  be  counted  madness,  or  malice,  or  something  else  which  shall  ba
reason  and  warrant  enough  to  contemn  it.  (T.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Deceived. —
Various  kinds  of  deceived  persons : — L  First,  what  a  fearful  deceit  is  that  of  many
who  strengthen  themselves  in  their  sins,  sometimes  PurriNa  otv  all  toe  feab  of  God's
JOSTicB,  AND  oBowiNO  INTO  CONTEMPT  OF  His  JUDOUENTS ;  sometimes  absolving  them-
selves from  the  guilt  and  curse  of  sin  in  hope  of  impunity,  as  though  the  Lord
were  become  an  idle  essence,  who  hath  put  off  the  power  of  judging  the  world  and
revenging  the  wickedness  of  it.  Zepbaniah  noted  in  his  time  such  a  knot  of  ungodly
men  that  were  frozen  in  their  dregs ;  but  how  came  they  to  this  settledness  in
Bin?  "They  said  in  their  hearts.  Tush  1  the  Lord  will  do  neither  good  nor  evil."  And
did  this  sin  die  with  that  age  ?  U.  A  second  and  as  fearful  deceit  as  the  former  is
that  proud  CONCEIT  of  a  kind  of  inbbed  and  inhebent  biqhteousness  of  many  reputed
Christians,  but  indeed  of  such  as  wanting  Christ's  righteousness,  seek  to  sew  their
own  fig-leaves  together.  The  Pharisees  in  their  time  thanked  God  that  they  were
not  as  other  men ;  they  were  whole  and  needed  no  physician.  The  Laodiceans  took
themselves  to  be  rich  and  increased  and  stood  in  need  of  nothing,  but  were  deceived*
and  saw  not  themselves  in  a  true  glass,  which  would  have  showed  their  blindness  and
nakedness  and  poverty.  So  how  many  civil,  just-dealing,  and  harmless  men  every-
where are  there  at  this  day  who  overthrow  themselves  with  this  deceit,  which  ariseth
sometimes  by  measuring  themselves  with  themselves,  as  the  proud  preachers  of
Corinth  seemed  somewhat  comparing  themselves  with  themselves,  and  otherwhilea
comparing  themselves  with  others,  whom  they  take  greater  sinners  than  themselves
as  the  Pharisees  did ;  but  especially  through  ignorance,  or  a  dead  knowledge  of  ths
righteousness  of  the  law,  they  see  not  what  strict  righteousness  God  requireth,  not
their  own  corruption  boiling  within  them,  and  so  neglect  all  the  sense  of  their
secret  lusts  rising  up  against  the  love  of  God  or  man  and  that  incessantly  in  them  f
ni.  A  third  sort  of  men  as  far  deceived  as  the  former  are  secube  peesons,  wh»
being  baptized  into  the  name  of  Christ  as  yet  never  came  unto  Him,  but  plod  on  in
all  dirty  and  sinful  ways  with  many  pretences  underpropping  themselves,  but  never
examining  duly  whether  they  be  right  or  no.  1.  Superstitious  persons  who  take  up
a  voluntary  religion  which  hath  some  show  of  wisdom  and  humbleness  of  mind ;
worship  God  they  think  they  do,  but  it  is  uncommanded ;  devout  they  are,  but
resist  the  truth  as  those  devout  women  which  resisteth  Paul.  2.  General  or
Catholic  Protestants  of  aU,  any,  or  no  reUgion,  these  content  themselves  with  the
Jews  to  say,  "  the  temple,  the  temple,  the  covenant,  Abraham's  seed,"  ifec,  so  theu
find  a  religion  established,  and  they  love  it  because  it  is  crowned  and  bringeth  ia
abundance  of  property  with  it.    3.  A  rabble  of  idle  Protestants  whose  carnal  heartt


180  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m.

turn  the  grace  of  God  into  wantonness.  4.  The  f  earth  sort  may  well  carry  the  title  of
crafty  Christians,  as  also  of  free-will  Protestants,  who  for  the  present  walk  in  a
secure  path  and  will  not  yet  be  acquainted  with  repentance  for  their  sin  they  think.
6.  The  fifth  sort  of  secure  persons  may  be  called  sensible  Protestants,  who  by
outward  things  judge  themselves  high  in  God's  books  ;  and  many,  both  rich  and
poor,  tread  in  this  path.  Thus  David  observed  of  wicked  rich  men ;  their  houses
were  peaceable  without  fear,  and  because  they  are  not  in  aflOiction  like  other  men,
pride  compasseth  them  as  a  chain ;  they  seek  not  after  God,  nor  sound  and  settled
peace  in  Him,  but  httle  know  they  the  end  of  that  fat  pasture.  He  learned  at  the
sanctuary  ^at  they  were  lifted  up  above  other,  as  felons  on  the  ladder,  to  come
down  with  a  greater  mischief  and  breakneck.  But  more  marvellous  it  is  that
corrections  and  afflictions  should  become  a  pillow  for  security  in  many,  which  are
God's  spurs  in  the  flank  of  the  godly  to  prick  them  up,  and  rouse  them  from  their
drowsiness ;  and  yet  many  determine  hence,  and  conclude  without  further  ground,
the  Lord's  love  towards  them,  because  of  long  and  durable  afflictions,  of  which
they  could  never  come  to  make  good  use,  nor  take  any  profit  by  them,  whom  God
loveth,  say  they,  He  chasteneth.  And  we  are  judged  of  the  Lord,  that  we  should
not  be  condemned  of  the  world,  and  when  they  are  exceeding  crossed  in  the  world,
and  indeed  cursed  in  their  counsel  and  attempts,  they  thank  God  they  have  their
punishment  here  in  this  life  and  so  secure  themselves  from  all  future  pains.  But
this  is  but  a  guile  and  stratagem  of  Satan  to  cast  his  poison  into  the  Lord's  cup,  and
bane  and  destroy  men  with  that  which  might  be  a  special  mean  of  their  good,  even
a  special  provocation  to  make  them  seek  reconciliation  with  God  in  Jesus  Christ.
IV.  The  fourth  and  last  sort  of  men  who  are  deceived  and  wander  out  of  the  good
way  are  some  that  seem  to  themselves  and  othebs  to  be  very  good  Christians,  at
LEAST  KONE  OF  THE  WORST,  and  yet  many  of  them  little  better  than  some  of  the  former.
And  these  are  of  two  sorts ;  some  are  deceived  in  regard  of  their  sins,  others  in
regard  of  their  graces  or  virtues.  1.  Of  the  former  sort.  There  be  some  who,
because  they  are  not  carried  to  such  sins  as  they  see  others,  they  conclude  presently
that  they  are  in  the  right  way  to  heaven,  whereas  there  may  be  a  work  of  the  Word
and  Spirit  forcible  against  many  sins,  where  there  is  no  saving  grace  in  the  soul.
2.  The  latter  sort  are  they  that  deceive  themselves  in  turning  their  eyes  from  their
sins  to  some  virtues  or  graces  which  they  find  in  their  souls.  Hence  have  we  men
that  can  be  dihgent  in  hearing  the  Word,  and  that  gladly  with  Herod,  and  think
that  enough  to  dispense  with  their  holding  of  their  Herodias,  some  sweet  sin  or
other.  Others  can  rejoice  and  be  affected  as  we  have  known  soft-hearted
Protestants,  that  could  melt  at  sermons  into  tears  with  great  affection,  and  yet  have
made  little  conscience  of  their  ways,  but  not  mortifying  the  deeds  of  the  flesh,  have
yielded  to  their  lusts  the  reins  in  all  liberty.  Others  can  receive  the  Word,  talk  of
it,  yield  a  seemly  obedience  unto  it ;  any  man  would  say  they  were  surely  good
Christians,  yet  as  bad  ground  they  give  it  not  depth  enough  ;  they  give  it  the  under-
standing and  some  affection,  but  the  will  and  the  whole  joy  is  not  carried  unto  it.
If  they  talk  of  it,  it  is  but  as  such  as  only  have  tasted  it  with  their  tongues,  as  cooks
do  their  services,  but  they  have  not  filled  their  belly  with  it,  as  they  for  whom  it  is
prepared.  Their  sightly  obedience  is  like  Herod's,  who  did  many  things  because
John  was  a  good  man.  In  a  word,  they  can  be  reverent  and  hberal  to  ministers,
kind  to  professors,  forward  in  good  motions,  can  lend  their  hands  or  purses  to  help
the  godly  out  of  trouble,  and  yet  in  all  these  commendable  duties  are  like  a  deceitful
bow,  which  being  cast  and  crooked,  let  the  eye  aim  never  so  right  at  the  mark,  it
casteth  it  quite  besides  all  the  way ;  even  all  these,  proceeding  from  deep  hypocrisy,
and  done  not  purely,  but  sinister  respects  furthering  them,  deceive  the  soul  and  keep
it  far  from  the  happiness  of  it.  (Ibid.)  Serving  divers  lusts  and  pleasures. —
Lusts  and  pleasures : — Sins  are  called  lusts  because  they  be  indeed  so  many  inordinate
desires  against  the  commandment.  And  pleasures,  because  of  the  imagination  of
them  that  commit  sin,  being  carried  away  with  the  present  pleasure  and  sweetness
of  them.  And  diverse  pleasures — 1.  Because  they  are  many  in  themselves,  and
tiiough  every  man  yield  not  service  to  every  one,  yet  some  serve  this,  and  some  that,
and  every  wicked  man  some.  Samson  will  be  slave  to  his  Delilah,  in  the  lust  of
the  flesh  and  uncleanness  ;  Nabal  to  his  wealth,  in  the  lust  of  the  eye  ;  H«rod  to
his  vainglory,  in  the  lust  of  pride  of  life.  2.  Because  they  diversely  carry  men,
even  as  a  man  in  the  sea  is  carried  backward  and  forward  and  hurried  with
divers  waves,  for  there  is  no  stability  nor  settledness  but  in  the  fear  of  God.  The
wicked  are  like  the  raging  sea,  and  there  is  no  peace  to  them,  saith  the  Lord  ;  but  as
■laves  having  served  one  last,  they  must  presently  be  at  the  call  and  command  of


OHAP.  m.]  TITUS,  181

another,  and  if  it  command  they  mast  obey,  althoagh  it  call  to  the  clean  contrary
course.      (Ibid.)         The  slavery  of  tin: — What  slavery  is  like  the  slavery  of
Bin  f    In  every  other  case  there  is  hope ;  there  are  lulls,  at  least,  and  intervals  of
anguish ;  there  are  alleviations,  though  perhaps  they  may  be  few  and  rare ;  there  is
patience,  there  is  prayer  ;  there  may  be  the  comfort  of  the  cherished  Spirit  of  Qod
m  the  inner  heart ;  there  is  death,  in  which  the  consummation  of  earthly  tyranny
vorks  its  own  cure,  and  the  slave  is  free  for  ever ;  but  in  the  slavery  of  sin  tiiere  is
no  hope,  no  lull,  no  check,  no  flight,  no  patience,  no  prayer,  no  inward  peace  of  a
religious  spirit  counterbalancing  the  outward  misery  of  the  fettered  limbs ;  and  dea^h,
the  limit  of  the  one  slavery,  is  but  the  terrible  "  beginning  of  the  end  "  of  the  other ;
when  sin,  which  has  been  allowed  to  rule  in  the  heart  and  members  during  life,
declares  itself  visibly  and  unmistakably  to  be  the  very  tyrant  of  souls  himself,  the
Prince  of  Darkness,  to  whose  sway  his  slave  is  consigned  to  all  eternity.     {Bp.
Moberly.)        Living  In  malice  and  envy,  hateful,  and  hating  one  another. — ^L
First,  TO  DISTINGUISH  THE  woBDS.    The  £irst  of  them,  malice,  is  an  evil  affection  of
the  heart,  which  properly  desireth  the  hurt  of  our  neighbonr  and  rejoiceth  in  his
fall.    Envy  is  a  contrary  affection,  but  as  wicked,  for  it  grieveth  at  the  neighbour's
good,  and  fretteth  itself  at  his  prosperous  and  fortunate  success  in  anything.
Hateful  may  to  good  purpose  be  taken  either  actively,  as  it  is  read,  namely  for  such
as  are  in  such  extremity  of  wickedness,  as  they  in  every  way  are  abominable
creatures  in  themselves ;  or  else  passively,  and  so  may  be  read  hated,  that  is,  justly
execrable  and  odious  unto  others,  both  God  and  men.    And  hating  one  another,  as
full  of  poison  and  venomous  hatred  towards  others  as  they  could  be  unto  us,  requit-
ing like  for  like,  all  which,  although  they  show  a  most  godless  and  comfortless  con-
dition,  yet  we  lived  in  this  graceless  course,  that  is,  passed  our  days,  or  at  least  a
great  part  of  them  in  time  past,  before  we  came  to  know  the  grace  of  God.    II.  Now
this  being  the  estate  of  every  natural  man,  that  his  whole  conversation  is  mon-
strously depraved,  so  as  he  spendeth  his  days  and  consumeth  his  time  in  malice,
envy,  hatred,  and  such  hateful  courses,  it  may  let  many  a  man  see  how  XjIttle  thbt
ABE  escaped  from  THE  FiLTHiNEss  OF  NATORE.  For — 1.  How  do  the  livcs  of  most  men
show  that  the  spirit  which  lusteth  after  envy  ruleth  them  7  and  how  doth  that  bitter
root  of  malice  and  hatred  shoot  forth  buds  and  blossoms  at  all  seasons  ?    (1)  In
affection,  when  as  men  grieve  at  the  good  and  greatness  of  another,  and  cannot
look  opon  the  prosperity  of  a  man  whom  they  wish  not  so  well  unto,  but  with  an  evil
eye,  and  the  more  they  look  upon  it,  the  sorer  still  groweth  their  eye,  accounting
themselves  after  a  sort  wronged  by  him,  if  they  cannot  attain  to  his  estate.     (2)  In
men's  speeches,  how  doth  Satan  tip  many  men's  tongues  and  set  them  on  fire  with
all  manner  of  malicious  and  murdering  speeches  ?     What  is  more  common  speech
than  detraction  and  impairing  from  the  just  praise  of  men?     (3)  In  the  actions  of
life,  what  a  cloud  of  frivolous  suits,  and  yet  fiery  enough,  witness  the  malice  and
envy  of  men's  hearts.  If  a  man's  beast  look  but  over  another  man's  hedge,  and  so  make
but  offer  of  a  trespass,  or  any  other  such  trivial  colour  is  sufficient  to  fire  the  gun-
powder within,  and  to  carry  the  controversy  with  such  violence,  as  one  must  yield
or  both  be  blown  up.    But  the  most  fearful  and  wretched  work  of  this  inbred
corruption  is  most  apparent  in  the  pursuit  of  good  men,  because  they  are  good ;
for  who,  be  he  never  so  good,  can  stand  before  envy,  which  feedeth  even  upon  virtue
and  goodness  itself?    2.  This  must  teach  us  that  profess  ourselves  to  be  the
Lord's,  to  abhor  all  the  sins  of  this  suit,  and  to  banish  such  filthy  fruits  of  the
flesh,  which  God  giveth  them  up  unto  who  are  of  a  reprobate  mind ;  and  have
nothing  to  do  with  such  wicked  inmates,  which  are  ever  plotting  to  set  the  whole
tenement  on  fire,  and  which  bring  rottenness  into  their  own  bones  and  bowels.     As
well  said  a  godly  man  of  Cain,  he  had  half  killed  and  consumed  himself  with  malice
before  he  killed  his  brother.    And  not  to  urge  the  multitude  of  reasons  which  to  this
purpose  offer  themselves,  I  will  only  name  those  iwo  which  are  couched  in  the
verse.     (1)  Because  that  we  profess  that  we  were  such  in  times  past,  but  now  are
begotten  unto  God,  which  were  it  not  a  forcible  reason,  the  apostle  would  not  s«
often  beat  upon  it  (Col.  iii.  8 ;  1  Cor.  v.  8  ;  James  i.  18).     (2)  These  hateful  sins
make  us  justly  odious — (a)  To  God  (Prov.  xiv.  '62).     The  wicked  is  cast  away  for
his  malice   loth  root  and  fruit,     (b)  To  man,  in  that  they  wage  battle  against
Christian  love,  \\  hich  is  the  preservative  of  all  society.     3.  Lastly,  let  every  one
learn  timely  to  take  in  hand  this  crooked  nature  before  he  be  accustomed  to  evil ;
for  else  as  hardly  as  a  blackamoor  changeth  his  skin  shalt  thou  become  changed
when  wicked  nature   and  worse  custom   bave  both  barred   thy  repentance   and
bound  thy  ains  faster  upon  thee.     And  because  much  of  this  folly  is  bound  up  ia


IM  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m

the  hearts  of  children  and  servanta,  lei  masters  and  fathers  seek  seasonably  to
drive  it  oat ;  fathers  especially,  beoaase  they  helped  their  children  into  it,  mast  by
Christian  instruction,  godly  example,  and  the  rod  of  correction,  laboar  to  help
them  oat,  and  thus  do  their  best  to  make  their  children  a  part  of  amend£
2uinglias  calleth  this  corruption  the  disease  of  nature.  And  herein  it  fitly
resembleth  the  diseases  of  the  body,  the  which  the  longer  they  continue  the  more
incurable  they  are ;  and  if  they  be  let  go  too  long  they  bring  certain  death ;  %nd
therefore  let  parents  and  masters,  many  of  whom  are  careful  enough  to  prevent  and
seek  out  for  help  against  the  diseases  which  threaten  the  bodily  death  of  their
ohildren  and  servants,  take  up  some  care  to  remove  that  everlasting  death  which
this  evil  threateneth,  and  will  certainly  bring  if  in  due  season  it  be  not  repressed.
Teach  thy  child  and  train  him  in  the  Scriptures  from  a  child  ;  teach  thy  servant
the  trade  of  Christianity  and  godliness,  for  thou  art  no  less  bound  to  deliver  him
the  principles  of  this  calling,  as  the  particular  to  which  he  is  bound.  Use  good
means  to  get  them  the  light  of  knowledge,  opposed  against  this  blindness  of  mind  ;
work  opon  their  wills  to  break  them  from  the  follies  and  vanities  of  youth,  opposed
to  this  rebellion  of  will ;  bring  them  at  least  to  outward  conformity  in  their  con-
versation, opposed  to  this  general  depravation  of  manners.  These  things  they  will
not  forget  in  their  age,  or  if  they  do,  the  peril  is  their  own ;  thou  hast  done  thy
duty.  One  thing  remember :  thy  servants,  thy  children  are  all  poisoned,  and  have
need  of  some  present  antidote.  (T.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Malice: — Malice  is  the  devil's
picture.  Lust  makes  men  brutish,  and  malice  makes  them  devilish.  Malice  is
mental  murder ;  you  may  kill  a  man  and  never  touch  him.  '•  Whosoever  hateth
his  brother  is  a  murderer."  (T.  Watson.)  Malice  self-destructive : — A  bee,  in
inflicting  a  sting,  it  is  said,  leaves  it  barbed  weapon  in  the  wound,  and,  being  thus
mutilated,  inevitably  dies.  The  bee  stings  itself  to  death  in  trying  to  sting  some
one  else.  Your  stinging  may  hurt  others  and  kill  yourself.  Malice  and  rancour :
— Malice,  in  Latin,  malitia,  from  malus,  bad,  signifies  the  very  essence  of  badness
lying  in  the  heart.  Bancour  is  only  continued  hatred;  the  former  requires  no
external  cause  to  provoke  it,  it  is  inherent  in  the  mind ;  the  latter  must  be  caused
by  some  personal  offence.  Malice  is  properly  the  love  of  evil  for  evil's  sake,  and  is,
therefore,  confined  to  no  number  or  quality  of  objects,  and  limited  to  no  circum-
stances; rancour,  as  it  depends  upon  external  objects  for  its  existence,  so  it  is  con-
fined to  such  objects  only  as  are  liable  to  cause  displeasure  or  anger.  Malice  will
impel  a  man  to  do  mischief  to  those  who  have  not  injured  him  ;  rancour  can  subsist
only  between  those  who  have  had  safficient  connection  to  be  at  varianoe.    (G.  Crabb.)

Vers.  4-7.    Bat  after  that  the  Mndnesa  and  love  of  God. — The  power  of  Ood^t

kindness : — In  the  incarnation  of  Christ,  His  life  and  miracles  and  mercies  and
divinest  teaching;  in  His  sacrificial  death  upon  the  cross.  His  resurrection  and
ascension,  we  have  that  manifestation  of  the  kindness  of  God  which  is  intended  and
calculated  to  lift  us  up  out  of  our  sins,  and  to  bring  us  into  His  own  most  holy
fellowship.  And  see  how  broad  and  far-reaching  this  kindness  is  ;  it  is  not  for  the
elect  nor  for  the  Church,  though  these  of  course  are  included,  but  for  man  as  such
— for  the  whole  human  family,  without  exception.  Wide  as  the  world  is  Thy  com-
mand, vast  as  eternity  Thy  love  I  We  know  something  of  this  power  of  kindness  to
subdue  the  evil  and  develop  the  good  even  between  man  and  man.  It  has  many  a
time  succeeded  where  everything  else  has  failed,  and  where  it  fails  we  know  of
nothing  else  Ukely  to  succeed.  Pinel,  the  celebrated  Frenchman,  was  the  first  to
introduce  into  Europe  a  more  humane  treatment  of  the  insane.  In  the  madhouse
at  Paris  there  had  been  confined  for  some  twenty  years  a  sea-captain,  furious  in  hui
madness,  ferocious  and  untameable.  Two  of  the  keepers  had  been  struck  dead  by  him
with  a  blow  from  his  manacled  hands.  He  was  chained  to  his  seat  when  Pinel
approached  him,  and  with  cheerful  face  and  kindly  manner,  said,  * '  Captain,  I  am
going  to  release  you  and  take  you  into  the  open  air."  The  mariner  laughed  out
right  and  said,  "  You  dare  not  do  it."  It  was  done,  the  poor  wretch  staggered  to
the  door  accompanied  by  Pinel,  and  lifting  up  his  eyes  to  the  blue  heavens  above,
a  sight  he  had  not  seen  for  twenty  years,  said,  as  the  tears  coursed  down  his  fsMie,
"  Oh,  how  beautiful  1 "  and  from  that  hour  became  perfectly  docile.  If  human
kindness  meets  such  returns,  shall  God's  love  go  unrequited,  no  echo  answering  to
the  Divine  from  the  human  ?  (J.  W.  Lance.)  St.  PauVs  gospel : — Note  at  the
•utset  two  points.  First,  the  central  words,  on  which  as  on  a  peg  the  whole  struc-
ture both  of  thought  and  of  expression  hangs,  is  the  proposition — "  He  saved  us."
Ia  what  sense  is  man  lost  7    In  what  must  his  salvation  consist  ?    What  ig  nece«*


CHAP,  m.]  TITUS.  16S

flary  in  order  to  it  ?  In  proportion  as  these  questions  are  answered  in  a  profound
or  in  a  shallow  way  will  be  our  appreciation  of  those  redemptive  actions  of  God —
the  mission  of  His  Son  and  the  outpouring  of  His  Spirit.  Next,  let  it  be  noted  that
in  this  saving  of  man  by  God  three  leadmg  points  have  to  be  attended  to :  The
source  or  origin  of  it ;  the  method  of  it ;  the  issues  and  effects  of  it.  What  we
have  to  ask  team  St.  Paul  is  a  distinct  reply  to  these  three  great  queries — 1.  Fbou

WHAT  SOUBCE  DID  God's  SAVINO  ACTIVITY  ON   OUB  BEHALF  TAKE  ITS  BISE  ?      2.   ThrOUgh

what  miethods  does  it  operate  upon  us  ?  3.  To  what  ultimate  issues  does  it  conduct
those  who  are  its  objects  ?  I.  The  answer  to  the  first  of  these  need  not  detain  us  long.
True,  it  is  a  point  of  primary  importance  for  the  immediate  purpose  of  the  writer  in
the  present  connection.  What  he  is  engaged  in  enforcing  upon  Cretan  Christians  is  a
meek  and  gentle  deportment  toward  their  heathen  neighbours.  With  this  design,
it  is  most  pertinent  to  observe  that  they  have  not  themselves  to  thank  for  being  in
a  better  state  than  others — saved  Christians  instead  of  lost  heathen ;  not  them-
selves, bat  God's  gratuitous  kindness.  It  is  worth  remarking  too  in  this  connection,
how  singularly  human  are  the  terms  selected  to  express  the  saving  love  of  God.
Two  terms  are  used.  The  one  is  God's  •'  kindliness  "  or  sweet  benignity,  like  that
gentle  friendUness  which  one  helpful  neighbour  may  show  to  another  in  distress.
The  other  is  God's  "  love  for  man,"  literally.  His  philanthropy,  or  such  special
benevolence  to  all  who  wear  the  human  form  as  might  be  looked  for  indeed  among
the  members  of  our  race  themselves,  but  which  it  startles  one  to  find  is  shared  in
by  Him  who  made  us.  These  curiously  human  phrases  are  chosen,  it  is  to  be  pre-
sumed, because  St.  Paul  would  have  us  imitate  in  our  dealings  with  one  another
God's  behaviour  towards  us.  In  substance,  however,  they  describe  just  the  same
merciful  and  compassionate  love  in  God  our  Saviour,  to  which  the  whole  New
Testament  traces  back  man's  salvation  as  to  its  prime  or  fontal  source.  It  is  quite  in
harmony  with  this  ascription  of  our  salvation  to  God's  love  as  its  fountain-heac ,
that,  throughout  his  account  of  the  process,  Paul  continues  to  make  God  the  sub
ject  of  his  sentence,  and  man  its  object.  All  along  the  line  God  appears  as  active
and  we  as  receptive  ;  He  is  the  doer  or  giver,  man  the  field  of  His  operations  and
the  recipient  of  His  benefits.  H.  We  pass  next  from  the  epiphany  of  God's  un-
merited kindness  in  the  advent  of  the  Saviour,  to  that  pbocess  by  which  individoais,
at  Crete  or  elsewhere,  become  pabtaeebs  in  His  salvation.  The  conversion  of  one
born  a  heathen  wears  a  conspicuous  character,  which  is  usually  awanting  to  cases
of  conversion  among  ourselves.  The  day  of  their  baptism,  on  which  they  sealed
their  conversion  to  the  Christian  faith,  had  marked  a  complete  revolution  in
«yery  department  of  their  life.  It  had  in  many  cases  severed  family  ties.  It  had
in  all  cases  made  them  marked  men  in  society.  It  had  brought  them  into  the  circle
of  a  strange  community,  and  affiliated  them  to  new  comrades  under  the  badges  of  a
foreign  religion.  Outwaxdly,  no  less  than  inwardly,  they  were  become  new  creatures;
the  old  had  passed  away  and  all  things  were  become  new.  The  font  at  which  they
sealed  their  vows  of  discipleship  had  proved  to  be  a  second  birth — the  starting-
point  for  a  changed  life.  Of  course  it  is  still  the  same  among  the  converts  who  are
won  at  our  mission  stations  abroad ;  and  we  require  to  keep  the  condition  of  an
infant  missionary  church  weU  in  mind  if  we  would  do  justice  to  such  language  as
Bt.  Paul  has  here  employed  to  describe  the  conversion  of  his  readers.  He  speaks  of
tiie  change  in  phrases  borrowed  both  from  its  outer  and  inner  side,  its  ritual  and  its
spiritual  elements.  Inwardly,  the  convert  was  saved  by  the  power  of  the  Holy
Spirit  regenerating  and  renewing  him.  Outwardly,  this  spiritual  second  birth
found  its  expressive  seal  in  the  bath  or  laver  of  holy  baptism.  Paul's  language
could  not  mislead  hi;  Cretan  readers.  But  it  was  admirably  adapted  to  revive  their
most  touching  recollections.  As  they  read  his  words,  each  one  of  them  seemed  to
himself  to  stand  once  more,  as  on  the  most  memorable  and  solemn  day  of  his  life,
beside  the  sacred  font.  Once  more  he  saw  himself  descend  into  the  laver  to  sym-
boUse  the  cleansing  of  his  conscience  from  idol  worship,  from  tmbridled  indulgence,
from  a  vain  conversation,  by  the  precious  death  and  burial  of  his  Lord.  By  thai
act  how  utterly  had  he  broken  once  for  all  with  his  earUer  life  and  its  polluted  asso-
ciations, leaving  them  behind  like  a  buried  past  1  Coming  up  afresh  to  commence
the  new  pure  career  of  a  Christian  disciple,  he  had  received  the  symbolic  white  robe
amid  the  congratulations  of  the  brotherhood,  who  thronged  around  to  welcome  the
new-bom  with  a  kiss  of  love — to  welcome  him  among  that  httle  band  who,  beneath
the  cross,  had  sworn  to  fight  the  devil  in  Jesus'  strength,  and,  if  need  arose,  to  shed
their  blood  for  Jesus'  name !  How  keenly,  as  aU  this  rushed  back  upon  the  Chris.
tian'B  recollection,  most  he  have  felt  that  a  change  so  wonderful  and  blessed  was


184  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohaf.  m.

the  Lord's  doing.  What  power,  save  God's,  coald  have  turned  backward  the  carrents
of  his  being,  reversing  the  influences  of  education  with  the  traditions  of  his  ancestry
and  the  usages  of  his  fatherland?  What  hand  bat  the  Ahnighty's  could  have
snatched  him  out  of  the  doomed  nations  over  which  Satan  reigned,  to  translate  him
into  that  kingdom  of  light — the  kingdom  of  God's  dear  Son?  Where  was  the
spiritual  force  that  could  have  opened  his  eyes,  cleansed  his  conscience,  quickened
his  heart,  and  made  a  new  man  out  of  the  old  one,  save  that  Divine  Spirit  whose
advent  at  Pentecost  had  been  the  birthday  of  a  new  era  for  the  human  family  ?  The
grateful  praise  which  could  not  fail  to  mount  to  the  lips  at  such  a  recollection,  was
a  doxology  to  the  Triune  God,  into  whose  name  he  had  been  baptized :  to  the
Father  unseen,  eternal  fountain-head  of  mercy ;  to  the  Incarnate  Son,  sole  channel
for  its  manifestation  to  guilty  men ;  to  the  Holy  Ghost,  who,  like  a  stream  of  life,
had  been  plentifvdly  poured  forth  from  the  Father,  through  the  Son,  to  be  the
effectual  giver  of  life  in  sinful  souls  1    III.  Consider,  in  the  last  place,  whitheb  thi»

8AVZNO  ACTIVITTr  ON  THE  PABT  OF  THE  GoDHEAD  IS  CABRTINO  SUCH  AS  8UBBENDEB  THEU-

SELVES  TO  IT.  What  is  to  be  the  outcome  of  His  redemptive  undertaking?  In  this  alone,
that  the  sinner  is  justified  freely  by  His  grace  ?  Is  the  release  of  the  guilty  from
condemnation  and  penalty  the  issue  of  all  that  God  has  done  in  His  kindness  ?  No ;
but  that,  "  having  been  justified,  we  should  be  made  heirs."  Birth  of  the  Divine
Spirit  involves  sonship  to  God  Himself.  The  privilege  of  sons  is  to  inherit;
"  heirs,"  therefore,  of  "  life  eternal."  The  word  is  one  which  opens,  as  it  were,  a
door  into  heaven.  It  is  true  that  it  is  not  yet  apparent  what  the  children  of  God
shall  hereafter  be,  for  purity,  for  freedom,  for  wisdom,  for  felicity.  But  forth  from
that  opened  door,  how  there  streams  to  meet  us  a  radiance  of  the  unseeo  glory,
which  in  the  twilight  of  this  lifetime  dazzles  our  earthly  eyes!  For  that  undis-
covered heritage  of  the  saints  in  light  we  can  only  hope.  To  this  point,  therefore,
and  no  further,  does  the  Christian  gospel  conduct  its  disciple.  Here  for  the  present
it  leaves  him,  sitting  patient  and  expectant  by  the  gate  of  Paradise,  to  await,  with
steadfast  heart,  the  moment  that  shall  disclose  to  him  his  patrimony  of  bUss.
While  he  sits  and  waits,  shall  he  not  behave  himself  as  a  child  of  God,  and  strive  to
grow  more  meet  for  the  heritage  of  the  holy?  {J.  0.  Dykes,  D.D.)  God's  kind-
ness : — The  sun  that  shines  on  you  shall  set,  summer  streams  shall  freeze,  and
deepest  weUs  go  dry  ;  but  God's  love  is  a  stream  that  never  freezes,  a  fountain  that
never  fails,  a  sun  that  never  sets  in  night,  a  shield  that  never  breaks  in  fight.
God's  kindness  only  partially  seen  by  the  soul  .-—The  sun  appears  red  through  a  fog,
and  generally  red  at  rising  and  setting,  the  red  rays  having  a  great  momentum  which
gives  them  power  to  traverse  so  dense  an  atmosphere,  which  the  other  rays  have
not.  The  increased  quantity  of  atmosphere  which  oblique  rays  must  traverse,
loaded  with  the  mists  and  vapours  which  are  usually  formed  at  those  times,  pre-
vents the  other  rajs  from  reaching  us.  It  is  thus  that  but  a  few  of  the  rays  of
God's  love — like  the  red  rays — reach  the  soul.  Sin,  passion,  and  unbelief  surround
it  as  with  a  dense  atmosphere  of  mists  and  vapours ;  and,  though  the  beams  of
God's  love  are  poured  out  innumerable  as  the  sun's  rays,  they  are  lost  and  scattered,
and  few  of  them  shine  upon  the  soul.  (H.  G.  Salter.)  God's  love  incomparable  :
— If  an  angel  were  to  fly  swiftly  over  the  earth  on  a  summer  morning,  and  go  into
every  garden — the  king's,  the  rich  man's,  the  peasant's,  the  child's — and  were  to
bring  from  each  one  the  choicest,  loveliest,  sweetest  flower  that  blooms  in  each,  and
gather  them  all  in  one  cluster  in  his  radiant  hands,  what  a  beautiful  bouquet  it
would  be  1  And  if  an  angel  were  to  fly  swiftly  over  the  earth  into  every  sweet  and
holy  home,  into  every  spot  where  one  heart  yearns  over  another,  and  were  to  take
out  of  every  father's  heart,  and  every  mother's  heart,  and  out  of  every  heart  that
loves,  its  holiest  flower  of  affection,  and  gather  all  into  one  cluster,  what  a  blessed
love-garland  would  his  eyes  behold  1  What  a  holy  love  would  this  aggregation  of
all  earth's  loves  be  1  Yet  infinitely  sweeter  and  holier  than  this  grouping  of  all
earth's  holiest  affections  is  the  love  that  fills  the  heart  of  our  Father  in  heaven.
(John  R.  Miller.)  God's  love  to  men : — I  was  leaving  a  gentleman's  house  where
I  had  been  paying  a  visit,  said  a  minister  |of  the  gospel,  when  I  put  this  question
to  the  servant-maid  who  was  about  to  open  the  door :  "  My  friend,  do  you  love
God?  "  "  I  am  afraid  not,"  she  answered,  "  and  I  fear  I  never  shall."  "  Well,"  I
said,  ••  yoo  may  at  least  depend  on  this — it  is  certain  that  God  loves  you."  "  How
can  yon  possibly  tell  that?  "  asked  the  master  of  the  house,  who  was  going  down-
stairs wilJi  me.  "  This  is  the  first  time  you  have  ever  seen  this  woman ;  you  know
nothing  about  her  character.  You  cannot  tell  whether  she  attends  to  her  duties
properly  or  not."    "  Never  mind  about  that,"  I  said.    "  It  is  certain  that  God  lovet


esAF.  m.J  TITUS.  185

her,  and  you  too.  I  am  quite  sure  of  this,  because  God  has  told  us  that  His  love  to
U8  does  not  depend  on  what  we  are,  or  what  we  deserve.  The  Bible  tells  us,  *  God  so
loved  the  world  that  He  gave  His  only  begotten  Son'  to  die  for  it;  and  again  it  tells
ns,  'Herein  is  love  ;  not  that  we  loved  God;  but  that  God  loved  us,  and  sent  His
Son  to  die  for  our  sins '"  (1  John  iv.  10).  ••  If  that  is  so,"  said  the  gentleman,  "  and
your  words  seem  to  prove  it,  what  a  shame  it  is  that  I  don't  love  Him.  May  I  say
to  myself,  without  any  fear  of  making  a  mistake,  •  It  is  certain  that  God  loves
me'?"  "Indeed  you  may,"  I  said;  "and  I  pray  to  God  you  may  soon  be
able  to  say,  *  It  is  certain  that  I  love  Him.' "  And  Jesus  may  well  be  called
a  loving  messenger,  because  He  came  into  the  world,  not  only  to  tell  us  this
great  truth,  but  also  to  be  Himself  the  proof  of  it.  {Richard  Newton.)  The
disposition  of  God : — God's  forgiveness  is  unspeakably  generous,  and,  ii  I  may
so  say,  unspeakably  more  fine,  delicate,  and  full  of  strange  gentleness  than  ours.  I
believe  the  more  we  come  to  know  the  disposition  of  Almighty  God,  the  more  we
shall  find  in  it,  in  magnitude  and  power,  those  traits  which  we  call,  among  men,
rare  in  their  excellence.  And  when  God  undertakes  for  us,  if  we  have  thrown  our-
selves upon  EQs  mercy,  and  we  have  really  meant  to  be  His,  and  are  reaUy  striving
to  be  His,  I  believe  that  His  feeling  toward  us  transcends  that  of  the  tenderest  love,
of  the  most  generous  parentage,  and  of  the  m  ->«t  romantic  friendship  in  men ;  that
He  is  not  less  than  men  in  these  emotions  of  friendship  and  of  generosity  in  it,  but
transcendently  more  ;  that  in  Him  they  spread  over  a  broader  ground,  and  take  on
a  more  wondrous  experience.  And  instead  of  being  likely  to  over-estimate  the  vol-
ume of  the  Divine  goodness  and  mercy  towards  those  who  fear  Him,  we  are  always
under  the  mark.  We  always  think  less  of  God,  and  more  meanly  of  the  Divine
nature  than  we  ought  to  do.  (H.W.Beecher.)  Not  by  works  of  righteousness. —
Salvation,  not  of  works,  but  of  grace : — I.    Works  of  eighteousness  wb  cannot

PERFORM,   AND   THEREFORE   THEY    CANNOT    SAVE    XJ8.      1.    Could   WC  render  SUCh  WOrks,

they  would  save  us.  2.  Without  rendering  such  works,  we  cannot  be  saved.  II.
Redemptive  mercy  tt*h  been  vouchsafed  to  us,  and  therefore  we  may  be  saved.  1.
The  special  work  of  this  redemptive  mercy.  (1)  Cleansing.  (2)  Renewal.  2.  The
Divine  Administrator  of  this  redemptive  mercy — the  Holy  Ghost.  3.  The  glorious
medium  of  this  redemptive  mercy — Jesus  Christ.  4.  The  sublime  result — "That
being  justified,"  &c.  (1)  This  rectitude  inspires  with  the  highest  hope.  (2)  Inaugu-
rates the  highest  relationship— "Him."  (Homilist.)  The  source  of  salvation :  —
L  Salvation  based  upon  Divine  mercy.  "  Kindness"  or  goodness,  "Love."  Mar-
gin, "  pity."  Literally,  "  philanthropy  "  ;  that  is  "  the  love  of  man  "  (John  iii.  16).
II.  Salvation  independent  of  human  merit.  1.  There  is  in  the  best  of  us  an  absence
of  good  (i.e.,  meritorious)  works.  2.  Redemption  can  only  be  attained  by  a  new
creation.  "  Regeneration,"  or  "  new  birth."  III.  Salvation  provided  abundantly.
1.  Abundantly — as  an  exhibition  of  abundant  mercy.  2.  Abundantly — as  a  remedy
for  g'c^Lt  sin.  3.  Abundantly  as  a  provision  for  all  who  will  repent.  IV.  Salvation
BVEBLASTiNQ.  1.  Justification  a  ground  of  hope.  2.  Hope  of  eternal  life.  {F.
Wagstaff.)  The  way  of  salvation:—!.  Salvation  is  not  effected  by  human
AGENCY.  1.  Where  there  is  no  salvation,  there  are  no  works  of  righteousness
(Gen.  vi.  6 ;  Gal.  v.  19-21).  2.  Works  of  righteousness,  even  where  they
exist,  possess  no  saving  effect.  They  are  the  evidences,  not  the  causes,  of  salvation.
3.  The  Bible  disclaims  the  merit  of  human  agency  in  salvation  (Isa.  Ixiv.  6 ;  Dan.
ix.  7 ;  Rom.  iii.  20-28,  xi.  6,  6 ;  Gal.  ii.  21 ;  Eph.  ii.  8,  9).  H.  Salvation  origi-
nates IN  THE  Divine  compassion.  "  According  to  His  mercy  He  saved  us,"  &c.  1.
Our  salvation  accords  with  the  tender  sympathies  attributed  to  that  mercy  (Psa.  xxv.
6,  Ii.  6  ;  Isa.  Ixiii.  15  ;  Luke  i.  78 ;  James  v.  11).  2.  It  accords  with  the  readiness
ascribed  to  that  mercy  (Neh.  ix.  17 ;  Isa.  xxx.  18 ;  Mio.  vii.  18).  3.  It  accords  with
the  description  given  of  the  greatness,  fulness,  and  extent  of  that  mercy  (Num.  xiv.
19 :  Psa.  V.  7 ;  Neh.  ix.  19  ;  Psa.  cxix.  64,  cxlv.  9).  4.  It  accords  with  the
perpetuity  of  that  mercy  (Psa.  cxviii.  1).  III.  Salvation  is  attended  by  an  impor-
lANT  CHANGE.  We  are  saved  "  by  the  washing  of  regeneration,"  that  is,  delivered
from  sin  and  all  its  tremendous  consequences  in  the  other  world.  1.  Delivered
from  the  love  of  sinful  pleasures  and  carnal  delights,  by  having  the  "  love  of  God
ahed  abroad  in  our  hearts."  2.  From  the  guilt  of  sinful  practices,  by  having  a
knowledge  of  salvation  by  the  remission  of  our  sins.  3.  From  the  prevalence  of  sin-
ful habits,  by  the  principles  of  holiness,  and  the  power  of  the  Divine  Spirit.  4.  From
the  commission  of  sinful  acts,  by  the  total  regeneration  of  cor  natures  (1  John  t.  18).
rV.  Salvation  is  accomplishbd  by  a  Divine  influence.  "  By  the  renewing  of  the
EUtly  Ghost."    All  the  infiuences  of  God  upon  the  human  soul  are  effected  by  tha


186  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [ohay.  m.

agency  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  1.  The  light  and  information  which  we  receive  on
Divine  subjects  are  communicated  by  the  Holy  Ghost  (John  xiv.  26;  1  Cor.  ii.  11,
12  ;  1  John  iL  20).  2.  The  conviction  we  have  of  our  personal  danger  is  derived
from  the  same  source  ^John  xvi.  8).  3.  The  change  which  is  produced  in  the  minds
of  Christian  believers  is  attributed  to  the  Holy  Ghost  (John  iii.  6-8 ;  1  Cor.  vi.  11 ;
2  Cor.  iii.  18).  4.  The  assurance  of  salvation  is  by  the  witness  of  the  Holy  Ghost
— the  Comforter  (John  xiv.  16;  Eom.  viii.  16).  Inferences :  L  How  awful  the  delu-
sion of  those  who  depend  on  themselves  or  their  works  for  salvation  I  2.  How
deeply  we  are  indebted  to  the  Divine  mercy  for  salvation  I  Let  us  sing  of  the
mercies  of  the  Lord  for  ever.  3.  How  indispensable  is  regeneration  t  Salvation
without  it  is  impossible.  4.  How  deeply  anxious  should  we  be  to  secure  the  iujtlu-
enoes  and  agency  of  the  Holy  Ghost  (Luke  xi.  13).  (Sketches  of  SermoTu.)  Salva-
tion : — ^I.  Salvation  is  mot  by  wobes.  1.  Because  of  our  relation  to  God.  We  are
His  creatures ;  we  owe  Him  everything  always ;  and  therefore  never  can  acquire
any  surplus  merit  to  place  to  the  account  of  past  shortcomings  and  offences.
2.  Because  of  our  moral  inability  to  perform  works  of  righteousness,  on  account
of  the  depravity  and  corruption  of  our  nature.  3.  Because  every  attempt  to  procure
salvation  by  works  implies  the  principle  of  '•  value  for  value,"  and  our  works  would
be  no  equivalent  for  the  salvation  required.  U.  The  tbue  soubce  asd  chabacteb
07  SALVATION.     1.  It  has  its  origin  in  God's  kindness  and  love  toward  man  (ver.  4).

2.  His  kindness  and  love  were  manifested  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour  (ver.  6).

3.  This  salvation  includes  justification  by  His  grace,  adoption  into  His  family  by
His  love,  regeneration  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  blessed  hope  of  eternal
life  while  here,  and  the  blessed  reality  of  eternal  life  hereafter  (vers.  6,  7).  (0.
McCutcheon.)  Salvation  by  grace : — I.  Pbevious  chabacteb.  Two  great  lessons^
1.  Adoring  gratitude.  2.  Deep  humility.  H.  Fbesent  state.  Sinners  saved  by
grace.  1.  The  originating  cause  of  salvation.  2.  The  efficient  means  of  salvation.
III.  Fdtobe  expectations.  1.  This  hope  is  supporting.  2.  Sanctifying.  (Exposi-
tory Outlines.)  Salvation  viewed  from  God's  side  : — In  this  passage,  which  is  a
brief  but  pregnant  epitome  of  the  gospel,  the  scheme  of  man's  salvation  is  regarded
only  from  the  side  on  which  it  is  wholly  God's  work,  without  taking  note  of  the
conditions  and  qualifications  which,  however  much  they  too  are  God's  work,  are
required  from  the  co-operation  of  man.  The  apostle  was  dwelling  on  the  truth  that
the  change  referred  to  in  ver.  3  is  not  due  to  ourselves  or  our  own  merit,  but  to
God's  grace.  He  therefore  had  no  occasion  to  allude  here  to  the  qualifications  or
stipulations  required  at  baptism,  nor  to  the  faith  by  which  man  is  justified,  nor  to
'*  the  working  out  his  own  salvation,"  which  is  one  of  the  instruments  by  which  the
Holy  Ghost  renews  us  day  by  day,  nor  to  the  holiness  which  is  the  character  and
badge  of  the  heirs  of  eternal  life.  All  this  is  needed ;  but,  viewed  from  God's  side,
it  is  not  by  anjthiug  which  man  has  done  or  could  do,  bat  by  His  own  free  mercy
that  God  has  saved  him.  (Bp.  Jackson.)  Working  hard  for  salvation: — ^A,
Christian  lady  was  visiting  a  poor,  sickly  woman,  and  after  conversing  with  her  for
a  little  she  asked  her  if  she  had  found  salvation  yet.  "  Ko,"  she  replied,  "  but  I
am  working  hard  for  it."  "  Ah,  you  will  never  get  it  that  way,"  the  lady  said.
"  Christ  did  all  the  working  when  He  suffered  and  died  for  us,  and  made  complete
atonement  for  our  sins.  You  must  take  salvation  solely  as  a  gift  of  free,  unmerited
grace,  else  you  can  never  have  it  at  all."  The  poor  woman  was  at  first  amazed
beyond  measure,  and  felt  for  the  moment  as  if  all  hope  had  been  taken  from  her ;
but  very  soon  the  enlightenment  came,  and  she  was  enabled  to  rest  joyously  on
Jesus  alone.  When  speaking  afterwards  of  the  friend  who  had  been  so  helpful,  she
said,  "  Oh,  how  I  will  welcome  her  into  heaven,  for  she  guided  me  to  the  Saviour."
Good  works  no  ground  of  acceptance  with  God  : — A  man  whom  I  knew  in  Chicago
failed  in  business,  and  got  into  difficulties.  He  had  paid  his  creditors  what  proved
to  be  worthless  notes,  for  he  had  no  assets.  He  coolly  proposed  to  put  matters
right  by  handing  to  his  creditors  more  worthless  notes.  Now,  many  of  you  are
trying  to  act  Hke  that.  You  have  no  spiritual  assets,  you  have  nothing  with  which
to  pay,  and  yet  you  are  proposing  to  pay  God  with  wliat  is  worthless  to  save  you.
Suppose  you  owe  a  grocer  £20,  and  you  go  and  tell  him  that  you  are  not  going  in
debt  in  future,  what  answer  would  you  expect  ?  He  would  say  :  •'  All  very  well  so
far  as  it  goes ;  I'm  glad  to  hear  it.  But  your  keeping  out  of  debt  in  the  future
won't  pay  what  you  owe  me  now.  What  about  that  £20  akeady  due  ? "  A
hundred  years  ago,  when  Prince  Charles  the  Pretender  headed  a  rebeUioh,  many
risked  their  lives  and  property  for  bis  sake,  feeling  sure  that  if  he  succee<l«d  he
would  reward  them  handsomely.    But  he  did  not  succeed.    He  lost,  and  ck>  ^he^


•HJjp.  m.]  TITUS.  187*

lost.  What  ooald  they  get  from  him,  when  he  had  nothing  to  pay  ?  At  the  close
o£  our  late  American  Civil  War,  between  the  Federals  and  rebel  Confederates,  a
man  in  Oeorgia  wanted  to  pay,  as  his  tax,  money  issued  by  the  Confederate  Govern-
ment.  But  of  course  the  oflBcer  representing  the  revenue  of  the  Federal  Govern-
ment said,  "  That  won't  do.  Tour  money  is  worthless.  It  was  issued  b/  rebels,
and  we  cannot  accept  it."  The  man  who  expects  God  to  accept  him  on  the  ground
of  his  good  works,  or  of  anything  that  he  can  do,  is  acting  like  that.  In  America
no  man  lost  his  life  or  his  estate  through  engaging  in  that  great  rebellion,  because
mercy  was  shown.  But  for  all  that  the  government  could  not  recognise  the  cur-
rency of  rebels.  Mercy  is  offered  to  all  men,  but  everything  with  which  they  hope
to  purchase  pardon  and  peace  is  simply  worthless.  {Major  Whittle.)  Good
works  not  to  be  relied  on : — Though  good  works  may  be  our  Jacob's  staff  to  walk
with  on  earth,  yet  they  cannot  be  our  Jacob's  ladder  to  climb  to  heaven  with.  To
lay  the  salve  of  our  services  upon  the  wound  of  our  sins,  is  as  if  a  man  who  is  stung
by  a  wasp  should  wipe  his  face  with  a  nettle ;  or  as  if  a  person  should  busy  himself
in  supporting  a  tottering  fabric  with  a  burning  fire-brand.  (T.  Seeker.)  The
washing  of  regeneration. — Regeneration : — The  main  thoughts  which  run  through
these  verses  are  the  cause  and  method  of  redemption.  These  are  set  against  the
old  state  of  sin,  in  which  we  were  "  foolish,  disobedient,  deceived,  serving  divers
lusts  and  pleasures,  living  in  malice  and  envy,  hateful,  and  hating  one  another."

I.  Salvation  as  to  its  pbimabt  cause.  The  cause  is  Divine,  lodged  within  the
Divine  heart,  and  is  twofold.  1.  Love.  The  love  of  God  for  a  "world  of  sinners
lost,"  is  the  first  cause  of  man's  redemption.  That  love  is  like  Himself — free,
boundless,  inexplicable,  and  eternal.  "  For  God  so  loved  the  world,"  &c.  "  God
is  love."  2.  Mercy.  The  object  of  love  can  only  be  touched  by  the  hand  of  mercy.
This  speaks  of  the  sinfulness  of  our  nature,  and  that  compassion  which  has  found
a  way  for  love  to  operate  on  the  human  heart.  The  original  of  the  gospel  is  not  a
human  device,  or  the  work  of  righteousness,  but  the  gift  of  God  to  fallen  man.

II.  Salvation  as  to  its  method.  There  are  here  also  two  observations  made  by  the
apostle.  1.  The  removal  of  guilt.  The  washing  of  regeneration  means  the  removal
of  the  guilt  of  the  soul,  and  the  acceptance  of  the  peace  of  the  Father.  It  was  the
custom  to  sprinkle  the  proselytes  with  water,  in  token  of  their  renouncing  their
idolatry,  and  be  made  clean  to  enter  the  service  of  the  true  God.  2.  The  renewal
of  Divine  influences.  The  Spirit  rests  on  believers  to  light  them,  and  to  guide
them;  also  to  comfort  them.  Begeneration  must  be  followed  by  the  indw^ing
Spirit.  This  is  a  comparison  taken  from  nature,  where  all  hving  things  are
renewed  in  the  spring  of  the  year.  Thus  we  are  reminded  of  the  necessity  for  the
constant  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  our  daily  life.  (Weekly  Pulpit.)  Regenera-
tion : — I.  The  benewino.  1.  It  creates  a  new  thing  in  man  (2  Cor.  v.  17).  Like
a  vessel  with  a  new  commander,  steering  a  new  course,  by  a  new  compass,  to  a
new  haven.  The  old  nature  remains,  though  the  new  nature  has  come,  and
there  are  now  in  the  one  man  the  carnal  and  the  spiritual  mind — the  human
and  the  Divine  life — ^that  which  is  bom  of  the  flesh,  and  that  which  is  born
of  the  Spirit — the  old  man  of  sin  that  is  to  be  crucified,  and  the  new  man  that  is  to
be  renewed  daily  in  the  image  of  Him  that  created  him,  until  he  shall  come  to  the
full  stature  of  a  man  in  Christ  Jesus.  2.  It  is  a  restoration  of  a  former  state.
That  which  was  lost  by  sin  is  restored  by  regeneration,  3.  It  is  a  renovation  of  the
whole  man.  Though  every  part  be  not  thoroughly  sanctified,  yet  the  regenerate
are  sanctified  in  every  part.  They  have  a  perfection  of  parts,  though  not  of
degrees.  The  renewing  is  going  on  in  every  part,  though  every  part  is  not  perfectly
renewed.  The  seat  and  centre  of  this  renewing  work  is  the  heart.  The  might  of
the  Spirit  is  exerted  in  the  inner  man.  And  from  thence  He  works  outwardly  to  the
utmost  extremity.  Just  as  the  vital  fluid  is  driven  by  the  propelling  power  of  the
animal  heart  to  every  extremity  of  the  body,  so  is  the  renewing  energy  sent  forth
from  the  centre  of  moral  and  spiritual  life — the  inner  man  by  the  power  of  the
indwelling  Fpirit.  And  so  will  He  continue  to  work  until  the  day  of  perfection  shall
come,  when  we  shall  be  presented  faultless  before  the  throne  of  glory,  without  spot
or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing,  II.  The  renewer.  "  The  Holy  Ghost."  1.  Not  an
influence,  but  a  Person,  having  ascribed  to  Him  in  Holy  Scripture  the  attributes
and  actions  of  a  person,  and  that  a  Divine  and  omnipotent  person.  To  Him  is  con-
fided the  work  of  carrying  out  the  purposes  of  the  Father  by  applying  the  truth  and
work  of  the  Son.  It  is  by  the  Spirit's  overshadowing  of  the  soul  that  the  new
creature  is  conceived  and  brought  forth.  The  babe  of  grace  can  call  no  man  on
«Khh  father.    And  while  a  man's  regeneration  is  not  of  his  fellow-man,  neither  is


188  IRE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [oha».  m.

it  of  himself.  They  which  are  bom  of  the  flesh  contribute  nothing  to  their  own
being,  neither  do  they  that  are  bom  of  the  Spirit ;  they  are  begotten  of  God.  2.  Bat
the  Holy  Ghost,  in  His  renewing,  uses — Instrumentality.  The  one  grand  instm*
ment  is  the  Word  (James  i.  18 ;  1  Peter  i.  23).  (1)  It  may  be  by  the  Word  read.
Augustine  and  Luther  tell  as  they  were  converted  by  the  reading  of  the  Word ;  bo
have  many  thousands  of  others.  In  Madagascar  we  have  a  striking  illustration  of
this,  in  the  conversion  of  many  thousands  by  reading  only  fragments  of  the  Word
of  God,  left  in  their  country  by  the  banished  missionaries.  (2)  It  may  be  by  the
Word  remembered.  I  read  once  of  an  aged  man,  who  had  lived  an  ungodly  life,
and  had  wandered  thousands  of  miles  away  from  his  native  home,  who  one  day,
while  he  was  sitting  under  a  tree,  had  suddenly  brought  to  his  remembrance  truths
he  had  read  and  heard  when  a  child  and  youth,  bat  which  had  been  long  forgotten.
They  came  with  such  irresistible  power  that  his  conversion  was  the  result.  (3)  It
may  be  by  the  Word  Uved  and  acted  out.  There  are  those  who  will  not  read  the
written  Word,  neither  will  they  go  to  hear  the  Word  preached,  but  who  are  willing
readers — anconscious  readers  of  the  lives  of  Christians  among  whom  they  dwell.
God  expects  His  people,  whom  He  has  regenerated,  to  be  "  Uving  epistles  of  Christ,
known  and  read  of  all  men."  Was  it  not  in  this  sense  that  Paul  e^orted  believing
wives  to  win  their  unbeUeving  husbands  "  without  the  Word,"  by  their  "  chaste
conversation,  coupled  with  fear."  (4)  It  may  be  by  the  Word  spoken — as  a  man
would  speak  to  his  friend.  The  kmd  and  faithful  teachings  of  friendship  have
often  proved  the  instrument,  in  the  hands  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  for  the  accomplish-
ment of  this  great  object.  "I  owe  much  to  the  pubUc  ministry  of  the  Word,"  said
a  recent  convert  to  his  minister ;  "  but  it  was  the  Word  spoken  by  a  friend  that  was
made  by  God  the  immediate  instrument  of  my  conversion."  (5)  But  it  is  principally
by  the  preached  Word  that  God  works.  The  public  ministry  of  the  Word  is  God's
appointed  institution  for  the  accomplishment  of  this  glorious  end.  The  preacher
is  the  spiritual  husbandman,  sowing  broadcast  the  incorruptible  seed  of  the  Word,
which  shall  spring  up  and  bring  forth  fruit,  some  thirty,  some  sixty,  and  some  a
hundred-fold.  This  is  all  the  minister  can  do ;  sow  the  seed  in  prayer,  and  faith,
and  hope — God  must  give  the  increase.  {H.  Quick.)  The  laver  of  regeneration  :—
I.  We  must  conceive  that  in  eveby  sacbameni  these  be  thbee  essentiaij  pabxs,  the
absence  of  any  of  which  destroys  the  whole.  1.  The  sign.  2.  The  thing  signi&ed.
8.  The  analogy  between  them,  which  is  the  union  of  them  both.  The  first  is  some
outward  and  sensible  thing ;  the  second,  Inward  and  spiritual ;  the  third,  mixed  d
them  both.  As  in  baptism  the  sign  is  water,  the  thing  signified  the  blood  of  Christ.
The  analogy  or  union  standeth  in  this  resemblance,  that  as  the  former  outwardly
washeth  the  filthiness  of  the  body,  so  the  latter  inwardly  purgeth  the  soul  from  all
Bin.  By  reason  of  which  relation  and  near  affection  between  the  sign  and  the  thing
signified,  it  is  usual  in  the  Scriptures  by  an  improper,  but  sacramental  speech.  1.
To  call  the  sign  by  the  name  of  the  thing  signified,  and  contrarily.  And  thus
baptism  is  called  the  washing  of  the  new  birth,  because  it  is  a  sign,  seal  and  instra-
ment  of  it.  2.  To  ascribe  that  to  the  sign  which  is  proper  to  the  thing  signified,
and  so  baptism  is  here  said  to  save,  as  also  1  Pet.  iii.  21,  which  is  indeed  the  pro*
perty  of  the  blood  of  Christ  (1  John  i.  7),  but  by  the  near  affinity  of  these  two  in  the
sacrameut  it  is  said  so  to  do,  to  note  unto  us — (1)  Not  to  conceive  of  the  sacramental
elements  as  bare  and  naked  signs,  so  to  grow  into  the  contempt  of  them.  (2)  As
we  may  not  conceive  them  idle  sins,  so  neither  idle  signs  by  insisting  in  them  as
though  they  were  the  whole  sacrament,  for  they  are  but  outward,  whereas  the  prin-
cipal matter  of  a  sacrament  is  spiritual  and  inward.  (3)  That  then  we  truliest
conceive  of  a  sacrament,  when  by  looking  at  the  one  of  these  we  see  both,  neither
making  the  sign  a  vain  symbol,  nor  yet  ascribing  anything  to  it  transcending  the
nature  of  it,  such  as  are  the  peijuliars  and  the  prerogatives  of  God,  but  in  the  sign
and  action,  which  is  outward,  be  led  to  those  which  are  spiritual  and  inward.  II.
How  IS  BAPTISM  THKN  THE  LAViiE  OF  BEOENERATioN  ?  1.  As  it  is  an  institution  of  God
signifying  the  good  pleasure  of  God  for  the  pardoning  of  sin,  and  accepting  to  grace
in  Christ ;  for  as  the  word  signifieth  this,  so  doth  also  the  sacrament  which  is  a
visible  word.  And  thus  is  it  truly  said  of  the  Word  and  sacraments  too  that  they
save  and  sanctify,  because  they  signify  the  good  pleasure  of  God  in  saving  and
sanctifying  us,  even  as  we  say  a  man  is  saved  by  the  king's  pardon,  not  that  the
pardon  properly  doth  it,  for  that  is  the  mere  merciful  disposition  of  the  king,  but
because  the  pardon  (written  and  sealed  perhaps  by  another),  signed  by  the  king,  is
the  ordinary  instrument  to  manifest  the  merciful  mind  of  the  king  in  pardoning
•uoh  a  malefactor.    2.  As  it  is  a  seal  or  pledge  of  our  sanctification  and  salvation.


CHAr.  m.J  TITUS,  189

as  oertainly  assoring  these  to  the  soul  of  the  believer,  as  he  is  or  can  be  assured  of
ihe  other,  that  as  a  man  having  a  bond  of  a  thousand  pounds  sealed  him  may  truly
say  of  it,  here  la  my  thousand  pound,  that  is,  a  security,  as  surely  confirming  it  unto
me  as  if  I  had  it  in  my  hands,  or  as  I  have  this  even  so  may  the  believing  party
baptized  say  of  his  baptism,  Here  is  my  regeneration,  here  is  my  salvation.  3.  As
it  is  a  means  to  excite  and  provoke  the  faith  of  the  receiver  to  lay  hold  upon  the
grace  of  the  sacrament,  and  apply  it  to  these  purposes,  in  which  regard  it  be
as  truly  said  to  renew  as  faith  is  said  to  justify,  and  that  is  only  as  it  may  be  a
means  or  hand  to  lay  hold  on  Christ  our  righteousness ;  so  baptism  is  a  means
helping  forward  our  renewing  by  the  true  understanding  and  conscionable  and  serious
meditation  of  it.  4.  In  that  in  the  right  use  of  it,  it  giveth  and  exbibiteth  Christ
and  all  His  merits  to  the  fit  receiver,  for  then  Ood's  grace  putteth  forth  itself,  and
after  a  sort  conveyeth  itself  in  and  by  this  instrument  into  the  heart  of  the  worthy
receiver.  And  thus  principally  it  is  the  laver  of  regeneration,  because  in  it  and  by
it  as  a  means  and  organ  the  Holy  Ghost  freely  worketh  His  grace  in  such  as  in
whom  He  delighteth.  {T.  Taylor,  D.D.)  The  laver  of  regeneration : — On  man's
side  there  is  the  washing  with  water ;  and  on  God's  side  there  is  the  washing  away
of  sin  and  pouring  out  of  the  Spirit.  The  body  is  purified,  the  soul  is  purified,  and
the  soul  is  hallowed.  The  man  is  washed,  is  justified,  is  sanctified.  He  is
regenerated :  he  is  "  a  new  creature."  "  The  old  things,"  his  old  principles,
motives,  and  aims,  then  and  there  "passed  away":  "behold,  they  are  become  new"
{2  Cor.  V.  17).  Can  any  one  reasonably  doubt  that,  when  the  apostle  speaks  of
"  the  washing  of  regeneration,"  he  means  the  Christian  rite  of  baptism,  in  which,
and  by  means  of  which,  the  regeneration  takes  place  ?  We  are  fully  justified  by
his  language  here  in  asserting  that  it  is  by  means  of  the  baptismal  washing  that  the
regeneration  takes  place ;  for  he  asserts  that  God  "  saved  us  through  the  washing
of  regeneration."  The  laver  or  bath  of  regeneration  is  the  instrument  or  means
by  which  God  saved  us.  Such  is  the  natural,  and  almost  the  necessary  meaning  of
the  Greek  construction.  And  there  are  numerous  analogies  which  throw  light  upon
the  question,  proving  to  us  that  there  is  nothing  exceptional  in  God  (who  of  course
does  not  need  any  means  or  instruments)  being  willing  to  use  them,  doubtless
because  it  is  better  for  us  that  He  should  use  them.  In  what  way  is  the  employ-
ment of  perceptible  means  a  help  to  us  ?  In  two  at  least.  It  serves  the  double
purpose  of  being  both  a  test  to  faith  and  an  aid  to  faith.  1.  The  acceptance  of
divinely  appointed  means  is  necessarily  a  test  of  faith.  Human  intellect  is  apt  to
assume  that  Omnipotence  is  above  using  instruments.  "Is  it  likely,"  we  ask,  "  that
the  Almighty  would  employ  these  means  ?  Are  they  not  altogether  beneath  the
dignity  of  the  Divine  nature  ?  Man  needs  tools  and  materials ;  but  God  needs
neither.  It  is  not  credible  that  He  has  ordained  these  things  as  conditions  of  His
own  operation."  All  which  is  the  old  cry  of  the  captain  of  the  host  of  Syria.
Therefore  humbly  to  accept  the  means  which  God  has  revealed  as  the  appointed
channels  of  His  spiritual  blessings  is  a  real  test  of  the  recipient's  faith.  He  is  thus
enabled  to  perceive  for  himself  whether  he  does  sincerely  believe  or  not ;  whether
he  has  the  indispensable  qualification  for  receiving  the  promised  blessing.  2.  The
employment  of  visible  means  is  a  real  aid  to  faith.  It  is  easier  to  believe  that  an
effect  will  be  produced,  when  one  can  perceive  something  which  might  contribute
to  produce  the  effect.  It  is  easier  to  believe  when  one  sees  means  than  when  none
are  visible  ;  and  it  is  still  easier  to  believe  when  the  means  seem  to  be  appropriate.
The  man  who  was  bom  blind  would  more  readily  believe  that  Christ  would  give
him  sight  when  he  perceived  that  Christ  was  using  spittle  and  clay  for  the  purpose ;
for  at  that  time  these  things  were  supposed  to  be  good  for  the  eyes.  And  what
element  in  nature  is  more  frequently  the  instrument  both  of  life  and  of  death  than
water  ?  What  could  more  aptly  signify  purification  from  defilement  ?  What  act
could  more  simply  express  death  to  sin  and  a  rising  again  to  righteousness  than  a
plunge  beneath  the  surface  of  the  water  and  a  re-issuing  from  it  ?  Faith  in  the
inward  gift,  promised  by  God  to  those  who  believe  and  are  baptized,  becomes  more
easy  when  the  outward  means  of  conferring  the  gift,  not  only  are  readily  perceived,
but  are  recognised  as  suitable.  In  this  way  our  faith  is  aided  by  God's  employment
of  means.  Is  the  "  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost "  the  same  thing  as  the  "  washing
of  regeneration  "t  In  this  passage  the  two  expressions  refer  to  the  same  fact,  but
in  their  respective  meanings  they  are  not  co-extensive.  The  Greek  construction  is
ambiguous  like  the  English ;  and  we  cannot  be  sure  whether  St.  Paul  means  that
God  saved  us  by  means  of  the  washing  and  by  means  of  the  renewing,  or  that  God
■ftved  as  bj  means  of  a  laver,  which  is  both  a  laver  of  regeneration  and  a  laver  of


190  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  in.

renewal.  The  latter  is  more  probable :  but  in  either  case  the  reference  is  to  one
and  the  same  event  in  the  Christian's  hfe.  The  laver  and  the  renewing  refer  to
baptism ;  and  the  regeneration  and  the  renewing  refer  to  baptism  ;  viz.,  to  the  new
birth  which  is  then  effected.  But,  nevertheless,  the  two  expressions  are  not
oo-extensive  in  meaning.  The  laver  and  the  regeneration  refer  to  one  fact,  and  to
one  fact  only :  a  fact  which  takes  place  once  for  all  and  can  never  be  repeated.  A
man  cannot  have  the  new  birth  a  second  time,  any  more  than  he  can  be  bum  a
second  time:  and  hence  no  one  may  be  baptized  twice.  But  the  renewing  of  the
Holy  Spirit  may  take  place  daily.  {A.  Plummer,  D.D.)  Spiritual  toashing : —
The  following  is  related  in  the  life  of  the  late  Dr.  Guthrie.  James  Dundee,
a  weaver,  lived  on  a  lone  moor,  where,  beyond  his  wife's,  he  had  no  society
but  that  of  God  and  nature.  James  might  have  been  a  poet,  though  I  don't
know  that  he  ever  cultivated  the  muse;  a  man  he  was  of  such  an  impassioned
nature,  lofty  thoughts,  and  singularly  vivid  imagination.  On  the  morning
of  a  communion  Sabbath  he  rose,  bowed  down  by  a  sense  of  sin,  in  great  dis-
tress of  mind.  He  would  go  to  church  that  day,  but,  being  a  man  of  a  very  tender
conscience,  he  hesitated  about  going  to  the  Lord's  table.  He  was  in  a  state  of  great
spiritual  depression.  In  this  state  of  mind  he  proceeded  to  pat  himself  in  order  for
church,  and  while  washing  his  hands,  no  one  being  by,  he  heard  a  voice  say,
"  Cannot  I,  in  My  blood,  as  easily  wash  your  soul,  as  that  water  does  your  hands?"
"  Now,  minister,"  he  said,  in  telling  me  this,  "  I  do  not  say  there  was  a  real  voice,
yet  I  heard  it  as  distinctly,  word  for  word,  as  you  now  hear  me.  I  felt  a  load  taken
off  my  mind,  and  went  to  the  table  and  sat  under  Christ's  shadow  with  great  delight."
The  renewing  of  the  Holy  Spirit : — The  word  '•  renewing  "  is  used  in  the  Scriptures
in  reference  to  the  starting-point  of  the  Christian  life — regeneration,  and  to  the
progressive  development  of  it,  day  by  day.  Consider  it  now  in  the  latter  sense,
that  is  in  cormection  with  the  Holy  Spirit's  work  in  those  who  have  "  hfe  eternal."

1.  Establishing.    1.  Bringing  back  the  wanderer  (Hos.  xiv.  1,  2 ;  Job.  xxiL  23).

2.  Settling  the  unstable  (Psa.  li.  10,  Ivii.  7 ;  Eph.  iii.  17).  3.  Comforting  the
fearful  (Psa.  xxiii.  3,  h.  12).  11.  Strengthening.  1.  Separating  us  from  the  things
that  hinder  our  growth  (2  Cor.  vi.  16-18).  2.  Bringing  us  into  closer  contact  with
the  Fountain  of  Supply  (Isa.  xl.  31 ;  Eph.  iii.  17).  3.  Enlarging  our  capacity  and
powers  of  reception  (2  Cor.  iv.  16).  IH.  Tbansfobmino.  1.  Illuminating  the  mind
(Bom.  xii.  2 ;  Col.  iii.  10).  2.  Gladdening  the  heart  (Eom.  xv.  13,  xiv.  17).  3.
Energising  the  will  (Eph.  iii  16,  iv.  23).  4.  Transfiguring  the  character  (2  Cor.  iii.
18).  {E.  H.  Hopkins.)  Renevrlng  of  the  Holy  Ghost.— TAe  renewing  of  the
Holy  GhoBt: — I.  Bbing  together  some  of  the  more  striking  Scriptubs  testi-
monies TO  THE  necessity  OF  THIS  AGENCT.  1.  As  embodied  in  the  devotional
sentiments  of  holy  men.  Hear  David.  ••  Create  in  me  a  clean  heart,"  &c.  "  Cast
me  not  away  from  Thy  presence,"  &c.  "  Teach  me  to  do  Thy  will,"  Ac.  "  Thy
Spirit  is  good  ;  lead  me,"  &o.  And  so  Paul.  "  Now  the  God  of  peace  fill  you  with
all  joy,"  &c.  2.  As  a  fulfilment  of  ancient  promise.  •'  I  will  pour  water  on  him
that  is  thirsty,  and  floods  upon  the  dry  ground."  "  I  will  pour  My  Spirit  upon  thy
seed,  and  My  blessing  upon  thine  offspring."  "A  new  heart  also  will  I  give  you,
and  a  new  spirit  will  I  put  within  you."  "  And  I  will  put  My  Spirit  within  yon,
and  cause  you  to  walk  in  My  statutes."  If  from  these  examples  we  pass  to  the
New  Testament,  to  consider  how  far  the  supposition  of  this  great  spiiitual  change
enters  into  the  pleas  and  arguments  by  which  the  sacred  writers  exhort  their  con-
verts to  the  duties  of  practical  godliness,  we  find  the  great  promise  of  Whitsuntide
sharing  equally  with  our  Lord's  proper  oblation  a  claim  to  be  received  as  among
the  very  necessities  of  our  salvation.  "  If  any  man  have  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ
he  is  none  of  His."  •'  Now  we  have  received  not  the  spirit  of  the  world,  but  the
Spirit  which  is  of  God."  "  Know  ye  not  that  ye  are  the  temple  of  God,  and  that
the  Spirit  of  God  dwelleth  in  you  ?  "  "  Hereby  we  know  that  we  dwell  in  Him,  and
He  in  us,  because  He  hath  given  us  of  His  Spirit."  These  passages,  with  number-
less others  which  might  be  quoted,  show  to  us  how  completely  the  work  of  Christ
for  man,  and  the  work  of  the  Spirit  in  man,  are  looked  upon  by  the  inspired  pen-
man as  joint  and  co-equal  parts  of  a  common  salvation,  the  constituent  elements
of  one  great  truth,  successive  and  inseparable  links  in  that  chain  of  mercy  by  which
sinners  are  to  be  lifted  up  from  earth's  lowest  pit,  and  set  down  with  Christ  on
heaven's  highest  throne.  3.  As  practically  attested  by  the  great  facts  of  gospel
history.  The  great  miracle  of  Pentecost  is  one  standing  witness  that  without  the
agency  of  the  Divine  Spirit  there  never  was,  and  never  can  be,  such  a  thing  as  true
conversion.     It  was  not  Peter's  preaching  that  turned  the  hearts  of  those  three


CHAP,  m.]  TITUS.  191

thonsand.  He  might  have  exhibited  truth  to  the  nnderstanding  of  that  great
andience ;  he  might  have  addressed  powerful  appeals  to  their  consciences ;  he
might  even  have  lodged  a  deep  conviction  of  the  truth  of  all  be  said  in  their  very
souls ;  but  BO  to  convince  them  as  to  make  them  yield,  so  to  prick  their  hearts  that
into  its  open  pores  there  shonld  be  received  and  welcomed  "  the  truth  as  it  is  in
Jesus,"  this  was  a  work  to  be  done,  "  not  by  might,  nor  by  power,  but  by  My  Spirit,
eaith  the  Lord  of  Hosts."  The  manner  in  which  the  notorious  Earl  of  Rochester
describes  his  conversion  is  strikingly  illustrative  of  some  great  influence  from  with-
out, acting  upon,  though  still  concurrently  with  his  own  natural  faculties.  He  was
reading,  he  tells  us,  the  53rd  chapter  of  Isaiah,  and  his  language  is  that  there  was
some  inward  force  upon  him  which  convinced  him  that  he  could  resist  no  longer,
for  the  words  had  an  authority  which  did  shoot  like  rays  or  beams  in  his  mind ;
and  this  power  did  so  effectually  constrain  him  that  he  did,  ever  after,  as  firmly
believe  in  his  Saviour  as  if  he  had  seen  Him  in  the  clouds.  H.  How  this  benbw>
INO  or  THB  Holt  Ghost  in  the  soul  of  man  is  accomplished.  1.  First,  we  attri-
bute to  Him  a  true  and  proper  indwelling  in  our  souls  (John  xiv.  17).  2.  Again,
bv  the  influences  of  this  Spirit  alone,  are  both  produced  and  maintained  withm  as
all  those  affections  and  dispositions  which  constitute  the  renewed  man.  3.  Far-
ther, it  is  helpful  to  that  renewing  process  which  the  Spirit  of  God  carries  on
within  UB,  that  He  testifies  to  the  reality  of  His  own  work.  Without  raising  the
question  of  how  much  or  how  little  of  assurance  must  be  inseparable  from  true
conversion,  the  various  expressions,  witness  of  the  Spirit,  earnest  of  the  Spirit,  seal
of  the  Spirit,  must  imply  that  one  office  of  this  Divine  Agent  is  to  supply  some
form  of  corroborative  testimony  to  our  own  minds  that  we  are  the  children  of  God.
"  He  that  believeth  on  the  Son  of  God  hath  the  witness  in  himself."  4.  Once
more,  the  renewing  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  to  be  looked  for  in  the  daily  sane-
tification  of  our  souls,  and  the  preparing  them  for  a  condition  of  endless  life.  (D.
Moore,  M.A.)  The  difficulty  of  removing  the  pollution  of  tin: — At  Portland
navy-yard  one  of  the  United  States  ships  came  in  for  repair  and  fomigation,  as
yellow-fever  had  broken  ont  amongst  her  crew  during  her  previous  voyage.  She
was  thoroughly  scraped  and  repainted,  and  then  put  into  commission  again,  but  she
was  less  than  a  month  at  sea  when  the  fever  once  more  appeared.  It  was  decided
to  open  her  up  and  expose  the  fever-spores  to  a  thorough  freezing  during  the  winter,
as  medical  men  said  that  the  spores  could  not  live  in  cold  weather.  In  the  spring
she  was  agsan  painted  and  re-furnished,  bat  the  fever  appeared  again.  Then  it
was  found  that,  though  a  noble-looking  vessel,  death  was  in  her,  and  she  was  towed
to  sea  and  sunk.  So  is  it  with  all  who  have  not  been  born  again ;  they  carry
within  their  hearts  the  seeds  of  a  fatal  fever,  and  unless  they  are  completely
cleansed  from  it  by  Christ  tbey  will  one  day  go  down  in  the  sea  of  the  Divine
wrath.  Which    He    shed   on    us    abundantly,    through    Jesus     Christ. —

Almndant  supply    of  grace  : — L    The  graces  op  the  Spirit  abb  plentiptjllt

POtTBEI)    OCT    UPON    US    AS    OUT    OF    A    FXniL    AND    BICH    UEBCT.       For — 1.    We    haVB

the  accomplishment  of  many  prophecies  and  promises,  as  Isa.  xi.  9 ;  Dan.
xii.  4.  Many  prophecies  were  then  sealed,  and  the  book  shut  until  the  term
of  time;  bat  then  many  should  run  to  and  fro,  and  knowledge  should  be  in-
creased. 2.  We  have  the  truth  of  many  types  and  resemblances,  as  of  the  waters
running  from  under  the  threshold  of  the  sanctuary,  still  rising  to  increase ;  and  of
the  proceedings  of  the  New  Testament,  typified  in  the  cloud  which  at  the  first
appearance  was  no  bigger  than  a  man's  hand,  but  after  rose  to  that  greatness  as  to
cover  the  whole  heavens.  3.  If  we  compare  our  Church  with  that  of  the  Jews'  we
shall  observe  that  the  Lord  did  but  drop  and  sprinkle  these  graces  here  and  there
npon  a  few  persons  where  He  pleased,  but  now  hath  poured  out  His  Spirit  and
opened  a  fountain  of  grace  to  the  house  of  Judah  and  Jerusalem,  even  for  all  true
believers.  (1)  If  such  plenty  of  grace  be  poured  out  upon  us,  our  care  must  be  to
be  found  answerable  thereunto,  that  according  to  our  proportion  our  increase  may
be ;  for  we  may  not  think  the  return  of  one  talent  sufficient  if  we  have  received  five
or  ten,  seeing  where  much  is  given  much  will  be  required.  Hath  the  Lord  so  richly
shed  out  His  Spirit  that  whereas  the  most  excellent  patriarchs  saw  Christ  only  afar
off,  the  most  simple  of  our  age  may  see  Him  in  the  Word  and  sacraments  even
crucified  before  his  eyes,  and  will  it  not  be  expected  that  in  all  things  we  should  be
made  rich  in  Him  ?  And  thus  have  we  ministered  unto  us  a  ground  of  examina-
tion whether  we  find  the  fruits  and  work  of  these  waters  upon  us.  (2)  If  npon  this
examination  we  feel  not  this  plenty  of  grace,  we  must  beware  of  accusing  God,  but
condemn  ourselves  in  whom  all  the  fault  is,  as  who  refuse  and  despise  so  great


192  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha*.  hi.

grace.  If  any  ask  how  it  can  oome  to  pass  that  such  excellent  grace  should  be
refased,  I  answer  there  are  three  main  causes  of  it — 1.  Ignorance  and  blindness  of
mind.  2.  Hardness  of  heart.  3.  Security,  which  three  destitute  us  of  so  abundant
grace  as  is  offered.  II.  All  the  grace  that  is  bestowed  on  us  is  by  means  of  Jesus
Chbist,  fob  with  Him  is  the  fountain  and  headspring  ;  yea,  He  is  the  head  which
sendeth  life,  sense,  motion,  and  direction  into  all  the  members,  resembled  in  tbat
holy  ointment  which  ran  down  from  Aaron's  head  and  beard  even  to  the  skirts  of
his  garment.  The  evangelist,  after  he  had  affirmed  that  Christ  was  full  of  grace
and  truth,  addeth  that  of  His  fulness  we  receive  grace  for  grace,  so  the  apostle
(Col.  ii.  9, 10).  (1)  Want  we  any  grace  ?  call  upon  God  in  the  name  of  Christ.
"Whatsoever  ye  ask  the  Father  in  My  name.  He  will  give  it  unto  you."  Get  Christ
to  be  thine  own,  become  a  true  believer,  that  thou  mayest  in  Him  begin  thy  prayer
■with  Our  FalJtier ;  this  is  the  way  to  be  rich  in  grace.  (2)  Hast  thou  received  any
spiritual  grace  ?  sacrifice  not  unto  thine  own  net,  but  be  thankful  unto  God  in
Christ.  (3)  Take  heed  of  quenching  that  grace,  neither  grieve  that  good  Spirit  of
God  by  thy  sin,  for  thou  earnest  hardly  by  it,  ifor  Christ  must  come  dovm  from
heaven,  humble  Himself  to  the  death,  rise  again,  ascend,  and  now  make  continual
intercession  before  He  could  procure  thee  the  least  grace.  A  thing  very  Uttle
thought  of.  (T.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Eminent  holiness  : — Our  text  combines  doctrine
and  practice,  faith  and  morals,  and  makes  the  one  the  proper  foundation  of  the
other.  That,  being  justified  by  His  grace,  we  should  be  made  heirs.  This  is  a
faithful  saying — that  they  which  have  believed  be  careful  to  maintain  good  works.
It  is  worthy  of  remark  that  there  are  four  passages  of  Scripture  in  which  the  ex-
pression "  a  faiihfal  saying  "  is  employed,  and  each  faithful  saying  is  worthy  of  all
acceptation  (1  Ton.  i.  15,  iv.  8,  9 ;  2  Tim.  xi.  11-13 ;  Titus  iii.  8).  And
they  all  mark  out  the  connection  between  faith  and  obedience — between  holiness
and  happiness — between  principle  and  practice.    I.  That  the  doctbinb  of  cub

ACOEPTANCK  IN  ChBIBT,  WHUJB   IT  F0BM8   THE    ONLY    FOUNDATION    OF    A    BDINEB's^  HOPE,

HAS  A  dibeot  tendency  TO  PROMOTE  EMINENT  HOLINESS.  1.  The  doctrine  of  justifi-
cation by  faith,  through  the  merits  and  advocacy  of  Christ,  constitutes  the  alone
basis  of  our  acceptance  with  God.  We  are  said  to  be  justified  by  His  grace.  Thia
doctrine  forms  the  only  answer  to  the  question  which  in  every  age  has  baffled  the
wisdom  of  the  wise,  and  brought  to  nought  the  understanding  of  the  prudent.  How
shall  man  be  just  with  God  ?  A  cordial  reception  of  Jesus  Christ  as  the  end  of  the
law  for  righteousness  to  every  one  that  believeth,  entitles  the  returning  offender  to
life  by  a  merciful  appointment,  and  brings  him  into  a  state  of  personal  acceptance
with  God.  This  doctrine  may  well  be  considered  as  the  cardinal  doctrine  of  Chris-
tianity, and  as  lying  at  the  very  foundation  of  all  our  hopes  for  eternity.  So  deep
and  aggravated  is  our  guilt,  that  it  is  quite  evident  that  if  we  be  not  accepted  by
the  merits  and  righteousness  of  another  vre  cannot  be  accepted  at  all ;  for  it  is  clear
we  have  no  righteousness  of  our  own.  This  therefore  forms,  as  the  text  states,  a
singular  exhibition  of  Divine  benignity  and  grace.  Grace  provided  the  Saviour
revealed  in  the  gospel — grace  accepted  His  substitution  in  the  sinner's  place — grace
communicated  the  principle  of  piety  implanted  in  the  human  heart— grace  pre-
serves that  principle  from  extinction,  amidst  all  the  storms  and  tumults  of  thia
opposing  world — and  grace  crowns  the  subjects  of  its  influences  with  glory  at  last.
2.  The  doctrine  of  justification,  so  far  from  lessening  the  obligations  to  obedience,
furnishes  the  most  powerful  of  all  inducements  to  eminent  holiness.  The  pardoned
offender  is  not  rendered  lawless ;  a  justified  state  is  not  exempted  from  obligation.
We  are  not  without  law  to  God,  but  under  the  law  to  Christ.  It  is  no  part  of  the
Divine  design  to  raise  up  one  light  in  order  to  extinguish  another.  What  was  once
truth  is  always  truth  ;  what  was  once  duty  is  always  duty.  All  the  original  grounds
of  moral  obligation  remain.  If  God  was  our  Creator  before  our  conversion.  He  is
our  Creator  still— a  faithful  Creator.  If  God  was  our  Judge  before,  He  is  our  Judge
still.  Neither  does  Divine  grace  destroy  or  change  any  of  the  relations  in  which
we  previously  stood  to  each  other,  nor  cancel  any  of  the  duties  arising  out  of  those
relations.  Neither  does  Divine  grace  alter  the  nature  of  sin,  nor  render  it  one  whit
less  than  before  the  abominable  thing  which  God  hateth.  The  plague  does  not
cease  to  be  the  plague  because  a  remedy  has  been  mercifully  provided  for  it.  The
gospel  has  produced  no  change  in  our  moral  relation  to  God,  nor  in  our  relation  to
our  fellow-man  ;  and,  therefore,  all  the  antecedent  obligation  to  obedience  remains
unchanged ;  and  they  that  have  believed  in  God  are  enjoined  carefully  to  maintain
good  works.  The  gospel  superadds  motives  and  inducements  unknown  before  to
induce  conformity  to  the  Divine  will.    The  grace  of  God,  that  bringetb  salvation.


CHIP.  in.J  TITUS.  193

teacheth  us  that,  denying  ungodliness  and  worldly  lusts,  we  should  live  soberly,
righteously,  and  godly.  All  false  religions  attempt  to  lower  the  standard  of  morals,
in  order  to  fall  in  with  the  weakness  or  wickedness  of  mankind.  But  Christianity
presents  us  with  raised  views  of  the  spirituality  of  the  Divine  law.  It  presents  us
with  the  most  powerful  motives  to  holiness—derived  from  the  love  of  God — the
Cross  of  Christ — the  glories  of  the  coming  world,  and  especially  from  the  great
work  of  redemption.     II.  Teat  these  fbinciples,  in  theib  connection  with  each

OTHEB,    ABE   TO   BE    EXPLICITLY    ASSEBTED   AND   MAINTAINED.        "  These    thiogS   I    will

that  thou  affirm  constantly."  They  are  to  be  affirmed  in  their  connection  with
each  other — that  is,  the  doctrine  of  justification  is  to  be  affirmed — and  the  doctrine
of  sanctification  is  to  be  affirmed  too :  the  one  as  the  cause,  the  other  as  the  effect ;
the  one  as  the  root,  the  other  as  the  fruitful  branch.  And  observe  to  what  class  of
characters  the  exhortations  and  commands  of  the  gospel  are  to  be  specifically
addressed — That  they  which  have  believed  in  God  might  be  careful  to  maintain
good  works ;  plainly  proving  that  the  most  advanced  Christians  reqxiire  to  be  fre-
quently admonished.  Our  text  says  these  truths  are  to  be  constantly  affirmed.
These  good  works  are  to  be  expressly  enjoined  upon  those  who  beUeve.  We  are  not
to  leave  them  to  implication  and  inference,  as  though  we  presumed  that  they  would
follow  as  a  necessary  result  from  the  mere  belief  of  the  doctrine  of  justification,
but  they  are  to  be  plainly  stated  and  enforced.  This  is  to  be  done  in  defiance  of
opposition  and  contradiction,  which  supposes  objection  and  denial  on  the  part  of
some.  The  reasons  why  we  should  thus  constantly  urge  these  truths  will  be  per-
ceived at  a  glance.  1.  Because  we  are  always  Uable  to  overlook  and  forget  them
amidst  the  active  engagements  and  snares  of  life.  The  gospel  ministry  was  insti-
tuted for  this  purpose.  2.  Because  the  personal  sanctity  of  Christians  is  the  final
object  of  the  dispensation  of  mercy.  To  this  everything  in  the  Divine  economy
tends ;  in  this  everything  terminates.  It  is  no  inferior  degree  of  excellence  to  which
we  are  taught  to  aspire ;  we  are  not  to  begin  only,  but  to  advance  and  persevere —
we  are  to  maintain  good  works,  and  to  be  careful  to  maintain  them.  The  marginal
rendering  is  more  emphatic  still — the  force  of  the  Greek  word  being  to  go  before  in
good  works — to  excel,  to  emulate — ^to  attain  eminence  in  holiness  and  devotion.
Plutarch  tells  us  that  it  was  the  aim  of  Tully,  that  it  was  his  ambition,  to  be
eminent  in  all  that  he  undertook.  How  much  more  should  Christians  desire  to
attain  the  highest  measures  of  moral  and  reUgious  excellence.  3.  Because  advance-
ment in  holiness  is  essential  to  the  enjoyment  of  all  genuine  consolation.  The
state  of  grace  is  only  evidenced  by  the  sanctities  of  the  Christian  character.  4.
Because  the  absence  of  these  good  works  proves  the  destitution  of  Christian  prin-
ciple, and  leaves  the  individual  exposed  to  a  fearful  disappointment  and  a  final
doom.    III.  That  fbou  the  faithful  exhibition  of  these  tbuths  the  happiest

BESDLTS  ABE  TO  BE  ANTICIPATED  TO  THE  CUDBCH  AND  THE  WOBLD.      TheSB  THINGS  ABK

GOOD  AND  PBOFiTABLE  TO  MEN.  They  are  good  in  themselves,  and  good  in  their
influence  upon  the  mind.  Many  things  may  be  good  that  are  not  profitable,  and
some  may  be  thought  profitable  that  are  not  good ;  but  these  are  both  good  and
profitable.  They  are  good  in  the  Divine  esteem — good  as  the  transcript  of  His  own
infinite  excellence — good  as  perfectly  accordant  with  all  His  revelations  to  man —
good  in  their  origin — good  in  their  progress — good  in  their  end.  They  come  from
heaven  and  lead  to  it.  They  are  good  and  profitable,  as  opposed  to  those  "  foolish
questions,  and  genealogies,  and  contentions,  and  strivings  about  the  law,"  which
we  are  told  in  the  next  verse  to  avoid  as  unprofitable  and  vain.  (The  Evangelist.)
That  being  Justified  by  His  g^race. — Juttification ;  faith;  works: — I.  The  mobaxi
BECTiFicATioN  OF  THE  Bouii.  1.  All  souls  in  their  unrenewed  state  are  unrighteous.
2.  Eestoration  to  righteousness  is  the  merciful  work  of  God.  8.  In  this  moral  reo-
iifioation  of  soul  there  is  the  heirship  of  eternal  good.  II.  The  essential  fodnda-
TiON  OF  ALL  TEUE  FAITH.  To  believe  in  God  impUes — 1.  To  believe  in  what  He  is
in  Himself — the  only  absolute  existence,  without  beginning,  without  succession,
without  end,  who  is  in  all  and  through  all,  the  All-Mighty,  the  All- Wise,  the  All-
Good  Creator  and  Sustainer  of  the  universe.  2.  To  beheve  in  what  He  is  to  us —
the  Father,  the  Proprietor,  and  the  Life.  IH.  The  supbemb  pubposb  or  uobal
BzisxENOs  IS  TO  MAINTAIN  GOOD  W0BE8.  1.  Good  works  are— (1)  Works  that  have
right  motives.  (2)  Works  that  have  a  right  standard.  2.  The  maintenance  of
these  works  requires  strenuous  and  constant  effort.  3.  The  great  work  of  the
Christian  ministiy  is  to  stimulate  this  effort.  (D.  Thomas,  DJ).)  God's  method
ofjustification : — 1.  The  originating  cause  is  the  grace,  the  free,  sovereign,  undeserved,
and  spontaneous  love  of  God  towards  fallen  man  (Titus  iii.  4,  5  ;  ii.  11 ;  Bom.  iii.

13


194  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  ni;

24).  2.  Our  Lord  Jesas  Christ  is  the  sole  meritorioas  canse.  All  He  did,  &nd  all
He  Boffered,  in  His  mediatorial  character,  may  be  said  to  have  contribated  to  this
great  purpose.  8.  The  instromeDtal  cause  of  jnstificatlon.  The  merit  of  the  blood
of  JesoB  does  not  operate  necessarily  so  as  to  produce  our  pardon  as  an  immediate
and  unavoidable  effect,  but  through  the  instrumentality  of  faith.  Hence — 1.  We
are  not  justified,  in  whole  or  part,  by  the  merit  of  our  own  works,  whether  past,
present,  or  future.  2.  Our  repentance  is  neither  the  meritorious  course,  nor  the  imme-
diate instrument  of  justification.  3.  The  Holy  Spirit's  work  of  regeneration  and  sanc-
tification  is  not  the  previous  condition  of  our  free  justification  or  the  pre-requLsite
qualification  of  it.  4.  Our  justification  is  not  by  the  merit  of  faith  itself ;  but  only  by
faith,  as  that  which  embraces  and  appropriates  the  merit  of  CJhrist.  («7.  Bunting.)
Belation  of  juttiftcation  to  regeneration : — Justification  is  a  qualification  of  title ;
regeneration  of  nature.  Justification  alters  the  relative  character;  regeneration
the  personal.  Justification  reconciles  us  to  the  Divine  favour ;  regeneration  to
the  Divine  service.  Justification  removes  every  obstacle  of  law ;  regeneration  every
obstacle  of  disposition.  Justification  destroys  the  incapacity  of  guilt ;  regeneration
the  resistance  of  depravity.  Justification  makes  us  one  with  God  in  acceptance ;
regeneration  makes  us  one  with  Him  in  will.  Justification  opens  heaven ;  re-
generation causes  us  to  walk  in  its  white.  Justification  furnishes  the  song  of
deliverance;  regeneration  teaches  us  to  modulate  it.  (R.  W.  'Hamilton,  Tt.H.)
The  finished  work  of  Christ : — A  poor  man  was  very  anxious  about  his  soul.  Though
he  knew  the  Bible  well,  yet  he  could  not  get  over  one  difiBculty,  which  was  that  he
wanted  to  do  something  to  save  himself ;  it  was  too  easy  a  way  to  be  saved  by
Christ  without  doing  anything  to  merit  salvation  himself ;  at  least  so  he  thought.
One  day  an  evangelist  called  at  his  workshop,  and  saw  a  gate  all  painted  and  var-
nished, ready  to  be  hung  in  its  place.  "  John,"  he  said,  "  is  this  gate  complete?  "
"Yes,  sir;  it  is  quite  finished ;  it  has  got  the  last  coat  of  varnish."  "You  are
perfectly  certain?"  "Yes,  quite."  The  evangelist  took  up  a  plane,  and  in  a
moment  had  taken  a  shaving  off  the  top  bar.  "  Stop,  stop,  sir  I "  cried  John,  "  you
are  spoiling  the  gate."  "  Ah,  John,  that  is  what  you  want  to  do  with  Christ's
work ;  He  has  completed  the  work  of  your  salvation,  yet  you  want  to  spoil  it  by
doing  something — ^you  don't  know  what — to  improve  upon  it  1 "  This  practical
hint  was  just  what  John  needed,  and  there  and  then  he  gave  up  trying  to  improve
upon  the  work  of  Christ,  and  gave  himself  up  to  be  saved  at  once,  just  as  he  was,
in  the  workshop.  We  should  be  made  heirs. — Heirs  of  eternal  life  .'—In  these
words  is  laid  down  the  second  end  of  that  new  condition  into  which  believers  are
brought.  In  which  for  the  meaning  two  parts  must  be  considered — 1.  The  right  and
privilege  of  believers  who,  being  once  justified  by  faith,  are  made  heirs  of  life  eternal.
2.  Their  present  tenure  of  this  their  inheritance  by  hope.   L  For  the  former,  the  word

HEIB  IN  THE  FIBST   AND   PBOPEB   BIGNTFICATION  BETOKENETH  A  LOT,  and  Is  USCd   BOmC-

times  in  the  New  Testament  with  allusion  unto  the  twelve  tribes,  whose  portions
were  divided  and  distributed  unto  them  by  lot,  as  Eph.  i.  11,  whence  that  people
were  more  peculiarly  called  the  lines  and  heritage  of  the  Lord,  as  whom  Himsell
made  partakers  of  all  the  good  things  of  that  land ;  and  by  proportion  those  also
who  by  faith  laid,  or  shaJl  lay,  hold  upon  His  covenant,  for  aU  those  spiritual  and
eternal  good  things  shadowed  out  thereby.  But  commonly  it  signifieth  those  who
after  a  man's  death  succeed  him  in  his  goods  and  possessions,  especially  children,
whose  right  it  is  to  inherit  their  father's  lands  and  possessions ;  and  thus  must  we
become  heirs  by  becoming  the  sons  and  children  of  God.  Now,  whereas  children
are  either  natural  or  adopted,  our  title  to  this  inheritance  cometh  in  by  the  grace  of
adoption,  seeing  Christ  is  the  only  natural  Son,  as  we  confess  in  our  creed ;  and  the
phrase  of  the  text  is  observable,  which  faith  we  are  made  heirs,  but  not  so  born ;  so
as  this  inheritance  belongeth  properly  unto  Christ  the  natural  son,  the  heir,  and
firfitbom  of  many  brethren,  and  consequently  through  Him  communicated  unto  ns,
who  are  sons  by  adoption  (John  i.  12).  H.  Thb  present  tenube  of  this  iNHERiTANoa
IS  BY  HOPE,  for  our  inheritance  is  not  so  much  set  before  our  bodily  eyes  as  the  eyes
of  our  faith,  which  is  not  of  things  present,  but  of  things  to  come.  And  yet
although  it  be  an  estate  to  come,  the  Lord  would  not  leave  us  without  such  graces
as  being  conversant  about  it  might  serve  us  in  this  life  to  retain  our  hold  and  com-
fort therein,  such  as  are  faith,  hope,  and  patience.  Now  hope  signifieth  two  things
— 1.  The  thing  hoped  for.  "  Hope  which  is  seen  is  not  hope  "  (Rom.  viii.  24).
"What  is  the  hope  of  the  calling"  ffiph.  i.  18).  2.  For  the  gift  whereby  we  hope  and
expect  good  things  promised,  and  this  must  of  necessity  here  be  meant,  because  life
eternal  of  which  we  have  spoken  is  the  thing  hoped  for.    This  grace  hath  the  Lord


CHAJ.  in.]  TITUS,  IW

for  oar  enconragement  and  comfort,  in  and  for  the  state  of  this  life  only,  pat  into
the  hearts  of  His  elect,  that  they  might  hereby  have  a  certain  hold  and  expectation
of  aU  that  good  which  God  of  EUs  mercy  through  the  merit  of  His  Christ  hath
promised ;  the  which  shall  cease  when  they  come  once  to  see  that  which  they  now
hope  for,  seeing  hereafter  can  be  no  hope,  not  in  heaven,  for  the  godly  shall  enjoy
all  blessedness  their  hearts  can  wish  ;  not  in  hell,  tor  the  damned  can  never  hope
for  any  good.  1.  That  which  the  apostle  specially  aimeth  at  is  that  heaven  is  not
merited,  bat  a  free  gift ;  here  it  is  called  eternal  hfe,  which  is  the  gift  of  God  (Bom.
yi.  23).  It  is  called  here  an  inheritance,  in  that  the  elect  are  called  heirs ;  it  is
against  the  natare  of  an  inheritance  to  come  any  way  but  by  free  gift,  legacies  we
know  are  most  free  without  desert,  without  procurement,  and  what  an  absurd  thing
were  it  for  a  child  to  go  to  his  father  to  offer  to  buy  his  inheritance  ?  It  is  said
here  farther  Uiat  we  are  made  heirs,  that  is  adopted,  not  born  to  the  inheritance,
and  therefore  it  is  so  much  the  more  free.  And  lastly,  it  is  here  called  an  eternal
inheritance,  which,  if  it  be  so,  how  can  it  be  merited,  being  so  far  disproportionabla
to  anything  we  can  do.  2.  It  teach  eth  us  if  we  would  have  right  to  eternal  life  to
become  the  sons  of  God,  and  consequently  heirs ;  seek  to  be  resolved  that  thou  hast
a  child's  part  in  heaven.  How  shall  I  come  to  know  this  ?  A  man  may  know
himself  an  heir  of  grace  by  two  things — (1)  By  the  presence  of  faith,  for  this
intitleth  into  the  covenant.  Noah  by  faith  was  made  heir  of  the  righteousness
which  is  by  faith  (Heb.  xi.  7).  Faith  in  the  Son  of  God  it  is  which  maketh  thee
the  King's  son  and  free  bom ;  this  is  the  means  of  thy  freedom,  here  cometh  in
thy  title,  if  thou  reliest  only  upon  the  mercy  of  God  in  Christ  for  thy  salutation.

(2)  By  the  presence  of  sanctification  of  heart,  sanctimony  of  life  (1  Cor.  vi.  10, 11).
3.  This  doctrine  teacheth  ns  to  set  our  hearts  upon  this  inheritance ;  a  man  that
hath  any  possibiUty  to  befal  him  cannot  keep  his  mind,  but  it  will  be  running
after  it,  insomuch  as  many  wicked  children  in  regard  of  their  patrimony  will
inquire  into  their  fathers'  years,  and  grow  sick  of  their  mothers,  and  it  is  ordinary
that  such  as  look  for  windfalls  by  decease  will  be  feeding  their  hearts  with  their
hopes ;  so  should  it  be  with  us,  who  may,  without  injury  to  our  Father,  long  after
oar  inheritance  in  heaven ;  and  as  we  see  men  take  no  content  in  any  part  of  the
earth,  no  nor  in  the  whole,  comparable  to  that  peace  or  portion  which  is  their  own,
even  so  should  not  we  suffer  our  hearts  so  to  wander  after  earth  or  earthly  things,
as  that  we  settle  our  contentment  anywhere  but  where  our  inheritance  and  our
treasure  is.  The  which  desire  if  it  filled  our  hearts,  three  worthy  fruits  of  it  would
manifest  themselves  through  our  lives.  (1)  It  would  moderate  the  eager  cares  of
tiiiB  life,  and  would  not  suffer  men  to  become  drudges,  or  sell  themselves  as  slaves
onto  the  earth,  for  he  that  taketh  himself  to  be  an  heir  of  heaven  is  well  enough
provided  and  cared  for  already,  his  Father  hath  left  him  so  well  as  he  need  not
basely  shift  for  himself.  (2)  It  would  content  the  mind  with  any  present  condi-
tion. 4.  Set  tiiyself  well  to  keep  this  inheritance  and  the  deeds  of  it,  lay  up  the
covenant  safe  in  the  closet  of  the  soul,  hide  the  Word,  which  is  the  indenture  of
God  passing  it  unto  thee,  in  the  midst  of  thy  heart,  let  not  Satan  nor  any  cheater
defraud  thee  of  it.  5.  This  doctrine  affordeth  sundry  grounds  of  most  sweet  con-
Bolation.  (1)  The  meanest  believer  is  a  great  heir,  and  that  to  all  God's  best
blessings,  a  truth  which  few  see  as  they  might  and  ought,  and  therefore  fail  of
that  comfort  which  God  hath  put  into  their  hands.  (2)  God's  children  being  such
heirs,  they  cannot  but  in  the  meantime  be  well  provided  for  till  their  patrimony
fall.  We  know  that  great  heirs  in  their  minority  are  well  and  honestly  maintained,
their  fathers  being  rich  and  kind  will  not  suffer  them  to  want  things  fit  for  them,
and  what  thay  want  in  the  purse  they  have  in  their  education,  and  if  they  be  any
way  scanted  for  the  present  they  shall  afterward  find  it  with  much  advantage.

(3)  In  any  want  thou,  being  thy  Father's  heir,  mayest  boldly  repair  to  thy  Father,
with  good  hope  to  speed  in  any  request  which  He  seeth  fit  for  thee  and  making  for
thy  good.  (T.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Looking  for  the  hope  of  eternal  K/«;— One
bright  morning  last  summer,  while  travelling  in  Switzerland,  I  took  my  seat  on  the
top  of  a  diligence  as  we  passed  along  the  magnificent  country  from  Geneva  to
Chamounix.  I  was  full  of  expectation  to  see  Mont  Blanc.  Our  driver  said,  as  we
drew  nearer  the  object  of  our  journey,  "  Unless  a  cloud  sails  up  and  covers  its  fore-
head yoQ  will  see  it  leaning  up  against  the  clear  blue  sky."  I  need  not  tell  yoa  I
kept  looking  up,  feeling  that  every  moment  brought  me  nearer  to  the  sight  I  M
much  wanted  to  see.    {Mn.  Bottome.)

Yer.  8.  Maintain  good  works. — The  maintenance  of  good  worjkt ;— L  What  wb


196  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  in.

ONCE  WEBB.    A  threefold  set  of  evils  is  here  described.    1.  The  first  set  consists  of
the  evils  of  the  mind  :  •'  We  were  sometimes  foolish,  disobedient,  deceived."    We
were  foolish.     We  thought  we  knew,  and  therefore  we  did  not  learn.     Every  lover
of  vice  is  a  fool  writ  large.     In  addition  to  being  foolish,  we  are  paid  to  have  been
disobedient ;  and  so  we  were,  for  we  forsook  the  commands  of  God.    We  wanted
our  own  will  and  way.     We  were  unwilling  to  yield  God  His  due  place  either  in
providence,  law,  or  gospel.     Paul  adds  that  we  were  deceive  1,  or  led  astray.    Wo
were  the  dupes  of  custom  and  of  company.    We  were  here,  there,  and  everywhere
in  our  actions  :  no  more  to  be  relied  upon  than  lost  sheep.    2.  The  next  bundle  of
mischief  is  found  in  the  evils  of  our  pursuits.    The  apostle  says  we  were  "  sei-ving
divers  lusts  and  pleasures."    The  word  for  "  serving  "  means  being  under  servitude.
We  were  once  the  slaves  of  divers  lusts  and  pleasures.    By  lusts  we  understand
desires,  longings,  ambitions,  passions.    Many  are  these  masters,  and  they  are  all
tyrants.    Some  are  ruled  by  greed  for  money ;  others  crave  for  fame ;  some  are
enslaved  by  lust  for  power ;  others  by  the  lust  of  the  eye ;  and  many  by  the  lusts
of  the  flesh.    3.  We  were  also  the  bond-slaves  of  pleasure.    Alas  I  alas  I  that  we
were  so  far  infatuated  as  to  call  it  pleasure  I    Looking  back  at  our  former  lives,
we  may  well  be  amazed  that  we  could  once  take  pleasure  in  things  whereof  we  are
now  ashamed.    The  Lord  has  taken  the  very  name  of  our  former  idols  out  of  our
mouths.    A  holy  man  was  wont  to  carry  with  him  a  book  which  had  three  leaves
in  it,  but  never  a  word.    The  first  leaf  was  black,  and  this  showed  his  sin  ;  the
second  was  red,  and  this  reminded  him  of  the  way  of  cleansing  by  blood ;  while
the  third  was  white,  to  show  how  clean  the  Lord  can  make  us.    I  beg  you  just  now
to  study  that  first  black  page.    It  is  all  black ;  and  as  you  look  at  it  it  shows  blacker
and  blacker.    What  seemed  at  one  time  to  be  a  httle  white  darkens  down  as  it  is
gazed  upon,  till  it  wears  the  deepest  shade  of  aH.    Te  were  sometimes  erring  in
your  minds  and  in  your  pursuits.    Is  not  this  enough  to  bring  the  water  into  your
eyes,  O  ye  that  now  follow  the  Lamb  whithersoever  He  goeth  ?    4.  The  apostle  then
mentions  the  evils  of  our  hearts.    Here  you  must  discriminate  and  judge,  each  one
for  himself,  how  far  the  accusation  hes.    He  speaks  of  "  Uving  in  malice  and  envy,
hateful  and  hating  one  another."    That  is  to  say,  first,  we  harboured  anger  against
those  who  had  done  us  evil ;  and,  secondly,  we  lived  in  envy  of  those  who  appeared
to  have  more  good  than  we  had  ourselves.    II.  What  has  been  done  fob  os  ?    1.
First,  there  was  a  Divine  interposition.    The  love  and  kindness  of  God  our  Saviour,
which  had  always  existed,  at  length  "  appeared  "  when  God,  in  the  person  of  His
Son,  came  hither,  met  our  iniquities  hand  to  hand,  and  overcame  their  terrible
power,  that  we  also  might  overcome.     2.  Note  well  that  there  was  a  Divine  salva-
tion.   In  consequence  of  the  interposition  of  Jesus,  believers  are  described  as  being
saved:  "not  by  works  of  righteousness  which  we  have  done,  but  according  to  His
mercy  He  saved  us."     Hearken  to  this.    There  are  men  in  the  world  who  are
saved :  they  are  spoken  of,  not  as  "  to  be  saved,"  not  as  to  be  saved  when  they
come  to  die,  but  saved  even  now — saved  from  the  dominion  of  the  evils  which  we
described  under  our  first  head :  saved  from  folly,  disobedience,  delusion,  and  the
hke.    Whosoever  believeth  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  whom  God  has  set  forth  to  be
the  propitiation  for  sin,  is  saved  from  the  guilt  and  power  of  sin.    He  shall  no
longer  be  the  slave  of  his  lusts  and  pleasures ;  he  is  saved  from  that  dread  bondage.
He  is  saved  from  hate,  for  he  has  tasted  love,  and  learned  to  love.    He  shall  not  be
condemned  for  all  that  he  has  hitherto  done,  for  his  great  Substitute  ana  Saviour
has  borne  away  the  guilt,  the  curse,  the  punishment  of  sin ;  yea,  and  sin  itself.
3.  There  was  a  motive  for  this  salvation.    Positively,  "  According  to  His  mercy  He
saved  us  " ;  and,  negatively,  "  Not  by  works  of  righteousness  which  we  have  done."
We  could  not  have  been  saved  at  the  first  by  our  works  of  righteousness;  for
we  had  not  done  any.    "No,"  says  the  apostle,  "we  were  foolish,  disobedient,
deceived,"  and  therefore  we  had  no  works  of  righteousness,  and  yet  the  Lord  inter-
posed and  saved  us.     Behold  and  admire  the  splendour  of  His  love,  that  "  He  loved
us  even  when  we  were  dead  in  sins."    He  loved  us,  and  therefore  quickened  us.    4.
There  was  a  power  by  which  we  were  saved.    The  way  in  which  we  are  delivered
from  the  dominion  of  sin  is  by  the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost.     This  adorable  Person
is  very  God  of  very  God.     This  Divine  Being  comes  to  us  and  causes  us  to  be  born
again.    By  His  eternal  power  and  Godhead  He  gives  us  a  totally  new  nature,  a  life
which  could  not  grow  out  of  our  former  life,  nor  be  developed  from  our  nature — a
life  which  is  a  new  creation  of  God.     We  are  saved,  not  by  evolution,  but  by
oiealion.     The  Spirit  of  God  creates  us  anew  in  Christ  Jesns  unto  good  works.
We  experience  regeneration,  which  means — being  generated  o.er  again,  or  bom


'.  in.]  TITUS.  197

again.    6.  There  is  also  mentioned  a  blessed  privilege  which  comes  to  us  by  Jesus
Christ.    The  Spirit  is  shed  on  as  abundantly  by  Jesus  Christ,  and  we  are  "  justified
by  His  grace."     Both  justification  and  sanctification  come  to  as  through  the
medium  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.    6.   Once  more,  there  comes  out  of  this  a
Divine  result.    We  become  to-day  joint-heirs  with  Clurist  Jesus,  and  so  heirs  of  •
heavenly  estate ;  and  then  out  of  this  heirship  there  grows  a  hope  which  reaches
forward  to  the  eternal  future  with  exceeding  joy.    III.  What  wb  wish  to  do.    "  Be
careful  to  maintain  good  works."    1.  This  precept  is  fuU  in  its  meaning.    What
are  good  works  ?    The  term  is  greatly  inclusive.    Of  course  we  number  in  the  list
works  of  charity,  works  of  kindness  and  benevolence,  works  of  piety,  reverence^
and  holiness.    Such  works  as  comply  with  the  two  tables  of  command  are  good
works.    Works  of  obedience  are  good  works.    What  you  do  because  God  bids  yoa
do  it,  is  a  good  work.    Works  of  love  to  Jesus,  done  out  of  a  desire  for  His  glory,
these  are  good  works.    The  common  actions  of  every-day  life,  when  they  are  well
done,  with  a  view  not  to  merit,  bat  one  of  gratitude — these  are  good  works.    "  Be
careful  to  maintain  good  works"  of  every  sort  and  kind.    2.  This  precept  is  special
in  its  direction.    To  the  sinner,  that  he  may  be  saved,  we  say  not  a  word  con-
cerning good  works,  except  to  remind  him  that  he  has  none  of  them.    To  the
believer  who  is  saved,  we  say  ten  thousand  words  concerning  good  works,  beseeching
him  to  bring  forth  much  fruit,  that  so  he  may  be  Christ's  disciple.    For  living  worksyoa
must  have  a  living  faith,  and  for  loving  works  you  must  have  a  loving  faith.    When
we  know  and  trust  Qod,  then  with  holy  intelligence  and  sacred  confidence  we  work
His  pleasure.    3.  This  precept  is  weighty  in  importance,  for  it  is  prefaced  thus :
"  This  is  a  faithful  saying."    This  is  one  among  four  great  matters  thus  described.
It  is  not  trivial,  it  is  not  a  temporary  precept  which  belongs  to  an  extinct  race  and
a  past  age.     "This  is  a  faithful  saying" — a  true  Christian  proverb,  "that  they
which  have  believed  in  God  might  be  careful  to  maintain  good  works."    Let  the
ungodly  never  say  that  we  who  believe  in  free  grace  think  lightly  of  a  holy  life.
4. 1  am  afraid  that  this  precept  of  being  careful  to  maintain  good  works  is  neglected
in  practice,  or  else  the  apostle  would  not  have  said  to  Titus,  "  These  things  I  will
that  thou  affirm  constantly."    There  are  still  persons  in  our  Churches  who  need
to  have  the  ten  commandments  read  to  them  every  Sabbath-day.    It  is  not  a  bad
plan  to  pat  up  the  ten  commandments  near  the  communion  table  where  they  can
be  clearly  seen.     Some  people  need  to  see  them ;  though  I  am  afraid,  when  they
oome  in  their  way,  they  wink  hard  at  some  of  the  commands,  and  go  away  and
forget  that  they  have  seen  them.    Common  morality  is  neglected  by  some  who  call
themselves  Christians.    6.  This,  mark  you,  is  supported  by  argument.    The  apostle
presses  home  his  precept  by  saying :  "  These  tlungs  are  good  and  profitable  onto
men."    Men  are  won  to  Christ  when  they  see  Christianity  embodied  in  the  good
and  the  true.    (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)        The  connection  of  faith  and  good  works: —
Truth  is  many-sided.    And  though  like  a  pore  gem,  it  is  on  all  sides  equally  bright,
it  cannot  all  be  seen  at  once.    No  merely  human  mind  can  so  take  it  all  up  as  to
give  to  every  part  the  same  sharp  and  well-defined  outline.     Truth  in  the  mind  of
Christ  was  like  light  in  the  sun,  pure  and  undivided,  and  ever  came  out  in  its
glorious  integrity.    In  the  minds  of  his  followers  it  was  like  light  in  the  prism,  in
which  the  rays  are  separated,  or  like  light  in  the  bow,  in  which,  according  to  certain
laws,  the  rays  are  first  refracted,  and  then  reflected  in  the  drops  of  rain,  and  in
whic^  we  see  the  conquering  splendour  of  the  light  in  its  straggle  with  darkness.
Faith  and  works  were  never  separated — not  even  in  idea — in  the  teaching  of  Christ.
In  His  own  miad  they  were  indissoluble,  and  so  in  His  instructions.    H  faith  did
not  express  itself  in  corresponding  action,  He  denied  the  existence  of  the  principle,
or  rather  He  treated  men  as  still  on  the  side  of  the  world  and  of  self.    His  apostles,
on  the  contrary,  gave  to  all  truth  their  ovm  mental  cast  and  colouring,  and  unless
these  various  colours  are  allowed  to  meet  and  mingle,  we  shall  lack  the  pure  light.
Though  Paul  and  James  are  treating  of  one  and  the  same  subject,  each  has  his
own  mode  of  statement ;  and  the  light  in  which  he  places  it  depends  on  his  own
individual  state  of  mind.    Both  apostles  are  teaching  and  enforcing  the  same
doctrine,  but  the  parties  whom  they  have  in  view  are  not  the  same.    The  teachers
occupy  exactly  the  same  position;  but  those  to  whom  they  address  themselves
have  assumed  entirely  opposite  and  conflicting  points.     The  contrariety  is  not  in
the  statements  of  the  inspired  men,  but  in  the  minds  of  Christian  professors.
Each  is  a  firm  believer  in  the  article  of  justification  by  faith,  but  it  has  different
phases,  and  according  as  it  appears  to  the  one  or  the  other,  is  his  representation.
Xbe  aim  of  St.  f  aul  is  to  set  forth  God's  method  of  forgiveness  and  acceptance


IM  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  um,

throagh  the  mediation  of  His  Son; — ^that  this  is  revealed  for  faith,  and  that
through  faith  alone  do  we  come  to  participate  in  all  the  provision  of  redeeming
love.  Faith,  and  not  justification,  is  his  theme.  There  is  but  one  ground  of
dependence — but  one  foundation  on  which  the  soul  can  rest  her  hope  of  eternal
life,  and  from  which  all  works  are  necessarily  and  for  ever  excluded.  But  having
been  once  brought  to  repose  our  faith  in  the  Divine  method  of  salvation,  it  remains
that  we  give  evidence  of  the  fact.  We  cannot  be  in  communion  with  the  Redeemer
of  oar  souls  without  partaking  His  higher  life ;  and  we  cannot  be  in  communion
with  the  Spirit  of  life  without  producing  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit.  Henoe  the
challenge  of  St.  James  addressed  in  words  of  sharp-pointed  irony  to  those  who
were  boasting  of  their  faith  as  something  separate  and  separable  from  a  life  of
practical  holiness  —  "Show  Me  thy  faith  without  thy  works."  If  it  have  no
outward  expression,  how  is  it  to  be  known  or  discovered  ?  "As  the  body  without
the  spirit  is  dead,  so  faith  without  works  is  dead  also."  As  the  spirit  is  the  inward
animating  and  informing  principle,  and  manifests  itself  in  the  outward  acts  and
movements  of  the  body,  so  faith  has  in  it  an  element  of  life,  which  cannot  but
develop  itself  in  practical  godliness  and  holy  activity.  It  follows  that  there  is  not
one  faith  to  justify  a  siimer  and  another  faith  to  justify  a  believer.  The  same
iaith  justifies  both ;  or  rather,  the  faith  which  brings  a  man  to  simple  dependence
on  the  propitiation  set  forth  by  God  for  the  remission  of  sins,  has  in  it  such  a  force
and  vitality  as  ever  afterwards  to  come  out  in  those  buds  and  blossoms  which  have
their  fruit  unto  holiness  and  the  end  everlasting  life.  If  this  simple  fact  had  been
but  kept  in  view,  no  discrepancy  would  have  been  found  in  the  statement  of  these
two  inspired  men.  The  one  wholly  excludes  the  human  element  from  the  Divine
method  of  reconciliation  and  life,  and  demands  the  most  childlike  faith  in  Heaven's
revealed  and  published  plan  of  mercy — the  other  sets  it  in  the  clearest  light  that
wherever  this  pure  unsophisticated  faith  has  existence  in  the  soul,  it  will  ever
manifest  itself  in  a  course  of  lofty  and  persevering  righteousness.  While  faith,
and  not  justification,  is  the  subject  treated  of  by  both  apostles,  it  may  not  be
amiss  just  to  glance  at  the  doctrine  commonly  denominated  justification  by  faith.
There  are  two  errors  common  on  this  subject.  First,  justification  is  confounded
with  acquittal ;  and,  secondly,  man  is  said  to  be  treated  as  righteous  for  the  sake  of
the  righteousness  of  another.  Now  if  he  be  acquitted,  he  needs  not  to  be  treated
as  righteous.  He  is  righteous ;  and  is  entitled  to  be  dealt  with  according  to  his
rectitude.  And  if  he  be  righteous,  it  is  absurd  and  contradictory  to  speak  of  his
acquittal.  Man  has  sinned ;  and  the  proof  of  his  guilt  is  overwhehmng.  With
the  sentence  of  condemnation  lying  heavy  upon  his  heart,  he  may  be  pardoned,  but
he  can  never  be  declared  to  be  innocent.  But  is  not  the  righteousness  of  Christ
said  to  be  imputed  to  us,  and  that  we  become  righteous  on  the  ground  of  Hi4
righteousness  1  In  creeds,  and  catechisms,  and  commentaries,  it  certainly  is  so,
but  nowhere  in  the  Book  of  God.  The  righteousness  of  Christ  is  a  phrase  which
never  occurs  but  once  in  the  whole  of  the  Christian  Testament.  When  the  great
apostle  of  the  nations  would  heighten  our  idea  of  the  grace  of  God,  by  setting  the
blessings  of  redeeming  love  over  against  the  evils  entailed  upon  our  race  by  the
introduction  of  sin,  he  says,  "  As  by  the  offence  of  one,  judgment  came  upon  all
men  unto  condemnation ;  even  so  by  the  righteousness  of  one,  the  free  gift  came
upon  all  men  unto  justification  of  life."  He  does  not  represent  the  righteousness
of  the  One,  as  something  imputed  or  transferred  from  Christ  to  man,  but  simply
as  the  procuring  cause  of  our  forgiveness  and  life.  The  righteousness  is  put  for
the  whole  work  of  the  Saviour's  mediation,  and  this  is  declared  to  be  the  sole
groxmd  on  which  the  blessings  of  Divine  mercy  are  extended  to  our  fallen  world.
Nor  is  more  than  this  to  be  extracted  from  the  deep  saying  of  this  same  apostle,
when  in  words  that  breathe,  he  thus  expresses  the  inmost  feeling  of  his  soul :  *'  I
have  suffered  the  loss  of  all  things,  that  I  may  win  Christ  and  be  found  in  Him,
not  having  mine  own  righteousness  which  is  of  the  law,  but  that  which  is  through
the  faith  of  Chi-ist — the  righteousness  which  is  of  God  by  faith."  The  idea  here
is,  that  he  was  supremely  anxious  to  be  kept  from  even  the  attempt  of  laying  a
foundation  in  his  own  strivings  and  doings  for  his  acceptance  with  God,  and  that
he  might  ever  be  led  to  repose  by  a  simple  faith  in  the  one  Divine  method  of  for-
giveness and  salvation.  The  righteousness  of  God  is  God's  revealed  plan  of  saving
man  through  the  propitiatory  offering  of  His  Son.  Faith  in  this  propitiation
involves  an  act  of  perfect  self-renunciation,  an  acknowledgment  of  conscious  sin
and  weakness,  and  a  resting  upon  another  for  help  and  succour.  Our  justification
introduces  as  into  a  new  and  loftier  relation.     Our  Father  in  heaven  may  not  treat


OBir.  m.]  TITUa,  199

as  as  righteons,  bat  He  will  most  sorely  bless  as  as  His  adopted  ones.  If  we  can
prefer  no  claim  we  may  yet  possess  all  good.  If  salvation  can  never  be  of  worka
it  can  ever  be  of  grace.  If  life  is  not  a  right  it  is  yet  our  high  privilege  and  oar
mightier  joy.  This  life  is  progressive.  As  the  first  ray  of  light  that  gilds  the
moontain's  height  predicts  a  meridian  snn,  and  as  the  first  blush  of  the  opening
fiower  promises  a  full  and  perfect  bloom,  so  the  faintest  Indications  of  the  life  c^
Ood  in  the  soul  assure  us  of  continued  growth  and  progress,  till,  from  its  fulness
and  exuberance,  it  burst  into  all  the  beauty  and  perfection  of  heaven.  The  power
that  quickens  is  the  power  that  purifies.  There  are  spots  on  the  disc  of  the  sun«
only  they  are  invisible  through  the  effulgence  and  the  fulness  of  his  light,  and
there  are  bat  few  spirits  so  highly  sanctified  and  refined  as  to  render  indiscernible,
through  the  glory  which  surrounds  them,  those  sin-spots  which  daily  alight  upon
their  renewed  nature.  Nor  can  the  work  of  inward  holiness  be  perfected  so  long
as  we  are  in  this  body  of  death.  It  is  in  the  act  of  shaking  mortality  oft  that  the
Spirit  puts  forth  his  last  and  latest  effort  in  the  soul ;  and  it  is  only  when  the  soul
has  burst  her  prison-wall,  let  fall  the  last  link  of  the  chain  which  bound  her  to
eurth,  and  is  on  her  way  to  the  great  world  of  light,  that  she  is  conscious  of  her
final  and  everlasting  separation  from  sin.  Up  to  that  mysterious  point  we  may
become  day  by  day  more  closely  assimilated  to  God  oar  Saviour.  Our  sanctification
is  inseparable  from  our  justification.  It  is  not  enough  that  we  live.  It  is  the
will  of  God  that  we  should  enjoy  the  fulness  of  life.  Life  can  have  fellowship
on^  with  life.  We  must,  therefore,  detach  ourselves  from  every  opposing  element
and  infiuenoe.  We  must  give  up  the  material  and  the  visible  for  the  spiritual  and
the  unseen.  Enjoyment  without  activity  would  not  be  an  unmixed  good.  It
follows  that  as  life  is  quickened  and  our  nature  is  purified,  we  are  freed  from  sloth
and  sluggishness.  The  soul  moves  with  a  freedom  and  a  swiftness  corresponding
to  the  onconfined  liberty  of  heaven.  That  is  a  world  of  never-ending  activity,
and,  in  proportion  as  we  rise  into  conformity  with  the  pure  spirits  that  surround
the  throne  of  God,  shall  we,  like  them,  employ  all  our  renovated  powers  in  holy
and  active  service?  Christianity  is  love — universal,  unboimded  love — and  embraces
within  itself  the  present  and  the  everlasting  interests  of  man.  And  the  more  we
partake  its  spirit,  the  more  entire  will  be  our  consecration— the  more  unreserved
our  activity  and  our  service.  Let  no  one  be  startled  and  offended  with  the  doctrine
of  good  works.  They  necessarily  flow  from  faith.  They  are  faith  in  action.
They  are  "  the  living  effluence  of  the  tide  of  Divine  love,"  which  refuses  to  be
confined  within  any  prescribed  limits,  and  flows  out  in  deeds  of  unwearied
benevolence  and  piety.  He  who  repudiates  a  life  of  well-doing  in  the  dreamy
belief  that  in  the  same  proportion  he  is  exalting  the  grace  of  God,  is  not  the  man
whose  character  exhibits  the  closest  correspondence  to  the  pure  and  sublime
reqoirements  of  the  Book.  It  is  a  grand  mistake  to  suppose  that  the  law  ia
repealed  by  the  gospel.  In  Christianity  the  law  reappears  ;  only  it  is  transfigured
and  glorified.  Every  utterance  which  was  given  in  the  thunder-tones  of  Sinai,
is  re-echoed  with  heightened  emphasis  in  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  only  it  comes
silent  as  the  light  and  gentle  as  the  dew  from  the  lips  of  Incarnate  Love.  We  hold
that  salvation  is  by  grace  and  not  by  works ;  but  where  the  works  are  wanting  th»
grace  cannot  be  present.  Our  activity  and  our  service  will  be  the  everlasting
recognition  and  expression  of  the  fact  that  we  have  been  redeemed  by  blood  and
saved  by  grace.  We  should  be  unfaithful  to  our  ministry  and  to  your  souls  did
we  dare  to  say  that  sin  committed  by  a  professed  believer  is  less  criminal  or  less
damnable  than  what  we  discover  in  the  unregenerate  and  the  unholy.  Sin  is  sin
by  whomsoever  committed,  and  involves  the  same  tremendous  consequences.  It
is  of  infinite  moment  that  they  who  believe  in  God  should  be  careful  to  maintain
good  works — that  their  life  should  be  pure,  their  character  transparent,  and  their
conduct  patent.  Their  principles  should  be  above  suspicion,  and  their  whole
course  of  action  such  as  may  challenge  the  higher  light  of  the  world  to  come.
{R.  Ferguton,  LL.D.)  The  practice  of  good  works : — I.  It  is  not  enough  to  believk
WHAT  God  hath  said  to  be  true,  and  to  arvE  oub  assent  to  the  cebtaintt  or
Divine  revelation,  unless  oub  belief  influences  oub  heart  and  life.  Christ's
laws,  as  weU  as  any  other,  run  in  this  disjunction — either  do  or  suffer ;  either  live
holily,  or  perish  everlastingly :  nothing  is  therein  promised,  but  upon  condition  of
oar  obedience.  The  main  thing  our  Saviour  aimed  at  all  His  life  was  to  restore
human  nature  to  its  primitive  purity  and  perfection,  and  to  advance  true  piety  and
holiness  in  the  world  ;  to  bring  men  to  a  good  opinion  of  and  a  ready  compUance
with  Ck>d'8  laws,  bo  that  it  influences  all  Uieir  actions,  faith  not  being  enough  to


900  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  nr

denominate  a  man  a  tme  Christian,  nnless  he  goes  on  to  add  to  his  faith  virtoe,
Ac.    II.  The  pbacticb  o»  oood  wobks,  taken  either  fob  piety  towards  God  ob

OHABITT   T0WABD8    MAN,  18    AB80LDTELY  NECEBSART  FOB  ALL  UNTO  SALVATION.       1.    They

render  our  services  more  acceptible  unto  God.  Purity  and  holiness  in  the  heart,
before  these  be  or  when  there  is  no  opportiinity  to  work,  are  in  themselves  good  ;
but  when  they  are  demonstrated  by  godly  and  charitable  actions,  then  smell  they
sweet,  and  are  sacrifices  well-pleasing.  2.  By  them  God's  name  is  more  glorified
(Matt.  T.  16).  8.  By  them  we  shall  be  the  greatest  gainers  or  losers,  in  that  by
them  we  make  oui  calling  and  election  sure  (2  Pet.  i.  10).    III.  Why  those  abb

HOBB  INDI8PENSABLT  OBLIOBD  TO  BE  EXEMFIiABT  IN  ALL  GOOD  WOBES,  WHO  HAVE  BBEH
MOBB    PABTICDLABLT    ACQUAINTED   WITH    God'S   WILL,    AND    BABLT    INSTBDCTBD    IN    IT.

As  we  may  be  supposed  to  have  been,  whose  parents  were  our  spiritual  guides,  aa
well  as  fathers  of  our  flesh,  and  under  whose  roof  we  were  early  seasoned  with
their  daily  instructions  and  good  example.  We  shall,  therefore,  reflect  upon  '-heir
memory  and  care,  we  shall  cause  others  to  uncover  their  ashes  with  dishonour,
onless  we  adorn  that  faith  our  fathers  believed,  which  they  taught  us,  and  which
we  saw  them  practise.  (Thot.  Whincop,  D.D.)  On  the  necessity  of  good  works :
— I.  The  cebtain  tbuth  and  CBEDiBiLrn  of  this  sayino  ob  pboposition,  that
they  which  have  believed  in  God  ought  to  be  careful  to  maintain  good  works.

I.  If  we  consider  the  great  end  and  design  of  religion  in  general,  which  is  to
make  ns  happy,  by  possessing  our  minds  with  the  belief  of  a  God,  and  those
other  principles  which  have  a  necessary  connection  with  that  belief,  and  by  obliging
hb  to  the  obedience  and  practice  of  His  laws.  2.  If  we  consider  the  great  end  and
design  of  the  Christian  religion  in  particular,  which  was  to  reform  the  world,  to
purity  the  hearts  and  lives  of  men  from  corrupt  affections  and  wicked  practices,  to
teach  men  to  excel  in  all  kinds  of  virtue  and  goodness.  II.  The  obeat  fitness  Aia>
necessity  of  inculcating  fbequently  upon  all  that  pbofess  themselves  Chbistiasb,
the  indisi>ensable  necessity  of  the  practice  of  the  virtues  of  a  good  life.  {A  bp.  Tillotson.)
Oood  works : — I.  That  believebs  abe  undeb  obligations  to  maintain  good  wobks  is
80  evident,  not  only  from  the  text,  but  from  the  whole  tenor  of  the  Scripture,  that
I  know  of  no  sect  of  Christians  that  pretend  to  deny  it.  But,  with  regard  to
their  place  and  importance  as  connected  with  our  salvation,  great  mistakes  have
been  made.  It  will  certainly  then  be  worth  our  pains  to  inquire  from  the  oracles  of
God,  "  How  far  and  in  what  respect  are  our  good  works  necessary  to  be  maintained
with  regard  to  salvation."  1.  In  my  negative  answer  to  this  question,  I  must  first
observe  that  we  are  not  to  do  good  works  in  order  to  change  God's  purposes  and
designs  towards  us ;  or  to  excite  His  benevolence  and  compassion  to  us.  Our  busi-
ness is  to  come  to  Christ  and  learn  of  Him,  to  bow  our  necks  to  His  yoke,  to  do
good  works  from  faith  in  Christ,  and  out  of  love  and  obedience  to  Him  ;  and  in  that
way  to  hope  in  God  for  mercy,  for  Christ's  sake,  and  for  His  own  sake,  and  not  for
crars.  2.  We  are  not  to  do  good  works  with  a  view  to  qualify  us  for  our  reception
of  Christ  by  faith,  or  for  obtaining  an  interest  in  Him.  The  gospel  brings  glorious
tidings  of  salvation  to  perishing  sinners.  It  exempts  and  excludes  none  who  will
come  to  Christ  for  Ufe,  who  will  come  to  Him  as  lost  sinners  under  a  sense  of  their
guilt  and  unworthiness,  who  will  "  buy  of  Him  wine  and  milk  without  money  and
without  price,  and  who  will  take  the  water  of  Life  freely."  3.  I  must  further  add
that  we  are  not  to  do  good  works  in  expectation  that  we  shall  by  them  obtain  a
title  to  the  future  inheritance.  Heaven  is  a  purchased  possession ;  our  title  to  it,
our  qualification  for  it,  our  perseverance  in  the  way  that  leads  thither,  and  our  eternal
enjoyment  of  the  glorious  inheritance,  are  all  purchased  by  the  blood  of  Christ.  In
all  these  respects  Christ  Jesus  is  our  Hope ;  and  when  we  "  rejoice  in  hope  of
the  glory  of  God,"  we  must  "rejoice  in  Christ  Jesus,  having  no  confidence  in  the
flesh."  4.  I  shall  only  add  that  we  must  not  depend  upon  our  good  works  for  re-
newing supplies  of  grace,  and  for  continual  progress  in  holiness,  and  comfort  unto
God's  heavenly  kingdom.  We  are  not  only  justified  by  faith,  but  we  must  be
sanctified  by  faith  too,  and  of  Christ's  "  fulness  must  receive  even  giace  for  grace."

II.  I  proceed  now  to  show  you  in  what  bespects  good  wobks  are  of  necessity  ;  and
to  that  purposes  they  must  be  done  by  all  those  who  would  approve  themselves
Christians  indeed.  1.  Good  works  are  necessary  as  boing  one  design  of  our  redemp-
tion and  effectual  calling.  Though  not  the  fountain  aud  foundation  of  a  renewed
nature,  they  are  always  the  streams  that  flow  from  that  fountain,  and  the  super-
structure upon  that  foundation.  Though  they  do  not  sanctify  us  they  are  the
natural  and  necessary  actings  nnd  operations  of  a  sanctified  heart.  2.  Good  works
are  necessary,  as  they  belong  to  the  way  leading  to  heaven.     "  Without  boliivess


CHAP.  III.]  TITUS.  201

no  man  shall  see  the  Lord."    We  must  not  only  "  enter  in  at  the  strait  gate,  but
walk  in  the  narrow  way  which  leadeth  unto  life."  They  who  would  hope  for  heaven
hereafter  must  have  it  begun  in  their  sools  here.    Their  hearts  must  be  in  some
measure  conformed  to  the  Divine  nature  and  will,  that  they  may  be  qualified  for  the
enjoyments  and  employments  of  the  heavenly  world.    3.  Good  works  are  necessary
as  acts  of  obedience  to  Ood's  commands,  and  a  just  acknowledgment  of  His  do-
minion over  ns.    Our  freedom  from  the  curses  and  demands  of  the  moral  law  as  a
covenant  of  life  is  so  far  from  freeing  ns  from  oar  duty  towards  it  as  a  rule  of  prac-
tice, or  excusing  ns  from  a  careful  observation  of  its  precepts,  that  the  glorious
liberty  we  are  made  partakers  of  is  given  as  for  this  very  end  that  we  may  serve
"  God  without  fear,  in  holiness  and  righteousness  before  Him  all  the  days  of  our
life."    4.  Good  works  are  necessary  as  expressions  of  our  gratitude  to  God  for  all
His  goodness  to  us,  more  especially  for  gospel-grace,  and  the  influences  of  His
blessed  Spirit.     They  who  have  ever  tasted  that  the  Lord  is  gracious,  and  have  any
suitable  sense  of  their  obligations  to  Him,  will  study  what  they  shall  render  to  the
Lord  for  all  His  benefits ;  they  will  delight  in  endeavours  to  glorify  Him,  titey  will
be  solicitously  careful  of  a  constant  conformity  to  His  will,  and  a  peculiar  delight
in  following  after  holiness.    6.  Good  works  are  necessary  to  honour  oar  profession,
to  adorn  the  doctrine  of  God  our  Saviour,  and  to  bring  glory  to  His  name.    6.  Good
works  are  hkewise  necessary  to  our  inward  peace  and  comfort.    A  truly  tender
conscience  will  always  remonstrate  against  the  indulgence  of  any  sin,  either  of
omission  or  cosomission.    And  how  unhappy  and  miserable  mast  that  man  be  to
have  his  heart  condemning  him  ;  to  have  a  worm  gnawing  in  his  breast,  to  have
conscience  applying  the  terrors  of  the  Lord,  and  representing  to  Him  his  guilt  and
danger  1    And  yet  this  cannot  be  avoided  without  a  life  of  good  works.    We  cannot
have  grounds  of  rejoicing,  but  from  "  the  testimony  of  our  conscience,  that  in  sim-
pUcity  and  godly  sincerity,  not  with  fleshly  wisdom,  but  by  the  grace  of  God  we  have
oar  conversation  in  the  world."    (/.  King,  B.A.)        Morality  the  proper  tuhject  of
preaching : — Among  the  many  causes  which  nave  concurred  to  render  our  holy
religion  thus  ansuccessful,  the  indifference  and  neglect  with  which  many  sects  of
Christians  have  been  accustomed  to  treat  the  moral  precepts  of  the  gospel  deserves,
I  think,  to  be  considered  as  none  of  the  least.    By  giving  an  imaginary  importance
to  subjects  of   speculation,  concerning  which  wise  and  good  men  have  always
thought,  and  will  probably  continue  to  think,  differently,  they  have  turned  aside  the
attention  and  zeal  of  mankind  from  those  things  in  which  their  present  and  future
happiness  are  really  and  principally  concerned.    My  design  is  to  counteract  the  in-
fluence of  these  prejudices,  as  far  as  I  am  able,  by  showing  that  the  principal  end
of  public  preaching  is  to  recommend  the  practice  of  virtue ;  and  that  those  who
attend  upon  it  should  be  best  satisfied  with  such  discourses  as  clearly  explain  and
strongly  inculcate  the  several  branches  of  moraUty  as  it  comprehends  our  duty  to  oax
Maker,  oar  fellow-creatures  and  ourselves,  without  entering  further  into  subjects  of
speculation  and  controversy  than  is  of  evident  importance  to  the  moral  improve-
ment and  happiness  of  mankind.  1. 1  observe,  in  the  first  place,  that  if  the  duties  of
morahty  and  religion  were  made  the  principal  subjects  of  public  preaching,  it  would
remove  or  prevent  many  evils  which  have  arisen  from  the  contrary  practice.    The
divisions  and  contentions,  the  persecutions  and  cruelties,  which  have  disgraced  the
Christian  Church,  from  its  first  establishment  to  the  present  day,  are  so  well  known
that  I  may  be  excused  the  painful  talk  of  entering  into  a  particular  enumeration  of
them.    The  time,  however,  seems  to  be  at  length  arrived,  in  which  men  are  begin-
ning to  see  the  folly  of  hating  and  persecuting  one  another  for  a  difference  in
opinion  on  subjects  concerning  which  it  is  impossible  that  they  should  be  agreed.
And  shameful  indeed  must  be  the  weakness,  and  fatal  the  delusion  of  mankind  if
the  experience  of  so  many  ages  hath  not  been  sufficient  to  teach  them  this  one
plain  bat  important  lesson,  that  all  zealous  contentions  about  particular  modes
of  faith  or  worship  are  unfriendly  to  the  interests  of  religion,  and  the  happiness  of
the  world.    From  these  circumstances  one  may  hope  that  the  present  time  is  the
dawning  of  a  happy  day,  in  which  all  distinctions  of  sects  shall  be  abolished
and  all  dissentions  and  animosities  will  be  forgotten ;  in  which  we  shall  all  love
one    another  with    pure    hearts    fervently,    and    shall    cordially    unite  in  the
worship  of  one  God,  the  Father  of  as  all.    And  what  can  be  more  likely  to  hasten
the  approach  of  this  delightful  period  than  for  the  ministers  of  religion  to  overlook
and  as  much  as  possible  discourage  every  party  distinction  and  useless  speculation,
and  constantly  to  direct  the  attention  of  their  hearers  to  those  subjects  concerning
which  we  are  all  agreed,  and  in  which  we  are  all  immediately  interested ;  I  mean  the


802  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [obat.  m.

great  duties  of  morality  and  religion  ?  2.  Another  reason  whj  theee  daties  shonld
be  the  constant  sahjecta  of  pabUo  precMshing  is  because  we  may  speak  concerning
tbem  with  the  greatest  perspicuity  and  certainty.  That  we  ought  to  venerate
the  most  excellent  and  perfect  of  all  beings  ;  that  we  should  devoutly  and  thankfully
acknowledge  the  hand  which  feeds  and  clothes  us,  and  gives  as  richly  all  things  to
enjoy ;  that  we  should  cheerfully  submit  ourselves  to  the  direction  of  that  Being
who  ordereth  all  things  well ;  that  we  should  observe  the  great  laws  of  equity  in  all
our  transactions  with  mankind  ;  that  we  should  pity,  and,  if  possible,  relieve  a
brother  in  distress ;  that  we  should  love  our  friends,  be  grateful  to  our  benefactors,
and  forgive  our  enemies ;  that  we  should  behave  with  honour  and  generosity,  kind-
ness, and  charity  towards  all  men ;  that  we  should  govern  ourselves  with  prudence
and  discretion,  and  diligently  ooltivate  the  powers  which  God  hath  given  us ;  these
are  truths  as  obvious  as  they  are  important ;  truths  concerning  which  all  mankind
in  every  country,  and  of  every  sect,  are  agreed.  They  are,  therefore,  of  all  others,
the  most  proper  subjects  of  public  discourse.  8.  I  add  this  strain  of  preaching  is
best  adapted  to  the  understanding  and  taste  of  the  generality  of  mankind.  If  a
preacher  endeavours  to  establish  received  opinions,  or  if  he  takes  pains  to  overturn
them ;  ii  he  recites  the  comments  of  the  most  learned  and  celebrated  fathers  of  the
Chorob  on  difficult  texts  of  Scripture,  and  supports  them ;  or,  if  on  the  other  hand,
he  attempts  to  explain  them  in  a  different  manner,  and,  on  this  explanation,  to
ground  a  more  rational  scheme  of  faith ;  he  may  perhaps  amnse  and  please  a  few ;
bat  he  will,  most  probably,  offend  some,  soar  above  the  understandings  of  many,
and  reach  the  hearts  of  none.  But  if  he  exhorts  his  hearers  to  maintain  good
works;  if  he  appeals  to  their  consciences  for  the  reasonableness  and  importance  of
the  duties  which  he  recommends ;  if  he  gives  them  just  and  lively  representations
of  the  influence  which  the  observance  or  neglect  of  these  duties  wUl  have  upon
their  peace  and  happiness ;  if  he  touches  the  springs  of  gratitude,  benevolence  and
homanity,  of  self-love,  of  hope  and  fear  in  their  hearts,  and  calls  forth  every  power
and  passion  within  them  to  assist  him  in  pleading  the  cause  of  virtue ;  he  will
generally  find  his  audience  attentive  and  serious,  and  may  hope  to  send  them  away
not  only  pleased  but  improved.  4.  Further,  we  may  remark,  that  to  exhort  Chria-
tians  to  maintain  good  works  is  the  proper  business  of  the  Christian  ministry.
Jesus  Christ  was  eminently  a  Preacher  of  righteousness.  This  character  He  sup-
ported during  the  whole  course  of  His  pubho  ministry.  All  the  doctrines  which  He
taught ;  all  the  wonderful  works  which  He  performed ;  all  the  pains  and  sufferings
to  which  He  submitted,  were  with  this  immediate  view,  that  He  might  take  away
sin  and  bring  in  everlasting  righteousness.  Now,  by  what  means  can  the  teachers
of  religion  so  properly  merit  the  character  of  Christian  ministers  as  by  pursuing
the  same  important  plan  with  Him  whom  they  acknowledge  as  their  Lord  and
Master  1  6.  The  last  consideration  which  I  shall  mention  to  evince  the  reasonableness
of  making  the  duties  of  morality  and  religion  the  constant  subjects  of  publie
preaching  is,  that  they  are  of  the  highest  importance  to  the  happiness  of  mankind,
and  that,  in  comparison  with  them,  all  other  subjects  are  unprofitable  and  vain.  6.  I
will  conclude  by  earnestly  recommending  it  to  you  to  take  heed  that  you  hear  with
the  same  design  with  which  your  ministers  do  or  ought  to  preach,  that  you  may  b«
confirmed  in  all  goodness.  Attend  upon  public  preaching,  not  with  a  view  to  have
your  favourite  opinions  established,  your  curiosity  gratified,  or  your  imaginations
amused ;  but  to  have  your  evil  habits  corrected,  your  good  dispositions  strengthened,
and  your  characters  continually  improved.  "  Be  ye  doers  of  the  Word,  and  not
hearers  only."  {W.  Enfield. )  The  maintenance  of  good  workt  the  fruit  of  fnith : —
This  text  places  Christian  morals  npon  a  basis  sufficiently  firm  and  extended  to
support  the  fabric.  Well  aware  of  the  absolute  necessity  of  preaching  sound
principles  in  order  to  attain  to  a  holy  practice,  and  of  the  mighty  influence  which
evangelical  doctrine,  if  rightly  understood  and  fairly  stated,  hath  npon  holiness  in
the  life,  St.  Paul  heaps  privilege  upon  privilege,  and  within  tiie  compass  o(
three  short  verses,  enumerates  the  leading  articles  of  oar  holy  religion — giving
such  a  view  of  them  in  their  cotmection  and  influence  upon  practice,  as  must
delight,  constrain  and  ravish  the  heart  of  every  believer.  From  hence  I  would
humbly  suggest  this  general  remark,  which,  by  the  favour  of  our  God,  I  intend  to
l^rosecute  in  the  sequel  of  this  discourse — whoever  in  the  ministry  would  really  ad-
vance the  interests  of  holiness  must  be  constant  assertors  and  unwearied  defenders
of  the  doctrines  of  free  grace.     I.  Glance  at  those  thinos  in  thb  FAiTBrcL  sayino

WHICH  OUB  APOSTUB  WOULD  HAVK  THB  UIMI8TEBS  OF  OhBIST  TO  AnTBU  OONSTANTLT,  FOB

Pt7BP0SB  OF  PBOMOTiNO  H0LIKKS8.     The  Very  humbling  doctrine  of  uni-


OUT.  m.]  TITU8.  BOS

▼eraal  depravitj  (ver.  3).  We  have  little  reason  to  be  proud  or  vainglorloas,
Mvere  or  oensorionB  of  others,  or  to  despise  those  who  have  not  obtained  mercy
with  oarselves — a  vice  which  freqnently  deforms  the  character  eyen  of  a  child  of
a  Ood.  Bat  by  frequently  insisting  npon  the  doctrines  of  nniversal  depraTity,
the  graces  of  hamility,  meekness,  mildness,  tenderness,  and  benevolenoe  are  per-
ceived to  be  of  the  highest  request  for  adorning  the  Christian  character,  and  pro-
moting the  happiness  of  men ;  and  hence  the  necessity  as  well  as  the  advantage  of
affirming  it  constantly.  2.  The  Divine  benevolence  to  man  (ver.  4).  According
to  this  statement,  the  gospel  of  our  salvation  is  a  system  of  love — of  Divine  love —
of  the  love  of  God  towards  foolish,  disobedient,  and  enslaved  men.  8.  Our  sal-
▼ation  is  all  of  grace  (ver.  6).  Men  cannot  be  too  diligently  cautioned  against
seeking  salvation  by  the  works  of  the  law,  nor  too  distinctly  taught  to  ascribe  the
glory  of  the  whole  to  "  the  Lord  our  righteousness."  4.  Grace  displayed  in  re-
generation (ver.  6).  The  reality  and  necessity  of  regeneration,  the  Divine  Agent
by  whom  the  gracious  change  is  accomplished,  the  manner  in  which  this  happy
change  is  effected,  with  the  unbounded  mercy  and  love  displayed,  both  by  the
Father  and  the  Son,  in  giving  the  Holy  Ghost  for  such  a  purpose.  These  things
cannot  be  too  constantly  affirmed :  for,  till  this  change  be  wrought  on  the  nature  and
the  heart,  no  true  reformation  will  ever  adorn  the  life.  5.  Justification  only  by
grace  (ver.  7).  This  is  a  cardinal  article  in  the  scheme  of  salvation,  according  to
the  Scriptures.  Well  may  the  preservation  or  loss  of  it  be  designed  the  mark  of  a
standing  or  falling  Church.  It  is  the  glory  of  the  gospel,  the  melody  of  the  joyful
Boand,  tiie  admiration  and  the  joy  of  redeemed  men,  the  most  powerful  motive  to
holiness  which  can  be  presented.  6.  The  title  secured  by  justification  to  the  en-
joyment of  eternal  life  (ver.  7).  It  is  both  pleasant  and  very  encouraging  to  mark,
in  this  statement  preceding  my  text,  how  regeneration,  justification,  adoption,  and
eternal  glory,  are  so  linked  together  in  the  same  chain,  that  by  holding  one  of  the
links,  the  happy  possessor  is  infallibly  secured  of  all  the  rest.  A  most  glorious  and
eternal  truth — an  assurance  eminently  calculated  to  enliven  the  believer's  hope  of
eternal  life  in  Christ.  And  "  whosoever  hath  this  hope  in  Him  purifieth  himself,"
as  Jesus  Christ,  his  hope  ••  is  pure."    II.  Show  that  the  constant  affibmation  of

THB  DOCTRINES   OF   THE   GOSPEL  IS   THE   ONLY   SCEIPTURE   METHOD  OF  PBEAOHING  GOOD

W0BK8.  Good  works  is  a  general  expression  for  the  practice  of  holiness,  or  the  per-
formtinee  of  every  part  of  new  obedience,  whether  it  respect  moral,  civil,  or  religions
duty.  To  maintain  good  works,  according  to  the  signification  of  the  original  word,  is
to  take  the  lead  in  the  practice  of  them.  The  term  is  of  a  military  illusion.  As  the
officers  of  an  army  stand  before,  or  a  little  in  advance  of  the  line,  both  to  display
heroism  and  preserve  the  order  of  the  troops,  so  the  believer  in  God  is  expected  and
commanded  to  stand  forth,  in  the  view  of  the  world,  in  the  sight  of  the  Church,
and  particularly  in  the  presence  of  younger  disciples  of  Christ,  as  examples  of
regularity,  sobriety,  tenderness,  and  devotion.  To  be  emulous  to  excel,  so  as  to
provoke  one  another  to  faith,  "to  love  and  to  good  works."  An  emulation  this
eminently  worthy  of  being  cherished  I  To  be  "  careful  to  maintain  good  works,"  is
to  be  wholly  intent  upon  the  study  and  the  practice  of  new  obedience ;  for,  except  the
mind  feel  a  deep  interest  in  holiness,  from  a  love  to  God  and  a  desire  to  be  like
Him,  the  external  performance  of  good  works  wiU  be  cold,  formal,  and  remiss.
Hence  it  follows  that  the  constant  affirmation  of  these  doctrines,  so  happily  cal-
culated to  cherish  the  exercise  of  faith,  must  be  peculiarly  friendly  to  the  interests  of
holiness ;  nay,  more,  that  the  constant  affirmation  of  these  things  is  the  only  Scrip-
tural and  consistent  plan  of  engaging  the  believer  in  God  to  be  careful  to  maintain
good  works.  This  I  hope  to  m^e  manifest  to  your  satisfaction  from  these  four  con-
siderations. 1.  These  doctrines  contain  the  principles,  powers,  and  privileges,  by
which  alone  any  of  the  human  race  become  qualified  for  maintaining  good  works.
2.  In  these  doctrines  the  believer  is  presented  with  the  most  powerful  and  proper
motives  and  inducements  to  maintain  good  works.  3.  These  doctrines,  when  firmly
beheved,  excite  an  inveterate  antipathy  at  everything  contrary  to  the  nature  and
holy  will  of  God.  4.  The  constant  affirmation  of  these  things  affords  the  Chris-
tian moralist  every  advantage  to  state  his  subject  in  aU  its  force.  {W.  Taylor.)
On  the  necetsity  of  Christian  morality  : — I.  The  necessity  of  good  wobks  in  beoabd
TO  oueselves.  1.  The  practice  of  good  works  is  necessary  to  prove  the  reality  and
sincerity  of  our  faith.  Faith  or  belief  is  a  hidden  principle  which  no  man  can  see,
and  there  is  no  other  way  of  testifying  that  we  possess  this  principle,  but  by  the
benevolent  sentiments  which  it  breathes,  and  the  good  actions  which  it  prompte  us
to  perform.    2.    Good  works  are  necessary  to  promote  our  moral  improvement.


204  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m

We  know  very  well  that  there  is  such  an  indissoluble  connection  between  a  true
faith  and  eternal  salvation,  that  the  man  who  is  a  sincere  believer  will  be  justified
and  sanctified  and  glorified ;  but  his  sanctification  is  entirely  distinct  from,  and  la
only  a  consequence  of,  his  faith  and  justification.  It  is  therefore  necessary  that
the  principle  of  a  Divine  life  should  operate  in  transforming  him  from  glory  to  glory,
and  from  one  degree  of  religious  and  moral  improvement  unto  another,  until  he  be
conformed  to  the  image  of  the  Son  of  God,  and  attain  to  the  measure  of  the  stature
of  a  perfect  man  in  Christ  Jesus.  It  is  not  merely  necessary  that  he  should  cease
to  do  evil ;  but  he  must  learn  to  do  well.  In  short,  by  a  diligent  and  unremitting
attention  to  the  duties  of  religion  and  morality,  he  must  cultivate  the  principle  of
universal  righteousness  and  perfect  holiness  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord.  3.  Good  works
are  necessary  to  qualify  us  for  heaven.  They  are  necessary  to  form  us  to  th»
temper  and  disposition  of  Christ,  who  went  about  continually  doing  good ;  in  order
that  the  same  mind  may  be  also  in  us  that  was  in  Him  ;  for  we  may  depend  upon
it,  that  if  we  have  not  the  spirit  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  we  are  assuredly  none  of  His.

II.  How  THESE  THINGS  ABE  GOOD  AND  PROFITABLE  UNTO  MEN.     1.  TheSe  WOlks  are  gOOd,

because  they  flow  from  a  faith  or  belief  in  the  command  of  God,  and  are  done  from
a  principle  of  conformity  to  His  will.  2.  But  the  apostle  not  only  characterises
these  things  as  good,  he  also  affirms  that  they  are  profitable  unto  men.  We  shall,
therefore,  conclude,  by  briefly  pointing  out  how  these  good  works  are  especially
profitable  to  those  to  whom  they  are  performed  ;  and  we  are  espressly  enjoined  in
Scripture  to  do  good  to  all  men  as  far  as  we  have  opportunity.  Now,  all  who
believe  in  God  have  it  in  their  power,  more  or  less,  to  do  good  to  the  bodies  and
the  souls  of  men.  This  is  one  substantial  reason  why  we  are  required  to  prove  our
faith  by  our  works.  He  has  ordained  many  to  be  rich,  and  more  to  be  poor,  that
those  to  whom  He  has  been  bountiful  might  glorify  Him  with  His  own.  He  has
bestowed  wisdom  and  knowledge  upon  many,  that  they  should  instruct  the  ignorant,
reclaim  the  wandering,  and  those  who  are  out  of  the  way.  He  commands  us  to
defend  the  fatherless  and  plead  for  the  widow;  to  be  the  stranger's  shield  and  the
orphan's  stay ;  to  relieve  the  oppressed ;  to  pour  the  balm  of  consolation  into  the
wounded  spirit ;  to  feed  the  hungry  and  clothe  the  naked,  that  the  blessing  of  those
who  are  ready  to  perish  may  come  upon  us.    (D.  Stevenson.)  Good  works : —

1.  Define  good  works.  1.  That  our  works  may  be  good,  they  must  be — (1)
Performed  by  good  persons ;  (2)  Bequired  by  God's  Word  ;  (3)  Done  from  a  sound
principle;  (4)  Done  to  a  right  end.  2.  How  these  good  works  must  be  main-
tained— (1)  Attention  to  God's  Word;  (2)  Solicitude  to  know  God's  mind;  (3)
Watchfulness  against  temptations;  (4)  Embracing  every  opportunity  of  doing
good ;  (5)  Pressing  forward  in  knowledge ;  (6)  Exciting  others  to  do  the  same.
n.  The  faith  which  produces  good  works.  1.  Knowledge  of  God.  2.  And  of
the  Word  of  God.  3.  Faith  is  a  composing  grace.  4.  A  receptive  grace.  6.  An
operative  grace.  6.  A  rooting  grace.  7.  A  humbling  grace.  8.  An  elevating  grace.
9.  A  strengthening  grace.  10.  A  uniting  grace.  11.  A  working  grace.  12.  A  saving
grace.    HI.  How  good  works  abe  pbofitable  to  men.    1.  As  evidences  of  true  faith.

2.  Testimonies  of  gratitude  to  God.  3.  Strengthening  to  assurance.  4.  Edifying
toothers.  5.  Condemning  the  world.  {T.  B.  Baker,  M.A.)  Practical  Christianity :
— I.  Practical  Christianity  is  good  in  itselp.  1.  It  accords  with  the  will  of  God.  2.
It  is  an  object  of  moral  approbation  to  all  minds.  II.  Good  in  its  influence.
Nothing  is  so  useful  to  men  as  a  Christly  life.  (Homilist.)  Some  hints  to
preachers : — I.  Fundamental  truths  are  to  be  continually  enforced.  II.
Practical  preaching  is  never  out  of  season.  IH.  Christian  duties  abb  of
universal  application.  IV.  Trivial  questions  out  of  place  in  the  pulpit.
Inferences — 1.  It  is  possible  to  have  repetition  without  sameness:  ''affirm  con-
stantly." 2.  Belief  that  does  not  change  the  life  is  useless  (James  ii.  17).  3.  The
law  is  to  be  obeyed  in  spirit,  rather  than  letter.  (F.  Wagstaff.)  Creed  and  con-
duct : — The  things  that  Titus  is  to  "affirm  constantly,"  as  we  shall  see  presently,
are  the  doctrines  of  Christianity.  What  for?  "In  order  that  they  which  have
believed  in  God  "  might  be  orthodox  ?  Guarded  against  heresies  ?  Certainly !
But  something  more  than  that.  In  order  that  they  might  "  give  their  minds  to
being  foremost,"  as  the  word  might  be  rendered,  "  in  good  works."  That  is  what
you  are  to  preach  your  theology  for,  says  Paul ;  and  the  only  way  to  make  sure
that  your  converts  shall  live  sober  and  righteous  lives  is  to  see  that  they  bo
thoroughly  saturated  in  the  great  and  recondite  truths  which  I  have  taught  yon.
L  Thb  gospel  is  degraded  unless  it  is  asserted  stbonglt.  "These  things  I
will  that  thou  affirm  constantly  " ;  or,  as  the  word  migh^  be  rendered, "  MSOTttAtt


CHAP,  ni.]  TITUS.  205

pertinaciously,"  persistently,  positively,  affirm  and  assert  constantly  and  oonfi>
dently.  That  is  the  way  in  which  Paul  thinks  it  ought  to  be  spoken.  "  These
things."  What  things  ?  Well,  here  they  are  (vers.  4-7).  There  are  all  the  funda<
mentals  of  evangelical  Christianity  packed  into  three  verses.  They  are  all  there
— man's  sin,  man's  need,  the  Divinity  of  Jesus  Christ,  His  sacrificial  death,  the
gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  act  of  faith,  the  inheritance  of  eternal  life.  And  these
are  the  things  wMch  are  to  be  asserted  with  aU  the  energy  and  persistency  and
decisiveness  of  the  speaker's  nature.  Paul  did  not  believe  in  fining  them  down
because  people  did  not  like  them.  He  did  not  believe  in  consulting  the  "  spirit  of
the  age,"  except  thus  far,  that  the  more  the  spirit  of  the  age  was  contrary  to  the
truth,  the  more  need  for  the  men  that  believed  it  to  speak  out.     II.  This  positivb

ASSEBTION  OF  THE  TRUTHS  OF  BEVELATION  IS  THE  BKST  FOUNDATION  TO  LAY  FOB  PRAC-
TICAL ooDLiNEBS.  "  I  will  that  these  things  thou  affirm  constantly,  in  order  that
they  which  have  believed  might  be  careful  to  maintain  good  works."  Eightly
understood  and  presented,  the  great  body  of  truth  which  we  call  the  gospel,  and
which  is  summarised  in  the  preceding  context,  grips  daily  life  very  tightly,  while,
on  the  other  hand,  of  all  the  impotent  things  in  this  world,  none  are  more  impotent
than  exhortations  to  be  good,  which  are  cut  away  from  the  great  truths  of  Christ's
mission  and  work.  The  world  has  been  listening  to  these  ever  since  it  was  a  world,
and  it  is  not  a  bit  better  for  them  all.  There  is  only  one  thing  that  supplies  the
requisite  motive  power  for  practical  godliness,  and  that  is  the  great  sacrifice  of
Jesus  Christ  and  His  indwelling  in  our  hearts.  The  motives  that  the  gospel  gives
for  goodness,  for  holiness,  for  purity,  for  self-sacrifice,  for  consecration,  for  en-
thusiasm, for  widespread  sympathy  and  benevolence,  for  contempt  of  the  material
and  the  perishable — the  motives  that  Christianity  gives  for  all  things  that  are  love!/
and  of  good  report — are  the  strongest  that  can  ever  be  brought  to  bear  upon  men,
as  regards  their  fulness,  their  depth,  their  sweetness,  and  their  transforming  energy.
Then,  if  it  be  true  that  the  best  foundation  for  all  practical  goodness  is  in  the  procla-
mation and  the  possession  of  the  great  message  of  Christ's  love,  two  things  follow.
One  is  that  Christian  people  ought  to  familiarise  themselves  with  the  practical  side
of  their  faith,  just  as  Christian  ministers  ought  to  be  in  the  habit  of  insisting,  not
merely  upon  the  great  revelation  of  God's  love  in  Jesus  Christ,  but  upon  that  reve-
lation considered  as  the  motive  and  the  pattern  for  holy  living.  And  another  con-
sequence is  that  here  is  a  rough  but  a  pretty  effective  test  of  so-called  religious  truth.
Does  it  help  to  make  a  man  better  ?  It  is  worth  something  if  it  does ;  if  it  does  not,
then  it  may  be  ruled  out  as  of  small  consequence.  lU.  The  true  test  and  out-
couE  OF  PBOFESSIMO  FAITH  IS  CONDUCT.  In  the  text  the  fact  that  these  Cretan
Christians  *'  believed  in,"  or  rather,  perhaps,  we  should  translate  simply,  "  believed
God,"  is  given  as  a  reason  why  they  ought  to  maintain  good  works.  "That  is  to  say,
those  who  profess  to  have  Him  for  their  Lord  and  Father,  those  who  avow  that
they  are  Christians,  are  by  that  profession  bound  to  a  conduct  corresponding  to  the
truth  which  they  say  they  have  received ;  and  to  conformity  to  the  will  of  the  God
in  whom  they  say  that  they  have  believed.  Eeligious  knowledge  is  all  very  neces-
sary,  but  what  is  it  for  ?  It  is  to  make  as  like  God.  Eeligious  emotion  is  very
necessary,  too,  and  very  delightful.  It  is  right  that  Christian  men  should  feel  the
glow  of  love  and  gratitude,  the  joy  of  forgiveness,  the  lofty  and  often  unspeakable
delights  of  cahn  communion  with  Him.  All  these  are  essential  parts  of  a  deep  and
true  Christian  character,  but  all  these  are  for  a  purpose.  If  we  are  Christians  wa
know  God  and  we  feel  the  emotions  of  the  religious  life,  in  order  that  we  may  ba
and  that  we  may  do.  IV.  No  one  will  keep  up  these  oooo  works  who  does
HOT  arm  his  iosd  to  it.  "That  they  .  .  .  might  be  careful  to  maintain."  Tha
word  tbat  the  apostle  employs  is  a  very  remarkable  one,  only  used  in  this  one  place
in  the  New  Testament ;  and  the  force  of  it  might  be  given  by  tbat  colloquialism
which  I  have  ventured  to  employ — "  Giving  their  minds  to  maintaining  good
works."  Tou  have  to  make  a  business  of  it  if  you  would  succeed  in  it.  You  have
to  make  a  definite  effort  to  bring  before  you  the  virtues  and  the  excellencies  which
you  ought  to  possess,  and  then  to  try  your  best  to  have  them.  And  my  text  suggests
one  chief  means  of  securing  that  result,  and  that  is,  the  habit — which  I  am  afraid
is  not  a  habit  with  a  great  many  professing  Christians — the  habit  of  meditation
upon  the  facts  of  the  gospel  revelation  looked  at  in  their  practical  bearing  on  our
daily  life  and  character.  We  should  bring  ourselves  into  that  atmosphere,  and
saturate  our  minds  and  hearts  with  the  thoughts  of  God's  great  love  to  us  in  Jesos
Christ's  death  for  us,  of  the  pattern  in  His  life,  of  the  gift  of  His  Spirit,  of  the  hopa
ot  inheritance  of  eternal  life.    We  should,  by  frequent  meditation,  submit  ooraelTOt


206  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oai».  m.

to  the  power  of  these  saored  thoughts,  and  we  shall  find  that  in  them,  one  bj  one,
are  motives  which,  twisted  together,  will  make  a  cord  of  love  that  shall  draw  us  up
out  of  the  pit  of  selfishness  and  the  mire  of  sense,  and  shall  attract  us  joyfully  along
the  path  of  obedience,  else  too  hard  for  our  reluctant  and  unaccustomed  feet.
(A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Good  works : — By  flowers,  understand  faith ;  by  fruit,  good
works.  As  the  flower  is  before  the  fruit,  so  is  faith  before  good  works  ;  so  neither
is  the  fruit  without  the  flower,  nor  good  works  without  faith.  Faith  and  works. —
'Twas  an  unhappy  division  that  has  been  made  between  faith  and  works.  Though
in  my  intellect  I  may  divide  them,  just  as  in  the  caudle  I  know  there  is  both  li^t
and  heat ;  but  yet,  put  out  the  candle,  and  they  are  both  gone ;  one  remains  not
without  the  other.  So  'tis  betwixt  faith  and  works ;  nay,  in  a  right  conception,
fides  est  opus  (faith  is  work) ;  if  I  believe  a  thing  because  I  am  commanded,  that  is
opus  (work),    (r.  Selden.)

Ver.  9.  Avoid  foolish  questions. — Foolish  questions  reproved: — I.  Amongst  the
QUESTiOKS  TO  BE  AVOIDED,  such  as  the  foUowlng  may  be  included.  1.  Those  which
savour  of  scepticism  and  unbelief,  or  which  imply  a  doubtfulness  of  the  truth  of
Divine  revelation,  or  of  any  of  its  fundamental  doctrines.  Religion  is  not  intended
to  gratify  our  curiosity,  or  to  answer  our  speculative  inquiries ;  its  object  is  to  renew
and  sanctify  the  heart,  and  to  meeten  us  for  heaven.  2.  Intricate  and  controversial
questions  are  in  general  to  be  avoided,  as  engendering  strife  rather  than  ministering
to  godly  edifying.  3.  Prying  questions  relative  to  futurity,  and  which  tend  only  to
gratify  a  vain  curiosity,  ought  to  be  avoided.  4.  Questions  arising  from  impatience
and  discontent  are  generally  in  a  high  degree  improper,  and  unworthy  of  a  Chris-
tian. When  the  mind  is  disquieted  and  full  of  trouble,  we  are  commonly  dissatisfied
with  everything  about  us,  and  wish  if  it  were  possible  to  have  it  otherwise.  But
this  is  a  spirit  which  the  Scriptures  condemn,  as  utterly  inconsistent  with  submis-
sion to  the  will  of  God,  and  as  savouring  of  presumption  and  unbelief.  5.  Perplexing
and  disquieting  questions,  which  have  no  tendency  to  promote  the  great  objects  of
practical  religion,  but  only  to  excite  unnecessary  doubts  and  fears,  are  also  prohibited
in  the  text.  Instead  of  asking  the  anxious  question,  for  example,  Are  we  elected  ?
our  great  concern  should  be  to  know  whether  we  be  effectually  called  ?  Not,  are
our  names  written  in  heaven,  but  is  God's  law  written  in  our  hearts  ?  6.  Trifling
and  uninteresting  questions  which  serve  only  to  amuse  and  not  to  impart  any
useful  information,  ought  by  aU  means  to  be  avoided.  There  is  too  great  a  dispo>
sition,  even  in  serious  people,  to  indulge  in  frivolous  disputes,  or  in  a  strife  about
words  rather  than  things,  to  the  neglect  of  the  weightier  matters  of  the  law,  judg.
ment,  charity,  and  the  love  of  God.  II.  Notice  some  things  that  are  nkoessabv  to
A  PBOFiTABLE  coNVEBSATiON.  1.  Beware  of  loquacity,  or  too  much  speaking.  Let
not  your  words  go  before  your  thoughts ;  think  twice  before  you  speak  once.  2.
Accustom  yourselves  to  a  sober  way  of  thinking  and  talking,  using  at  all  times  sound
speech  which  cannot  be  condemned.  3.  It  may  be  proper  to  lay  in  a  stock  of  inte-
resting questions  as  matter  for  after  conversation.  Inquiries  relative  to  our  state,
tending  to  promote  experimental  religion,  both  in  ourselves  and  others,  would  at  all
times  be  useful  and  edifying.  We  cannot  too  frequently  ask  ourselves.  Are  we  in  a
state  of  acceptance  with  God ;  do  we  grow  in  grace ;  do  we  hate  sin  and  love  holi-
ness; are  we  more  weaned  from  the  world,  and  fit  for  heaven?  An  awakened
sinner  would  naturally  inquire,  What  must  I  do  to  be  saved  ?  and  those  who  have
believed  through  grace  should  be  anxious  to  inquire.  What  shall  we  do  that  we  may
work  the  works  of  God?  4.  Living  as  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  under  a  conviction
that  for  every  idle  word  we  must  give  an  account  in  the  day  of  judgment,  will  exclude
a  great  deal  of  light  and  trifling  conversation,  and  give  a  savouriness  to  our  speech,
which  will  minister  grace  to  the  hearer.  {B.  Beddome,  M.A.)  Religious  dis-
putes : — Never  was  there  a  time  wherein  there  was  more  talk  or  bustle  and  ado
made  about  religion,  and  yet  so  little  of  the  power  of  it  seen  in  the  world,  whilst
every  one  is  most  eager  and  busy  in  defending  and  propagating  those  doubtful
doctrines  which  distinguish  their  several  sects  and  factions,  and  so  few  mind  those
great  and  certain  truths  wherein  they  all  are,  or  at  least  pretend  to  be,  agreed.
I.  That  oub  Saviour  and  His  oospel  oate  mo  beal  just  occasiom  roB  thosi
CONTROVERSIES,  which  siuco  have  been  so  hotly  moved,  will  appear  if  we  consider  a
little  His  doctrine  and  way  of  teaching  whilst  He  was  here  on  earth,  for  we  shall
find  all  along  that  He  delivered  His  message  not  in  any  studied,  artificial,  spruce,
and  affected  method,  but  with  the  greatest  perspicuity  and  plainness  imaginable.
He  aooommodated  not  His  discourses  to  the  learned  or  wiser  part  of  mankind  only.


CBAP.  ra.]  TITUS.  207

but  to  the  ignorant  and  simple.  Thus  also,  if  we  consult  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,
we  shall  find  it  was  in  the  first  and  early  times  of  the  gospel.  Much  pains  it  cost
them  to  convince  Gentiles  and  Jews  of  the  truth  of  our  Saviour's  religion,  and  to
take  off  their  prejudices  against  it  and  His  person,  and  to  resist  and  gainsay  apos-
tate  Christians  who  would  set  up  new  religions  of  their  own  in  opposition  to  Christ's,
but  Uttle  or  none,  in  comparison,  to  make  them  understand  the  doctrine  of  it  when
once  they  were  ready  to  follow  and  embrace  it.  They  did  not  perplex  their  hearers
with  any  quirks  and  intricacies,  but  avoiding  all  needless  disputations,  which  en-
gender strife  and  are  not  unto  edification,  told  them  plainly  that  Jesus  commanded
them  everywhere  to  repent  of  their  sins,  and  to  forsake  them,  and  to  believe  His
gospel,  and  become  His  disciples,  and  obey  what  He  enjoined  in  being  temperate,
humble,  just,  and  charitable,  and  they  should  be  for  ever  happy  in  the  other  world ;
and  that  for  the  effecting  of  this  the  Hon  of  God  came  down  from  heaven,  and  lived
here  amongst  men,  and  died,  and  rose  again,  of  which  they  were  witnesses.     II.  Ii

18  TBDE  SOME   DISPUTES  SOON  AROSE  IN  THE  ChURCH,  AND  WHAT  GAVE  OCCASION  TO  THEM

I  AH  NEXT  TO  INQUIRE.  Some  did  arise  even  in  the  apostles'  days,  occasioned  either
by  that  great  respect  and  veneration  the  Jews  had  for  Moses'  laws  and  institutions,
or  that  fond  presumption  they  had  of  God's  particular  inconditionate  favour  to
them,  and  His  absolute  election  of  the  seed  of  Abraham  only ;  or  else  by  the  wicked-
ness of  those  who  for  some  private  ends  would  pretend  to  Christianity,  but,  being
unwilling  to  undergo  the  severities  of  it,  invented  such  doctrines  as  might  best  serve
to  patronise  their  lusts  or  impieties.  Thus  though  there  were  disputes,  then,  yet
they  were  chiefly  between  Christians  and  their  open  and  professed  enemies,  or  such
as  had  apostatised  from  them,  or  were  but  in  part  converted ;  but  for  some  con-
siderable time  (whilst  the  persecutions  lasted)  the  Christians  amongst  themselves
lived  in  all  love  and  peace,  professing  the  same  faith,  joining  in  the  same  worship,
and  agreeing  in  the  same  principles  and  practices.  But  when  once  our  religion  had
triumphed  over  all  others  and  brought  the  greatest  part  of  the  world  to  its  subjec-
tion, and  the  princes  of  the  earth  and  the  great  and  wise  men  became  Christians,
and  there  was  no  public  enemy,  either  Jew  or  Gentile,  to  oppose,  and  find  work  for
busy  wits,  then  they  began  to  fall  out  about  their  own  religion ;  and  this  still  in-
creased more  as  the  Christians  grew  more  learned  and  idle,  and  less  honest,  and
found  time  and  leisure  to  study  philosophy,  the  greatest  part  of  which  about  that
time  was  nothing  else  but  sophistry,  or  the  art  of  wrangling,  and  making  plain
things  obscure.    III.  But  yet  by  anything  I  have  now  said  I  would  not  be  thought

TO   PERSUADE   TOU   THAT   THERE   WAS   NOTHING  IN  OUR  RELIGION  THAT  WAS  DIFFICULT  OB

BfYSTERiouB.  There  are,  without  all  doubt,  some  things  contained  in  Scripture
which  are  past  our  understandings,  the  particular  modes  and  circumstances  of  which
we  cannot  perfectly  comprehend,  but  only  that  it  would  have  been  much  more  for
the  honour  of  God,  the  interest  of  Christianity,  and  the  good  of  souls,  if  men  would
have  suffered  those  things  which  were  mysterious  to  have  remained  so,  and  also
left  those  things  that  were  plain  in  the  same  condition  they  found  them.  lY.  Had
I  time  in  particular  to  show  how  such  idle  disputes  in  matters  of  religion  arb
BTiLL  continued  IN  THE  WORLD,  I  MIGHT  TELL  TOU — 1.  Some  men  there  are  of  a
voluble  tongue  and  of  a  talking,  prating  humour,  who  debate  and  dispute  about  every-
thing, and  therefore  religion  shall  not  escape  if  it  ever  comes  in  their  way ;  you  can
say  nothing  but  they  presently  contradict  and  oppose  it.  2.  Others  there  are  that  are
pretty  cool,  tame,  and  calm,  and  can  discourse  freely  and  civilly  about  any  ordinary
common  affair ;  but  let  the  smallest  and  most  inconsiderable  point  of  religion  be
started,  and  they  shall  be  presently  all  on  fire,  and  as  quarrelsome  as  if  they  had
been  bom  disputing,  and  as  fierce  as  if  at  the  pronouncing  of  every  article  of  their
belief  their  swords  were  to  be  drawn,  and  it  was  to  be  fought  out.  3.  Others  there
are  who  furnish  themselves  for  dispute  by  reading  a  great  deal  of  Scripture  and
getting  it  by  heart,  and  so  pouring  it  forth  upon  all  occasions,  interpreting  it  as
peremptorily,  and  explaining  it  as  confidently,  as  if  they  were  guided  by  the  same
infallible  spirit  that  the  writers  of  it  were  endued  withal.  4.  Others  there  are  who
are  very  eager  in  mamtaining  a  great  many  opinions,  which  are  not  to  be  found  in
Scripture,  but  in  some  authors  they  have  great  esteem  of,  or  first  chanced  to  read,
or  were  directed  to  by  those  whose  judgments  they  most  valued ;  and  these  men's
books  such  make  their  Bible,  and  from  them  fetch  all  their  divinity.  V.  But  what-
ever be,  and  many  more  there  are,  occasions  of  these  quarrels  and  debates  in  religion,
the  inconvenience  of  them  18  GREAT  AND  NOTORIOUS.  1.  This  foolish  Contending
consumes  so  much  time  of  our  lives,  which  ought  to  be  spent  in  our  honest  employ-
ments, in  serious  devotions,  and  doing  the  offices  of  justice,  friendship,  and  chari^


208  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m.

one  towards  another;  and  I  doubt  not  bnt  mach  of  our  religious  brawling  and
disputing  shall  be  accounted  for  at  the  last  day  as  idle  words,  for  which  neither
ourselves,  nor  neighbours,  nor  anybody  else  was  anything  the  better.  2.  That
which  is  a  greater  mischief  than  this,  from  hence  men's  lusts  learn  to  dispute,  and
from  these  controversies  in  and  about  religion  men  have  found  out  how  to  quiet
their  consciences  in  a  way  of  sin,  and  to  go  on  securely  and  undisturbedly,  hoping
by  the  help  of  a  distinction  or  two  they  shall  for  all  that  get  to  heaven  at  last.
8.  These  disputes  have  been  the  occasion  of  those  great  breaches  that  have  been
made  amongst  Christians,  whose  care  it  ought  to  be  to  be  of  one  mind,  of  one  faith,
and  of  one  Church,  and  to  adorn  the  doctrine  of  our  Saviour  by  their  mutual  good
will  and  serviceableness  to  one  another ;  but  instead  of  this.  Christians,  by  their
several  httle  models  of  faith  and  their  passions,  have  made  it  their  business  to
divide  tbe  Church,  excluding  as  many  from  salvation  and  their  communion  as  are
not  just  of  their  own  way  and  fancy.  {B.  Calamy.)  Unanswerable  questions  to
be  avoided: — The  writer  remembers  calling,  late  one  Saturday  evening,  on  a
friend,  an  able  theologian,  whom  he  found  seated  at  his  writing  table,  evidently
almost  in  a  state  of  despair,  and  with  tears  in  his  eyes.  "Why  are  you  so
sorrowful  ?  "  he  said  to  him.  In  reply,  the  theologian  only  smiled  sadly,  and
pointed  to  his  waste-paper  basket,  which  was  full  of  torn-np  manuscript.  "  See,"
he  said,  "  the  remains  of  eighteen  quires  of  paper,  which  I  have  written  all
over  since  Monday  morning,  endeavouring  to  get  my  thoughts  into  order  for  my
sermon  to-morrow.  But  now  I  am  more  stupid  and  perplexed  than  when  I  began.
I  wanted  to  show  how  the  two  truths  can  be  harmonised,  that  God  knows  every-
thing and  is  the  cause  of  everything,  and  yet  that  man  is  a  free  agent."  It  was  no
wonder  that,  notwithstanding  all  the  intense  thought  and  all  the  expenditure  of
paper,  pens,  and  ink,  that  sermon  did  not  get  itself  finished ;  for  the  more  earnestly
a  man  ponders  on  such  problems  the  deeper  and  darker  does  the  Divine  mystery
become.  He  who  does  not  wish  to  lose  his  senses  will  postpone  the  consideration
of  such  unanswerable  questions  to  eternity,  and  then  there  will  be  no  fear  of  his
wanting  occupation  there.  {Otto  Funcke.)  Profitless  questions : — A  story  is  told
of  a  man  who  spent  most  of  his  time  interpreting  the  mysteries  of  Revelation.  He
said  to  A  friend  one  day,  "  I  can't  quite  understand  about  those  seven  trumpets,  can
you?"  "No,"  was  the  answer;  "but  if  you  would  pay  more  attention  to  your
seven  children  and  less  to  the  seven  trtmipets,  more  of  your  real  problems  would  be
solved."  The  teacher  must  rule  out  unprofitable  speculations  and  discussions.
*'  Let  us  call  up  a  great  logician  to  help  us  out,"  said  a  pastor  on  one  occasion,
breaking  in  on  such  a  debate  in  his  class.  "  •  Without  controversy,  great  is  the
mystery  of  godliness.'  Now,  when  I  eat  fish,  I  don't  wear  myself  out  grinding  on
the  bones.  I  just  leave  them  and  go  for  the  meat.  Now  for  some  meat  from  this
lesson.  Brother,"  turning  to  the  combatant,  "  what  have  you  found  in  this  Scrip-
ture to  help  you  this  week  ?  "  Avoiding  unprofitable  questions  : — I  once  heard
him  tell  an  amusing  story  about  a  scientific  man  and  popular  author,  who  left  •
very  celebrated  minister  for  a  seat  in  Bloomsbury  Chapel.    He  brought  a  letter

from  Dr.  H to  Dr.  Brock.    "  Before  you  open  it,  sir,"  said  the  author,  ••  allow

me  to  state  that  I  am  a  man  of  science,  and  that  I  have  much  to  do  with  beetles,
butterflies,  and  spiders.  Well,  I  get  tired  of  them  in  six  days,  and  on  the  seventh,
the  Sabbath,  I  don't  want  to  hear  anything  about  them.  But  our  good,  genial
minister  is  also  a  man  of  science,  and  he  will  talk  about  scientific  topics  in  the
pulpit  to  illustrate  the  Word.  Well,  last  night,  the  Sabbath,  you  know,  he  gave  us
a  sermon  full  of  spiders  1  I  could  not  stand  it  any  longer,  so  I  went  into  the  vestry,
and  said,  *  Doctor,  that  sermon  on  spiders  has  finished  me  ;  give  me  a  letter  to  Dr.
Brock.' "  "  So,"  said  the  pastor,  laughing,  "  he  came  to  us  because  he  knew  I
didn't  preach  about  spiders."  {Memoir  of  Dr.  Brock.)  The  polemical  and  th4
practical  Christian: — Two  learned  physicians  and  a  plain  honest  countryman,
happening  to  meet  at  an  inn,  sat  down  to  dinner  together.  A  dispute  presently
arose  between  the  two  doctors  on  the  nature  of  aliment,  which  proceeded  to  such  a
height,  and  was  carried  on  with  so  much  fury,  that  it  spoiled  their  meals,  and  they
parted  extremely  indisposed.  The  coimtryman,  in  the  meantime,  who  understood
not  the  cause,  though  he  beard  the  quarrel,  fell  heartily  to  his  meat,  gave  Ood  thanks,
digested  it  well,  returned  in  the  strength  of  it  to  his  honest  Inbour,  and  in  the
evening  received  his  wages.  Is  there  not  sometimes  as  much  diflerence  between
the  polemical  and  practical  Christian  7  Controversy  foolish  and  unprofitable  ;—
As  in  the  burning  of  some  wet  fuel  we  cannot  see  the  fire  for  smoke,  bo  the  hght  of
the  Scri^jtures  is  dusked  by  the  vapours  of  controversies.   {T.  Adams.)        It  i*  better


OHAT.  m.]  TITV8.  209

not  to  try  to  understand  too  much : — He  that  would  comprehend  all  things,  appre-
hends nothing.  As  he  that  comes  to  a  com  heap,  the  more  he  opens  his  hand  to
take,  the  less  he  graspeili,  the  less  he  holdeth.  Where  the  Scripture  hath  no
tongue,  we  should  have  no  ear.  {p>id.)  Genealogies. — The  right  and  wrong  ute
of  genealogies : — I.  The  second  thmg  which  Titus  must  resist  are  genealogies,  which
also  must  be  rightly  taken,  because  there  always  was,  and  yet  is,  an  excellent  use
of  them  in  Scripture.  Before  Christ  they  were  so  necessary,  as  the  Jews  were
commanded  to  keep  public  and  private  records  of  their  tribes  and  families — ^yea,
and  if  there  were  any  that  could  not  tell  or  find  his  genealogy,  he  was  not  to  be
admitted,  or,  if  inconsiderately  he  were,  was  to  be  deposed  from  public  office  (Numb.
i.  18 ;  Neh.  vii.  62) ;  and  to  this  purpose  some  holy  writers  of  Scripture  have  set
down  for  the  use  of  the  Church  to  the  end  whole  books  of  genealogies,  but
especially  that  the  Jews  might  be  able  to  bring  their  descent  from  the  patriarchs,  as
we  read  of  Paul,  who  no  doubt  could  bring  his  line  down  from  Benjamin  (Phil.  iii.
5).  The  use  of  these  genealogies  was  to  manifest  the  truth  of  God  in  the  Scrip,
tures.  I.  In  the  accomplishment  of  many  special  prophecies  to  particular  persons.
IL  What  is  it,  then,  the  apostle  condemneth  ?  Not  any  such  as  serve  to  the  edifi*
cation  of  the  faith  of  the  Church,  whereof  this  of  Christ  a  public  person  and  Savionr
of  the  world  is  the  chief  of  all ;  neither  the  keeping  of  the  descent  so  far  as  serveth
to  the  preservation  of  right  justice  and  civil  peace.  In  which  respect  kings  and
nobles,  yea,  and  other  inferior  persons,  may  inquire  into  that  right  which  their
ancestors  have  made  their  due,  and  must  so  hold  their  genealogy  as  they  may  hold
their  right  against  all  claims.  But  here  is  condemned  all  that  recounting  of  kindred
and  pedigree  in  all  sorts  of  men,  which  proceedeth  from  a  vain  mind,  and  tendeth
to  worldly  pomp  and  vainglory.  For  this  was  the  sin  of  the  Jewish  teachers,  that
whereas  now  by  Christ's  appearance  all  distinction  of  families  was  in  religions
respect  abrogated,  and  now  was  no  such  need  of  genealogy  as  before,  unless  it  were
before  infidels  and  such  as  were  not  persuaded  of  the  right  descent  of  Christ,  yet
they  out  of  their  pride  would  be  much  and  often  in  extolling  of  their  tribes  and
kindred,  and  so  not  only  for  these  accessories  let  go  the  substance  of  religion,  but,
as  if  they  would  build  up  that  polity  again  which  was  now  abolished,  to  the  great
hart  of  their  hearers,  would  much  busy  themselves  in  fruitless  discourses.  (T.
Taylor,  D.D.)

Vers.  10,  11.  An  beretlo  .  .  .  reject. — The  treatment  of  heresy : — ^I.  Hbbest  n
NOT  AS  UNSOxnn)  opinion,  but  an  unsound  LtFs.  A  man  may  hold  an  erroneous
opinion,  and  hold  it  sincerely ;  but  the  word  used  here  denotes  one  who  seeks  to
promote  discord  in  the  Church  (See  Bom.  xvi.  17).  11.  Hebesy  is  to  bb  dealt
WITH  nBMLY,  BUT  OENTLT.  1.  Firmly — by  admonition.  2.  Gently — by  repeated
admonitions.  UI.  Hardened  heretics  abb  to  bb  bbjeoted.  1.  But  this  only
applies  to  exclusion  from  Church  fellowship.  2.  It  is  no  warrant  for  persecution.
8.  Excluded  heretics  are  to  be  deemed  objects  of  pity.  (F.  Wagstaff.)  Treatment
of  heretics : — Paul  having  exhorted  Titus  both  to  teach  the  truth  according  to
godliness,  as  also  to  resist  all  such  foolish  and  vain  doctrine  as  might  do  hurt  in  the
Church  of  God.  Titus  might  object :  This  indeed  is  my  duty  wherein  I  extend  to
exercise  myself  with  diligence;  but  when  I  have  laboured  and  done  all  I  can,  many
there  are  who  will  not  yield  to  the  truth,  nor  submit  themselves  to  this  ordinance  of
God ;  how  am  I  to  carry  myself  towards  such  ?  Answer :  The  apostle,  careful  to
prevent  aJl  such  things  as  he  foresaw  might  be  hurtful  to  the  Church,  giveth
direction  in  these  two  verses  how  to  proceed  in  this  business  also.  The  former,
giving  direction  and  laying  down  the  duty ;  and  the  latter,  enforcing  the  same  by
moment  of  reason.  In  the  former  are  three  things  to  be  considered :  1.  The  persons
against  whom  Titus  is  to  deal — here  called  heretics.  2.  The  direction  how  he  is  to
behave  himself  towards  them — reject  them.  3.  The  orderly  manner  of  proceeding,
after  once  or  twice  admonition.  The  latter  verse  oontaineth  the  reason  of  this
severity,  because  such  persons  are  incurable  and  incorrigible ;  which  is  proved  by
two  arguments.  1.  Such  a  one  is  subverted,  that  is,  turned  or  cast  off  the  foxmda*
tion.  2.  He  sinneth  against  his  own  conscience,  being  damned  of  his  own  self,  that
is,  he  wittingly  and  willingly  sparneth  against  that  truth  of  which  his  conscience
is  by  the  former  admonition  convinced.  (T.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Heresy  not  to  be
trifled  irith : — I  am  asked  sometimes  to  read  an  heretical  book.  Well,  if  I  believed  my
reading  it  would  help  its  refutation,  and  might  be  an  assistance  to  others  in  keeping
them  out  of  error,  I  might  do  it  as  a  hard  matter  of  duty,  but  I  shall  not  do  it  onlesfl
I  see  some  good  will  come  from  it.    I  am  not  going  to  drag  my  spirit  through  ft

14


210  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOB.  [chap.  m.

ditch  for  the  sake  of  having  it  washed  afterwards,  for  it  is  not  my  own.     It  may  be
that  good  medicine  would  restore  me  if  I  poisoned  myself  with  putrid  meat,  but  I
am  not  going  to  try  it :  I  dare  not  experiment  on  a  mind  which  no  longer  belongs
to  me.    There  is  a  mother  and  a  child,  and  the  child  has  a  book  to  play  with,  and
a  blacklead  pencil.    It  is  making  drawings  and  marks  upon  the  book,  and  the
mother  takes  no  notice.    It  lays  down  one  book  and  snatches  another  from  the
table,  and  at  once  the  mother  rises  from  her  seat,  and  hurriedly  takes  the  book
away,  saying :  "  No,  my  dear,  you  must  not  mark  tbat,  for  it  is  not  ours. "    So  with
my  mind,  intellect,  and  spirit ;  if  it  belonged  to  me  I  might  or  might  not  play
tomfool  with  it,  and  go  to  hear  Socinians,  Universalists,  and  suchlike  preach  ;  but
as  it  ia  not  my  own,  I  will  preserve  it  from  such  fooleries,  and  the  pure  word  sball
not  be  mingled  with  the  errors  of  men.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)        Contagion  of  fdhe
doctrine  : — Sin  is  like  the  bale  of  goods  which  came  from  the  East  to  this  city  in  the
olden  time,  which  brought  the  pest  in  it.    Probably  it  was  but  a  small  bale,  but  yet
it  contained  in  it  the  deaths  of  hundreds  of  the  inhabitants  of  London.    In  those
days  one  piece  of  rag  carried  the  infection  into  a  whole  town.     So,  if  you  permit
one  sin  or  false  doctrine  in  a  church  knowingly  and  wittingly,  none  can  teU  the
extent  to  which  that  evil  may  ultimately  go.    The  Church,  therefore,  is  to  be  purged
of  practical  and  doctrinal  evil  as  diligently  as  possible.     That  sour  and  corrupting
thing  which  God  abhors  must  be  purged  out,  and  it  is  to  be  the  business  of  the
CJhristian  minister,  and  of  all  his  fellow-helpers,  to  keep  the  church  free  from  it.
(Ibid.)        Dilution  of  the  truth : — I  have  likened  the  career  of  certain  divines  to
the  journey  of  a  Roman  wine  cask  from  the  vineyard  to  the  city.    It  starts  from
the  wine-press  as  the  pure  juice  of  the  grape,  but  at  the  first  halting-place  the
drivers  of  the  cart  must  needs  quench  their  thirst,  and  when  they  come  to  a  fountain
they  substitute  water  for  what  they  had  drunk.    In  the  next  village  there  are
numbers  of  lovers  of  wine  who  beg  or  buy  a  little,  and  the  discreet  carrier  dilutes
again.    The  watering  is  repeated,  till,  on  its  entrance  into  Rome,  the  fluid  is
remarkably  different  from  that  which  originally  started  from  the  vineyard.     There
is  a  way  of  doctoring  the  gospel  in  much  the  same  manner.    A  little  truth  is  given
up,  and  then  a  little  more,  and  men  fill  up  the  vacuum  with  opinions,  inferences,
speculations,  and  dreams,  tiU  their  wine  is  mixed  with  water,  and  the  water  none
of  the  best.     (Ibid.)         Wilful  heresy  : — Heresy,  in  the  New  Testament,  is  most
commonly  used  in  an  indifferent  sense,  and  but  seldom  in  a  bad  one.    It  generally
signifies  no  more  than  a  sect  or  party  in  religion.  Thus  we  read  of  the  sect,  or  heresy,
of  the  Sadducecs;  of  the  sect,  or  heresy,  of  the  Pharisees ;  St.  Paul  is  styled  a  ring-
leader of  the  sect,  or  heresy,  of  the  Nazarenes ;  and  he  says  of  himself  that,  after  the
strictest  sect  (where  the  same  Greek  word  is  used)  of  the  Jewish  religion,  he  lived
a  Pharisee.    In  this  last  passage  particularly  nothing  can  be  more  plain  than  that
the  word  has    an    innocent  meaning,  since  the  apostle  rather  commends  than
charges  himself  with  anything  criminal  for  having  been  a  Pharisee  before  his  con-
version to  the  Christian    faith.    And  we  find  it  applied  in  the  same  manner
in  Acts  xxviii.  22.    I  shall  mention  but  one  text  more,  and  that  is,  "  For  there
must  also  be  heresies  among  you,"  &o.  (1  Cor.  xi.  19).    The  evident  design  of  which
is,  that  considering  the  various  tempers  of  men,  their  different  views,  passions,
prejudices,  their  selfishness,  ambition,  vanity,  and  the  like,  it  was  natural  to  expect
that  they  would  divide  into  parties  about  religion,  as  well  as  about  politics,  and  the
civil  affairs  of  life ;  and  that  the  providence  of  God  wisely  permitted  this  for  the
trial  of  their  integrity,  and  to  distinguish  the  indolent,  careless,  and  insincere  from
the  real  friends  of  truth,  persons  of  an  honest,  inquisitive,  and  ingenuous  temper.
Now,  according  to  this  account,  the  general  notion  of  a  heretic  is  no  more  than
this,  viz.,  one  tbat  sets  up  to  be  the  head,  or  chooses  to  join  himself  to  a  particular
religious  sect.    I  say  who  makes  this  the  matter  of  his  choice  because  it  is  implied
in  the  original  signification  of  the  word ;  and,  besides,  nothing  can  be  supposed  to
have  any  concern  with   religion    but  what  is  a  voluntary   action.      A  heretic,
therefore,  in  a  bad  sense,  must  be  one  who  knowingly  espouses  a  false  doctrine,
is  insincere  in  his  profession,  and  asserts  and  defends  what  he  is  convinced  is  con-
trary to  Christianity,  and,   consequently,   one  who  maintains   and  supports  the
interest  of  a  faction,  to  serve  some  base  designs.    According  to  St.  Paul's  cuscount
in  the  text,  a  heretic  is  not  only  subverted  or  turned  aside  from  the  true  faith,  ha
not  only  entertains  wrong  sentiments  of  Christianity,  but  sinneth,  <.«.,  doth  this
wilfully,  and  with  an  ill  attention.     He  is  one  that  makes  religion  a  cloak  for  bis
immoralities,  and  espouses  and  propagaies  what  he  knows  to  be  false,  to  promote
the  ends  of  his  ambition,  covetousness,  ot  sensual  pleasure ;  who,  indeed,  thinks  it


CHAP,  m.]  TITUS.  Ill

his  interest  to  retain  the  name  of  a  Christian,  and  in  that  circumstance  only  differg
from  a  thorough  and  wilful  apostate  from  Christianity,  but  which  incurs  the  greater
guilt  may  perhaps  be  hard  to  determine ;  for  as  the  one  rejects  the  Christian
religion  altogether,  the  other  out  of  choice  corrupts  it,  and  opposes  its  true  doctrines,
even  while  he  pretends  to  believe  and  reverence  its  authority.  Such  as  these,  I
say,  persons  of  such  vile  and  dishonest  principles,  and  of  so  flagitious  a  character,
are  the  heretics  condemned  by  St.  Paul;  and  therefore  to  fix  it  as  a  term  of
reproach  on  any  in  whom  there  does  not  appear  hatred  of  the  truth,  a  sensual
mind,  and  a  profligate  conscience,  must  be  unchristian  and  scandalous.  And  if  we
examine  other  passages  of  the  New  Testament  we  shall  find  that  they  all  concur  in
giving  us  the  same  idea  of  heresy.  It  is  represented  as  a  work  of  the  flesh,  because
it  has  its  foundation  in  the  corrupt  inclinations  of  human  nature.  It  is  reckoned
among  the  most  heinous  and  execrable  vices — such  as  adultery,  idolatry,  hatred,
variance,  seditions,  murders.  And  heretics  are  constantly  described  as  men  of  no
probity  or  honour,  strangers  to  all  the  principles  of  virtue,  and  embracing  such
opinions  only  as  were  calculated  for  the  gratification  of  irregular  appetites,  and
advancing  selfish  and  worldly  views  (1  Tim.  i.  19 ;  2  Pet.  ii.  1.)  1.  It  appears  from
what  has  been  said  that  no  mere  error  of  the  judgment  can  be  heresy.  For  heresy
Is  a  high  degree  of  wickedness;  and  necessarily  supposes  irregularity  of  the
affections  and  a  depraved  and  vicious  choice ;  whereas  erroneous  conceptions  and
apprehensions  of  things  are  no  crime  at  all,  but  natural  to  mankind  in  the  present
weak  and  imperfect  state  of  the  faculties.  2.  We  may  infer  that  no  honest  man
can  possibly  be  a  heretic.  He  may,  indeed,  have  errors  (and  who  is  there  among  ni
that  has  not  ?) — nay,  he  may  err  in  points  of  importance  too,  but  his  mistakes  cannot
be  dangerous  while  he  takes  care  to  maintain  a  good  conscience.  3.  If  heresy  be  an
error  of  the  will,  and  such  only  can  be  guilty  of  it  who  are  condemned  of  them>
selves,  how  can  we  certainly  know,  in  most  cases  at  least,  whether  a  man  be  a
heretic  or  not  ?  Let  each  of  us  put  this  question  to  himself  impartially,  and  if  we
cannot  answer  it  to  our  satisfaction,  let  us,  however,  learn  thus  much  from  our
ignorance,  to  be  modest  in  the  censures  we  pass  upon  others.  If  it  be  said  that
such  wicked  deceivers  are  generally  known  by  their  fruits,  and  that  their  vicious
lives  will  show  us  by  what  views  they  are  acted,  and  the  vile  design  of  their  im-
posture, I  answer  that,  even  upon  this  supposition,  I  should  thii^  it  better  that
they  be  rejected  for  their  immorality,  which  is  notorious  and  palpable,  than  for
heresy,  of  which  we  cannot  so  certainly  judge.  4.  Though  it  be  a  point  of  great
nicety  to  judge  of  heresy  in  particular  instances,  the  persons  who  come  nearest  the
character  of  the  old  heretics  are  violent  party  men,  who  confine  Christianity  to
their  own  faction,  and  excommunicate  all  that  take  the  liberty  to  differ  from  them ;
the  rigid  imposers  of  human  schemes  of  doctrine  and  modes  of  worship,  as  essential
branches  of  religion,  and  laws  binding  conscience,  these,  I  say,  are  most  like  the
heretics  condemned  in  Scripture,  notwithstanding  their  insolence  and  presumption.
{James  Foster.)       I.  What  patience  the  Lobd  useth  in  His  just  proceedings,  even

AOA1N8T  THE  WORST  MEN,  WHOM    He  WILL    NOT    HAVE    CONDEMNED  NOR  CAST  OUT  OF  THE

Church  upon  suspicions,  or  surmises  ;  no,  nor  presently  after  an  open  sin  is  com-
mitted ;  but  there  must  be  a  time  between  wherein  the  Church  must  rightly  inform
herself,  that  she  may  know  the  nature  and  degree  of  the  sin  before  she  turn  her  to
any  censure  or  senten«e.  Tea,  and  further,  the  sin  being  apparent,  she  must  not
reject  any,  till  all  good  means  of  reclaiming  have  been  in  vain  used.  Which  may
teach  us,  that  to  hasten  excommunications  ipso  facto;  or  (as  it  is  often)  before
the  party  can  come  to  the  knowledge  or  suspicion  of  any  such  proceeding,  is
to  swerve  from  the  rules  of  the  Word,  and  those  weighty  reasons  also  upon  which
they  are  grounded.  As  namely ;  1.  Some  offenders  are  curable ;  and  what  man  in
his  wits  will  cut  oft  his  arm  or  leg  so  soon  as  it  beginneth  to  ache  and  pain  him,
and  not  rather  use  means  of  surgery  and  cure?  is  any  member  in  the  body  so
despised  ?  2.  Ourselves  must  not  be  so  uncharitable  ps  presently  to  despair  of  any
man's  conversion.  God  may  in  time  raise  the  most  desperate  sinner  unto  repent-
ance. 3.  The  means  used  are  not  lost ;  for  if  it  attain  no  other  end,  yet  shall  it
make  them  more  inexcusable,  the  censure  more  just,  and  the  Church's  proceeding
more  equal  and  moderate.  4.  Add  here  unto  the  Lord's  example,  who  never
striketh  before  He  have  sufiSciently  warned ;  He  never  precipitateth  either  sentence
or  execution,  but  first  cometh  down  to  see  (Gen.  xviii.  21),  and  hearkeneth  and
heareth  (Mai.  iii.   16),  and  accordingly  passeth  sentence.      II.  Note  that  when  a

SINNER  is  known  TO  SIN  OF  0B8TINA0Y,  THE  BEST  WAT  IS  TO  AVOID  HIM  AND  CAST  HIM  OUT.

I.  For  labour  is  but  lost  on  such  a  one.    2.  He  doth  but  tread  holy  things  under


212  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in.

his  feet ;  of  which  holy  things  the  Church  is  the  keeper,  and  must  be  faithful.
3.  He  Bins  not  only  of  judgment  and  reason,  but  of  affection ;  and  this  is  the
reason  why  very  few  heretics  are  converted,  when  many  unregenerate  men  and
outrageously  wicked  in  other  kinds  are,  who  sin  not  of  affection  and  wilfulness,
but  of  corrupt  judgment  only.  4.  The  Lord's  example  (Hos.  iv.  17).  III.  Note
hence,  also,  what  use  the  Lord  maketh  of  a  wicked  conscience,  even  in  desperatb
siNNEBS.  It  shall  be  the  accuser,  wituess,  and  judge  to  pronounce  the  sentence  of
death  against  his  own  soul ;  and  so  shall  make  way  unto  the  Lord's  most  righteona
judgment.  Use.  1.  It  letteth  us  see  what  an  intolerable  torment  a  wicked  con-
science is.  Use.  2.  This  further  teaches  us  not  to  neglect  the  checks  of  conscience,
nor  our  own  hearts  reproving  us  of  our  ways ;  as  those  men  who  are  resolved  to  hold
on  their  lewd  courees,  let  the  word  and  spirit,  yea,  their  own  spirits,  suggest  what
they  wiU  or  can  against  it.  For  the  time  cometh  when  thou  canst  not  set  the  voice
of  thy  conscience  so  light,  and  then  that  conscience  which  hath  checked  thee  shall
judge  thee,  and  that  heart  which  hath  reproved  thee  shall  torment  thee,  and  thou
shalt  never  be  able  to  turn  off  the  charge  of  it,  but  shalt  by  it  be  accused  and  con-
victed to  have  been  a  wilful  chooser  of  thine  own  destruction.  Use.  8.  This
eonsideration  also  teacheth  us  to  look  that  in  everything  we  keep  good  consciences
before  God  and  all  men,  the  use  of  which  will  be  manifold.  (1)  To  keep  us  from
errors  and  heresies,  and  contain  us  in  the  profession  of  the  true  faith  ;  for  let  good
conscience  be  put  away,  there  must  needs  follow  a  shipwreck  of  faith ;  as  is  to  be
seen  in  all  heretics.  Hence  are  we  counselled  to  make  pure  conscience  as  the  coffer
to  keep  faith  in  (1  Tim.  iii.  9).  (2)  In  doing  any  action  lawful  in  itself,  a  good  oon-
Bcience  only  maketh  it  good  to  the  doer ;  for  to  do  even  the  will  of  God  against  my
conscience  is  sin  to  me,  be  the  same  in  itself  never  so  materially  good.  (3)  In
Buffering  or  enduring  anything  for  well  doing  (as  not  the  pain,  but  the  cause  maketh
a  martyr  so),  not  the  cause  so  much  as  the  conscience  of  the  sufferer  worketh  out
his  boldness  and  peace  in  the  midst  of  the  combat,  and  giveth  him  security  in  his
conflict;  whereas  a  bad  conscience  will  betray  the  best  cause.  (4)  In  enjoying  any
condition  of  this  present  life,  a  good  conscience  is  a  sweet  companion  ;  even  a  dry
morsel  with  peace  of  heart  is  better  than  a  house  fuU  of  sacrifices  with  strife  and
war  within.  In  outward  afflictions  there  is  inward  rejoicing,  for  let  the  heart  be
pacified  in  God,  it  can  rejoice  in  tribulation.  The  disciples  can  go  away  rejoicing
from  the  council  that  they  were  counted  worthy  to  be  beaten  and  suffer  rebuke  for
Christ  (Acts  v.  41).  The  martyrs  can  kiss  the  stake,  embrace  the  fire,  and  sing  in
the  midst  of  the  flames.  (5)  Tea,  it  doth  not  only  through  the  whole  hfe  minister
joy  and  comfort  even  in  tne  remembrance  of  death,  as  in  2  Tim.  iv.  7,  8,  but  it
followeth  a  man  after  death,  when  all  things  else  forsake  him ;  and  as  a  most
faithful  friend  it  goeth  with  him  before  God's  judgment  seat,  and  pleadeth  for  him
at  the  bar  of  Jesus  Christ ;  yea,  testifieth  with  him,  and  oleareth,  and  quite
acquitteth  him  from  the  judgment  of  the  great  day.  All  which  being  so,  what  pains
and  labour  can  be  thought  too  much  in  the  getting  and  keeping  of  such  a  jewel,
which  bringeth  in  so  rich  a  recompense  for  so  little  labour,  and  how  worthily  doth
he  forfeit  all  these  sweet  fruits  of  it,  who  will  be  at  no  costs  nor  pains  for  it.
(T.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Heresy -hunters : — You  can  imagine  a  husbandman  who  would
neglect  to  care  for  his  soil,  and  go  out  after  squirrels  and  all  manner  of  vermin  that
were  eating  his  grain — if  he  had  any  that  they  could  eat — who  would  go  out  to
shoot  weasels  in  the  wall,  foxes  in  the  field,  wolves  in  the  wood,  and  bears  every-
where ;  and  who,  when  he  could  find  nothing  to  shoot,  would  lie  out  at  night,  watching
for  racoons,  and  range  up  and  down  through  the  day,  searching  for  some  stray  dog,
where  there  should  be  sheep,  but  where  there  are  none.  There  are  in  the  Church
what  may  be  called  heresy-hnnters.  They  always  carry  a  rifle — a  spiritual  rifle —
nnder  their  arm.  You  will  find  them  for  ever  outlying,  watching  for  heresy — not
so  much  in  their  own  hearts,  not  so  much  in  their  own  Church,  not  so  much  in  their
own  minister,  but  in  other  people's  hearts,  in  other  people's  Churches,  in  other
people's  ministers.  If  any  man  happens  to  hold  an  opinion  respecting  any  doctrine
which  does  not  accord  with  their  own  peculiar  views,  they  all  spread  abroad  to  run
him  down.  They  are  taking  care  of  and  defending  the  faith  I  They  are  searching
lor  foxes,  and  wolves,  and  bears,  that  they  suppose  are  laying  waste  God's
buBbsmdry  1  They  never  do  anything  except  fire  at  other  folks.  I  have  no  doubt
that  Nimrod  was  a  very  good  fellow  in  his  own  poor,  miserable  way,  but  a  Nimrod
■linister  is  the  meanest  of  all  sorts  of  hunters.  {H.  W.  Brecher.)  Treatment  of
heretics : — In  what  way  are  the  directions  here  given  to  Titus  to  be  used  for  our  own
fnidance  at  the  present  time?     T}>ey  do  not  apply  to  ^fr-'^ons  "ho  have  a'.wa-s


OHiP.  m.]  TITUS,  218

been,  or  who  have  ended  in  placing  themselves  outside  the  Christian  Church.  They
refer  to  persons  who  contend  that  their  self-chosen  views  are  part  and  parcel  of  the
gospel,  and  who  claim  to  hold  and  teEich  saoh  views  as  members  or  even  ministers
of  the  Cbnrch.  Secondly,  they  refer  to  grave  and  fundamental  errors  with  regard
to  first  principles;  not  to  eccentric  views  respecting  matters  of  detail.  And  in
determining  this  second  point  much  caution  will  be  needed ;  especially  when
inferences  are  drawn  from  a  man's  teaching.  We  should  be  on  our  guard  with
regard  to  assertions  that  a  particular  teacher  virtually  denies  the  Divinity  of  Christ,
or  the  Trinity,  or  the  perBonality  of  God.  But  when  both  these  points  are  quite
clear,  that  the  person  contradicts  some  of  the  primary  truths  of  the  gospel,  and
that  he  claims  to  do  so  as  a  Christian,  what  is  a  minister  to  do  to  such  a  member
of  his  flock  ?  He  is  to  make  one  or  two  effects  to  reclaim  him,  and  then  to  have  as
little  to  do  with  him  as  possible.  In  all  such  cases  there  are  three  sets  of  persons
to  be  considered :  the  heretic  himself,  those  who  have  to  deal  with  him,  and  the
Church  at  large.  What  conduct  on  the  part  of  those  who  have  to  deal  with  him
will  be  least  prejudicial  to  themselves  and  to  the  Church,  and  most  beneficial  to  &e
man  himself  ?  The  supreme  law  of  charity  must  be  the  guiding  principle.  Bat
that  is  no  true  charity  which  shows  tenderness  to  one  person  in  such  a  way  as  to  do
grievous  harm  to  others,  or  to  do  more  harm  than  good  to  the  person  who  receives
it.  Love  of  what  is  good  is  not  only  consistent  with  hatred  of  what  is  e'dl ;  it
cannot  exist  without  such  hatred.  What  we  have  to  consider,  therefore,  is  this.
Will  friendliness  confirm  him  in  his  error?  Would  he  be  more  impressed  by
severity?  Is  intercourse  with  him  likely  to  lead  to  our  being  led  astray?  Will  it
increase  his  influence  and  his  opportunities  of  doing  harm  ?  Is  severity  likely  to
excite  sympathy  in  other  people,  first  for  him,  and  then  for  his  teaching?  It  is
impossible  to  lay  down  a  hard  and  fast  rule  that  would  cover  all  cases ;  and  while
we  remember  the  stem  instructions  which  St.  Paul  gives  to  Titus,  and  St.  John  to
the  "  elect  lady,"  let  us  not  forget  the  way  in  which  Jesus  Christ  treated  publicans
and    sinners.      {A.    Plummer,   D.D.)  Condemning   of   himself: — Ferdinand,

Emperor  of  Germany,  possessed  a  great  number  of  watches,  in  collecting  of
which  he  had  a  fancy.  "  It  pleased  him  once,"  says  our  quaint  author,  *'  to  pat
this,  his  variety  of  speaking  gold,  upon  a  table,  as  if  he  would  expose  it  to  sale :  he
then  stepped  aside.  A  stander-by,  driven  by  a  desire  of  stealkig,  filched  one  of
them  (a  repeater),  which  the  emperor  espying  aslant,  called  him,  and  vrithoat
accusation,  kept  him  in  various  discourse  till  the  watch  striking  disclosed  the  hoar
and  his  theft.     {Saturday  Magazine.)

Ver.  13.  Bring  Zenas  the  lawyer. — Sermon  to  the  legal  profession : — This  man  of
my  text  belonged  to  a  profession  which  has  often  had  ardent  supporters  of  Christ
and  the  gospel.  Among  them,  Blackstone,  the  great  conomentator  on  English  law ;
and  Wnberforce,  the  emancipator ;  and  Chief  Justices  Marshall,  and  Tenterden,  and
Campbell,  and  Sir  Thomas  More,  who  died  for  the  truth  on  the  scaffold,  saying  to
his  aghast  executioner :  "  Pluck  up  courage,  man,  and  do  your  duty :  my  neck  is
very  short;  be  careful,  therefore,  and  do  not  strike  awry."  Among  the  mightiest
pleas  that  ever  have  been  made  by  tongue  of  barrister,  have  been  pleas  in  behalf  of
the  Bible  and  Christianity — as  when  Daniel  Webster  stood  in  the  Supreme  Court  at
Washington,  pleading  in  the  famous  Girard  will  case,  denoancing  any  attempt  to
educate  the  people  without  giving  them  at  the  same  time  moral  sentiment,  as  "  low,
ribald,  and  vulgar  deism  and  infidelity  " ;  as  when  Samuel  L.  Southard,  of  New  Jersey,
the  leader  of  the  forum  in  his  day,  stood  on  the  platform  at  Princeton  Collpge  com-
mencement, advocating  the  literary  excellency  of  the  Scriptures;  as  when  Edmund
Burke,  in  the  famous  trial  of  Warren  Hastings,  not  only  in  behalf  of  the  English
government,  but  in  behalf  of  elevated  morals,  closed  his  speech  in  the  midst  of  the
most  august  assemblage  ever  gathered  in  Westminster  Hall,  by  saying :  **  I
impeach  Warren  Hastings  in  the  name  of  the  House  of  Commons,  whose  national
character  he  has  dishonoured ;  I  impeach  bim  ia  the  name  of  the  people  of  India,
whose  rights  and  liberties  he  has  subverted ;  I  impeach  him  in  the  name  of  human
nature,  which  he  has  disgraced ;  in  the  name  of  both  sexes,  and  of  every  rank,  and
of  every  station,  and  of  every  situation  in  the  world,  I  impeach  Warren  Hastings. "
Yet,  notwithstanding  all  the  pleas  which  that  profession  has  made  in  behalf  of
God,  and  the  Church,  and  the  gospel,  and  the  rights  of  man,  there  has  come  down
through  the  generations  a  style  of  prejudice  against  it.  So  long  ago  as  in  the  time
of  Oliver  Cromwell,  it  was  decided  that  lawyers  might  not  enter  the  parliament


214  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (chap.  ni.

hoase  as  members,  and  they  were  called  *'  sons  of  Zeruiah."  The  learned  Dootor
Johnson  wrote  an  epitaph  for  one  of  them  in  these  words :

*'  God  works  wonders  now  and  then,
Here  Ues  a  lawyer,  an  honest  man  I  **

There  b  no  man  who  has  more  temptations,  more  trials,  or  graver  responsihilitiea
than  the  barrister,  and  he  who  attempts  to  discharge  the  daties  of  his  position  with
only  earthly  resources,  is  making  a  very  great  mistake.  Witness  Lord  Thurlow,
announcing  his  loyalty  to  earthly  government  in  the  sentence :  "  If  I  forget  my
earthly  sovereign,  may  God  forget  me,"  and  yet  stooping  to  nnaccountable  mean-
ness. Witness  Lord  Coke,  the  learned  and  the  reckless.  No  other  profession
more  needs  the  grace  of  God  to  deliver  them  in  their  temptations,  to  comfort  them
in  their  trials,  to  sustain  them  in  the  discharge  of  their  duty.  While  I  would  have
yon  bring  the  merchant  to  Christ,  and  while  I  would  have  you  bring  the  farmer  to
Christ,  and  while  I  would  have  you  bring  the  mechanic  to  Christ,  I  address  yon  to-
day in  the  words  of  Paul  to  Titus,  "  Bring  Zenas  the  lawyer."  By  so  much  as  hia
duties  are  delicate  and  great,  by  so  much  does  he  need  Christian  stimulus  and
safeguard.  God  alone  can  direct  him.  To  that  chancery  he  must  be  appellant,  and
he  will  get  an  answer  in  an  hour.  Blessed  is  that  attorney  between  whose  office
and  the  throne  of  God  there  is  perpetual,  reverential,  and  prayerful  communication.
That  attorney  will  never  make  an  irreparable  mistake.  True  to  the  habits  of  your
profession,  you  say,  "Cite  us  some  authority  on  the  subject."  Well,  I  quote  to  you
the  decision  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  Heaven :  "  If  any  lack  wisdom,  let  him  ask  of  God,
who  giveth  to  all  men  liberally,  and  upbraideth  not,  and  it  shall  be  given  him."
There  are  two  or  three  forms  of  temptation  to  which  the  legal  profession  is  especially
lubjeoted.  1.  The  first  of  all  is  scepticism.  Tou  get  so  used  to  pushing  the  sharp
f  nestion  "  why "  and  making  unaided  reason  superior  to  the  emotions,  that  the
religion  of  Jesus  Christ,  which  is  a  simple  matter  of  faith,  and  above  human
reason,  has  but  little  chance  with  some  of  you.  Scepticism  is  the  mightiest  temp-
tation of  the  legal  profession,  and  that  man  who  can  stand  in  that  profession,  re-
listing all  solicitations  to  infidelity,  and  can  be  as  brave  as  George  Briggs  of  Massa-
ehusetts,  who  stepped  from  the  gubernatorial  chair  to  the  missionary  convention,  to
plead  the  cause  of  a  dying  race :  then  on  his  way  home  from  the  convention,  on  a
eold  day,  took  off  his  warm  cloak  and  threw  it  over  the  shoulders  of  a  tbinly-olad  mis-
sionary, saying :  ••  Take  that  and  wear  it,  it  will  do  you  more  good  than  it  will  me  " ;
er,  like  John  McLean,  who  can  step  from  the  Supreme  Court  room  of  the  United
States  on  to  the  anniversary  platform  of  the  American  Sunday  School  Union — its
most  brilliant  orator — deserves  congratulation  and  encomium.  0  men  of  the  legal
profession,  let  me  beg  of  you  to  quit  asking  questions  in  regard  to  religion,  and
Begin  behoving.  If  you  do  not  become  a  Christian,  0  man  of  the  legal  profession,
nntil  you  can  reason  this  whole  thing  out  in  regard  to  God,  and  Christ,  and  the
nnmortality  of  the  soul,  you  will  never  become  a  Christian  at  all.  Only  believe.
"  Bring  Zenas  the  lawyer."  2.  Another  mighty  temptation  for  the  legal  profession
is  to  Sabbath  breaking.  What  you  cannot  do  before  twelve  o'clock  Saturday
night,  or  after  twelve  o'clock  Sunday  night,  God  does  not  want  you  to  do
at  all.  Beside  that,  you  want  the  twenty-four  hours  of  Sabbath  rest  to  give  you
•hat  electrical  and  magnetic  force  which  will  be  worth  more  to  you  before  the  jury
than  all  the  elaboration  of  your  case  on  the  sacred  day.  Every  lawyer  is  entitled
to  one  day's  rest  out  of  seven.  If  he  surrender  that,  he  robs  three — God,  hii  own
soul,  and  his  client.  Lord  Castlereagh  and  Sir  Thomas  Bomilly  were  the  leaders  of
the  bar  in  their  day.  They  both  died  suicides.  Wilberforce  accounts  for  their
aberration  of  intellect  on  the  ground  that  they  were  unintermittent  in  their  work,
and  they  never  rested  on  Sunday.  "Poor  fellow!"  said  Wilberforce,  in  regard  to
Castlereagh — "Poor  fellow!  it  was  non-observance  of  the  Sabbath  "  Chief  Justice
Hale  says,  "  When  I  do  not  properly  keep  the  Lord's  day,  all  the  rest  of  the  week  is
■nhappy  and  unsuccessful  in  my  worldly  employment."  3.  Another  powerful  temp-
tation of  the  legal  profession  is  to  artificial  stimulus.  The  fiower  of  the  American
bar,  mined  in  reputation  and  ruined  in  estate,  said  in  his  last  moments  :  "  This  is
the  end.  I  am  dying  on  a  borrowed  bed,  covered  with  a  borrowed  sheet,  in  a  house
built  by  public  charity.  Bury  me  under  that  tree  in  the  middle  of  the  field,  that  I
may  not  be  crowded ;  I  always  have  been  crowded."  4.  Another  powerful  temptation
of  the  legal  profession  is  to  allow  the  absorbing  duties  of  the  profession  to  shut  out
Aoughts  of  the  great  future.    You  know  very  well  that  you  who  have  so  often  tri<  d


CHAP.  m.J  TITUS.  215

others,  will  after  awhile  be  put  on  trial  yourselves.  Death  will  serve  on  yoa  a  writ
of  ejectment,  and  you  will  be  put  off  these  earthly  premises.  On  that  day  all  the
affairs  of  your  life  will  be  presented  in  a  "  bill  of  particulars."  No  certiorari  from
a  higher  court,  for  this  is  the  highest  court.  The  day  when  Lord  Exeter  was
tried  for  high  treason ;  the  day  when  the  House  of  Commons  moved  for  the  impeach-
ment of  Lord  Lovatt ;  the  day  when  Charles  I.  and  Queen  Caroline  were  put  upon
trial;  the  day  when  Bobert  Emmet  was  arraigned  as  an  insurgent;  the  day  when
Blennerhasset  was  brought  into  the  court-room  because  he  had  tried  to  overthrow
the  United  States  government,  and  all  the  other  great  trials  of  the  world  are  nothing
compared  with  the  great  trial  in  which  you  and  I  shall  appear,  summoned  before  the
Judge  of  quick  and  dead.  There  will  be  no  pleading  there  "  the  statute  of  limita-
tion";  no  "turning  State's  evidence,"  trying  to  get  off  ourselves,  while  others
suffer;  no  "moving  for  a  non-suit."  The  case  wUl  come  on  inexorably,  and  we
shall  be  tried.  You,  who  have  so  often  been  advocate  for  others,  will  then  need
an  advocate  for  yourself.  Have  you  selected  Him  ?  The  Lord  Chancellor  of  the
Universe.  Lord  Ashburton  and  Mr.  Wallace  were  leading  barristers  in  their
day.  They  died  about  the  same  time.  A  few  months  before  their  decease  they
happened  to  be  at  the  same  hotel  in  a  village,  the  one  counsel  going  to  Devonshire,
the  other  going  to  London.  They  had  both  been  seized  upon  by  a  disease  which
they  knew  would  be  fatal,  and  they  requested  that  they  be  carried  into  the  same
room  and  laid  down  on  sofas,  side  by  side,  that  they  might  talk  over  old  times  and
talk  over  the  future.  So  they  were  carried  in,  and  lying  there  on  opposite  sofas,
they  talked  over  their  old  contests  at  the  bar,  and  then  they  talked  of  the  future
world  upon  which  they  must  soon  enter.  It  was  said  to  have  been  a  very  affecting
and  solemn  interview  between  Mr.  Wallace  and  Lord  Ashburton.  My  friends,  my
subject  to-day  puts  you  side  by  side  with  those  men  in  your  profession  who  have
departed  this  life,  some  of  them  sceptical  and  rebellious,  some  of  them  penitent,
childlike,  and  Christian.  These  were  wandering  stars  for  whom  is  reserved  the
blackness  of  darkness  for  ever,  while  these  others  went  up  from  the  court-room  of
earth  to  the  throne  of  eternal  dominion.  Through  Christ,  the  advocate,  these  got
glorious  acquittal.  In  the  other  case,  it  was  a  hopeless  lawsuit.  An  unpardoned  sinner
versui  the  Lord  God  Almighty.  O  what  disastrous  litigation  1  {T.  De  Witt  Talmage,
D,D.)  That  nothing  be  wanting  nnto  them. — Titus'  duty  to  his  fellow-ministers  : —
Ministers  ought  to  abound  in  the  fruits  of  kindness  to  one  another,  and  most  to
those  whose  circimistances  render  the  expressions  of  brotherly  kindness  needful.
Probably  Titus  could  not,  from  his  own  purse,  furnish  everything  that  was  needful
to  his  brethren  who  were  travelling  in  the  service  of  the  Churches.  But  he  might,
through  his  influence,  do  by  the  hands  of  others  what  was  not  in  his  own  power.
The  apostle  had  already  said  that  the  doctrine  of  salvation  by  grace  teaches  and
constrains  men  who  believe  it  to  maintain  good  works.  And  here  he  calls  on  the
believers  under  the  care  of  Titus  to  embrace  the  occasion  that  was  presented  to
them,  of  testifying  their  faith  by  their  works,  and  learning  to  practise  the  duties  by
which  they  were  to  approve  themselves  unto  God  as  faithful  Christians.  There  are
too  many  who  form  good  resolves,  but  when  opportunities  offer  of  putting  them
into  practice,  suffer  them  to  pass  unimproved.  They  intend  to  do  what  they  know
to  be  right,  but  are  in  no  haste  to  perform  it.  But  let  ours^  those  who  belong  to
oar  holy  society,  learn  not  only  to  do,  but  to  stand  foremost  in  doing,  good  works,
on  all  necessary  occasions.  An  opportunity  for  doing  good  ought  to  be  as  much
valued  by  us  as  an  opportunity  for  receiving  it,  for  we  are  sure  that  "  it  is  more
blessed  to  give  than  to  receive."  We  know  not  what  opportunities  we  may  after-
wards have  to  do  good ;  but  the  present  opportunity  will  not  return ;  and  we  may
(eel  the  same  disposition  to  neglect  a  second  and  a  third  as  a  first  opportunity  of
Qsefolness.  How  then  shall  we  approve  ourselves  fruit-bearing  branches  in  the
tme  vine,  and  not  to  be  found  among  the  barren  branches  against  whom  the  terrible
sentence  is  pronounced,  that  the  great  Husbandman  will  take  them  away,  and  they
shall  be  gathered,  and  cast  into  the  fire  and  burned  *  "  Bring  Zenas  the  lawyer,
and  ApoUos,  dihgently  on  their  way,"  and  in  supplying  their  necessities  let  oar
people  learn  to  excel,  or  go  before  others,  in  good  works,  that  they  be  not  anfraittal.
Zenas  had  probably  been  a  Jewish  lawyer.  And  against  that  class  of  men  awful
things  had  been  spoken  by  our  Lord.  Amongst  others,  it  is  said  that  they  took
away  the  key  of  knowledge  from  men.  But  the  grace  of  God  can  make  a  most
effectual  change  in  those  from  whom  least  good  and  most  evil  is  to  be  expected.
He  was  now  travelling  with  the  key  of  knowledge  to  open  the  mysteries  of  the
kingdom  of  heaven  to  Gentiles  as  well  as  Jews.    Apollos  was  a  well  known  and  tax


216  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHi*.  ni.

eminent  labourer  in  the  gospel.  And  those  who  were  not  ready  to  afford  encourage-
ment and  facilities  to  such  labourers  for  Christ,  and  for  the  souls  of  men,  gave  too
much  reason  to  suspect  that  they  were  themselves  barren  and  unfruitful  in  the
knowledge  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour.  Let  us  be  fellow-helpers  to  the  truth,  that
we  may  not  incur  the  punishment  of  those  who  are  lukewarm  in  the  cause  of  Christ
(Bev.  iii.).  ((?•  Lawson,  D.D.)  Christianity  enjoins  courtesy  : — Christianity
hindereth  not,  but  commendeth  and  enjoineth  oivil  courtesy  and  all  kind  of
humanity.  For — 1.  Whatsoever  pertaineth  to  love  and  good  report,  that  mnst
believers  think  on  and  do  (Phil.  iv.).  2.  The  wisdom  which  is  from  above  is  gentle,
peaceable,  full  of  mercy  and  good  fruits  (James  iii.  17).  8.  Those  many  command-
ments, tiiat  Christians  should  salute  and  greet  one  another,  and  that  with  a  holy
kiss  (1  Thess.  v.  26),  called  by  Peter  the  kiss  of  love ;  usual  in  those  East  coun-
tries, by  which  outward  testimony  they  declared  mutual  love  and  kindness.  4.  Out-
ward courtesy  is  a  necessary  virtue  even  for  the  maintaining  of  the  bond  of  Chris-
tian peace ;  yea,  availeth  much  for  the  nourishing  and  increasing  the  communion  of
Baints,  and  society  with  God's  people.  6.  How  disgraceful  a  thing  were  it  for  the
profession  of  Christ,  that  such  as  profess  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  should  show
themselves  inhuman  or  hoggish,  who  should  be  as  lambs  and  little  children,  for
Euch  are  they  who  have  entered  into  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  as  the  prophet  wit-
nesseth.  Let  this  point,  therefore,  be  well  thought  of,  that  as  faith  and  love
cannot  be  separate,  so  must  good  conscience  and  good  manners  go  together.
(T.  Taylor,  DJ).)

Ver.  14.  Let  out's  also  learn. — TJie  mutual  property  and  purpose  of  good  men  ;—

1.  The  mutual  pbopebty  of  good  men.      "  Ours."      1.   A  mutual  appreciation.

2.  A  mutual  accumulation.  II.  The  mutual  pubpose  of  good  men.  "  To  main-
tain good  works."  1.  "What  are  good  works?  Works  that  grow  out  of  supreme  loye
to  God,  and  tender  and  disinterested  sympathy  with  man.  2.  Why  is  the  mainten-
ance of  good  works  so  transcendently  important?  (1)  Because  they  are  essential
to  the  building  up  of  a  true  moral  character.  (2)  Because  they  are  necessary  to  the
spiritual  reformation  of  mankind.  (Homilist.)  That  they  be  not  unfrultfoL —
Christianity  fruitful: — The  metaphor  implieth  that  as  the  Church  is  God's  orchard
or  garden,  and  His  ministers  are  His  planters  and  waterers,  so  the  faithful  are  the  trees,
even  trees  of  righteousness,  the  planting  of  the  Lord,  and  planted  by  the  rivers  of
waters,  that  they  might  bring  forth  their  fruit  in  due  season ;  and  teacheth  that  true
Christianity  is  not  a  barren  but  a  fruitful  profession,  unto  which  Christians  are  every-
where called.  In  Ezek.  zlvii.  12  we  have  a  notable  resemblance  of  those  manifold
fruits,  which  by  the  power  of  the  gospel  should  be  by  believers  produced  In  the
Church  of  the  New  Testament.  The  vision  was  of  waters  which  ran  from  the  Temple,
and  from  under  the  threshold  of  the  sanctuary.  And  wheresoever  these  waters  should
run,  they  should  cause  admirable  fruitfulness,  in  so  much  as  on  both  sides  of  the
river  shall  grow  all  kind  of  fruitful  trees,  whose  leaves  shall  not  fade,  and  their  fruit
Bhall  not  fail.  These  waters  are  the  gospel  which  issue  from  nnder  the  threshold :
that  is,  from  Christ  the  door,  typified  by  that  beautiful  gate  of  the  Temple ;  from
the  Temple  at  Jerusalem  these  waters  were  with  swift  current  to  run  not  only  over
Judeea,  but  all  the  world  in  a  short  space:  hence  was  the  Church  mightily  increased,
for  though  these  waters  run  into  the  dead  sea,  wherein  (if  we  believe  histories)
abideth  no  living  thing,  yet  such  a  quickening  power  they  carry  with  them,  as  even
there  everything  shall  live ;  such  as  were  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins  are  hereby
quickened,  and  become  trees  of  righteousness  green  and  flourishing,  yea,  and  con-
stantly fruitful  in  all  godly  conversation.  And  this  the  same  which  our  Saviour
noteth  (Johnzv.  1),  that  His  Father  is  the  husbandman,  Himself  is  the  Vine,  Chris-
tians are  the  branches  of  that  vine,  who  if  they  be  found,  His  Father  purgeth  that
they  may  bring  forth  more  fruit ;  teaching  us  hereby  that  it  is  the  Lord's  scope
and  aim  that  Christians  should  be  abundant  in  fruits  beseeming  their  profession.
The  Apostle  Paul  accordingly  exhorteth  the  Philippians  to  be  much  in  goodness,
to  abound  in  love,  in  knowledge,  and  in  all  judgment ;  yea,  to  be  filled  with  fruits
of  righteousness  which  are  by  Jesus  Christ  unto  the  glory  and  praise  of  God.  And
the  same  apostle  calleth  rich  men  to  be  rich  in  good  works.  I.  Thb  oonditionb  or
THIS  fhuitfulness.  1.  Every  Christian  must  be  fruitful ;  for  every  fruitless  branch
is  cut  down  and  made  fuel  for  the  fire.  2.  Every  Christian  must  bring  forth  good
fruit.  8.  This  fruitfulness  must  proceed  from  good  causes.  (1)  The  tree  must  be
good,  for  men  gather  not  grapes  of  thistles.  (2)  He  must  have  a  good  root  (John
zv.  4).     (3)  He  must  draw  thence  good  sap  and  juice  through  the  fellowahip  and


CBAP.  m.]  TITUS.  217

eommnnion  of  Christ's  death  and  resnrreotion.  (4)  He  mnsi  have  the  Spirit  of
the  Son  to  be  a  principal  agent  in  the  setting  and  ripening  of  these  fruits.  (6)  He
tnnst  have  the  love  of  God  within  him,  constraining  him,  which  will  be  as  the  sun
helping  on  these  fruits  to  their  perfection.  (6)  He  must  have  good  ends  in  his  eye,
▼iz.,  Ood's  glory  and  man's  good  (Phil.  i.  2).  4.  Every  Christian  must  bring  forth
much  fruit,  and  not  for  clusters  scarce  berries,  trees  of  righteousness  are  laden
with  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit ;  and  herein  is  the  Father  glorified,  that  ye  bring  forth
much  fruit  (John  xv.  8).  5.  Christians  must  continue  fruitful,  and  grow  daily
more  fruitful  (John  xv.  2).  H.  Beasons  to  movb  Christians  to  this  frditful-
SEss.  1.  God's  pains  and  costs  with  us.  2.  It  is  more  than  time  to  yield  up  our
fruits.  Let  us  consider  how  much  we  have  already  lost,  and  how  little  remaineth
behind,  and  this  cannot  but  be  as  a  loud  voice  in  our  ears  unto  fruitfulness.
S.  Heavenly  wisdom  which  is  from  above  is  full  of  good  fruits  ;  which,  if  it  have
taken  up  oar  hearts,  will  bewray  itself  in  love,  in  joy,  peace,  long-suffering,  genlle-
nesB,  goodness,  faith,  meekness,  temperance,  and  such  like ;  and  as  naturally  we
rejoice  to  see  everything  about  us  fruitful — our  fields,  our  cattle,  our  orchards —
even  so  this  supernatural  wisdom  would  make  it  the  delight  of  our  souls  to  see  our
hearts  and  lives  laden  with  the  best  fruits.  4.  The  barren  condition  hath  little
comfort  in  it,  and  the  danger  of  unfrnitfulness  is  very  great ;  for  God's  fearful
displeasure  disburdeneth  itself,  and  seizeth  on  sach  persons  by  sundry  degrees.
(1)  The  Lord  rejecteth  them.  (2)  Degree  of  God's  curse  on  such  fruitless  branches
is  the  withering  which  presently  followeth  their  casting  forth,  and  this  the  Lord
bringeth  on  them  two  ways :  sometimes  by  removing  means  of  fruitfulness,  and
so  having  laid  His  vineyard  waste.  He  threateneth,  in  the  next  place,  that  the  clouds
should  not  rain  upon  it  (Isa.  v.  6) :  and  sometimes  by  blowing  upon  the  gifts  He
had  given,  he  shall  lose  his  sap  and  greenness  he  once  had;  the  unprofitable
servant  after  conviction  must  have  his  talent  taken  from  him ;  and  this  curse  is  so
eminent  upon  many  men  that,  comparing  them  with  themselves  not  long  since,  a
man  may  say,  as  the  disciples  of  the  fig  tree,  against  which  the  curse  was  passed
from  the  mouth  of  Christ,  "How  soon  is  the  fig  tree  withered ! "  (3)  Another  degree  is,
that  no  means  shall  be  able  henceforth  to  do  such  a  person  any  good;  but  the  curse
being  passed  against  him,  this  is  one  branch  of  it,  that  he  shall  be  like  the  heath
in  the  wilderness,  which  shall  not  see  when  any  good  cometh.  Now  the  heath  it
hath  good  coming  upon  it,  the  rain  falleth,  the  sun  shineth,  the  spring  and  summer
season  returneth  upon  it,  but  it  seeth  none  of  this  good,  but  remaineth  a  dry  and
parched  heath  still ;  even  so  it  is  with  a  barren  soul  which  God  hath  begun  to  curse—
the  rain,  the  sun,  the  season,  the  Word,  sacraments,  days  of  grace,  Jesus  Christ  Him-
self do  him  no  good ;  he  sees  no  good  towards  him  in  all  these ;  nay,  the  Word
judgeth  him,  the  sacraments  are  poison  unto  him,  and  Christ  Himself  is  a  rock  of
offence  to  him,  on  whom  he  breaketh  the  neck  of  his  soul.  (4)  After  all  these
eometh  the  heavy  sentence,  unto  which  by  all  these  this  sinner  hath  been  prepared.
Cot  him  down,  bring  now  the  axe,  for  the  pruning-knife  hath  done  him  no  good ;
hew  him  down  by  death  from  the  ministry  under  which  he  hath  been  so  long  fruit-
less, bind  him  hand  and  foot,  make  a  faggot  of  him,  and  cast  him  into  hell  fire —
east,  I  say,  that  unprofitable  servant  into  utter  darkness,  there  shall  be  wailing  and
gnashing  of  teeth :  and  this  is  the  woeful  hire  of  unfrnitfulness.  HI.  Thb
HiNDBANCEs  OF  THIS  FBUiTPULNESS.  1.  Superfluity  of  lusts  and  inordinate  desires,
which  are  as  dead  branches,  and  therefore  must  be  lopped  off  before  fruit  can  be
expected ;  the  denial  of  a  man's  self  so  far  as  corrupt  is  the  first  lesson  in  Chris-
tiimity.  2.  The  unfitness  of  the  soil,  as  if  it  be  stony,  or  near  unto  a  rock  where  it
cannot  take  deep  roots ;  the  hard  and  stony  heart  suffereth  not  any  good  seed  to
take  root,  and  much  less  rise  up  to  fruit.  Or  if  the  soil  be  a  dry  ground  on  which
the  rain  falls  not,  or  on  a  high  and  hilly  ground  on  which  the  rain  stayeth  not ;
so  the  haughty  and  proud  heart  shutteth  off  the  rain  as  fast  as  it  cometh ;  it  mois-
teneth  the  crust  and  outside  a  little,  but  it  stayeth  not  to  get  within  it  to  prepare  it
to  fruitfiilness.  Or  if  the  ground  be  shaded  that  the  sun  cannot,  or  seldom,  look
npon  it ;  if  the  mind  and  affections  are  otherwise  distracted,  that  seldom  men  set
themselves  under  the  means  of  instruction ;  the  Sun  of  Bighteousness  shining  in  His
Church  not  enlightening,  not  warming  nor  cherishing  them,  not  bringing  back  a
new  spring  upon  them,  how  can  we  expect  fruit  from  such,  unless  we  can  look  that
•  tree  which  hath  been  fruitless  all  the  summer  should  be  laden  with  fruit  in  the
midst  of  winter.  3.  Sundry  vain  conceits  suggested  by  the  devil,  and  assented  nnto
by  men  to  keep  them  in  unfruitful  courses.  (1)  As  many  will  not  stick  to  objeot,
I  hope  notwithstanding  I  have  not  been  hitherto  so  fruitful  as  yoa  speak  ot,  j«t  I

15


218  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iu.

have  done  well  enough  all  this  while,  and  why  may  I  not  do  so  still  ?  and  thos
resolve  because  God  hath  used  patience  and  spared  them,  He  will  therefore  spare
them  BtUl  in  their  unfruitfulness.  But  this  is  the  devil's  logic,  the  clean  contrary
whereof  is  the  conclusion  of  the  Scripture.  Hath  God  spared  thee  the  second  and
third  year,  and  art  thou  still  fruitless?  He  must  now  needs  call  for  the  axe,  and  thia
is  that  which  thou  must  expect.  (2)  Another  saith,  "  Oh,  but  I  am  a  member  of  the
Church,  and  what  talk  you  to  me.  I  hear  the  Word,  receive  the  sacraments,  and
though  I  be  not  so  forward  and  strict,  I  hope  I  shall  do  well  enough."  Which
is  all  one  as  if  a  fruitless  tree  should  reply  to  the  master  and  say,  "  I  hope,
master,  thou  wilt  not  cut  me  down,  I  am  in  thy  orchard,  and  stand  near  thy  house ;
if  I  were  in  the  waste  I  should  think  thou  should  care  less  for  me."  But  will  not  the
master  reply,  that  "  Thou  must  rather  go  down,  because  thou  standest  unprofitable  in
my  orchard."  (3)  Others  say,  "  Oh,  but  we  are  not  so  fruitless  as  you  take  us,  and
what  desire  you  more?  "  Whereunto  I  say,  that  such  have  great  need  to  desire  better
evidences  to  allege  for  themselves  than  this.  Thou  must  not  be  a  privative,  but  a
positive  Christian,  laden  with  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit,  else  thou  hast  lost  all  thy
labour.  (T.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Fruifulnesi  the  true  test: — It  is  with  professions
of  religion,  especially  such  as  become  so  in  a  time  of  outpouring  of  the  Spirit  of
God,  as  it  is  with  blossoms  in  the  spring ;  there  are  vast  numbers  of  them  upon  the
trees  which  all  look  fair  and  promising,  but  yet  many  of  them  never  come  to  any>
thing,  and  many  of  those  that  in  a  little  whUe  wither  np,  drop  off,  and  rot  under  the
trees,  yet  for  a  while  look  as  beautiful  and  gay  as  others;  and  not  only  so,  but  smell
sweet  and  send  forth  a  pleasant  odour,  so  that  we  cannot,  by  any  of  our  senses,  oer<
tainly  distinguish  those  blossoms  which  have  in  them  that  secret  virtue  which  will
afterward  appear  in  the  fruit,  and  that  inward  solidity  and  strength  which  shall
enable  them  to  bear,  and  cause  them  to  be  perfected  by  the  hot  summer  son  that
will  dry  op  the  others.  It  is  the  mature  fruit  which  comes  afterward,  and  not  the
beautiful  colooi  and  smeU  of  the  blossoms,  that  we  must  judge  by.  (Jonathan
Edward$.)

Ver.  15.  Greet  them  that  love  ua  In  the  talVh. — Christian  love : — Hence  note  that
religion  bindeth  man  to  man  in  the  straightest  bond ;  for — 1.  The  Spirit  is  the  tier  of
it;  and  hence  is  it  called  the  unity  of  the  Spirit  in  the  bond  of  peace ;  and  indeed  it
most  be  a  wonderful  bond  that  can  reconcile  such  deadly  enemies  as  men  are  before
they  oome  into  the  kingdom  of  Christ  (Isa.  zi.  6).  2.  God's  image,  wheresoever  it  is,
is  exceeding  beautiful,  and  a  great  binder,  especially  where  renewed  and  repaired ;
which  being  once  espied,  let  the  outward  condition  be  what  it  can  be,  a  religious
heart  seeth  sufficient  matter  of  love,  and  will  knit  the  soul  unto  the  soul  of  such  a
one.  3.  It  addeth  strength  and  firmness  to  all  other  bonds  of  nature,  affinity,
desert,  &c.,  and  maketh  them  more  natural.  What  a  true  friend  was  Jonathan  to
David  I  Because  he  saw  that  God  was  with  him  bis  soul  clave  unto  him  ;  though
the  kingdom  was  to  be  rent  from  him  for  it,  yet  could  he  not  rend  his  heart  from
David.  If  Joseph  had  not  had  more  than  nature,  he  could  not  but  have  revenged
aooh  infinite  wrongs  upon  his  brethren ;  whereas  the  grace  of  his  heart  made  him
say,  "It  was  not  you,  my  brethren,  but  God  sent  me  before  you."  Consider  also  of
the  example  beyond  all  imitation  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  gave  Himself  to  the
death  for  us  when  we  were  yet  His  enemies.  4.  This  love  must  needs  be  most
lasting ;  for  being  love  in  the  truth  for  the  truth's  sake,  it  shall  continue  so  long  as
the  truth  doth ;  bat  the  truth  abideth  with  na,  and  shall  abide  with  us  for  ever ;
and  this  is  the  cause,  that  whereas  the  love  of  nature  dieth  with  it,  and  the  love  of
wicked  men  dieth  with  their  persona,  this  1  :ive  liveth  in  death,  yea,  when  it  goeth  to
heaven  with  a  man,  and  getteth  strength  and  perfection  then  faith  ceaseth,  and
hope  vanisheth  away.  Use  1.  Whence  we  are  taught  most  familiarly  to  embrace  them
that  love  us  in  the  faith,  and  to  make  most  account  of  their  love.  Many  love  in
the  face,  many  in  the  flesh,  many  in  nature,  only  the  love  of  Christians  is  a  fruit
of  faith,  a  work  of  the  Spirit,  and  therefore  a  surer  bond  than  they  all.  Well  knew
the  apostle  that  none  was  in  comparison  worth  having  but  this ;  he  oalleth  for  no
other,  he  careth  for  no  other,  he  mentioneth  no  other.  2.  Such  8is  set  into  any
society  vrith  others,  if  he  would  have  it  comfortable  unto  him,  let  him  strengthen
all  other  natural  or  civil  bonds  by  this  bond  of  religion  ;  let  him  labour  to  begin
his  love  in  the  faith,  or,  if  he  have  begun  elsewhere  already,  let  him  reform  the  same
hereby  if  he  look  for  any  sound  comfort  in  his  estate ;  for  this  is  the  cause  that  men
often  have  so  little  return  of  love  from  their  wives,  so  Uttle  obedience  from  their
children,  so  little  duty  from  their  servants,  so  slender  respeot  from  their  equals,


chjlT.  m.]  TITUS.  S19

because  they  begin  their  love  and  duties  at  a  wrong  end,  and  have  for  other  respeoti
affeoted  those  with  whom  they  live,  hot  the  least,  if  at  all,  for  graoe  and  religion,
which  of  all  is  the  soundest,  most  profitable,  and  most  comfortable.  (T.  Taylor,  DJ>.)
Shake  hand$ : — Shake  hands  with  somebody  as  yon  go  out  of  ohurch.  The  mor«
of  it  the  better,  if  it  is  expressive  of  real  mterest  and  feeling.  There  may  be  a
great  deal  of  the  spirit  of  the  gospel  put  into  a  hearty  shake  of  the  hand.  Think
of  St.  Paul's  four  times  repeated  request — "  Greet  one  another  " — after  the  custom
then  in  coimnon  use,  and  one  which  is  expressive  of  even  warmer  feeling  than  ova
common  one  of  hand-shaking.  Why  not  give  your  neighboors  the  benefit  of  the
warm  Christian  feeling  that  fills  you  to  your  finger  tips,  and  receive  the  like  from
them  in  return  7  Ton  will  both  be  benefited  by  it ;  and  the  stranger  will  go  away
feeling  that  the  Church  is  not,  after  all,  so  cold  as  he  had  thought  it  to  be.
ChrUtian  love : — ^A  lady  and  her  httle  daughter,  passing  out  of  church,  the  child
bade  good-bye  to  a  poorly  dressed  little  girL  "  How  did  you  Imow  her  ?  "  inquired
the  mother.  **  Why,  yoa  see,  mamma,  she  came  into  oor  Sabbath  Scdiool  alons,
and  I  made  a  |>lace  for  hsr  oa  mj  seat,  and  I  smiled  and  ah»  smiled,  and  tha*
w  mn  aeqnamted."


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  EPISTLE  TO  PHILEMON.

AnTHOBSHiP. — The  testimonies  to  the  Pauline  authorship  of  this  Epistle  are
abundant.  1.  External.  It  is  not  quoted  so  often  bj  the  earlier  Christian  fathers
B8  some  of  the  other  letters ;  its  brevity  and  the  fact  that  its  contents  are  not
didactic  or  polemic,  account  for  that  omission.  We  need  not  urge  the  expressions
in  Ignatius,  cited  as  evidence  of  that  apostolic  father's  knowledge  and  use  of  the
Epistle,  though  it  is  difficult  to  regard  the  similarity  betireen  them  and  the
language  in  ver.  20  as  altogether  accidental.  The  Canon  of  Muratori,  which  cornea
to  us  from  the  second  century,  enumerates  this  as  one  of  Paul's  Epistles.  Tertullian
mentions  it,  and  says  that  Maroion  admitted  it  into  his  collection.  Sinope,  in
Pontus,  the  birthplace  of  Marcion,  was  not  far  from  Colosse  where  Philemon
lived,  and  the  letter  would  find  its  way  to  the  neighbouring  churches  at  an  early
period.  Origen  and  Eusebius  include  it  among  the  universally  acknowledged  writings
of  the  early  Christian  times.  It  is  so  well  attested  historically,  that  De  Wette  says
its  genuineness  on  that  ground  is  beyond  doubt.  2.  Internal.  It  is  impossible  to
conceive  of  a  composition  more  strongly  marked  within  the  same  limits  by  those
nnstndied  assonances  of  thought,  sentiment,  and  expression,  which  indicate  an
author's  hand,  than  this  short  Epistle  as  compared  with  Paul's  other  productions.
It  will  be  found  also  that  all  the  historical  allusions  which  the  apostle  makes  to
events  in  his  own  life,  or  to  other  persons  with  whom  he  was  connected,  harmonise
perfectly  with  the  statements  or  incidental  intimations  contained  in  the  Acts  of  the
Apostles  or  in  the  other  Epistles  of  Paul.  {H.  B.  Hacltett,  D.D.)  The  authenticity
of  this  Epistle  was  probably  never  very  seriously  denied ;  its  inspiration  was  un-
popular in  certain  quarters,  external  to  the  Church.  It  is  very  necessary  to
remember  that  the  objections  to  the  inspiration  of  the  letter  came  from  anti-
dogmatic,  not  from  dogmatic  Christians ;  that  '•  in  the  battle  of  the  creeds  "  the
defenders  of  the  Catholic  doctrine  are  the  champions  of  the  Epistle ;  that  "  the
fierce  current  of  prejudice,"  stemmed  by  Jerome,  Chrysostom,  and  Theodore  of
Mopsuestia,  set  in  from  a  quarter  external  to  the  Church.  Jerome  states  that  the
arguments  used  against  the  Epistle  were,  either  that  it  was  not  St.  Paul's,  or  that,
if  it  came  from  his  hand,  he  was  not  always  inspired.  Its  subject,  they  argued,  proved
that  it  was  a  commendatory  note,  not  a  dogmatic  document.  Jerome  argues  that  its
universal  reception  by  all  churches  in  the  whole  world  is  unaccountable,  except  on
the  hypothesis  of  a  Pauline  origin.  As  to  apparent  triviality  and  everyday  style,  he
points  to  such  passages  as  2  Tim.  iv.  13,  Gal.  v.  12,  1  Cor.  vii.  12,  with  their
apparently  petty  details,  outbursts  of  human  feeling,  admissions  of  uncertainty.
For  the  brevity  of  the  letter  he  refers  to  the  Minor  Prophets,  and  concludes  by  a
quaint  quotation  of  Bom.  ix.  28,  as  if  the  very  shortness  of  Philemon  were  in
consonance  with  the  spirit  of  the  gospel.  {Bp.  Wtn.  Alexander.)  The  beautiful
Epistle  to  Philemon  contains  nothing  inconsistent  with  its  genuineness,  and  bears
everywhere  marks  of  the  hand  and  character  of  Paul.  Among  these  last  must  be
reckoned  the  absence  of  any  request  for  the  manumission  of  Onesimus.  Tact
so  delicate  belongs  not  to  a  forger.     The  names  sending  greeting  to  Philemon  are  a

ft


6  INTRODUCTION  TO  TEE  EPISTLE  TO  PHILEMON,

Tftlaable  coincidence  with  the  same  names  in  the  Epistie  to  the  Colossiant.    (Prof.
J.  A.  BeiL)

FiiiOB.  TIME,  oooASioit,  AND  OBJECT  o»  WBTTZSQ. — ^We  have  to  bring  before  oar
thoughts  the  picture  of  St.  Paul's  life  at  Borne  during  the  two  years'  sojourn  in  hia
hired  bouse,  in  custody,  a  prisoner  so  far  though  not  in  prison  (Acts  xxviii.  30).
Friends  and  visitors  were  allowed  free  access  to  him.  When  the  churches  which  he
bad  founded  heard  of  his  being  at  Bome,  it  was  natural  that  they  should  send
messengers  with  their  gifts,  their  offers  of  personal  help,  their  affectionate  remem-
brances. Such  as  these  were  Epaphroditus  from  Fhilippi,  Epapbras  from  Colossef
OnesiphoruB  and  Tychious  from  Ephesus.  It  was  a  time  when,  apart  from  the
danger  which  might  attach  to  their  position  as  Christians,  a  visit  to  the  imperial
tity  was  not  without  its  special  dangers.  There  was  a  serious  epidemic  which
affected  all  classes  of  the  community.  The  emperor  himself  was  so  ill  that  sacrifices
were  offered  in  all  the  temples  for  his  recovery  (Philostratus,  "  Life  of  Apollonius  of
Tyana,"  b.  iv.,  o.  44).  It  may  be  inferred  from  Phil.  ii.  25-27,  that  Epaphroditus
nearly  fell  a  victim  to  the  disease.  It  was  under  such  circumstances  that  an  on-
looked-for  visitor  would  seem  to  have  made  his  way  to  the  apostle's  quarters.  We
may  picture  him  as  in  early  manhood.  He  looks  outwardly  in  evil  case.  His  face
is  tiiat  of  one  weary  and  alarmed,  oppressed  alike  by  the  consciousness  of  guilt  and
by  the  fear  of  punishment.  It  was  a  common  story  enough.  He  had  yielded  to  the
temptations  of  his  calling  and  had  robbed  his  master,  either  by  direct  purloining  or
by  indirect  fraud  or  culpable  negligence.  He  had  been  afraid  of  punishment —
perhaps  all  the  more  afraid  because  he  thought  that  Philemon's  higher  standard  of
duty  as  a  Christian  would  make  him  more  rigorous  than  other  masters — and  had
run  away.  The  punishment  of  such  a  crime  might  have  been  scourging  or  im-
prisonment. He  might  have  been  branded  with  the  three  letters  (F  U  B= thief)
which  would  stamp  him  with  an  indelible  ignominy.  When  flight  had  been  added
to  his  guilt,  Roman  law  would  hardly  have  interfered  had  the  scourging  or  the
torture  ended  in  death.  It  is  not  di£Bcult  to  picture  to  ourselves  how  the  apostle
received  ti  at  confession ;  how  he  would  clasp  the  hands  of  the  penitent,  and  lay  hia
hands  in  blessing  on  his  head,  and  tell  him  of  the  love  of  Christ  and  the  death  upon
the  Cross,  and  tell  him  that  his  sin  was  forgiven.  Was  this  followed  by  a  night  of
prayer  and  a  morning  baptism  7  Was  it  a  time  to  which  St.  Paul  looked  back  as
one  in  which  he,  the  prisoner,  shut  out  from  most  opportunities  of  evangelistic  work,
had  yet  been  able,  in  the  might  of  intercession,  to  save  a  soul  from  death,  to  win  a
new  spiritual  son  for  God  and  for  himself?  That  new  life  was,  at  any  rate,  im-
planted, and  it  showed  itself,  as  was  natural,  in  love  and  reverence  to  the  teacher  to
whose  influence  it  was  due.  To  wait  upon  the  apostle,  ministering  to  his  infirmities,
to  mitigate  the  inevitable  discomforts  of  his  imprisonment,  to  watch  over  him  with
tk  devotion  which  was  at  once  filial  and  fraternal — this  was  the  return  which
Onesimus  strove  to  make  for  the  great  blessing  of  his  new  biith  to  a  higher  and
Diviner  life.  With  a  gentle  playfulness  St.  Paul  loved  to  dwell  on  the  thought  that
the  slave  was  now  *'  profitable  "  to  him,  and  would  be  piofitable  when  he  re-entered
his  former  master's  service  also.  That  re-entry  was  the  subject  of  the  Epistle  to
Philemon.  .  .  Of  the  after-history  of  those  whom  the  Epistle  has  brought  before
ns,  we  are  left  to  guess.  We  can  picture  to  ourselves  the  arrival  of  Onesimus  and
the  presentati'n  of  the  letter.  We  can  scarcely  doubt  that  his  reception,  both  by
his  master,  and  by  the  company  of  believers  at  Colose,  was  such  as  St.  Paul
desirea.  We  can  think  of  him  telling  the  story  of  his  cuuversion,  and  of  all  that  he
owed  to  the  tender,  fatherly  kindness  of  the  apostle,  or  reporting  what  he  bad  seen
of  the  prowth  and  work  of  the  Church  at  Rome.  If,  with  most  recent  writers  on
St.  Paul's  life,  we  beUeve  that  he  was  relea-ed  from  his  first  imprisonment,  and


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  EPISTLE  TO  PHILEMON.  7

earried  into  effect  his  intention  of  revisiting  the  Macedonian  and  Asiatic  ohorches,
we  may  believe  that  the  "  lodging  "  for  which  he  asked  was  not  prepared  in  vain,
and  that  the  three — the  apostle,  the  master,  and  the  slave — met  once  more,  to  give
thanks  for  all  the  great  things  God  had  done  for  them,  to  pray  together  for  each
other's  welfare,  to  partake  together  in  the  breaking  of  bread,  of  that  which  was  the
pledge  and  symbol  of  their  brotherhood  in  Christ.  (Dean  Plumptre.)  What  a
picture  rises  in  the  mind  as  one  tries  to  conceive  the  scene  I  There,  in  his  wooden
cabin,  often  "  crowded  "  by  anxious  hearers  of  the  Word,  sits  a  scholar  and  a
gentleman,  exhausted  by  the  labours  of  the  day.  The  lamp  shines  down  on  his
bald  forehead,  lights  up  the  keen  aquiline  features  of  his  oval  face,  shaded  with
grey  hair,  and  glitters  from  the  armour  of  the  brawny  Frsetorian  who  lounges  beside
him,  and  from  the  hnks  of  the  chain  which  binds  them  wrist  to  wrist.  Paul
dictates  sentence  after  sentence  to  Luke,  the  learned  physician,  who  carries  his  pen
and  ink-horn  at  his  waist.  He  is  inditing  a  letter  to  bis  friend  Philemon  in  tar-
away  Phrygian  Golosse,  about  a  runaway  slave,  pleading  for  the  outcast,  promising
that  if  in  anything  the  slave  has  wronged  his  master,  he  (Paul)  will  be  answerabla
for  it.  The  thought  strikes  him  that  tiie  promise  will  carry  more  weight  with  it  if
written  by  his  own  hand.  He  interrupts  the  flow  of  speech ;  cries,  "  Here,  Lake,
give  me  the  reed  i  "  and  with  benumbed,  labouring  fingers  inscribes  these  words,
"  I,  Paul,  write  this  with  my  own  hand — I  will  repay  it."  It  is  touching,  is  it  not,
to  think  of  so  great  a  man  in  such  miserable  conditions.  A  man  so  like  the  Master
whom  he  serves  that,  while  he  carries  whole  races  and  churches  on  his  heart,  he
yet  has  a  special  love  for  every  wretched  outcast  who  will  accept  his  love ;  and  is
not  only  bent  on  serving  him,  but  will  take  thought  how  he  may  best  serve  him,
and  spare  no  pains  to  make  his  service  effectual.     (S.  Cox,  D.D.)

Characteb  and  bttlb. — This  Epistle  has  one  peculiar  feature — its  eestheticsd
character — which  distinguishes  it  from  all  the  other  Epistles.  It  has  been  admired
deservedly  as  a  model  of  deUcacy  and  skill  in  the  department  of  composition  to  which
it  belongs.  The  writer  had  pecuhar  difficulties  to  overcome.  He  was  the  common
friend  of  the  parties  at  variance.  He  must  coucihate  a  man  who  supposed  that  he
had  good  reason  to  be  offended.  He  must  commend  the  offender,  and  yet  neither
deny  nor  aggravate  the  imputed  fault.  He  must  assert  the  new  ideas  of  Christian
equality  in  the  face  of  a  system  which  hardly  recognised  the  humanity  of  tiie
enslaved.  He  could  have  placed  the  question  on  the  ground  of  his  own  personal
rights,  and  yet  must  waive  them  in  order  to  secure  an  act  of  spontaneous  kindness.
His  success  must  be  a  triumph  of  love,  and  nothing  be  demanded  for  the  sake  of  the
justioe  which  could  have  claimed  everything.  He  limits  his  request  to  a  forgiveness
of  the  alleged  wrong,  and  a  restoration  to  favour  and  the  enjoyment  of  future  sym-
pathy  and  affection,  and  yet  would  so  guard  his  words  as  to  leave  scope  for  adl  the
generosity  which  benevolence  might  prompt  towards  one  whose  condition  admitted
of  BO  much  alleviation.  These  are  contrarieties  not  easy  to  harmonise ;  but  Paul,  it  is
eonfessed,  has  shown  a  degree  of  self-denial  and  a  tact  in  dealing  with  them,  which  in
being  equal  to  the  occasion  could  hardly  be  greater.  {H.  B.  Hackett,  DJ).)  Dignity,
generosity,  prudence,  friendship,  affection,  pohteness,  skilful  address,  purity,  are  ap-
parent.  Hence  ithasbeentermed  with  great propriety,'*thepoliteEpistle."  The  deli-
cacy, fine  address,  consummate  courtesy,  nice  strokes  of  rhetoric,  render  the  letter  an
onique  specimen  of  the  epistolary  style.  (S.  Davidgon,  D.D. )  This  Epistle  showeth  a
right  noble,  lovely  example  of  Christian  love.  Here  we  see  how  St.  Paul  layeth  himself
out  for  the  poor  Onesimns.and  with  all  his  means  pleadeth  his  cause  with  his  master ;
and  so  setteth  himself,  as  if  he  were  Onesimus,  and  had  himself  done  wrong  to  Phile-
mon. Yet  this  doeth  he  not  With  power  or  force,  as  if  he  had  right  thereto ;  bat  ha
■trippetb  himself  of  his  right,  and  thus  enforceth  Philemon  to  forego  his  right  also.


8  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  EPISTLE  TO  PHILEMON.

Even  as  Christ  did  for  us  with  God  the  Father,  thus  also  doth  St.  Paul  for  Onesimua
with  Philemon :  for  Christ  also  stripped  Himself  of  His  right,  and  by  love  and
hmnility  enforced  the  Father  to  lay  aside  His  wrath  and  power,  and  to  take  ns  to
His  grace  for  the  sake  of  Christ,  who  lovingly  pleadeth  our  cause,  and  with  all  His
heart  layeth  Himself  out  for  ub.  For  we  are  all  His  Onesimi,  to  my  thinking.
(Luther.)  The  Epistle  to  Philemon  holds  an  unique  place  among  the  apostle's
writings.  It  is  the  only  strictly  private  letter  which  has  been  preserved.  It  is
addressed  apparently  to  a  layman.  It  is  wholly  occupied  with  an  incident  of
domestic  life.  The  occasion  which  called  it  forth  was  altogether  commonplace.  It
is  only  one  sample  of  mmiberless  letters  which  must  have  been  written  to  his  many
friends  and  disciples  by  one  of  St.  Paul's  eager  temperament  and  warm  affections,
in  the  course  of  a  long  and  chequered  life.  Yet  to  ourselves  this  fragment,  which
has  been  rescued,  we  know  not  how,  from  the  wreck  of  a  large  and  varied  corre-
spondence, is  infinitely  precious.  Nowhere  is  the  social  influence  of  the  gospel  more
strikingly  exerted ;  nowhere  does  the  nobility  of  the  apostle's  character  receive  a
more  vivid  illustration  than  in  this  accidental  pleading  on  behalf  of  a  runaway  slave.
{Bp.  Lightfoot.)  "  Though  he  handleth  a  subject,"  says  Calvin,  "  which  other-
wise were  low  and  mean,  yet  after  his  manner  he  is  borne  up  aloft  unto  God.  With
BQch  modest  entreaty  doth  he  humble  himself  on  behalf  of  the  lowest  of  men,  that
scarce  anywhere  else  is  the  gentleness  of  his  spirit  portrayed  more  truly  to  the
life."  "A  true  little  chef  cTceuvre  of  the  art  of  letter- writing,"  exclaims  M.
Benan,  characteristically.  "  We  have  here,"  writes  Sabatier,  "  only  a  few  familiar
lines,  but  so  full  of  grace,  of  salt,  of  serious  and  trustful  affection,  that  this  short
Epistle  gleams  like  a  pearl  of  the  most  exquisite  purity  in  the  rich  treasure  of  the
New  Testament."  Even  Baur,  while  laying  violent  hands  upon  it,  is  constrained  to
Bpeak  of  this  "  little  letter "  as  "  making  such  an  agreeable  impression  by  its
attractive  form,"  and  has  penetrated  "  with  the  noblest  Christian  spirit."

Thb  ATTiruDH  OF  Christianitt  towabds  BiiAVEBT. — It  is  worthy  of  note  that  in
this  Epistle  Paul  does  not  require  or  ask  Philemon  to  Uberate  Onesimus.  Moreover,
while  Onesimus  was  still  a  slave  in  the  house  of  Philemon,  the  latter  was  apparently
a  recognised  Christian  and  a  beloved  friend  of  PauL  This,  together  with  the  silence
of  the  rest  of  the  New  Testament,  impUes  that  the  apostles  did  not  forbid  their
converts  to  hold  slaves.  Yet,  not  only  has  the  gospel  put  an  end  to  slavery  where
throughout  the  world  it  has  gained  power,  but  it  is  the  only  religious  system  which
has  done  anything  effective  in  this  direction.  The  reason  of  this  apparent  tolerance
of  slavery  is  not  far  to  seek.  By  asserting  the  Fatherhood  of  God,  the  gospel  pro-
claims the  brotherhood  of  man ;  and  thus  asserts  a  principle  utterly  inconsistent
with  one  man  treating  another  as  his  property.  On  the  other  hand,  had  Christ  and
His  apostles  forbidden  the  holding  of  slaves,  they  would  have  arrayed  against  the
gospel  all  those  interested  in  maintaining  the  existing  order  of  society,  and  thus
have  needlessly  placed  in  its  way  most  serious  obstacles.  And,  worse  still,  by  raising
a  standard  of  revolt  against  a  social  injustice,  they  would  have  rallied  around  them-
selves multitudes  anxious  only  for  relief  from  a  social  grievance.  An  appeal  to  such
classes  would  have  utterly  misrepresented  Christianity,  and  their  help  would  have
ruined  it.  Christ  therefore  offered  to  men  only  a  spiritual  liberation.  But  this
carried  with  it  the  living  germ  of  every  kind  of  freedom.  For  these  reasons  the
apostles  tolerated  slavery.  We  have  no  trace  of  fault  found  for  holding  Onesimus
as  a  slave.  It  does  not  even  lessen  Paul's  warm  recognition  of  Philemon's  excellence.
And,  even  if  Onesimus  resume  his  former  position,  Paul  will  gladly  be  Philemon's
gnest.  Yet,  while  refusing  to  claim  for  the  slaves  a  liberty  for  which  they  were  not
yet  prepared,  and  which  would  have  loosened  the  very  framework  of  society,  Paul
taught  that  in  Christ  the  distinction  of  bond  and  free  no  longer  exists,  and  that  a


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  EPISTLE  TO  PHILEMON,  9

believing  slave  is  abeady  virtaally  free  (Gal.  iii.  28 ;  1  Cor.  yil.  21).  And  in  Col.  !▼.
1  he  teaches  that  slaves  have  just  claims  upon  their  masters,  claims  recognised  by
a  Master  in  heaven.  Bach  teaching  at  once  improved  the  lot  of  the  slave  and  pre<
pared  gradually  a  way  for  the  emancipation  which  our  day  has  seen.  From  the
example  of  the  apostles  in  the  matter  of  slavery  we  may  learn  an  important  lesson.
There  are  many  things  contrary  to  the  spirit  of  the  gospel,  which  it  is  inexpedient
at  once  to  forbid  by  civil  or  ecclesiastical  law.  In  some  few  cases  such  prohibition
would  appeal  to  unworthy  motives.  And  verbal  prohibition  can  be  effectiTe  only
when  supported  by  the  public  conscience.  The  gospel  works  always  from  within,
shedding  light  upon  broad  principles  of  right  and  wrong,  light  which  nltimatelj
reaches  and  illumines  all  the  details  of  practical  life.  But,  for  this  inner  illumin**
tion,  time  is  often  needfuL  Legislation  Ib  eSeotive  only  when  It  regJBten  an  inward
growth  of  the  moral  sentiment.    {Prof.  J.  A,  Beet.)


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOE.

PHILEMON.

▼la.  1.  PaTil  a  i>rlBoner  of  Jestu  Cbrlst. — A  patJuHe  eommeneemeiU : — 8t.  Paul
does  not  give  himself  the  title  of  "  apostle  "  in  this  place.  The  vety  first  'word  in
which  he  speaks  of  himself  is  pathetic.  He  refers  to  his  chains  no  less  thtui  five
times  in  this  short  letter  (vers.  1,  9,  10,  13,  23).  He  feels  it  glorioas  to  snffer
shame  for  his  Lord's  sake,  and  blessed  to  inherit  the  beatitude  of  those  who  are
persecuted  for  righteousness'  sake  (Matt.  ▼.  10).  He  literally  fulfils  the  exhortation
of  St.  Peter  (1  Pet.  iv.  14-16).  (Bp.  Wm.  Alexander.)  A  lofty  title:— To  me  it
seems  a  loftier  thing  that  he  should  style  himself  "  prisoner  of  Jesus  Christ "  than
"apostle."  The  apostles  gloried  because  they  were  counted  worthy  to  Buffer
shame  for  the  Name  (Acts  v.  41) ;  but  the  authority  of  bonds  is  irresistible.  He
who  is  about  to  plead  for  Onesimus  feels  that  he  should  plead  in  such  a  form  that
he  could  not  be  refused.  (Jerome.)  The  bondman  teen  to  advantage: — We  dwell
on  the  circumstances  of  his  imprisonment — we  fondly  recall  his  vexatious
position — because  the  whole  "  surroundings "  of  this  letter  lend  additional  effect
to  its  inherent  grace.  It  is  when  the  fragrant  herb  is  pressed  that  it  gives
forth  the  richest  odour;  and  it  is  when  Paul's  heart  is  being  tried  that  it
breathes  out  the  tenderest  sympathy.  Himself  a  bondman,  "with  gyres  upon
his  wrist,"  he  pleads  the  cause  of  that  other  bondman,  whose  story  is  the
burden  of  the  letter.  It  is  when  he  is  a  much-wronged  captive  that  he  begs
forgiveness  for  a  wrongdoer,  and  when  society  is  making  war  upon  himself  he
plays  the  part  of  peacemaker  with  others.  As  dewdrops  are  seen  to  best  advan-
tage on  the  blades  of  grass  from  which  they  hang,  or  gems  sparkle  brightest  in
their  appropriate  settings,  su  may  we  regard  Paul's  imprisonment  as  the  best  foil
to  the  design  of  this  letter.  Wrongs  and  oppressive  suffering  may  drive  even  wise
men  mad ;  but  here  it  only  seems  to  evoke  Paul's  tenderest  feelings,  and  open  wide
the  sluices  of  his  affectionate  sympathies.     [A.  H.  Drysdale,  M.A.)  Christ  the

Christian's  supreme  motive: — "  Paul,  a  prisoner  of  Jesus  Christ."  The  one  point
in  this  clause  that  we  have  to  do  with  now  is  that  wherever  Paul  was  and  whatever
he  was  doing,  the  place  he  was  in  and  the  work  he  was  about  were  always  coloured
by  reminiscences  and  considerations  of  the  relation  in  which  he  stood  to  his  Divine
Lord,  Jesus  Christ.  If  it  was  any  kind  of  service  he  was  rendering,  why,  he  writes
himself  "  the  servant  of  Jesus  Christ."  If  he  viewed  himself  in  the  character  of  a
message-bearer,  why,  then,  always  it  was  from  Christ  he  received  the  message ;  and
he  writes  himself  "  the  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ. "  That  relation  of  his  to  his  Lord
underlay  every  other  relation :  it  was  the  fundamental  fact  in  his  experience,  and
determined  everything  that  pertained  to  him,  inwardly  and  outwardly.  And  now
in  this  letter  to  Philemon  it  is  "  Paul,  a  prisoner  of  Jesus  Christ."  This  means
not  simply  that  it  was  Christ  that  had  imprisoned  him,  or  that  his  imprisonment
eame  about  in  consequence  of  his  having  preached  Christ's  gospel ;  he  means  all
of  this,  perhaps,  but  he  means,  besides,  that  in  whatever  place  he  is,  in  whatever
relation  he  stands,  he  is  Christ's  in  that  place  and  relation ;  Christ  was  the  Green-
wich from  which  he  counted  longitude,  the  Equator  from  which  he  reckoned  lati-
tude. If  he  was  out  of  doors  and  at  liberty,  why  then  he  was  the  Lord's  freeman  ;
If  he  was  in  prison  and  fettered,  then  he  was  the  Lord's  prisoner.  This  same
determining  influence  comes  out  in  the  fourteenth  chapter  of  his  Boman  letter,
when  he  Mys,  "  Whether  we  live,  we  live  unto  the  Lord ;  and  whether  we  die,  wa

11


12  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.

die  unto  the  Lord :  whether  we  live,  therefore,  or  die,  we  are  the  Lord's."  Thii
explains  the  compactnesa  of  Paul's  life — the  gathering  in  of  all  the  loose  ends — the
unity  of  it.  Wherever  you  touch  him,  after  his  conversion,  you  find  him  the  same
man  all  through.  At  the  same  time,  nobody  finds  in  the  devotedness  to  Christ  of
this  man  Paul  anything  unwholesome.  That  is  one  of  the  startling  and  instructive
features  of  his  case.  We  are  constantly  encountering  people  who  have  a  great  deal
of  piety,  but  who  take  piety  in  a  hard  way.  They  are  what  we  are  going  to  call
cranks — holy  cranks.  Not  impostors,  but  holiness  that  has  passed  the  line  that
divides  between  health  and  fever.  Paul's  letters  make  good  reading  for  any  one  who
suspects  that  there  is  any  inherent  antagonism  between  ordinary  sense  and  a  mind  all
alive  unto  the  Lord.  The  more  reason  a  man  has,  the  more  opportunity  there  is
for  faith  ;  and  the  greater  his  faith,  the  more  need  of  reason  to  foster,  sustain,  and
guarantee  it.  If  what  are  known  as  very  holy  people  are  sometimes  intellectually
out  of  joint  with  the  good  sense  of  the  people  about  tbem,  it  is  due  to  some  other
cause  than  the  whole-heartedness  of  their  devotion  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.
Abnormal  specimens  of  piety  ought  not  to  be  taken  as  indices  of  the  true  quality
and  import  of  piety,  any  more  than  deranged  minds  should  be  accepted  as  fair
exponents  of  what  intelligence  is  and  can  do,  or  than  a  man  with  an  excess  of
fingers,  or  two  heads,  or  a  club  foot,  should  be  counted  a  just  exponent  of  human
anatomy.  It  is  rather  surprising,  and  betrays  lack  of  honesty,  that  in  matters  of
religion  objectors  pick  for  the  most  unlucky  examples,  and  insist  on  estimating
religion  by  them,  but  in  other  matters  grade  their  judgments  by  the  best  obtainable
exponents.  Because  buildings  sometimes  fall  beneath  their  own  weight,  we  do  not
give  up  our  faith  in  architecture ;  and  when  we  go  into  a  new  town  to  live,  the  first
thing  we  seek  for  is  a  house  to  live  in.  Do  not,  then,  be  repelled  from  this  matter
of  whole-hearted  commitment  to  Jesus  Christ  because  you  know  of  some  people
who  have  made  very  hard  and  awkward  and  morbid  work  of  being  holy.  Select
the  most  winning  specimens,  not  the  most  repellent,  you  know  of,  and  take  from
the  best  the  law  of  your  estimate.  In  that  way  only  can  you  be  just  to  yourselves
and  just  to  the  truth.    Besides  this,  in  insisting  upon  the  unifying  of  our  nature

this  bending  of  it  all  to  one  end,  in  order  to  the  largest  attainments  in  Christian

character  and  living — we  are  only  commending  that  same  policy  of  whole-hearted-
ness which  prevails  in  secular  matters,  and  which,  unfortunately,  asserts  itself  there
with  a  good  deal  more  constancy  and  strenuousness  than  it  does  in  affairs  dis-
tinctively personal  and  Christian.  Other  things  being  equal,  the  amount  that  we
attain  in  any  department  will  be  according  to  the  intensity  with  which  we  concen-
trate ourselves  upon  the  one  object  that  we  are  in  pursuit  of.  No  one  understands
this  better  than  the  business  men  and  the  money-makers  that  are  here  this  morii-
ing.  Concentration  pays.  Incompatible  motives  weaken  results.  I  only  want  it
should  be  realised  what  a  practical  thing  this  whole-hearteduess  is,  and  how  full  of
effect  it  is.  All  of  this  points  one  way.  It  means  that  you  must  gather  yourself  in
upon  a  purpose  if  you  are  going  to  succeed  in  it.  It  is  just  as  true  in  art,  law,
medicine,  literature,  as  in  money-making.  Attainments  are  according  to  the  degree
in  which  we  make  ourselves  solid  in  their  pursuit.  There  is,  then,  nothing  absurd
or  impracticable  in  the  matter  of  concentration.  When,  therefore,  we  ask  a  man
to  become  sohd  for  Christ,  we  are  only  asking  him  to  bend  himself  beneath  tbe
sweep  of  one  imperial  motive,  and  to  aim  at  Christian  results  along  the  only  way
by  which  in  any  field  of  acquisition  the  largest  results  are  attainable.  This  matter
goes  by  supreme  motive.  And  it  is  not  hard  to  find  out  the  supreme  motive.  We
have  occasional  warm  days  in  winter,  but  there  is  no  difficulty  deciding  whether  it
is  January  or  July.  If  you  fall  in  with  a  man  who  has  devoted  himself  in  any
generous,  cordial  way  to  art,  you  never  have  difficulty  in  saying  whether  he  is  an
artist  or  an  engineer.  His  conversation  will  carry  the  flavour  of  art ;  his  library
or  studio  will  exhibit  the  literature  and  tokens  of  art.  His  whole  style,  taste,  choices,
phrases,  haunts,  will  be  redolent  with  his  aesthetic  engrossments.  These  matters  are
not  brought  in  review  by  way  of  criticism.  A  man  can  do  nothing  well  while  work-
ing counter  to  the  grain  of  his  impulses.  A  man's  hands  will  not  do  good  work,
his  thoughts  will  not  do  good  work,  unless  heart  goes  with  them.  It  a  man  who  is
engrossedly  an  artist  brings  everything  to  the  arbitrament  of  beauty,  then  a  man
who  is  engrossedly  a  Christian  brings  everything  to  the  arbitrament  of  Christ ;  and
wherever  he  is,  the  conscious  or  unconscious  sense  of  what  Christ  is  to  him  will
shape  his  thoughts,  mould  his  affections,  determine  bis  purposes,  and  engender  his
activities.  I  hope  it  is  not  necessary  to  say  that  this  does  not  stand  in  the  way  of
men's  having  other  aims  and  ends.     Christianity  has  never  embarrassed  wholesome


PHILEMON.  13


art,  or  science,  or  literature,  or  trade,  or  commerce ;  rather  has  she  been  the  foster-
mother  of  all  these.     Because  the  moon  goes  aronnd  the  sun  does  not  hinder  its
going  around  the  earth  every  day  on  its  way  round.    Christ  is  the  Christian's  sun.
Whatever  other  orbits  he  describes — and  there  will  be  a  good  many  of  them,  accord-
ing to  the  various  relations  in  life  in  which  he  is  naturally  and  properly  and  neces-
sarily placed — ^whatever  other  orbits  he  describes,  they  will  only  be  fluctuations  this
side  and  that  of  the  one  continuous  circuit  about  the  solar  centre.    To  any  one,
then,  who  asks  what  it  is  to  be  a  Christian,  and  who  wants  a  definite  answer,  here
is  a  definite  answer.    Take  that  man  whose  character  and  life  are  delineated  in  the
evangelists;   familiarise  yourself  with  that  delineation;  walk  by  faith  with  the
unique  person  it  depicts— call  it,  to  begin  with,  what  you  please,  but  walk  with  it ;
let  it  show  itself  to  you  and  tell  its  best  story  to  you,  and  let  it,  so  fast  as  it  becomes
revealed  to  you,  decide  for  you  what  you  shall  be  and  what  you  shall  do.    You  per-
ceive we  are  saying  nothing  about  doctrines ;  we  are  talking  about  a  life.    We  are
not  urging  you  to  accept  something  that  you  find  yourself  mentally  incapacitated
from  believing.     Let  the  unique  figure  delineated  in  the  gospels  grow  upon  you,  if
it  will,  and  it  probably  will,  if  you  lend  yourself  to  it ;  and  then  so  fast  as  it  does
become  a  personal  fact  and  a  real  presence  to  you,  let  it  settle  for  you  the  questions
of  daily  living  in  the  order  in  which  they  come  up  to  be  settled,  making  it  the  final
court  of  appeal,  and  saying  in  each  perplexity.  What  does  the  light  of  such  a  life  as
that  show  that  I  ought  to  do  in  this  exigency  ?    I  am  distressed  by  the  dilettanteism
that  is  in  our  Christian  communities,  by  which  I  mean  the  numbers,  even  inside  of
the  Church,  who  have  taken  up  Christianity  simply  as  polite  pastime ;  men  and
women  who  are  not  supremely  motived  by  Christ,  and  who  gain  a  little  smattering
in  the  matter  because  it  is  rather  a  nice  thing  to  do,  or  take  it  up  on  occasion  when
there  is  nothing  else  pressing ;  men  and  women  who  are  worldly  in  all  their  heart-
experiences  and  ambitions,  and  to  whom  Christianity — what  they  have  of  it — is
only  a  wash  or  a  veneer.     The  initial  act  in  becoming  a  Christian  is  to  subordinate
everything  to  Jesus  Christ,  and  then  the  question  as  to  field  and  occupation  comes
in  for  adjustment  afterwards.     (C.  H.  Parkhurst.)        The  blot  wiped  out: — The
title   of    a  prisoner,   in  the  eyes  oi  the  world,  is   full  of  reproach;  but  when
it  is  for  Christ's  sake  the  blot  is  wiped  out.     {W.  Attersoll.)        A  prisoner  for
Christ : — The  apostle  testifieth  he  was  a  prisoner  for  Christ  and  the  gospel,  not
for  his  own  sins  and  offences.    It  is  not  our  suffering  barely  considered  ean
honour  us  with  the  reward  of  glory  and  the  crown  of  martyrdom,  but  the  cause
in  which   we  die  and  the  quarrel  in  which  we  suffer.    True  it  is,   afflictions
are  common  to   the  godly  and  ungodly,  they  are  imprisoned  alike;  but  albeit
the  afflictions  be  one  and  the  same,  yet  the  cause  is  not  one  and  the  same  for
which  they  are  afflicted.    The  ungodly  are  punished  for  their  sins ;  the  godly
are  afflicted  for  a  good  conscience.    Abel  is  murdered  of  his  brother ;  Cain  is  cursed
and  condemned  to  be  a  fugitive  upon  the  earth.     Both  of  them  are  afflicted,  but
tibe  cause  is  diverse.     Abel  is  killed  for  his  godliness ;  Cain  is  punished  for  his
wickedness.    Christ  had  His  feet  and  His  hands  nailed  on  the  Gross,  so  had  the
two  thieves  ;  they  suffered  all  one  punishment,  but  how  contrary  were  the  causes
of  Him  and  them,  seeing  He  suffered  without  cause,  but  they  justly  had  the
sentence  of  death  executed  upon  them,  as  one  of  them  confessed  (Luke  xxxiii.  5).
Let  ns  not,  therefore,  only  fasten  our  eyes  and  look  upon  the  bare  punishment,  but
consider  what  the  cause  is,  and,  according  to  the  cause,  esteem  both  of  the  person
and  of  the  punishment.     Some  are  prisoners  of  men,  others  are  prisoners  of  the
devil,  of  whom  they  are  holden  captive,  and  both  of  them  for  their  wickedness ;  but
it  we  will  be  martyrs  of  Christ  we  must  be  the  prisoners  of  Christ.     {Ibid.)
Lessons : — I.  This  Epistle  came  out  op  the  prison.     The  Spirit,  therefore,  was
Paol's  companion  in  the  prison,  and  so  is  He  to  aU  God's  children  that  are  prisoners
of  Jesus  Christ,  and  in  more  special  sort  communicating  Himself  unto  them,
whereby  it  cometh  to  pass  that  at  such  times,  and  in  such  estates,  they  are  more
fit  for  holy  duties  than  in  any  other.     Then  pray  they  more  feelingly  and  fervently
(Bom.  viii.),  then  also  as  here  we  see  writ,  they  exhort  more  powerfully  and
passionately,  as  me  thinketh,  in  those  Epistles  which  Paul  wrote  in  the  prison,  there
seemeth  a  greater  measure  of  holy  zeal  and  fervent  affections  than  in  any  other.
II.  But  now  Paul,  writing  this  Epistle  in  the  prison,  as  many  others  also,  HEREm
ruRTHEB  APPEABETH  THE  GOOD  PBoviDENCB  OF  GoD.    1.  In  that  oveu  in  the  time
of  this  his  restraint,  he  had  yet  liberty  of  pen,  vrill,  and  paper,  yea,  and  of  a  scribe
too,  sometimes,  and  those  which  did  minister  unto  him.    2.  God's  providence  als*
bcawin  did  show  itself  ih&i  would  not  suffer  Paul,  so  skilful  a  workman,  to  be  idle


U  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,

aad  do  nothing  in  the  basiness  of  the  Lord,  bat  would  have  a  sapplj  of  hia
apostolical  preaching  made  by  his  writing.  III.  Again,  it  is  to  be  observed  that
St.  Paul  doth  not  Bimply  call  himself  prisoner,  bot  with  this  condition,  or  Jesus
Chbist.  The  title  of  a  prisoner  in  itself  is  ignominious ;  but  when  he  addeth  "  of
JesTU  Christ "  all  stain  of  ignominy  is  clean  wiped  away.  lY.  But  here  is  not  aU
that  we  mast  look  to  in  our  sufferings,  that  our  cause  be  good,  but  also  that
WB  BomsB  FOB  A  oooD  CAUSE,  IN  A  oooD  UAMNEB.  The  which  point  is  farther
commended  unto  as  in  Paul's  example,  who  was  not  only  a  prisoner  of  Jesua
Christ,  but  also  a  cheerful  and  courageous  prisoner  of  Jesus  Christ ;  for  so  far
was  he  from  being  ashamed  of  his  chain,  wherewithal  for  the  hope  of  Israel's
Bake  he  was  bound,  that  he  even  glorieth  in  it,  accounting  it  far  more  honour-
able  than  a  chain  of  gold  about  his  neck.  V.  Lastly,  we  are  to  observe  in
Paul's  example  the   duty  of   all  the   ministers,   namely,   to   make   good  thezb

PSEAOHINO   BT   THE   PBISON,   17   NEED   BE,    THEIB   SATIMaS   BT  THEIB  BUFFEBINQS.      Oh,

base  is  that  liberty,  yea,  baser  than  the  basest  bondage,  which  is  got  by
flinching  from  that  truth,  which  we  have  preached  and  professed.  (D.  Dyke,
B.D.)  A  prisoner  of  Christ : — Samuel  Butherford,  in  prison,  used  to  date  his
letters,  "  Christ's  Palace,  Aberdeen."  He  wrote  to  a  friend :  •'  The  Lord  is  with
me ;  I  care  not  what  man  can  do.  I  burden  no  man.  I  want  nothing.  No
king  is  better  provided  than  I  am.  Sweet,  sweet,  and  easy  is  the  cross  of  my
Lord.  All  men  I  look  in  the  face,  of  whatsoever  rank,  nobles  and  poor.
Acquaintance  and  strangers  are  friendly  to  me.  My  Well-beloved  is  kinder  and
more  warm  than  ordinary,  and  cometh  and  visiteth  my  soul.  My  chains  are
over-gilded  with  gold.  No  pen,  no  words,  no  engine,  can  express  to  you  the
loveliness  of  my  only  Lord  Jesus.  Thus  in  haste  I  make  for  my  palace  at
Aberdeen."  The  Lord's  prisoner : — When  Madame  Guyon  was  imprisoned  in  the
Castle  of  Vincennes,  in  1695,  she  not  only  sang  but  wrote  songs  of  praise  to  her
God.  "  It  sometimes  seemed  to  me,"  she  said,  "  as  if  I  were  a  Uttle  bird  whom
the  Lord  had  placed  in  a  cage,  and  that  I  had  nothing  now  to  do  but  sing.  The
joy  of  my  heart  gave  a  brightness  to  the  objects  around  me.  The  stones  of  my
prison  looked  in  my  eyes  like  rubies.  I  esteemed  them  more  than  all  the  gaudy
brilhancies  of  a  vain  world.  My  heart  was  full  of  that  joy  which  Thou  givest  to
them  that  love  Thee  in  the  midst  of  their  greatest  crosses."  And  Timotby  oar
toother. — Paul  and  Timothy — the  old  and  the  young  : — I.  In  the  text  we  see  aob
AND  TouTH  TOQETHEB.  Not  Separate,  not  looMng  ashamed  at  each  other,  not
divided  by  incompatibilities  or  jealousies,  but  in  union.  The  young  often  flee  from
the  old.  The  old  are  often  impatient  with  the  young.  Here  is  an  instance  of
anion.  The  advantages  are  obvious.  1.  The  old  wiU  contribute  the  wisdom  of
experience.  2.  The  young  will  quicken  the  animation  of  hope.  No  doubt  temporary
difficulties  will  arise.  U.  Though  age  and  youth  are  together,  yet  aqb  taebb
PBECEDENCE  OF  YOUTH.  It  is  Paul  and  Timothy,  not  Timothy  and  Paul.  A  principle
of  right  settles  all  questions  of  priority.  It  is  not  beautiful,  because  it  is  not  right,
that  youth  should  take  precedence  of  age.  There  are  many  ways  of  taking  virtual
precedence.  1.  Contradiction.  2.  Impatience.  3.  Neglect.  III.  Though  age
takes  precedence  of  youth,  yet  both  age  and  youth  are  engaged  in  common  sebvick.
Paul  and  Timothy  are  both  servants,  it  is  not  Paul  the  master  and  Timothy  the
servant,  they  are  both  included  under  one  name.  See  how  one  great  relationship
determines  all  minor  conditions  and  attitudes  ;  as  between  themselves,  Paul  was
father,  and  Timothy  was  son ;  Paul  was  renowned,  and  Timothy  was  obscure ;  Paal
was  senior,  and  Timothy  was  junior ;  but  looked  at  as  before  Christ  the  one  Lord«
they  were  both  servants.  Many  reflections  arise  out  of  this  regulating  power  of
one  absorbing  relationship  or  union.  The  Alps  and  Apennines  are  great  mountains
in  themselves  ;  yet  they  are  less  than  pimples  when  looked  at  in  their  relation  to
the  whole  world.  The  earth  itself  is  a  "  great  globe  "  to  its  own  inhabitants  ;  it  is
a  mere  speck  of  Ught  to  the  nearest  star.  A  man  who  is  a  very  important  trades-
man in  a  small  town,  may  not  have  been  so  much  as  heard  of  in  the  great  city.
Through  and  through  life  we  see  how  relationships  supremely  important  as  between
themselves,  are  modified  by  one  great  bond.  The  right  way  to  take  our  proper
measure,  and  to  chasten  our  ambition,  is  to  look  at  the  highest  relationships  of  alL
The  great  citizen  dwindles  into  his  right  proportions  when  he  looks  at  the
Creator;  the  mighty  potentate,  when  he  looks  ait  the  King  of  kings;  the
philanthropist,  when  he  looks  at  the  Saviour.  The  noisy,  rushing,  forioos
train  seems  to  be  going  fast ;  let  it  look  at  the  flying  stars,  and  be  humble !
Compared  with  them  it  is  a  lame  insect  toiling  in  the  dust.    Life  should  never  be


PHILEMON.  li


looked  at  aB  merely  between  one  man  and  another.    Look  at  it  as  between  the
finite  and  the  in&iite — between   the  momentary  and   the  eternal — between  the
ignorant  and  the  omniscient.     It  wiU  thus  be  elevated.    No  man  will  then  think  of
himself  more  highly  than  he  oaght  to  think.   The  Alps  will  not  scorn  the  molehillB.
(J.  Parker,  D.D.)        Brotherhood  in  Christ : — In  the  Church  of  Christ  all  are
brethren.     They  have  "  one  heavenly  Father  ;  one  first-bom  brother,  Christ ;  (pe
seed  of  regeneration,  the  Divine  Word ;  one  inheritance  of  eternal  liie."    Mntaal
love  is  the  basis  of  true  Church  fellowship.     "  As  natural  relationship  produces
natural  affection,  so  spiritual  relationship  produces  spiritual  affection."     It  will  be
— 1.  An  unfeigned  love  (1  Pet.  i.  32).     Not  the  profession  of  the  lip,  which  may
fail  if  put  to  a  practical  test.    2.  A  pure  love.    In  sympathy  with  whatever  is  god-
like in  fellow-believers.     Grace  in  the  heart  seeking  and  fostering  its  kindred  grace
in  others.    There  is  need  of  clearer  evidence  that  the  love  which  is  of  God  has
place  in  hearts  on  earth.     3.  A  fervent  love.    A  fire  burning  up  natural  selfishness.
An  habitual  consideration  of  the  things  of  others  rather  than  oar  own.   4.  A  lasting
love.    It  has  come  from  God,  the  eternal  source  of  light,  and  it  bears  us  on  to  Him
again.    (A.  W.  Johnson.)        Lessons : — I.  Tm?  humilitt  of  Paul,  who,  though  an
apostle  in  the  highest  degree  of  the  ministry  (Eph.  iv.  11 ;  1  Cor.  xii.  28),  yet
disdaineth  not  to  yoke  himself,  not  only  with  the  Evangelist  Timothy,  an  inferior
degree,  but  even  with  an  ordinary  pastor,  Philemon,  who  was  yet  of  a  lower  place
than  Timothy.  Art  thou  a  pastor  ?    Speak  and  do  as  a  pastor  to  thy  feUow-pastors,
and  not  as  though  thou  wert  an  apostle  or  evangelist.    II.  I  observe  the  causb
OF  Paul's  love  to  Philemon  by  the  conjunction  of  these   two  things  together,
BELOVED  AND  FELLOW-WORKER.    The  latter  is  the  cause  of  the  former,  therefore  was
Philemon  beloved  of  Paul,  because  his  feUow-worker  in  the  ministry.     Those  that
are  joinpd  together  in  the  same  calling  ought  in  this  regard  more  dearly  to  love
one  another.     True  it  is  that  the  general  calling  of  a  Christian  should  be  a  sufficient
bond  to  knit  together  in  true  love  the  hearts    of   all   Christians.     But  when  to
this  bond  there  cometh  a  second  of   our  special  callings,  our  hearts  should  be
more  firmly  knit  together,  that  so  it  might  appear  that  when  our  hearts  shall  be
linked  together  by  the  bond  of  nature,  or  Christian  and  special  calling,  that  a  three-
fold cord  is  not  easily  broken.     But  where  shall  we  find  this  sweet  conjunction
of  beloved  and  feUow- worker  ?     In  the  most  men  the  proverb  is  verified.     One
potter  envies  another.    But  far  be  this  envy  from  all  Christians  of  what  calling
soever,  specially  of  the  ministry.     The  ministers  must  love  together  as  brethren,
and  with  one  heart  and  hand  give  themselves  to  the  Lord's  business.    Far  be
from  them  the  mind  of  the  monopolists,  that  they  should  go  about  to  engross  the
Word  of  God  to  themselves ;  nay,  rather  with  Moses  let  them  wish  that  aU  God's
people  were  prophets.     (D.  Dyke,  B.D.)        Two  better  than  one: — Paul  joineth
Timothy  with  him  in  this  suit,  because  howsoever  he  were  in  great  credit  with
Philemon,  and  able  to  obtain  a  great  matter  at  his  hands,  yet  he  knew  he  should
prevail  better  by  the  help  of  another  than  he  could  do  himself  alone,  seeing  two
may  prevail  more  than  one.    He  honoureth  him  also  with  the  name  of  a  dear
brother,  whom  oftentimes,  because  he  had  converted  him,  he  calleth  a  natural  son,
that  his  gifts  and  graces  may  be  considered  with  his  person,  and  carry  the  greater
weight  in  his  suit,  and  so  Philemon  sooner  yield  his  consent  and  grant  this  request,
being  requested,  and  as  it  were  set  upon  by  so  many.    From  this  practice  of  the
apostle  we  learn  that  what  good  thing  soever  we  take  in  hand  we  shall  better  effect
it  with  others  than  alone  by  ourselves.    The  joining  unto  us  the  hand  and  help
of  others  is  profitable  and  necessary  to  all  things  belonging  unto  us  for  the  better
performing  and  accomplishing  of  them.     Two  are  better  than  one.    Abimelech,
being  directed  by  God  to  stir  up  Abraham,  obtaineth  by  his  means,  who  prayed  for
him,  that  which  he  could  not  compass  and  accomplish  alone  by  himself.    Absalom
not  being  able  to  purchase  and  procure  of  himself  the  goodwill  of  his  father,
moved  Joab  to  deal  for  him,  Joab  useth  the  help  of  the  subtle  woman  of  Tekoah,
whereby  he  is  reconciled  t»  his  father.    Hereby  it  cometh  to  pass  that  Paul  so
often  requesteth  the  prayers  of  the  Church  that  utterance  may  be  given  unto  him,
that  he  may  open  his  mouth  boldly  to  publish  the  secrets  of  the  gospel.    All  those
places  of  Scripture  prove  plainly  and  directly  unto  us,  that  what  matter  of  weight
and  importance  soever  we  enterprise  and  go  about,  it  is  good  for  us  to  take  to  our-
selves  the  help  of  others  to  further  us  therein.      (W.  Attersoll.)        Unto  Philemon
our  dearly  beloved,  and  fellow-labourer. — A  Christian  household : — The  names  of
the  receivers  of  the  letter  bring  before  us  a  picture  seen,  as  by  one  glimmering  light
across  the  centuries,  of  a  Christian  household  in  that  Phrygian  valley.    The  head


16  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip,  i,

of  it,  Philemon,  appears  to  have  been  a  native  of,  or  at  all  events  a  resident  iiit
Colosse,  for  Onesimus,  his  slave,  is  spoken  of  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Church  there  as
"  one  of  you."    He  was  a  person  of  some  standing  and  wealth,  for  he  had  a  honse
large  enough  to  admit  of  a  "  church  "  assembling  in  it,  and  to  accommodate  the
apostle  and  his  travelling  companions  if  he  should  visit  Colosse.     He  had  ap-
patiently  the  means  for  large  pecuniary  help  to  poor  brethren,  and  willingness  to
use  them,  for  we  read  of  the  refreshment  which  his  kindly  deeds  had  imparted.
He  had  been  one  of  Paul's  converts,  and  owed  his  own  self  to  bim.      He  is  called
"  our  fellow-labourer."     The  designation  may  imply  some  actual  co-operation  at  a
former  time.    But  more  probably  the  phrase  is  but  Paul's  gracefully  affectionate
way  of  lifting  his  humbler  work  out  of  its  narrowness,  by  associating  it  with  his
own.     All  who  toil  for  furtherance  of  Christ's  kingdom,  however  widely  they  may
be  parted  by  time  or  distance,  are  fellow-workers.      The   first  man  who  dug  a
shovelful  of  earth  for  the  foundation  of  Cologne  Cathedral,  and  he  who  fixed  the
last  stone   on  the   topmost    spire  a   thousand   .years   after,    are    fellow-workers.
However  small  may  be  our  capacity  or  sphere,  or  however  solitary  we  may  feel,  we
may  summon  up  before  the  eyes  of  our  faith  a  mighty  multitude  of  apostles,
martyrs,  toilers  iu  every  land  and  age  as  our — even  our — ^work-fellows.     The  field
stretches  far  beyond  our  vision,  and  many  are  toiling  in  it  for  Him  whose  work
never  comes  near  ours.    There  are  differences  of  service,  but  the  same  Lord,  and
all  who  have  the  same  master  are  companions  in  labour.     {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)
Fellow-labourers  : — They  that  put  to  their  helping  hand  any  kind  of  way,  for  the
furtherance  of  the  gospel,  are  the   minister's  fellow-labourers,  that  edify  their
brethren  in  the  most  holy  faith,  that  exhort  one  another  while  it  is  called  to-day,
that  comfort  one  another,  that  are  as  bells  to  toll  others  to  Christ,  are  the  preacher's
feUow-labourers.     So  was  the  woman  of  Samaria  that  called  the  whole  city  to
Christ,  those  women  that  ministered  to  Christ  of  their  own  substance,  also  Priscilla
and  Aquila,  who  expounded  to  Apollos  the  way  of  God  more  perfectly.     Let  as  all
thus  be  feUow-labourers,  and  our  labour  shall  not  be  in  vain  in  the  Lord.     (W.
Jones,  D.D.)        Philemon: — He  addresses  himself  unto  Philemon  as  his  dearly
beloved  and  fellow -labourer.     Now  if  he  was  so  dearly  beloved  by  Paul  he  could
not  but  love  one  by  whom  he  was  so  much  beloved ;  and  if  he  had  that  love  for
Paul,  which  Paul's  love  for  him  challenged  as  a  suitable  return  of  gratitude,  he
would  give  him  a  testimony  of  his  affection  by  gratifying  him  in  his  request.    It
was  a  great  honour  to  Philemon  to  be  beloved  by  so  eminent  an  apostle  as  St.  PaoL
It  was  stUl  a  greater  honour  to  be  numbered  amongst  his  dearest  friends.    He
could  not  doubt  of  the  sincerity  of  St.  Paul,  when  he  made  these  large  professions
of  love  and  kindness  to  him.    It  was  not  agreeable  with  the  character  of  the
apostle  to  use  these   expressions,   as   empty  forms,  words   of  course,  and  idle
compliments ;  but  they  came  from  his  heart  as  well  as  from  his  pen.     Philemon
had  found  real  and  undoubted  proofs  of  St.  Paul's  love  to  him  in  the  pains  he
had  taken  in  his  conversion  to  Christ.     He  had  received  from  him  the  greatest
instances  of  kindness  that  one  man  could  receive  from  another.    He  had  been
turned  by  him  from  darkness  unto  light,  and  from  the  power  of  Satan  unto  God,
and  owed  to  him  the  means  of  grace  and  the  hopes  of  glory.     If,  therefore,  he  had
any  sense  of  gratitude,  any  sparks  of  generosity  in  him,  he  must  be  very  desirous
to  find  oat  some  opportunity  of  making  his  acknowledgments  to  one  to  whom  he
was  so  deeply  indebted.   He  could  not  but  with  great  greediness  embrace  an  oppor-
tunity which  was  put  into  his  hands  of  obliging  one  to  whom  he  was  so  highly
obliged.    He  could  now  no  longer  be  at  a  loss  how  he  might  in  some  measure  re
quite  St.  Paul  for  the  great  and  inestimable  benefits  he  had  received  from  him,  since
he  could  not  doubt  but  what  was  so  earnestly  asked  by  the  apostle  would  be  in  »
peculiar  manner  acceptable  to  him.    And  as  the  apostle  thus  strongly  enforces  his
request,  by  applying  to  Philemon  as  his  dearly  beloved,  so  doth  he  give  it  yet
farther  advantage  by  addressing  to  him  under  the  notice  of  his  fellow-labourer.
For  if  Philemon  was  an  assistant  of  St.  Paul  in  ministering  unto  him  in  the
execution  of  his  apostolical  office,  he  would  not  complain  of  the  absence  of  One-
simus, who  did  in  his  place  and  stead  minister  to  the  apostle.   He  would  be  pleased
that  he  tarried  with  St.  Paul  to  supply  his  absence  and  to  do  his  work.    He  would
not  think  himself  deprived  of  the  service  of  Onesimus  whilst  he  was  employed  in
that  work  in  which  he  himself  was  a  labourer.     This  his  servant  would  be  even
then  looked  upon  as  doing  his  master's  business,  whilst  he  was  subservient  to  the
apostle,  whose  minister  his  master  was.     {Bp.  Smalridge.)        St.  PauV$  relatiofu
vith  Bit  ileiium : — During  his  three  years'  stay  at  Ephesus  he  had  come  across  •


PHILEMON.  17


trader  from  Colosse,  who  carried  on  In  that  city  the  business  of  a  cloth-weaver  and
a  dyer,  for  which  the  three  cities  of  the  valley  of  the  Lycus — Laodicea,  Hierapolis,
and  Colosse  itself — were  all  alike  famous,  aud  who  had  come  to  the  city  of  Artemis
probably  during  the  month  of  May,  which  was  sacred  to  the  goddess,  to  seek  a
market  for  his  goods.  The  work  of  making  up  the  bales  of  cloth  into  curtains,
hangings,  and  the  like,  was  one  which  fell  in  with  St.  Paul's  calling  as  a  tent-
maker,  and  as  Aquila  and  Priscilla  had  left  Ephesus  to  return  to  Borne  (Bom.  zvi.
3),  he  was  glad  to  be  able  to  carry  out  his  rule  of  maintaining  himself  by  the  labour
of  his  own  bands,  by  entering  into  partnership  with  one  in  whose  character  there
was  80  much  to  esteem  and  love  (ver.  17).  When  they  first  became  acquainted
with  each  other,  Philemon  was  as  one  of  those  not  far  from  the  kingdom  of  God,  a
Gentile  who,  like  the  centurion  at  Capernaum  and  Cornelius  at  Csesarea,  had  come
to  be  a  worshipper  of  the  God  of  Israel,  and  to  share  the  hope  of  the  children  of
Abraham  in  the  manifestation  of  His  kingdom.  To  him  the  apostle  had  pointed
out  the  more  excellent  way  of  faith  in  Christ  crucified,  risen,  ascended,  as  the  Head
of  that  kingdom ;  and  he  was  accordingly  baptised  with  his  wife  Apphia,  and  his
eon  Archippus.  The  master  of  a  warehouse,  well-to-do  and  benevolent,  with  many
Blaves  and  hired  labourers  working  under  him,  was  naturally  an  important
personage.  His  employes  themselves  were  a  congregation.  His  house  became
the  meeting-place  of  an  "  ecclesia,"  which  included  friends  and  neighbours  as  welL
St.  Paul  was  a  frequent  guest  there,  spoke  as  a  teacher,  and  took  part  in  the
Eaoharistic  meal  on  the  first  day  of  the  week.  As  elsewhere  (Gal.  iv.  14,  15),  he
gained  the  affection  and  goodwill  even  of  those  who  were  as  yet  outside  the  faith.
The  very  slaves  learnt  to  love  one  who  never  lost  his  temper,  never  gave  a  harsh
command,  who  found  in  all  men,  as  such,  that  which  was  a  ground  of  brotherhood.
They  would  run  errands  for  him,  wait  upon  his  wants,  nurse  him  when  he  was  ill.
The  partnership  was,  however,  interrupted  by  St.  Paul's  plans  for  his  work  as  an
apostle.  He  left  Ephesus,  and  if  he  contemplated  any  return  to  it  at  all,  it  was
not  likely  to  be  till  after  the  lapse  of  some  years.  Then  came  the  journeys  to
Macedonia,  and  Achaia,  and  Jerusalem,  the  two  years'  imprisonment  at  Csesarea,
the  voyage  to  Italy,  the  shipwreck  at  Melita,  the  two  years'  residence  at  Bome.
And  now  the  apostle  had  at  last  heard  some  tidings  of  his  former  friends.  (Dean
Plumptre.)  Inferences  from  the  subject-matter  of  this  Epistle  : — 1.  We  should
not  despise  any  persons  by  reason  of  the  meanness  of  their  outward  condition ;
we  should  love  and  esteem  men,  not  so  much  by  the  rank  and  place  they
bear  in  the  world  as  by  the  inward  qualities  and  graces  of  their  souls ;  we
should  not  treat  even  servants  with  an  air  of  haughtiness  and  insolence,
as  if  they  were  creatures  of  another  kind  from  us,  and  of  a  species  below  us,
bat  should  show  them  all  that  humanity,  which  is  due  to  them  as  men,  who
are  partakers  of  the  same  nature,  and  with  all  that  love  and  affection  which
are  due  to  them  as  Christians,  partakers  of  the  same  grace  with  ourselves.  2.
We  should  use  that  interest  we  have  with  men  of  power  and  authority  for  the
advantage  of  those  who  stand  in  need  of  our  patronage  and  help.  3.  We  should
not  despair  of  the  reclaiming  of  any  sinners,  be  they  at  present  never  so  wicked.
4.  When  sinners  are  reclaimed  from  their  vicious  courses,  we  should  not  upbraid
them  with  their  past  faults.  6.  Those  who  have  ministered  to  others  in  spiritual
things  should  not  from  thence  assume  over  them  a  right  of  commanding  and
influencing  them  in  temporal  affairs.  6.  We  should  not  look  upon  the  first
preachers  of  the  gospel  as  men  of  no  skill,  no  learning,  no  address.  We  have
a  convincing  proof  to  the  contrary  in  this  Epistle.  7.  If  this  part  of  Scripture,
which  hath  been  generally  looked  npon  as  the  most  dry,  and  barren,  and  un-
edifying,  is  thus  fruitful  of  wholesome,  and  practical,  and  useful  truths,  we
should  have  an  high  esteem  and  reverence  of  these  Divine  oracles,  which  are
so  well  fraught  with  wisdom  and  knowledge.  {Bp.  Smalridge)  Lessons : — 1.
It  is  not  without  its  use  to  observe  the  persons  to  whom  the  Epistle  is  ad-
dressed— the  father,  the  mother,  the  son,  and  the  Church  at  the  house.  How
widely  contrasted  were  they,  but  all  were  Christians,  sending  a  voice  of  en-
couragement to  persons  of  all  classes  and  through  all  time  I  2.  While  we
contemplate  with  admiration  the  separate  individuals  of  this  group  of  early
believers,  our  attention  is  turned  to  the  fact  that  they  were  assembled  with
others  of  like  spirit,  and  along  with  them  formed,  according  to  the  apostle's
language,  an  ecclesia  or  Church.  Happy  those  who  possess  the  faith  that
gives  admission  to  this  Church ;  the  truth  that  commends  its  spirit  directs  its
worship  and  secures  its  permanence  and  promotes  its  peace ;  and  the  holiness


18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.

that  prepares  for  its  full  approaching  glory  I  3.  The  Church,  or  the  oompanj
of  the  out-called  and  separated,  who  received  the  apostle's  greetings,  and  who
were  "at  the  bouse"  of  Philemon,  consist,  in  the  first  instance,  of  the  varioas
members  of  bis  household.  When  converted  himself,  he  would  naturally
strengthen  bis  brethren.  A  man  who  has  learned  that  faith  in  the  Son  of  Qod
is  essential  to  his  own  happiness,  and  "  deliverance  from  the  wrath  to  come,"  is
no  more  able  to  keep  the  discovery  to  himself  than  he  would  withhold  the  know-
ledge of  a  medicine  of  sovereign  value  from  the  sufferers  he  saw  dying  around  him
in  the  wards  of  a  fever  hospital.  Beligion,  accordingly,  begins  at  home.  {R.
Nitbet,  D-D.)

Vet.  2.  Our  beloved  Apphla. — AppMa : — It  seems  in  the  highest  degree  probable
that  Apphia  was  Philemon's  wife ;  probable,  but  in  a  lower  degree,  that  Archippus
was  their  son.  The  mention  of  a  woman  between  two  such  men,  one  the  apostle's
"fellow-labourer,"  the  other  his  "  fellow-soldier,"  is  a  noble  example  of  the  spirit
of  the  gospel  (Gal.  iii.  28).  It  is  an  unobtrusive  yet  real  hint  of  the  elevation  of
woman,  as  the  whole  letter  is  of  the  release  of  the  other  victim  of  classical  civilisa-
tion, the  slave.  "  Thus,  supported  on  both  sides,  she  seems  to  have  the  place  not  of
her  own  sex,  but  of  her  worth."  (Bp.  Wm.  Alexander.)  A  new  reading  : — The
reading  "  the  sister  "  seems  preferable  to  "  the  beloved."  It  is  superior  in  uncial
authority.  It  is  of  course  conceivable  that  "  beloved  "  might  have  been  exchanged
for  "  sister"  from  motives  of  false  delicacy.  (Bp.  Lightfoot.)  Sitter : — On  the
other  hand,  the  adjective  applied  to  Philemon  might  readily  have  suggested  the
same  prefix  to  Apphia.  The  reading  "  beloved  "  seems  scarcely  grave  enough  for
the  dignified  reserve  which  St.  Paul  never  forgets  in  his  tenderest  moments.  Above
all,  the  word  "  sister  "  distinctly  adds  to  the  meaning.  For  it  shows  that  Apphia
had  embraced  the  gospel,  and  was  a  baptised  member  of  the  Church,  and  thus
preserves  the  line  of  thought  in  the  sentiments  balancing  the  epithets  "  fellow-
worker,"  "  fellow-soldier,"  applied  to  Philemon  and  Archippus.  (Ibid.)  Addretaed
to  both : — Her  friendly  reception  of  the  runaway  would  be  quite  as  important  M
Philemon's,  and  it  is  therefore  most  natural  that  the  letter  bespeaking  it  should  be
addressed  to  both.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Archippus  our  fellow- soldier. — Archip-
ptu  : — He  was  perhaps  Philemon's  son ;  or  a  family  friend  ;  or  the  minister  of  the
family ;  the  former  hypothesis  being  perhaps  the  most  probable,  as  the  letter
concerns  a  family  matter.  (Dean  Alford.)  Archippu$  was  a  Christian  pastor  at
Colosse  (Col.  iv.  7),  and  a  fellow-soldier  of  St.  Paul,  in  fighting  the  good  fight  of
faith  against  the  enemies  of  the  gospel.  (Bp.  Chris.  Wordsworth.)  Fellow-
soldier: — The  notion  of  the  spiritual  life — more  especially  as  connected  with
definite  ministerial  functions — being  a  warfare,  a  campaign,  a  soldier's  life,  passed
into  New  Testament  from  Old  Testament  (cf.  Num.  iv.  23 ;  viii.  24 ;  1  Sam.  ii.  22 ;
1  Cor.  ix,  7  ;  2  Cor.  x.  4 ;  1  Tim.  1.  18 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  4).  The  "  gospel  campaigns  "
in  which  Archippus  was  St.  Paul's  comrade  in  arms  may  have  been  those  during
the  apostle's  sojourn  at  Ephesus  (a.d.  54-57).  Those  who  hold  that  St.  Paul  had
a  personal  connection  with  Colosse  will  also  point  to  Acts  xviii.  23.  (Bp.  Wm.
Alexander.)  Soldier  instead  of  worker : — The  variation  of  "  soldier  "  for  "  worker  "
probably  is  due  to  the  fact  of  Archippus  being  the  bishop  of  the  Laodicean  church.
In  any  case,  it  is  very  beautiful  that  the  grizzled  veteran  officer  should  thus,  as  ii
were,  clasp  the  hand  of  this  young  recruit,  and  call  him  his  comrade.  How  it  would
go  to  the  heart  of  Archippus  I  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  A  stem  message : — A  somewhat
stem  message  is  sent  to  Archippus  in  the  Colossian  letter.  Why  did  not  Paul  send
it  quietly  in  this,  instead  of  letting  a  whole  church  know  of  it  ?  It  seems  at  first
sight  as  if  he  had  chosen  the  harshest  way ;  but  perhaps  further  consideration  may
suggest  that  the  reason  was  an  instinctive  unwillingness  to  introduce  a  jarring  note
into  the  joyous  friendship  and  confidence  which  sounds  through  this  Epistle,  nor
would  he  bring  public  matters  into  this  private  letter.  The  warning  would  come
with  more  effect  from  the  cburch,  and  this  cordial  message  of  goodwill  and
confidence  would  prepare  Archippus  to  receive  the  other,  as  rain-showers  make  the
ground  soft  for  the  good  seed.  The  private  affection  would  mitigate  the  public
exhortation,  with  whatever  rebuke  may  have  been  in  it.  (Ibid.)  Fellow-Soldier : —
He  calleth  him  a  fellow-soldier  because  they  of  the  ministiy  (if  they  be  faithful)  are
in  continual  warfare,  not  only  against  the  continual  engines  aud  assaults  of  Satan,
who  withstandeth  their  ministry,  I  nt  against  false  teachers,  and  against  many  other
anreasonable  men,  as  also  against  the  sins  and  corruptions  that  reign  or  arise  in  their
•everftl  charges.    We  see  how  men  destitute  of  faith  make  continual  war  against


PHILEMON,  19


them  one  wkj  or  other.     {W.  AttenoU.'^       Minittera  are  toldien : — I.  In  thb  fosld.

1.  Conflict.  (1)  With  Satan's  temptations.  (2)  With  persecutions  (Tim.  iL  3).  (3)
With  the  perverse  understanding,  will,  and  affections  of  sinful  man  (2  Cor.  x.  4).

2.  In  victory.  (1)  Over  the  elect,  who  are  taken  captive  and  made  willingly  to
submit  themselves  to  Jesus  Christ,  against  whom  formerly  they  fought  under  Satan's
banner.  (2)  Over  the  reprobate,  who  are  quite  killed  with  the  spiritual  sword,  and
because  tney  will  not  bend,  are  broken  to  pieces.  II.  In  the  oabbisom.  Though
returned  home  glorious  in  victory,  yet  he  must  not  sit  down  and  rest,  as  though  all
were  now  despatched,  but  on  with  his  defensive  weapons,  that  he  may  be  able  to
maintain  his  own.  And  herein  first  of  all  consisteth  the  second  part  of  the  minister's
soldiership  at  home,  namely,  in  having  a  wakeful  eye  to  discern  even  the  clouds  of
danger  even  arising  afar  off,  and  thereupon  to  give  warning.  Secondly,  having  so
done,  which  is  the  half -arming  of  his  people,  according  to  the  proverb,  ••  Fore-warned,
fore-armed,"  he  must  fortify  and  make  them  strong  against  the  power  of  the  adver-
saries. First,  by  instructing  them  how  to  carry  themselves,  how  both  to  wear  and
how  to  use  that  complete  harness  of  the  Christian  soldier.  Thus  like  a  good
captain  doth  he  train  his  soldiers,  teaching  their  hands  to  fight  and  fitting  tiieir
fingers  for  the  battle.  Secondly,  by  praying  tor  them ;  wherein  he  playeth  the
valiant  soldier  indeed,  combating  and  conflicting  with  the  Lord  God  Himself.  This
is  called  standing  in  the  gap,  and  making  up  of  the  hedge  (Ezek.  zzii.  30).  Look  as
the  wife  and  provident  martiallist  will  see  where  the  city  is  weakest  when  the  walls
are  anything  decayed,  and  will  bend  his  forces  most  of  all  to  fortify  that  place,
knowing  the  enemy  will  be  sure  to  take  advantage  of  that  place  for  has  more  easy
entering  upon  them,  so  likewise  doth  the  faithful  minister  consider  with  himself
where  &e  sins  of  the  people  have.most  weakened  them,  and  made  any  breaches  in
their  walls,  any  gaps  in  their  fence  for  God's  judgments  to  run  in  upon  them,
and  there  doth  he  make  up  the  breach  and  stand  up  in  the  gap  by  earnest  praying
and  calling  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord,  as  Aaron  (Num.  xvi.  47).  (D.  Dyke,  B.D.)
The  warfare  of  work : — Paul,  indeed,  loves  to  think  of  himself  as  a  soldier ;  for  in
all  earnest  work  there  is  verily  something  of  war.  Beal  labour  itself  is  but  a  war
against  sloth  and  self-indulgent  idleness.  Agricultural  labour  is  war  on  the  weeds
and  the  stubbornness  of  the  solL  And  so  shall  all  work  that  kindles  into  the  white
heat  of  earnestness  burst  often  into  a  war-flame.  {A.  H.  Drysdale,  M.A.)  Ful-
filling the  true  soldiership : — We  look  past  the  lounging  mercenary  at  his  wrist.
Not  he,  but  Paul,  is  fulfilling  the  true  soldiership  of  the  world.  We  see  the  apostle's
work,  by  its  iatensity,  rising  into  warfare ;  and  as  we  hear  him  in  his  prayers,  the
warfare  rises  into  worship  before  the  Lord.  (Ibid.)  Christians  are  fellow-
soldiers  : — Those  who  speak  of  the  Christian  warfare,  as  I  have  observed,
almost  always  limit  it  to  the  narrow  path  in  which  one  treads  alone.  That
was  the  idea  so  grandly  wrought  out  by  Bunyan  in  his  "  Pilgrim's  Progress."
But  that  sort  of  warfare  belonged  to  the  days  of  knight-errantry.  The  modern
soldiers  of  the  Cross,  like  other  soldiers,  are  massed  in  armies.  No  doubt  each
Christian  has  many  a  fight  single-handed  with  the  adversary.  But  those  thrilling
appeals  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians,  concerning  taking  the  whole  armour  of
God,  were  addressed  to  the  Church  collectively.  Individualism  has  its  perils.
Christians  are  fellow-soldiers.  We  need  to  build  a  common  barrier  against  the
common  foe.  Side  by  side  we  need  to  charge  on  the  enemy's  works.  And  then,  in
the  final  day  of  triumph,  we  shall  join  with  "  thousands  of  thousands,  and  ten
times  ten  thousand,"  in  shouting  the  glad  chorus  of  victory.  {J.  Hovey.)  The
church  in  thy  house. — Early  Christian  churches  : — As  vast  buildings,  publicly
consecrated  and  set  apart,  were  impossible  from  the  nature  of  the  case  in  the
earliest  years  of  Christianity,  houses  of  considerable  size  were  employed  for
worship — like  those  of  AquUa  at  Bome,  of  Nymphas  or  Philemon  at  Colosse— and
the  name  of  "  church  "  seems  to  have  been  transferred  at  an  early  period  from  the
collection  of  living  souls  to  the  building  in  which  they  met  {Bp.  Wm.  Alexander.)
An  act  of  zeal : — This  was  one  way  in  which  Philemon  might  be  said  to  have
"refreshed  the  bowels  of  the  saints"  (ver.  7),  and  to  have  shown  his  Christian
faith  and  love  to  his  poorer  brethren.  Here  probably  it  was  that  St.  Paul  preached
when  at  Colosse.  This  concession  of  some  apartment  in  their  own  houses  for  the
purposes  of  the  public  worship  of  the  Christian  Church, "  a  sect  everywhere  spoken
against "  in  those  days,  was  an  act  of  zeal  and  courage  on  the  part  of  the  wealthier
members  of  the  Christian  community,  and  seems  to  have  elicited  special  expressions
of  notice,  approval,  and  affection  from  St.  Paul  and  the  other  apostles  (Bom.  xvi.
»,  23 ;  CoL  iv.  15  ;  c/.  2  Tim.  1 16,  iv.  19 ;  3  John  6,  7).    {Bp.  Chris.  Wordsworth.)


liO  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.

A  comprehensive  salutation : — He  did  not  omit  the  slaves  here  ;  for  he  knew  that

the  words  of  slaves  can  often  change  a  master's  purpose,  and  especially  when  they

plead  for  a  fellow-servant.     Some  of  them  perhaps  had  stirred  up  Philemon  against

Onesimus.     He  does  not  permit  them  there  to  have  any  feeling  of  grudge,  as  he

addresses  them  with  the  family.    Nor  does  he  give  the  master  just  reason  for  anger.

If  he  had  addressed  the  slaves  by  name,  Philemon  probably  would  have  been

displeased.   See,  then,  how  prudently  he  deals.     For  the  word  "  Church  "  does  not

permit  masters  to  be  angry,  if  they  are  numbered  with  slaves.     For  the  Church

knows  not  the  distinction  of  master  and  slave  (Gal.  iii.  28) .  {Chrysostom.)     Tact : —

Meyer  remarks  the  tact  of  the  apostle  in  associating  with  Philemon  those  connected

with  his  house,   but  not  going  beyond  the  limits  of  the  house.      (Dean  Alford.)

The  domestic  church  : — 1.  A  Christian's  household  a  church  of  Christ.     2.  Means

and  influences  suited  to  make  it  such.     3,  Pleasures  and  secular  habits  which  tend

to  prevent  it ;  (1)  by  quenching  the  religious  spirit ;  (2)  by  interfering  with  domestio

•worship  and  training  ;  (3)  by  placing  godliness  in  a  secondary  position.   4.  Motives

which  should  urge  the  Christian  to  utmost  effort  to  secure  it.    (1)  Salvation  of

children  and  servants  greatly  dependent  on  him;  (2)  God  holds  him  responsible ;  (3)

world  needs  well-trained  workers.     (A.  W.  Johnson.)      A  Church  in  a  house : — 1.  In

this  pious  household  there  had  been  one  graceless  member.    Onesimus  must  often

have  witnessed  the  holy  engagements  of  this  "  Church  I  "  listened  to  reproofs  and

appeals  of  God's  Word;  seen  the  joyfuhiess  of  Christian  faith  and  life.    Thia

aggravated  the  wrong  he  had  done,  and  his  sin  against  God  and  conscience.  2.  Yet

the  holy  influence  was  not  lost.     It  prepared  his  heart  for  the  apostle's  doctrine.

8.  Apphia's  share  in  this  influence  may  be  safely  reckoned  apon.    There  is  no

power  in  a  home  like  that  of  a  mother  or  mistress.    Women's  work  may  seem  the

slowest,  but  it  is  the  surest.      {Ibid.)  The  family  church : — Christians  families

should  be  little  churches.   How  may  a  family  come  to  deserve  this  title  ?    For  this

purpose  many  things  are  required,  whereof  some  are  common  to  all  in  the  family,

others  proper  to  some.  Common  to  all  are  these  two  points — 1.  If  we  would  have  onr

families  churches  then  we  that  are  members  in  families  must  labour  to  become  tme

members  of  the  Church.    For  a  company  of  profane  men  is  not  the  house  of  God,

but  a  den  and  dungeon  of  thieves,  adulterers,  atheists,  conspiring  together  against

God.      The  which  yet  is  not  so  to  be  understood,  as  if  the  name  of  a  church

could  not  be  attributed  to  a  family  in  which  there  are  some  not  members  of  the

Church,  for  even  in  the  Church  itself  there  are  some  in  it  that  are  not  of  it.     Le*

therefore  every  one  of  a  family  be  desirous  the  house  he  dwells  in  should  be  Bethel —

God's  house — bring  one  stone  to  the  making  of  this  spiritual  house  that  so  he  may

be  able  to  say.  This  house  is  a  holy  edifice  and  I  am  one  of  the  living  stones  that

help  to  the  making  of  it  so.  2.  That  a  family  may  obtain  the  commendation  of  being

a  Church,  this  is  another  thing  that  we  require  generally  of  all  in  the  family,  namely,

that  look  what  kind  of  men  they  are,  or  at  least  would  seem  to  be,  in  the  Church

and  public  congregation,  the  same  they  would  show  themselves  to  be  in  the  family

and  private  conversement  one  with  another.    These  be  things  common  to  all ;  now

follow  those  peculiar  to  some — first  to  the  chief,  secondly  the  inferior.     Those

things  which  respect  the  chief  are  specially  these — first,  as  much  as  in  them  lies,

let  them  entertain  none  into  their  family  whom  God  hath  not  first  entertained  into

His.    The  Church  doth  not  indifferently  receive  all  and  admit  into  her  society  by

the  sacrament  of  baptism  the  children  of  Turks  and  cannibals,  strangers  from  the

covenant,  but  only  such  ordinarily  as  are  of  a  holy  seed,  the  offspring  of  religious

parents.      So  likewise  must  our  families,  if  we  would  have  them  like  churches,  be

something  dainty  who  they  receive.      David's  example  is  to  be  imitated  (Psa.  ci.),

whose  "  eyes  were  unto  the  faithful  of  the  land,"  that  he  might  pick  even  the  choicest

of  them  for  his  service,  and  that  so  much  the  rather  because  far  more  easily  may

we  keep  out  than  cast  such  guests  out  of  our  houses.     Secondly,  the  chief  in  the

family  must  resemble  the  chief  in  the  Church,  namely,  the  pastors,  Ac,  thereof;

and  that  not  only  in   those  things  which  concern  God's  service,  but  outward

discipline  also.   For  the  first.    There  are  two  special  duties  of  the  pastor  respecting

God's  service,  preaching  and  praying.     In  both  these,  in  some  measure,  should  the

governors  of  the  family  be  like  to  the  pastors  of  the  Church.    First,  therefore,  they

must  instruct  the  whole  family  in  that  doctrine  which  is  according  to  godliness.

This  they  must  do,  first,  in  words ;  which  Paul  commandeth  (Eph.  vi.),  and  which

God  Himself  commendeth  in  Abraham  (Gen.  xviii.).     Here,  then,  is  censured  that

fovemment  of  the  family  which  is  only  civil,  not  religious.     Assuredly,  if  the
7ord  of  God  found  not  in  thy  house  as  in  the  Church  it  is  onworthy  the  name  ti


PHILEMON,  21


a  church  ?  Secondly,  they  must  teach  likewise  by  example.  With  David,  walking
in  the  uprightness  of  their  hearts  in  the  midst  of  their  house ;  for  the  eye  of
the  whole  family  is  upon  the  governors  thereof,  as  is  the  eye  of  the  Church  upon
their  pastors.  Secondly,  as  in  preaching,  so  likewise  in  praying,  must  they  imitate
the  pastors;  for  the  house  of  God  is  called  the  house  of  prayer.  If,  therefore,  this
principal  part  of  God's  service  be  wanting  in  any  house,  how  can  it  be  called  God's
house?  Thus  must  they  be  like  the  pastors  in  things  concerning  God's  service.
Secondly,  they  must  resemble  them  in  their  discipline,  causing  their  house-
hold disciphne  to  be  answerable  to  the  Church  discipline.  First,  that  which
is  the  ground  of  all  good  discipline,  they  must  have  a  very  watchful  and
attentive  eye  over  every  soul  in  the  family,  so  that  they  may  know  the  several
natures,  conditions,  and  dispositions  of  all,  and  so  proportion  their  goverrmaent
accordingly.  This  is  rightly  to  play  the  bishop,  who  hath  that  name  from  his
careful  overseeing  of  the  flock  (Acts  xx.  20).  Secondly,  after  that  the  eye
hath  laid  these  foundations  the  hand  must  build  thereon.  First,  as  soon  as  it
hath  received  warning  from  the  eye  of  some  evil  that  is  in  brewing,  in  stretching
forth  itself  and  arming  itself  to  hinder  it,  and  keep  the  authors  thereof
within  their  bounds.  For  this  purpose  both  admonitions  and  threatenings  must
be  used,  but  especially  wholesome  laws  must  be  enacted  for  the  prohibiting  and
preventing  of  things  unlawful.  Secondly,  the  same  hand  which  made  the  sword
of  good  laws  for  the  prevention  of  evil  to  come  must  draw  it  out  for  the  punishment
of  evil  past,  and  not  suffer  it  to  Ue  rusting  in  the  sheath.  If,  then,  any  shall  break
those  good  laws  which  the  governors  of  the  families  have  made,  let  the  punishments
threatened  be  inflicted,  that  so  those  who  would  not  obey  the  precepts  of  the  law
may  perforce  be  constrained  to  obey  the  threatenings  thereof.  Now  herein  must
there  be  an  imitation  of  Church  discipline.  Look,  then,  as  in  the  Church  the  offender
is  first  admonished  divers  times,  and  at  length,  not  profiting  by  those  admonitions,
is  excommunicated  and  dis-synagogued,  so  likewise  in  thy  family,  finding  wicked
and  ungodly  ones,  first  must  thou  deal  with  them  by  admonition,  reprehension,
castigation ;  and  if,  for  all  these  means,  they  still  remain  incorrigible,  then  cast
them  out  of  thy  house,  and  think  their  room  better  than  their  company.  If  the
king  were  to  come  to  thy  house,  and  there  were  some  in  it  he  could  not  abide,
wouldest  thou  not  discharge  them  thine  house,  if  so  be  thou  wert  desirous  of  the
king's  presence  ?  And  entertaining  traitors  in  thy  house,  traitors  against  God,
thinkest  thou  that  He  will  come  and  pitch  His  tent  and  take  up  His  lodging  with
thee  ?  These  be  the  things  proper  to  the  chief.  Now  follow  those  which  belong
to  the  inferiors,  in  the  which,  as  in  the  former,  their  governors  resembled  the
pastors  of  the  Church,  they  must  resembled  the  rest  of  the  body  of  the  Church.
First,  in  matter  of  doctrine.  As  the  Church  acknowledgeth  those  that  are  over
her,  in  the  Lord,  and  obeyeth  them  (1  Thess.  v  ;  Heb.  xiii.),  so  must  those  that  are
under  government  carry  themselves  reverently  and  respectively  towards  their
governors,  cheerfully  and  conscionably  obe.^ing,  as  all  other  of  their  lawful  com-
mands, so  especially  those  which  concern  God's  worship.  And  as  by  the  example
of  the  pastors,  the  rest  of  the  Church  are  stirred  up  to  godliness  (Phil.  iv.  9),  so
mast  the  inferiors  in  the  family  be  encouraged  and  inflamed  to  virtue,  when  they
shall  see  their  superiors  going  before  them.  Secondly,  they  must  resemble  the
CSiurch  in  matters  of  discipline.  First,  enduring  those  chastisements,  either  verbal
or  real,  which  for  their  deserts  are  inflicted,  and  freely  acknowledging  the  equity  of
them.  Secondly,  if  at  any  time  they  see  any  of  their  fellows  misbehaving  him-
self, first  let  them  try  what  they  can  do  themselves  by  admonition  ;  but  if  that  way
they  prevail  not,  then  according  to  the  example  of  the  ecclesiastical  discipline  (Matt,
xviii.),  let  them  acquaint  their  governors  therewithal.  (D.  Dyke,  B.D.)  A  Christian
household: — We  have  here  shown  to  us,  by  one  stray  beam  of  twinkling  light,  for
a  moment,  a  very  sweet  picture  of  the  domestic  life  of  that  Christian  household  in
their  remote  valley.  It  shines  still  to  as  across  the  centuries  which  have  swallowed
up  so  much  that  seemed  more  permanent,  and  silenced  so  much  that  made  far  more
noise  in  its  day.  The  picture  may  ^ell  set  us  asking  ourselves  the  question
whether  we,  with  all  our  boasted  advancement,  have  been  able  to  realise  the  true
ideal  of  Christian  family  life  as  these  three  did.  The  husband  and  vrife  dwelling
as  heirs  together  of  the  grace  of  life,  their  child  beside  them,  sharing  their  faith
and  service,  their  household  ordered  in  the  ways  of  the  Lord,  their  friends  Christ's
friends,  and  their  social  joys  hallowed  and  serene— what  nobler  form  of  family  life
can  be  conceived  than  that?  What  a  rebuke  and  satire  on  many  a  so-called
Christian  household  I    {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)       Family  wonhip : — ^nobert  Hall'i


n  THE  BIBUCAL  ILLUSTRATOR.

words  on  this  sabjeot  are  as  beantifnl  as  they  are  true.  "  Family  worship."  ha
lay*,  "  serves  as  edge  or  border  to  prevent  the  web  of  life  from  anravelling."
Injltienee  of  penonal  contact: — Said  General  Havelock,  in  reply  to  a  remark  of  a
friend  as  to  his  influence  over  the  men  of  bis  regiment,  "  I  keep  close  to  them —
have  personal  contact  with  each  man,  and  know  each  man's  name.*'  {Preacher's
Lantern.)  Refreshment  in  the  Church : — The  bee  cannot  gather  honey  on  the  wing.
No  more  can  Christ's  disciples  gain  refreshment  and  sustenance  in  the  midst  of  the
world's  bustle,  save  by  habitually  alighting  and  drawing  on  the  resources  of  Christ's
presence  and  grace  afforded  in  the  assemblies  of  the  saints.  Not  as  though  the
"  Church  "  were  only  a  convalescent  home  for  recruiting  spiritual  energies — it  is  no
less  a  field  for  their  exercise  and  development.  It  is  the  seat  and  centre  of  witness-
ing for  Christ  and  of  working  for  Him.  His  disciples  need  not  think  to  carry  dark
lanterns.  Loyalty  to  Him  will  not  be  ashamed  to  confess  His  name  before  men.
{A.  H.  Drysdale,  M.A.)  The  migxion  of  the  Church: — ^For  as  the  lowly  bush

receives  the  dew  of  heaven,  not  to  absorb  it  on  itself,  but  to  distil  a  portion  on  the

{ret  lowlier  plant  that  may  grow  at  its  root,  so  must  "  the  Church  in  the  house  "
earn  "  to  do  good  and  distribute,"  as  a  steward  for  Christ  of  that  gospel  which  is
committed  to  it  in  trust  for  others.  Even  the  lordly  mountain  catches  the  first  oat-
pourings  of  the  skies,  not  to  treasure  them  up  in  its  own  bosom,  but  to  send  them
down  in  limpid  and  refreshing  streams  along  the  valleys  and  meadows  below.  And
BO  it  is  the  mission  of  the  Church  of  Christ  at  large  to  fulfil  such  offices  of  gospel
mercy  as  shall  make  "  the  wilderness  and  solitary  place  be  glad  for  them,  and  the
desert  rejoice  and  blossom  as  the  rose,"  and  to  be  the  instrument  of  Christian
enterprise  and  effort  to  the  ends  of  the  earth.    (Ibid.)

Ver.  3.  Grace  to  you,  and  peace. — A  touching  prayer: — The  word  "  grace  "  wonld
be  peculiarly  touching  to  Philemon  in  connection  with  the  plea  for  Onesimus.  The
speech  to  us  of  "  grace  "  is  to  remind  us  of  our  sins  and  of  their  forgiveness  by  an
infinite  compassion.  "  Think,"  he  seems  to  say,  "  how  much  God  hath  forgiven
thee,  how  thou  art  saved  by  grace.  Imitate  thy  Gfod."  (Bp.  Wm.  Alexander.)  A
loving  xnth : — The  two  main  points  to  be  observed  are  the  comprehensiveness  of
the  apostle's  loving  wish,  and  the  source  to  which  he  looks  for  its  fulfilment.  It
is  perhaps  accidental  that  we  have  here  the  union  of  the  Greek  and  of  the  Eastern
forms  of  salutation.  Just  as  the  regal  title  of  the  King,  whose  throne  was  the  Cross,
was  written  in  the  languages  of  culture,  of  law,  and  of  religion,  as  an  unconscious
prophecy  of  His  universal  reign ;  so,  with  like  unintentional  felicity,  we  have  blended
here  the  ideals  of  good  which  the  East  and  the  West  have  framed  for  those  to  whom
they  wish  good,  in  token  that  Christ  is  able  to  slake  all  the  thirsts  of  the  soul,  and
that  whatsoever  things  any  races  of  men  have  dreamed  as  the  chiefest  blessing,
these  are  all  to  be  reached  through  Him,  and  Him  only.  But  the  deeper  lesson
here  is  to  be  found  by  observing  tiiat  "  grace  "  refers  to  the  action  of  the  Divine
heart,  and  "  peace  "  to  the  result  thereof  in  man's  experience.  "  Grace  "  is  free,  un-
deserved, unmotived,  self-springing  love.  It  is  love  which  stoops,  forgives,  communi-
cates. Hence  it  comes  to  mean,  not  only  the  deep  fountain  in  the  Divine  nature,
and  that  property  in  His  love  by  which,  like  some  strong  spring,  it  leaps  up  and
gushes  forth  by  an  inward  impulse,  in  neglect  of  all  motives  drawn  from  the  lovable-
ness  of  its  objects,  such  as  determine  our  poor  human  loves,  but  also  the  results  of
that  bestowing  love  in  men's  characters,  or,  as  we  say,  the  "  graces  "  of  the  Chris-
tian soul.  "Whatsoever  things  are  lovely  and  of  good  report,"  all  nobihties,
tendernesses,  exquisite  beauties,  and  steadfast  strengths  of  mind  and  heart,  of  will
and  disposition— all  are  the  gifts  of  God's  undeserved  and  open-handed  love.  The
fruit  of  such  grace  received  is  peace.  That  old  Eastern  salutation  "  peace"  recalls
a  state  of  society  when  every  stranger  might  be  a  foe ;  but  it  touches  a  chord  which
vibrates  in  all  hearts.  We  have  little  fear  of  war,  but  we  are  all  weighed  upon  with
sore  unrest,  and  repose  sometimes  seems  to  us  the  one  thing  needful.  AU  the  dis-
flords  of  nature  and  circumstances  can  be  harmonised  by  that  grace  which  is  ready
to  flow  into  our  hearts.  Peace  with  God,  with  ourselves,  with  our  fellows,  repose
in  the  midst  of  change,  calm  in  conflict,  may  be  ours.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)
The  apostle's  prayer  : — 1.  The  matter  of  his  prayer,  what  it  is.  He  asketh  not  the
favour  of  men,  but  of  God  ;  he  craveth  not  earthly  and  worldly  peace,  but  spiritueJ
and  heavenly.  True  it  is,  the  favour  of  God  and  goodwill  of  men,  the  outward
peace  and  tranquillity  one  with  another,  are  excellent  gifts,  but  the  free  and  fatherly
favour  of  God,  together  with  peace  with  God  the  Father,  being  reconciled  unto  OS
in  His  dear  Son,  are  much  to  be  preferred  in  our  desires.    2.  As  we  learn  chiefly  to


PHILEMON.  23


ask  spiritnal  blessings,  so  we  see  what  blessings  among  snch  as  are  spiritual  are  the
principal  and  predominant — to  wit,  the  favour  of  Ood  and  peace  of  conscience.
He  that  is  possessed  of  these  two,  hath  a  hidden  mine  of  treasures,  with  which  all
the  riches  of  the  world  are  not  to  be  compared.  For  these  blessings  are  heavenly,
spiritual,  eternal ;  whereas  all  the  substance  of  this  world  is  temporal,  transitory,
corruptible.  3.  The  apostle  in  some  of  his  Epistles  useth  three  words — grace,
mercy,  and  peace.  Here  he  contenteth  himself  with  naming  two — grace  and  peace,
wherein  there  is  no  contrariety,  forasmuch  as  mercy  is  included  under  peace.
For  by  mercy  is  understood  our  justification,  which  consisteth  partly  in  the  forgive-
ness of  our  sins,  and  partly  in  the  imputation  of  Christ's  righteousness,  which  do
bring  true  peace  with  them.  4.  We  see  from  whom  he  asketb  all  these — first  from
God  the  Father,  to  teach  that  he  is  the  author  of  every  good  and  perfect  gift.  If
then  we  stand  in  need  of  them  we  can  receive  none  but  of  Him.  5.  We  see
that  to  Gk)d  the  Father  he  joineth  Jesus  Christ;  for  all  blessings  are  bestowed
through  Christ,  the  Mediator  of  the  New  Testament.  God  the  Father  is  the  foun-
tain, Christ  is  the  pipe  or  conduit,  by  whom  they  are  conveyed  unto  us.  He  that
hath  not  Him  hath  not  the  Father.  He  that  is  not  in  Him,  remaineth  in  death.
He  that  beUeveth  in  the  Son,  hath  everlasting  life,  and  he  that  obeyeth  not  the  Son,
shall  not  see  life,  but  the  wrath  of  God  abideth  on  him.  6.  The  title  given  unto
Him :  He  is  called  the  Lord  of  His  Church ;  it  is  a  kingdom,  whereof  He  is  the
Prince  ;  it  is  a  city,  whereof  He  is  the  governor ;  it  is  a  house,  whereof  He  is  the
master  or  owner ;  it  is  a  body,  whereof  He  is  the  head.  So  then,  aU  obedience  is
due  to  Him,  and  all  men  must  acknowledge  His  worship  over  them.  Lastly,  in
that  he  craveth  grace  and  peace  from  Christ  our  Lord,  as  well  as  from  God  the
Father,  it  confirmeth  our  faith  in  a  fundamental  point  of  Christian  religion,
touching  the  Deity  of  Christ,  Who  is  God  equal  with  the  Father.  (W.  AttersoU.)
Grace : — L  From  hence  let  us  observe  the  chiefest  cause  op  God's  favoub  to
tjs,  NAMELY,  His  own  free  will  and  obacious  disposition  to  favour  US.  The
use  of  this  doctrine  is  to  humble  us  in  ourselves,  as  having  not  the  least  spark  of
goodness  in  ourselves,  and  to  make  us  ascribe  all  glory  in  everything  to  God,  whose
grace  is  the  fountain  and  foundation  of  all  good  things  whatsoever.  H.  In  the
example  of  Paul,  in  all  his  salutations  wishing  first  of  all  grace,  that  is,  the  favour
of  God,  we  learn  what  it  is  that  we  should  chiefly  desibe,  eitheb  fob  oub-
BELVES  OB  FOB  OTHERS,  our  children,  wives,  kindred,  fathers  and  mothers,  acquain-
tance, (fee,  vi^.,  the  grace  of  St.  Paul.  1.  God's  favour  is  the  ground  of  all  other
mercies  whatsoever ;  it  is  the  main  and  mother-blessing,  the  very  seed  of  all  other
mercies  whatsoever — so  that  in  desiring  it,  we  desire  all  other,  and  getting  it,  we
get  other.  2.  God's  grace  is  instead  of  all  other  blessings,  in  case  they  be  wanting.
lU.  Since  whatsoever  we  desire,  we  are  hkewise  to  seek  it,  in  the  use  of  thb
MEANS.  Paul- in  his  example  commending  unto  us  the  desire  of  God's  favour
withal  further  showeth  us  that  we  must  use  means  for  the  attainment  of  it.  1.
Taking  thorough  notice  of  that  disgrace  and  displeasure  thou  art  in  with  God,  and
that  most  deservedly  for  thy  sins,  thou  must  first  of  all  come  as  Benhadad's  servants
came  to  Ahab,  even  with  a  halter  about  thy  neck,  creeping  and  crouching  before
the  throne  of  grace,  abasing  and  abjecting  thyself  at  His  footstool,  in  the  humble
and  penitent  confession  of  thy  sins.  2.  Thou  must  shroud  thyself  under  Christ's
wings.  Clothe  thyself  with  His  righteousness,  that  so  thou  mayest  appear  lovely  in
the  eyes  of  the  Lord,  for  in  Christ  only  is  the  Father  well  pleased ;  and  so  if  thou
wouldst  have  Him  well  pleased  with  thee,  thoa  most  become  a  member  of  Him,  bone
of  His  bone,  and  flesh  of  His  flesh.  This  thou  doest  when  by  faith  thou  layest
hold  upon  Christ's  righteousness,  and  gripest  the  promises  of  the  gospel.
3.  By  faith  having  clad  thyself  with  the  robes  of  Christ's  imputed  righteous-
ness, thou  must  be  clothed  upon  with  the  garment  of  thy  own  righteousness
and  obedience,  which  howsoever  being  in  itself  a  menstruons  cloth  as  it  comes
from  as  yet  being  of  the  Spirit's  own  weaving,  in  that  regard  is  acceptable  to  God,
and  causeth  Him  to  take  a  farther  delight  in  us.  (Prov.  iii.  8.)  (D.  Dyke,  B.D.)
Grace  to  be  used : — Grace  is  always  a  gift,  and  not  to  be  enjoyed  only  but  to  be  ased.
For  it  is  use  that  makes  all  things  bright  in  creation,  that  keeps  the  diamond  from
accretions,  and  the  fine  gold  from  being  tarnished.  The  great  lesson  of  the  universe
is  the  blessedness  of  use.  The  purest  atmosphere  obeys  the  law  of  circulation,  and
the  most  crystal  river  is  always  sending  up  clouds  of  blessing  from  its  living  waters.
(W.  M.  Statham,  M.A.)  Varieties  of  grace : — ^Ever  in  each  individual  Christian
ufe  there  is  seen  a  manifold  grace — grace  of  forgiveness,  grace  of  new  life  and
peace,  grace  of  birth  at  the  Cross,  grace  of  growth  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  growth  ia


24  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.

power  and  parity  and  in  likeness  to  God.  How  many  varieties  of  life  Nature  has  I
We  are  struck  with  her  grace  and  beauty  in  her  myriad  forms.  She  never  seems  to
exhaust  the  variety  of  her  wardrobe,  as  in  garments  of  light,  now  of  subdued  coloui,
now  of  effulgent  beauty,  she  proclaims  the  majesty  and  glory  of  God.  (Ibid.)
Peace : — I  do  willingly  assent  to  those  who  by  peace  understand  all  prosperity  and
felicity,  both  earthly  and  heavenly,  in  this  life,  and  that  to  come.  1.  First,  the
inward  peace  of  conscience  with  God,  which  springeth  out  of  the  grace  and  favour
of  God  (Eom.  v.  1).  A  man's  conscience  will  never  be  at  quiet  within  bim  till  it
feels  this  grace.  2.  The  peace  of  charity  among  ourselves.  This  also  is  an  ef  ect
of  God's  grace,  which  as  it  maketh  a  man  at  peace  with  himself  and  God,  so  with
his  brethren.  The  love  of  God  shed  into  our  hearts  will  make  us  love  our  brethren
also.  3.  The  peace  of  amity,  and  a  holy  kind  of  league  with  all  God's  creatures.
This  also  is  an  effect  of  grace  ;  for  when  we  have  His  favour,  who  is  the  Lord,  we
have  the  good  wiU  also  of  His  servants  the  creatures.  4,  Outward  prosperity  and
good  success  in  our  ways ;  so  it  is  commonly  taken  in  all  their  salutations  (1  Chron.
xii.  18).  Now,  the  reason  why  outward  prosperity  is  signified  by  this  name  of  peace
is — first,  because  to  the  godly  they  are  pledges  of  that  sweet  peace  they  have  with
God.  Secondly,  they  are  notable  maintainors  of  the  peace  and  quietness  of  our
affections ;  for  in  the  want  of  outward  things  how  are  we  disquieted.  But  peace,  in
this  fourth  signification,  is  so  taken  for  outward  prosperity,  that  which  all  this  out-
ward prosperity  hath  security  annexed  unto  it,  and  is  a  forerunner  of  that  eternal
prosperity  and  felicity  in  God's  kingdom  ;  for  both  these  things  are  understood  by
the  name  of  peace.  I.  From  hence  observe,  that  as  we  may  lawfully  desire  for  our-
selves and  others  outward  prosperity  and  the  blessing  of  this  life,  so  how  and  in
WHAT  MANNER  WB  MUST  DEsiBE  THEM.  1.  Having  desired  grace  in  the  first  place
"  First  seek  the  kingdom  of  God  "  (Matt.vi.) ;  and  then  in  the  second  place  we  may
seek  temporal  things ;  but  now  men  are  all  for  peace,  "Who  will  shew  us  any
good  ?  "  few  or  none  for  grace  ;  peaceable  men,  as  I  may  call  them,  enough,  very
few  gracious  men  that  do  first  of  all  seek  God's  grace,  and  then  in  the  second  place
peace.  2.  In  desuing  of  outward  things  we  must  moderate  our  desires,  that  they
go  not  beyond  their  bounds,  to  desire  abundance  and  superfluity  of  them ;  for  we
desire  them  by  the  name  of  peace  :  therefore  no  more  must  we  desire,  but  that  which
will  serve  us,  to  attend  the  works  of  our  caUing  with  free  and  quiet  minds,  without
disturbance  or  distraction.    U.  Paul  first  desiring  grace  and  then  peace,  showeth  ua

THAT   PEACE,   NAMELY,  OUTWARD   PBOSPERITT,   IS   A   EBUIT   OF   GRACE,   and   SO,   that   the

nearest  and  most  compendious  way  to  get  peace,  is  first  to  get  grace  and  favour  with
God.  Joseph  and  David  had  wonderful  success  in  all  their  ways,  and  the  reason  the
Holy  Ghost  yieldeth  thereof  is  this,  "  The  Lord  was  with  them  "  (Gen.  xxxix.  ;
1  Sam.  xviii.).  Grace  is  the  only  means  to  draw  on  peace.  When  we  have  got
Christ's  righteousness,  it  is  that  grace  vhich  makes  us  graceful  to  God  (Matt.  vi.).
Then  outward  things  come  voluntarily,  as  it  were,  without  our  seeking  or  desiring ;
no  marvel  then  if  oftentimes  things  go  cross  with  us,  we  by  our  sins  having  drawn
down  the  curse  of  God  upon  all  our  enterprises.  This  is  the  reason  why  God's
children  live  better,  even  with  greater  credit  and  reputation  in  the  world  with  a
Uttle,  than  many  times  the  wicked  do,  which  have  far  more.  God's  blessing  sets
forward  the  one,  and  his  curse  blows  upon  the  other.  But  we  oftentimes  see  those
that  are  not  in  greatest  favour  with  God  abounding  with  these  earthly  blessings.
And  on  the  contrary,  those  that  have  greatest  store  of  grace,  to  have  a  very  small
pittance  of  peace.  1.  For  the  godly,  who,  having  their  part  in  grace,  have  always
in  some  measure  their  portion  in  peace  also ;  for — (1)  The  end  of  all  his  afflictions,
whereto  they  are  disposed,  is  peace.  (2)  He  hath  the  peace  of  security  in  his
greatest  distresses  (Psa.  iii.  6 ;  iv.  9).  (3)  He  hath  the  peace  of  contentation,  grace
supplying  and  sweetening  the  want  of  peace,  and  turning  very  war  itself  into  peace,
darkness  into  hght  to  the  godly,  his  heart  is  at  rest  and  at  peace  within  itself.
There  is  no  warring  of  the  affections  against  God,  whatsoever  his  outward  estate  is.
2.  For  the  wicked.  It  is  far  otherwise  with  them  in  their  peace,  which  being  a
graceless  peace,  is  in  truth  a  peaceless  peace,  for  in  the  midst  of  their  peace  they
want  the  peace  of  security,  their  hearts  tremble  like  an  aspen  leaf,  in  fear  of  change ;
or  if  they  have  security,  it  is  a  presumptuous  and  false  security ;  for  when  they  cry,
••  Peace,  peace,"  then  is  their  destruction  at  hand  (1  Thess.  y.  3).  And  let  their
peace  be  never  so  flourishing,  yet  still  want  they  the  peace  of  contentation.  They
think  all  too  little ;  if  they  had  the  whole  world,  with  Alexander,  they  would  grieve
there  were  no  more  for  them  to  get.  Again,  as  the  end  of  the  godly  man's  warfara
is  peace,  so  the  end  of  the  wicked  man's  peace  is  warfare,  even  an  eternal  warfare,


PHILEMON.  2S


and  wrestling  with  the  anger  of  God  in  heUL     Therefore  a  sonnd  and  safe  peaoe
ariseth  only  from  the  grace  of  God,    (D.  Dyke,  B.D.)       From  God  our  Father,  and
the  Lord  Jesus  Clulst. — The  unity  of  the  Divine  Father  and  Son : — The  placing  of
both  names  under  the  government  of  one  preposition  implies  the  mysterious  unitj
of  the  Father  with  the  Son ;  while  conversely  St.  John,  in  a  parallel  passage  (2  Johm
3),  by  employing  two  prepositions,  brings  out  the  distinction  between  the  Father,
who  is  the  fontal  source,  and  the  Son,  who  is  the  flowing  stream.    But  both  forma
of  the  expression  demand  for  their  honest  explanation,  the  recognition  of  the
divinity  of  Jesus  Christ.    How  dare  a  man,  who  thought  of  Him  as  other  thaa
Divine,  put  His  name  thus  by  the  side  of  God's,  as  associated  with  the  Father  in
the  bestowal  of  grace  ?  .  .  .  The  double  source  is  one  source,  for  in  the  Son  is  the
whole  fulness  of  the  Godhead :  and  the  grace  of  God,  bringing  with  it  the  peace  d
God,  is  poured  into  that  spirit  which  bows  humbly  before  Jesus  Christ,  and  trust*
Him  when  He  says,  with  love  in  His  eyes  and  comfort  in  His  tones,  "  My  grace  is
suflScient  for  thee  ;  My  peace  give  I  unto  you."     {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)        God  owr
Father : — Dr.  Pentecost  said  that  he  once  gave  some  Bible  readings  at  Wellesley
College,  in  America,  where  about  three  hundred  young  ladies  were  being  educated.
The  principal  of  the  College  asked  him  to  give  them  to  two  of  the  students  wh«
were  confined  to  their  room  by  sickness.    On  being  introduced  to  them,  he  inquired
if  they  were  Christians.    One  replied,  •'  I  hope  so  "  ;  the  other  answered,  "  Some*
times  I  think  I  am,  and  sometimes  I  think  I  am  not."    Mr.  Pentecost  said :  ••  If  I
met  your  father  in  Boston  and  told  him  that  I  had  met  a  young  lady  at  Wellesley
who  said  that  she  thought  that  you  were  her  father,  what  would  he  think  7  '*    The
tears  streamed  over  her  cheeks  as  she  replied,  "  Do  you  mean  to  say  that  it  is  our
privilege  to  call  God  our  Father  in  the  same  way  as  our  earthly  father  ?  "    Thii
circumstance  was  the  means  of  leading  her  to  Christ.        Grace  from  God : — ^We
may  conceive  of  "  grace  and  peace "  being  connected  with  "  God  our  Father
and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  as  we  conceive  of  the  water  with  which  a  towa
is  supplied  in  relation  to  the  reservoir  of  storage  on  the  one  hand,  and  the
channel  of  communication  and  distribution  on  the  other.    We  may  think  of
God  our  Father  as  the  exhaustless  fount  of  these  perennial  blessings — He  is
"  the  God  of  all  grace,"  and  the  "  very  God  of  peace."    Yet  all  this  grace  and  peace
are  not  gathered  up  in  Him  like  water  in  some  lake  from  which  there  is  no  outlet,
but,  like  reservoir  supplies,  these  unspeakable  mercies  are  meant  to  be  communi-
cated and  enjoyed  through  the  channel  and  conduit  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.    And
while  the  whole  appUances  are  regulated  and  managed  by  the  continual  operatios
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  there  is  nothing  derogatory  to  that  Divine  Spirit,  although  ia
this  salutation  no  specific  mention  is  made,  in  so  many  words,  of  His  work  and
offices,  because  the  greater  function  includes  all  the  separate  distributions  for  indi-
vidua!  use  and  benefit.    Grace,  therefore,  is  peace  prepared  for  us,  and  peace  is
grace  enjoyed  by  us.    For  grace  is  simply  that  free  favour  that  spontaneously
emanates  from  love — the  grace  of  God  our  Father  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  being
the  self-moved  and  self-moving  operations  of  Divine  love  to  sinful  men.    Snca
kindness  is  called  '•  grace,"  because  the  inherent  goodness  of  the  Divine  disposition
alone  can  account  for  it — "grace"  being  the  word  that  brings  into  special  pro.
minence  the  Divine  motive  in  redemption  as  uubought,  unsought,  and  unconstrained
by  principles  from  without,  just  as  "mercy"  has  reference  particularly  to  the
unworthy  character  of  its  objects.    A  many-sided  word  like  grace  is  best  explained
by  analogies  suggested  by  some  similar  many-sided  word,  such  as  "life,"  "  vegeta>
tion,"  and  the  l^e.     Grace,  like  life,  may  be  regarded  as  a  great  and  blessed  gift
from  without,  or  a  Divine  power  working  mercifully  towards  us,  and  ultimately
working  in  us ;  bringing  salvation  for  us,  and  securing  its  mightiest  triumph  when
it  secures  a  lodgment  of  itself  within  us.    And  just  as  life  receives  various  names
£^m  the  various  blessings  it  includes — feeling,  moving,  seeing,  hearing,  which  are
but  varieties  of  the  one  great  privilege  of  living — so  grace  is  the  comprehensive
term  including  the  supply  of  all  favours  and  privileges  needful  for  our  fallen  and
ondeserving  condition  as  sinners  to  be  saved.     It  is  enlightenment  for  darkness,
pardon  for  transgression,  comfort  for  trial,  hope  for  despondency,  strength  for  weak-
ness, and  all  help  for  all  need.    And  just  as  life  brought  into  play  as  a  power  within
ns  will  be  sight  if  it  operate  through  the  eye,  speech  if  through  the  tongue,  hearing
if  through  the  ear ;  so  with  grace — if  it  work  upon  our  convictions  of  sin,  it  will  be
the  grace  of  repentance ;  if  on  God's  testimony,  it  is  the  grace  of  faith ;  if  on  God's
commandments,  it  is  the  grace  of  obedience — and  so  on  through  the  whole  range  of
Christian  excellence.    We  thus  use  "  grace  "  with  the  varied  applications  attachable


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.


to  any  kindred  word,  like  "  vegetation  ";  as  when  we  say  "  Vegv^ation  is  at  work,**
we  mean  the  hidden  power  or  influence  which  produces  the  bads,  leaves,  fruits,  and
•II  the  riches  and  beauty  of  the  face  of  nature  ;  or  when,  on  the  other  hand,  we
Bay,  "  Vegetation  is  looking  lovely,"  we  refer  to  the  effects  themstlves  of  the  hidden
f  ower  as  they  strike  and  delight  the  eye.  So  grace  is  the  Divine  agency  or  quicken-
ing power  which,  when  it  takes  hold  of  ns,  produces  all  good  thoughts,  all  holy
desires,  and  all  heavenly  life,  while  it  is  no  less  the  name  for  those  thoughts,  desires,
and  graces  themselves,  considered  as  its  fruits.  If,  farther,  it  be  viewed  as  dealing
with  Divine  truth  and  promise,  with  Ood's  gospel-message  of  mercy,  with  Christ  ana
His  work,  with  thejHoly  Spirit's  aid,  with  the  heavenly  inheritance,  and  the  like,
onder  the  aspect  oi  blessings  appropriated  and  enjoyed,  then  grace  becomes  peace.
When,  in  short,  we  think  of  spiritual  and  saving  benefits  as  connected  with  the
Divine  nature,  and  as  communicated  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  we  call  them
all  grace ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  we  call  them  all  peace  when  we  think  of  them
with  special  relation  to  our  own  good — when  we  think  of  their  precious  value  for  as,
and  their  tranquillising  and  enjoyable  effects  upon  as.  Oh  I  if  our  peace  were  not
«f  grace,  we  should  be  doomed  to  perish  for  want  of  it,  like  a  population  whose
whole  water  supply  depended  on  two  or  three  trickling  streams,  that  might  dry  ap
and  fail  when  most  needed.  If  we  are  to  live  beyond  the  fear  of  our  peace  getting
exhausted,  it  must  be  by  drawing  on  the  perennitd  resources  of  heavenly  grace,  ever
full  and  ever  flowing  among  the  everlasting  hills — the  free,  the  sovereign,  self-
moving  and  redeeming  love  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord.  What  an  appeal
there  is  to  Philemon  in  such  a  salutation  !  As  if  the  apostle  would  say,  "  This  is
sufficient  to  enable  you  to  do  all  I  am  to  ask  at  yoar  hands.  And  as  yoa  woold
find  grace  and  favour  with  the  Lord  yourself,  or  enjoy  peace  in  your  own  soul,  you
may  not  be  inexorable  or  ongracious  towards  Onesimus,  but  must  seek  peace  and
pursue  it,  by  sealing  its  comforts  on  the  penitent's  heart."  {A.  H,  Drysdale,
MA.)

Ver.  4.  I  thank  my  God. — A  thankful  eommendation : — Panl  has  the  habit  of  begin-
Bing  all  his  letters  with  thankful  commendations,  and  assurances  of  a  place  in  his
prayers.  The  exceptions  are  2  Corinthians,  where  he  writes  under  strong  and  painful
emotion,  and  Galatians,  where  a  vehement  accusation  of  fickleness  takes  the  place
of  the  usual  greeting.  But  these  exceptions  make  the  habit  more  conspicuous.
But  though  this  is  a  habit,  it  is  not  a  form,  but  is  the  perfectly  simple  and  natural
expression  of  the  moment's  feelings,  ne  begins  his  letters  so,  not  in  order  to  please
and  to  say  smooth  things,  but  because  he  feels  lovingly,  and  his  heart  fills  with  a
pore  joy  which  speaks  most  fitly  in  prayer.  To  recognise  good  is  the  way  to  make
good  better.  Teachers  must  love  if  their  teaching  is  to  help.  The  best  way  to
secure  the  doing  of  any  signal  act  of  Christian  generosity,  such  as  Paul  wished  of
Philemon,  is  to  show  absolute  confidence  that  it  will  be  done,  because  it  is  in  accor-
dance with  what  we  know  of  the  doer's  character.  "  It's  a  shame  to  teU  Arnold  a
lie ;  he  always  trusts  us,"  the  Bugby  boys  nsed  to  say.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)
A  thankful  interest  in  God : — God  cannot  be  possessed  except  as  a  personal  good ;
and  yet  cannot  be  possessed  and  enjoyed  as  a  personal  good  only,  any  more  than
sunshine  can  be  held  as  mere  private  property.  The  more  of  such  blessings  a
neighbour  enjoys,  there  is  the  more  for  any  one  else  to  use  and  enjoy.  So  there  is
that  in  vital  personal  interest  in  God  which  at  once  guarantees  a  thankful  spirit  in
the  possessor,  and  acts  as  a  safeguard  against  the  spirit  of  self-worship.  The  law
•f  the  solar  system  is  that  "  the  more  quickly  a  planet  revolves  round  the  sun,  the
more  slowly  it  turns  round  its  own  axis  "  ;  and  the  very  principle  which  regulates
its  speed  makes  it  sway  to  and  fro  from  its  own  centre  towards  neighbouring  orbs,
while  keeping  it  balanced  in  its  course  round  the  central  one  of  aU.  No  wonder
there  exhales  from  Paul's  heart  the  incense  of  pure  thanks  to  God  for  all  the
evidences  of  Philemon's  goodness  and  grace,  as  inwrought  by  saving  mercy,  and  as
working  outwardly  in  acts  of  love  and  kindness  auto  others  I  Far  from  the  expres-
raon  of  his  self-interest,  "  My  God "  being  self-confined,  his  very  thanks  are
absorbed  with  the  good  in  another.  The  more  a  fire  shoots  its  flame  and  heat
towards  heaven,  the  farther  out  from  itself  will  it  shoot  its  warmth.  So  the  more
vebementiy  the  soul  can  possess  itself  of  God  and  be  possessed  by  Him,  the  more
ardently  will  it  be  carried  upward  with  its  thanks  and  outward  with  its  intense
desires  for  the  good  of  others.  Thoughts  of  God's  mercies  will  ever  be  found  lying
•very  close  to  thoughts  of  others'  needs.  To  be  able  to  thank  God  sincerely  for  the
good  we  see  in  others,  is  the  best  security  for  oar  feeling  intensely  solioitoas  for


PHILEMON,  %1


their  farther  good.  {A.  H.  DrysdaU,  M.A.)  Prayerful  thanksgiving : — I.  Hoi
PBATSBrci<  THAKSSOiTiNO.  1.  The  mingling  of  thanks  with  intercession  is  tros
prayer — the  disoovery  of  a  reason  in  blessings  bestowed  for  craving  and  expect-
ing more  (Psa.  ozt.  12).  2.  Thanksgiving  insures  farther  grace  by  fostering
a  spirit  of  dependence.  3.  Gratitude  for  the  good  in  others  is  a  spiritual
grace.  Disinterested  love — the  prime  feature  of  heavenliness— Chris tlikeness.
II.  The  occasion  of  his  gbatitude.  Two  leading  characteristics  of  Christianity
are  specified  as  being  possessed  by  Philemon.  1.  Faith  fixed  on  Christ.  This
is — (1)  The  absolute  source  of  salvation.  (2)  The  principle  of  the  saved  life.
(3^  The  spring  of  beneficent  activity.  2.  Love  of  the  brethren  proving  the
faith.  Such  affection — (1)  Impartial.  (2)  Discriminating.  (3)  Active.  A  grac«
of  the  heait  £rst,  the  force  of  life  afterward.  HI.  Thb  object  of  his  petition.
Twofold:  Increase — 1.  In  practical  godliness.  "Be  ye  enlarged"  is  the  Divine
mandate  in  the  natural  and  spiritual  realm.  Paul  "  prays  for  that  very  thing  for
which  he  '  gives  thanks.'  The  most  perfect  need  prayers  for  their  perseverance  and
progress."  2.  In  the  number  of  believers.  The  eloquence  of  good  deeds  cannot  be
resisted.  "  Everything  in  us  that  is  good  makes  known  our  faith  "  and  impels  as
to  make  ' '  acknowledgment "  of  oar  relation  to  Christ.  His  reflected  light  in  aa
will  attract  men  to  seek  Him  for  themselves.  IV.  The  qbeatness  of  his  jot.  Great-
heart  he  who  could  be  glad  for  others'  sakes  under  such  conditions  !  1.  His  triumph
in  adversity.  Thinks  httle  of  his  own  troubles.  Mentions  them  only  to  appeal  ts
his  friend's  heart  in  the  interests  of  another.  2.  His  unselfishness.  "  The  hearts
of  the  saints  are  refreshed."  This  was  the  fountain  of  his  pleasure.  "  Singulac
love  to  feel  so  much  joy  on  account  of  the  benefit  received  by  others."  Learn  :  1.
To  cultivate  sympathy.  2.  To  master  circumstances.  3.  To  commend  the  gospeL
4.  To  advance  in  every  good.  {A,  W.  Johnson.)  Praises  and  prayers : — I.  Thb
OBJECT.  "  I  thank  my  God,"  <fco.  1.  God  is  the  Author  of  all  good  (Hos.  xiv.  8).
2.  To  him,  therefore,  is  all  praise  due  (1  Chron.  xxix.  13,  14).  3.  It  is  the  privilege
of  good  men  to  approach  Him  as  their  God.  4.  Our  prayers  and  praises  should  be
for  others  as  well  as  for  ourselves.  TL  The  circumstance.  "Always,"  Ac.  IIL
The  matter.  1.  Of  his  praises,  on  account  of  Philemon — (1)  Love  for  Christ.  (2)
Faith  in  Christ.  (3)  Love  to  saints.  2.  Of  his  prayers.  (1)  That  fruits  may
abound.  (2)  That  others  may  be  won.  (3)  That  God  may  be  glorified.  lY.  Thb
season.  (M,  Henry,  D.D.)  The  growth  of  graces: — We  learn  from  hence  that
all  Christians  (especially  teachers)  are  greatly  to  rejoice  and  praise  God  when  they
see  that  professors  grow  forward  in  heavenly  graces.  It  is  a  matter  of  great  joy  and
comfort  to  see  men  grow  in  graces  as  they  do  in  years,  and  to  increase  in  heavenly
things  as  they  multiply  their  days.  1.  It  serveth  exceedingly  to  advance  the  glory
of  God  that  men  grow  in  godliness,  which  ought  to  be  an  effectual  reason  to  move
OS  to  rejoice ;  for  what  is  there  that  should  more  cheer  us,  than  when  God's  name
is  magru£ed,  and  His  truth  extolled  among  the  sons  of  men.  2.  The  forwardness
of  one  is  a  notable  means  to  draw  forward  another.  For  as  one  wicked  man  maketh
another,  and  he  that  is  seduced  is  an  instrument  to  seduce  another ;  so  he  that  is
truly  converted  will  not  rest  in  the  quiet  fruit  and  inward  comfort  of  his  own  coo-
version,  but  labour  to  convert  others,  and  so  make  them  partakers  of  that  comfort
which  tiiey  have  found.  3.  It  is  a  great  comfort  to  the  pastors  and  teachers  of  the
Chorch,  when  such  as  are  taught  do  grow  in  grace  and  prosper  by  those  means  that
are  brought  and  offered  unto  them.  The  apostle  calleth  the  Philippians  his  brethren,
beloved  and  longed  for,  his  joy  and  his  crown  ;  wherein  he  accounteth  their  growth,
his  honour  ;  their  increasing,  his  rejoicing ;  their  faith,  his  hope ;  their  flourishing,
his  felicity.  It  is  a  great  comfort  to  the  husbandman  after  his  toiling  and  tilling,
after  his  planting  and  ploughing,  to  see  the  fruits  of  his  labours,  and  to  behold  the
increase  of  the  earth.  So  it  fareth  with  the  spiritual  husbandman,  whose  labour  fs
greater  and  oftener,  enduring  aU  the  year  long,  whose  patience  is  greater  in  waiting
for  the  early  and  latter  rain,  whose  gain  and  profit  is  less  in  tUling  a  dry  and  barren
soil,  that  yieldeth  little  or  no  increase,  but  a  crop  of  cares,  a  bundle  of  briars  and
bushes,  and  an  harvest  of  thorns  and  thistles,  that  are  reserved  for  the  fire.  4.  Tha
graces  of  God,  and  the  growing  in  these  graces,  are  fruits  of  their  election,  and  seals
of  their  salvation,  so  that  the  angels  in  heaven  rejoice  at  the  conversion  of  a  sinner.
(FF.  Attersoll.)  Christian  congratulation : — I.  Fob  his  obatulation,  ob  rejoicins
WITH  Philemon  in  his  graces,  it  is  set  down  in  the  form  of  thanesoivino,  *'  I
tiiank."  1.  Where  observe,  the  manner  of  true  Christian  congratulating  and  rejoicing
with  onr  friends,  for  any  good  thing  they  have ;  namely,  to  rejoice  in  the  Lord ;
giting  Him  first  of  all  His  due,  the  praise  of  all  that  good  they  have.    The  rejoicing


S8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,

of  the  world  is  carnal  and  profane.  God  is  never  bo  much  as  thought  upon.  The
parties  whom  we  congratulate,  they  are  dignified  and  almost  deified.  "  Oh,  I  admire
jour  wisdom,  eloquence,  learning,"  <fec.,  will  the  flatterer,  or  the  inordinate  lover  of
his  friend,  say.  But  Paul  would  say,  "  I  admire  the  goodness  and  mercy  of  God
towards  you,  in  enriching  you  with  these  gifts,  I  thank  God  for  your  wisdom,"  &o. ;
BO  all  the  praise  is  given  wholly  to  God,  whereas  before  it  was  wholly  derived  from
God  to  man,  and  so  God  was  defrauded  and  defeated  of  His  right.  Not  that  it  is
unlawful  to  praise  men  endued  with  the  graces  and  gifts  of  God's  Spirit ;  nay,  it  is
a  duty  we  owe  unto  them ;  but  it  must  be  performed  in  that  wise  sort,  that  God  in
the  first  place  be  praised  ;  for  by  this  means  we  shall  both  in  ourselves  take  away
suspicion  of  flattery,  and  in  our  brother  commended,  suspicion  of  pride.  2.  The
title  that  Paul  giveth  God  in  this  his  thanksgiving,  "  My  God."  (1)  The  privilege
of  every  true  Christian.  He  bath  a  pecuUarity  and  special  propriety  in  God,  that
look  as  a  man  may  say  of  his  inheritance,  his  house  and  lands,  "  These  be  mine,"
BO  he  may  as  truly  say  of  God,  "  God  is  mine  ;  "  I  am  righted  and  interested  in
Him.  This  privilege  is  conferred  upon  us  in  the  covenant  of  grace  which  runs  in
this  tenor,  *'  I  will  be  thy  God,  and  thou  shalt  be  one  of  My  people."  (2)  The
nature  of  true  justifying  faith,  which  is,  to  apply  God  in  special  to  the  believer.
True  faith  doth  not  only  believe  that  God  is  the  God  of  His  elect  in  general,  but
that  He  is  his  God  in  special,  as  Paul  here  saith,  "  My  God."     IL  The  second  effect

WHEREBY  Paul  DECLABETH  his  love  towards  them,  IB   HIS   DAIIiT  PBATINO  FOB  THEM.

"  Making  mention  of  you  always  in  my  prayers."  1.  Even  in  our  private  and
Bohtary  prayers,  we  must  be  mindful  of  our  brethren.  2.  Observe,  that  Paul  did
pray  even  for  those  for  whom  he  gave  thanks ;  from  whence  it  followeth,  that  there
is  no  man  so  perfect  that  he  hath  need  only  to  give  thanks  for  that  good  he  hath
received,  and  not  to  ask  some  good  thing  he  wanteth.  Unto  thanksgiving,  there-
lore,  for  ourselves  or  others,  petition  must  be  annexed  both  for  the  continuance  and
increase  of  that  good  we  give  thanks  for.     HI.  We  may  observe,  that  Philemon

WAS  BUCH  an  one  as  MINISTERED  TO  PaUL  JUST  OCCASION,  AS  OF  PRATER,  80  LIKEWISE  OF

thanksgivinq.  We  must  labour  herein  to  be  Uke  him,  that  others,  specially  God's
ministers,  who  either  see  us,  or  hear  of  us,  may  have  cause  not  only  to  pray  for  us,
bat  also  to  praise  God  for  us.  (D.  Dyke,  B.D.)  Making  mention  of  thee  always
In  my  prayers. — Good  men  need  our  prayers  : — The  best  men,  cumulated  with  the
greatest  graces  of  the  Spirit,  had  need  be  prayed  for.  St.  Paul  was  rapt  up  into  the
third  heaven,  where  he  saw  secrets  not  to  be  uttered,  yet  he  desires  the  Ephesians*
prayers.  St.  Peter  was  a  stout  champion ;  yet  Christ  prays  that  his  faith  should
not  fail.  Philemon  abounded  in  all  good  gifts,  of  knowledge,  faith  and  love,  yet  St.
Paul  ceased  not  to  pray  for  him.  1.  The  best  of  all  know  but  in  part,  love  in  part ;
therefore  we  had  need  to  pray  for  them,  that  their  defects  may  be  supplied,  that  they
may  increase  daily  more  and  more.  2.  Here  we  are  wayfaring  men,  we  are  not
come  to  our  journey's  end ;  therefore  we  had  need  to  be  prayed  for,  that  we  may
persevere  to  the  end,  and  have  the  crown  of  life.  {W.  Jones,  D.D.)  Happy  in
being  prayed  for : — Alexander  counted  Achilles  happy,  that  he  had  such  a  trumpeter
of  his  praises  as  Homer  was.  Philemon  might  count  himself  happy,  that  he  had
Buch  a  worthy  man  to  pray  for  him  as  St.  Paul.  (Ibid.)  A  large  prayer-list: —
What  a  list  of  persons  for  whom  be  daily  entreated  God  must  St.  Paul  have  had !
If  he  thus  prayed  especially  for  this  convert  in  the  comparatively  small  city  of
Colosse,  what  numbers  must  he  have  mentioned  in  Corinth,  in  Ephesus,  in  Philippi,
in  Thessalonica  ?  And  notice  how  in  these  supplications  for  private  persons  he
mentions  thanksgivings.  He  remembers  not  only  their  wants,  but  the  blessings
already  bestowed  upon  them.  (M.  F.  Sadler,  M.A.)  The  benefit  we  may  confer
on  oDiers  by  praying  for  them : — When  we  are  poor  and  can  do  our  brethren  no
other  good,  yet  may  we  benefit  them  by  our  prayers.  When  we  see  our  brethren  in
necessity,  in  danger,  in  affliction,  in  persecution,  in  sickness,  and  in  great  misery  ;
when  we  have  no  hand  to  help  them,  no  power  to  deliver  them,  no  means  to  succour
them,  no  favour  to  speak  for  them ;  yet,  we  have  hearts  to  lilt  up  lor  them  to  God,
the  Father  ol  all  mercies,  and  the  God  of  all  consolation,  and  by  praying  unto  Him
for  them,  we  shall  do  them  much  good,  give  them  much  comfort,  minister  unto
them  much  help,  and  procure  unto  them  speedy  deliverance.  This  shall  be  more
available  and  profitable  unto  them  than  all  other  means  ol  help  and  succour  used
for  their  safety  without  this.  Let  such  as  are  of  the  greatest  gifts  earnestly  crave
and  call  for  the  prayers  of  those  that  have  lesser  and  smaller  gifts.  This  reproveth
such  as  never  regard  them,  nor  require  them,  that  think  they  have  no  need  of  them,
■or  know  the  necessity  ol  them.    It  is  all  one  to  these  men,  whether  they  be  prayed


PHILEMON.


tot  at  not ;  whom  Ood  no  doabt  doth  oftentimes  cross  in  the  works  of  their  hands,
that  they  do  not  prosper,  because  they  make  no  account  of  the  Church's  prayers.
It  reproveth  such  also  as  regard  not  the  public  assemblies  of  the  faithful,  and  the
meeting  of  the  congregation  of  Christ  in  one  place,  where  prayers  are  made  for  the
Church,  where  praises  are  sung,  and  thanks  are  rendered  for  the  blessings  of  God ;
yea,  heaven  and  earth  are  made  to  ring  and  rebound  with  sounding  out  His  glory,
as  it  were  with  the  voice  of  one  man.  All  our  churches,  for  the  most  part  on  the
Lord's  day,  assemble  at  one  hour,  we  come  together  at  one  time,  a  blessed  hour,  a
blessed  time  ;  the  best  hour,  the  best  time  in  the  whole  week.  Oh,  how  should  we
love  it,  how  should  we  desire  it,  how  should  w^  delight  in  it  ?  Then  do  we  pray  for
the  Church,  then  the  Church  prayeth  for  us ;  then  are  we  mindful  of  our  brethren,
then  are  ooi  brethren  likewise  mindful  of  us ;  then  is  God  mindful  of  us  all.  (W,
Attersoll. )  Intercessory  prayer  a  means  for  diffusing  good : — It  is  matter  of  thank-
fulness that  the  privilege  of  intercession  is  the  property  of  all  Christians.  While
perishable  good — such  as  friends,  health,  riches — are  denied  to  thousands,  there  ia
not  one  so  poor  or  so  powerless  as  may  not  be  a  benefactor,  not  to  individuals  merely,
bat  to  the  Church  and  to  mankind,  through  the  common  privilege  of  prayer.  It
enables  the  weakest  and  most  lonely  to  direct  the  arm  of  Omnipotence,  and  to  help
the  objects  of  their  affection  from  afar.  It  gives  power  to  bless  those  who  are
separated  from  our  presence  by  half  the  globe,  and  secures  to  the  absent  child  the
comfort  of  a  parent's  presence,  whom  he  shall  never  meet  except  in  heaven.
••  Surely  some  good  Christian  is  praying  for  us  to-night,"  has  been  heard  from  the
lips  of  a  pious  seaman,  when  the  tempest  that  was  driving  them  in  resistless  fury
towards  destruction  suddenly  veered  round,  and  saved  them  from  the  rocks  on  which
they  expected  to  be  dashed  the  next  moment ;  and  God  only,  and  the  good  angels
whom  He  sends  to  minister  to  His  children,  can  tell  what  good  thoughts  have  been
inspired,  what  temptations  have  been  averted,  what  peace  has  been  communicated,
through  the  power  of  some  absent  beMever's  prayers.  Let  it  be  our  care  to  make
use  of  this  practicable  and  powerful  instrument  of  diffusing  good.  The  poorest  can
obtain  it ;  the  humblest  behever  is  already  in  possession  of  it.  Say  not  thou  canst
do  nothing  for  men  if  thou  canst  give  them  thy  love,  thy  Christian  example,  and
thy  prayers.  {R.  Nisbet,  D.D.)  Prayer  and  attainment : — Prayer  is  based
on  a  supreme  contentedness  with  Divine  gifts  and  blessings  but  also  on  a
sublime  uncontentedness  with  human  attainments  in  them.  It  therefore
catches  up  thankfulness  and  petition  into  a  happy  unity,  as  the  railway  train
holds  its  passengers  at  rest  and  yet  in  motion  at  the  same  moment.  True
prayer  is  free  alike  from  querulous  discontent  and  from  cloddish  self-content.
The  very  satisfaction  of  the  traveller  at  the  well  with  the  water  it  affords,  bids  him
draw  more  largely  on  its  supply  for  himself  and  others.  And  so  Paul  is  thankful
for  all  that  God  is  and  does,  for  all  He  has  and  offers,  as  manifested  in  the  evan-
gelic faith  and  love  of  Philemon ;  but  he  cannot  think  of  either  Philemon  or  him-
self resting  satisfied  where  so  much  more  remains  to  be  possessed.  To  have  nothing
further  to  ask  and  yearn  after  were  to  have  the  mainspring  of  activity  and  improve-
ment utterly  broken.  To  pray  is  therefore  a  privilege  and  a  relief.  To  pray  for
others  is  especially  so  to  a  loving  and  benevolent  heart.  We  might  have  been  per-
mitted to  pray  only  for  ourselves ;  but  amid  the  separations  and  scatterings  of  earth,
God  has  been  pleased  to  put  intercession  for  one  another  as  an  instrament  of
mutual  interest  and  blessing  into  the  hands  of  all  who  would  promote  each  other's
good.    {A.  H.  Drysda/e,  M.A.)

Ver.  5.  Hearing  of  thy  love  and  faith. — A  true  human  hve  : — Some  translators
in  ancient  times,  and  many  in  later  days,  would  at  once  accept  M.  Kenan's  version,
as  an  equivalent,  and,  indeed,  as  a  judicious  correction — "  De  ta  foi  au  Seigneur,  de
ta  charity  pour  tons  les  saints."  Yet  those  who  reverence  Scripture  may  justly
maintain  that  St.  Paul's  own  arrangement  of  the  words  has  a  higher  rhetoric,
under  the  guidance  of  a  better  wisdom.  Let  us  suppose  a  writer  to  have  before  him
two  propositions,  one  of  which  is  of  special  importance  for  his  immediate  purpose.
He  might  be  able  to  bring  out  that  purpose  most  effectively  by  beginning  and  ending
his  sentence  with  the  motive  to  which  he  wished  to  give  prominence.  From  this
point  of  view,  it  is  instructive  to  compare  the  two  contemporary  letters  to  the
Ephesians  and  Colossians.  In  those  more  elaborate  and  dogmatic  pieces  the  idea
of  faith  is  of  principal  significance,  and  in  one  or  other  of  its  aspects  is  the  leading
subject  of  consideration.  But  in  the  Epistle  to  Philemon  the  writer's  great  objeot
is  to  appeal  to  the  principle  of  Christian  humanity,  to  that  true  human  love  whfch


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,

flowB  from  the  constraining  power  of  Divine  love,  believed  in  and  accepted.    "  Love
toward  ihe  saints,"  and  therefore  to  the  brother  for  whom  he  pleaded,  is  con-
sequently placed  in  the  forefront.      It  is  the  first  note  of  the  whole  strain.    Let  as
conceive  the  epistle  presented  to  Philemon,  when  the  delegates  first  arrive,  and  the
returned  fugitive  anxiously  awaits  his  master's  decision.    The  letter  is  received
with  reverential  joy.    Philemon  listens,  or  reads,  in  breathless  expectation,  and  the
very  first  word  which  falls  upon  his  ear,  or  meets  his  eye,  after  the  salutation,  is —
love.    It  has  a  force  in  this  place  which  no  other  word  could  supply.     St.  Paul,
therefore,  places  love  first ;  but  as  he  never  can  forget  faith,  and  Christ  as  the
central  object  of  faith,  he  puts  love  first,  the  object  of  the  love  last,  faith  towards
Christ  in  the  middle  between  the  extremes.    (Bp.  Wm.  Alexander.)     Love  first : —
Love  is  put  before  faith.      The  significance  of  this  sequence  comes  out  by  contrast
with  similar  expressions  in  Eph.  i.  15  ;  Col.  i.  4.    The  reason  for  the  change  here
is  probably  that  Onesimus  and  Epaphras,  from  whom  Paul  would  be  likely  to  hear
of  Philemon,  would  enlarge  upon  his  practical  benevolence,  and  would  naturally
say  less  about  the  root  than  about  the  sweet  and  visible  fruit.    The  arrangement
then  is  an  echo  of  the  talks  which  had  gladdened  the  apostle.     Possibly,  too,  Iov«
is  put  first  because  the  object  of  the  whole  letter  is  to  secure  its  exercise  towards
the  fugitive  slave ;  and  seeing  that  the  apostle  would  listen  with  that  purpose  in
view,  each  story  which  was  told  of  Philemon's  kindness  to  others  made  the  deeper
impression  on  Paul.     The  order  here  is  the  order  of  analysis,  digging  down  from
manifestation  to  cause ;  the  order  in  the  parallel  passages  quoted  is  the  order  of
production,  ascending  from  root  to  flower.    {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)        Love  and  faith,
the  principal    points  of   salvation  : — 1.   He    reduceth   the    principal  points   of
salvation  to  two  beads — faith  and  love.    In  these  standeth  the  happiness  of  the
godly.    By  these,  a  Christian  man  perfected,  for  they  are  the  chief  graces  of  the
Holy  Ghost.     2.  He  beginneth  with  love,   and   placeth   it  before  faith ;   deed
is  more  precious,  but  it  is  inward  and  hidden  in  the  heart,  and  in  name  and  order
goeth  before  love.    But  he  first  nameth  love  because  it  is  better  known  to  us,  better
seen  of  us,  and  is  as  the  touch-stone  to  try  our  faith.    For  though  the  cause  be  more
worthy  than  the  effect,  yet  the  effect  is  more  conspicuous  and  manifest.     So  faith,
being  the  cause  of  works,  is  more  excellent,  and  love  as  an  effect  is  more  evident.
3.  We  see,  that  albeit  faith  be  set  in  the  last  place,  for  the  reason  rendered
before,  yet  faith  is  first  defined,  and  so  the  order  somewhat  inverted.    Now,  it  ia
described  and  declared  by  his  object,  that  it  respecteth  Christ  Jesus.     {W.  Attersoll.)
Faith  and  love  in  the  Christian  life  : — This  faith  embodies  the  theoretic  principles
of  Christian  life,  while  this  love  for  saints  embodies  these  principles  on  their  practical
side.    Like  heart  and  lungs  in  the  body,  each  has  its  own  functions ;  and,  though
separate,  the  one  never  acts  apart  from  the  other — life  being  the  combined  play  of
both.     Faith  binds  to  all  Christian  verities,  translating  them  into  personal  convic-
tions ;  while  love  binds  to  all  Christian  motives,  translating  these  into  personal
activities — love  being  well  called  the  daughter  of  faith  and  the  mother  of  virtue  and
good  works.     {A.  H.  Drysdale,  M.A.)        Faith  and  love  acceptable  to   God: —
I.    The    beasons    follow  to    confirm    this  doctrine.     1.  They  give  us  good
acceptance  with  God  'and  man,  because  they  are   evident    marks  and    nobble
testimonies  of  our  election  and  perseverance.    They  are  as  two  ear-marks,  to
know  and  discern  whose  sheep  we  are.    2.  God  hath  given  praise  and  glory
as  an  inseparable  companion  of  godliness  and  goodness;  and    on    the    other
side,  He  hath  allotted  shame  to  follow  sin.     He  hath  joined  these  together,
to  wit,  glory  with  piety,  and  shame  with  iniquity.    These  draw  together,  as  it
were,  in  one  yoke,  so  that  one  cannot  be  without  the  other.     The  apostle  speak-
ing of  the  ungodly,  faith,  their  glory  shall  be  to  their  shame.      Seeing,   there-
fore, the  graces  of  God's  spirit  are  testimonies  of  election,  and  companions  of  praise
and  glory,  we  must  from  hence  conclude  that  the  good  gifts  of  God  that  are  found
in  us  make  us  accepted  of  God  and  man.    U.  The  uses  follow  to  be  considebed
AND    learned    of   US.      1.  Seeing  faith  in  Christ,  and  love   toward  the  saints
give  us  a  good  report  in  the  Church,  and  lay  up  a  good  foundation  for  us  in  heaven,
we  see  that  only  godly  men  have  a  good  name,  and  evil  men  shall  leave  the  blots
of  an  evil  name  behind  them.     The  memorial  of  the  just  shall  be  blessed,  but  the
name  of  the  wicked  shall  rot.    This  overthroweth  three  sorts  of  men  that  offend,
and  esteem  not  of  men  according  to  their  faith  and  profession.     (1)  Such  as
slander  the  godly,  and  bring  up  an  evil  report  of  the  faithful  people  of  God  and
seek  to  take  away  their  good  name  from  them,  which  is  a  jewel  more  precioas  than
silver  and  gold.    But  we  shall  less  esteem  what  they  speak,  if  we  consider  who  they


PHILEMON.  81


are  that  speak.  For  the  witness  of  an  enemy  is  by  no  law  to  be  taken,  but
always  to  be  snspected.  (2)  Sach  as  magnify  and  advance  the  ungodly,  give
them  the  praise  of  the  world,  speak  well  of  them,  as  of  the  only  honest  men  that
deserve  to  be  commended.  But  so  long  as  they  live  in  sin,  their  own  wickedness
doth  testily  to  their  faces,  and  their  ungodly  hearts  proclaim  their  own  shame,  and
shall  bring  upon  them  utter  confusion.  Let  this  be  written  and  engraven  in  our
minds,  that  ungodliness  will  leave  a  reproach  behind  it.  (3)  It  convinceth
such  as  are  civil  men,  and  can  say  they  are  not  drunkards,  they  are  not  adulterers,
they  are  not  thieves,  they  lead  an  honest  life,  they  pay  all  men  their  own.  These
men  have  a  good  liking  of  themselves,  and  are  accounted  the  only  men  among
others.  But  a  man  may  do  all  this,  and  be  a  Pharisee,  yea,  no  better  in  the  sight
of  God  than  a  Turk  and  Infidel.  He  may  carry  the  countenance  and  have  the
report  of  such  a  liver,  and  yet  smell  strongly,  and  savour  rankly  in  the  nostrils  of
God,  of  ignorance,  of  unbelief,  of  pride,  and  of  self-love.  If  we  would  deserve  true
praise  indeed,  we  must  not  rest  in  these  outward  practices  and  in  this  moral
civility,  we  must  plant  religion  in  our  hearts,  we  must  have  a  sound  faith  in  Christ,
we  must  know  the  doctrine  of  the  gospel,  we  must  worship  God  aright.  2.  Seeing
faith  and  love  give  us  a  good  commendation  and  report,  let  us  by  these  and
such  like  graces  of  God's  Spirit,  seek  after  a  good  name,  let  us  not  hunt  after  the
praise  of  men.  but  that  which  is  of  God.  The  other  is  a  blast  of  wind ;  this  ia
certain  and  never  fadeth.  (Ibid.)  Love  and  faith  not  separated: — 1.  Seeing
these  two  gifts  are  coupled  together  one  with  another,  it  followeth  that  they
must  never  be  separated  in  a  Christian  man.  He  that  is  joined  with  the  head,
mast  also  be  joined  with  the  members  ;  and  he  that  hath  his  part  in  the  communion
o£  saints,  hath  his  fellowship  with  Christ.  2.  Seeing  faith  and  love  go  together,
and  dwell  together,  we  are  put  in  mind  of  a  notable  duty,  and  are  thereby
directed  to  prove  our  faith  by  our  love,  and  our  love  by  our  faith,  and  to  make  oije
of  them  serve  to  assure  the  other.  The  cause  wUl  prove  the  effect,  and  the  effect
will  manifest  the  cause.  ,  We  may  prove  fire  by  the  heat,  and  the  heat  by  the  fire ;
a  good  tree  by  his  fruit,  and  the  fruit  by  his  tree.  (Ibid.)  Thankful  for  the  graces
of  others  : — I.  See  in  Paul's  example,  what  is  the  effect  that  the  good  repobt

WHICH    THE    QODLT    HEAB    OF    THEIB    BBETHREN,    U8BTH    TO    WORK    IN    THEIB    MINDS.

Commonly  men  suck  in  their  own  praises  with  very  greedy  ears,  but  they  cannot
with  patience  endure  the  praises  of  others,  thinking  that  the  praises  of  others  is  a
close  kind  of  dispraising  themselves,  and  that  so  much  is  taken  from  them  as  is
given  unto  another.  Hence  it  is  that  the  speech  of  those  that  are  much  in  the
commendations  of  others  is  so  troublesome  to  us,  in  that  thereby  we  feel  ourselves
stirred  up  to  wrath,  fretting,  envy,  and  such  like  distemper  of  corrupt  affections.
But  it  is  far  otherwise  with  the  children  of  God,  who  have  the  circumcised  ears  of
Paul,  that  not  only  with  patience,  but  with  great  joy,  can  hear  the  commendations
of  their  brethren,  and  upon  the  hearing  of  them  break  forth  not  into  fretting  and
faming,  but  into  a  holy  lauding  of  the  Name  of  the  Lord.    H.  Observe,  that

THANKS  ARE  DUE  TO  GOD,  NOT  ONLY  FOB  THOSE  BENEFITS  WHICH  He  BESTOWETH  ON  US

ouBSELVEs,  BUT  ON  ouB  BRETHREN  ALSO.  And  therefore  if  we  pay  him  not  this  debt,
he  may  justly  charge  us  with  ingratitude.  For  shall  we  confess  it  our  duty  to  pray
for  our  brethren,  that  they  may  be  enriched  with  these  graces  ;  and  shall  we  not
think  ourselves  equally  bound  to  give  thanks  to  God,  when  He  hath  heard  our
prayers  ?  III.  If  in  Paul's  example  others  are  bound  to  give  thanks  for  our  graces,
then  it  is  our  part,  who  through  God's  mercies  are  possessed  of  any  of  His  graces

80  TO  USE   THEM  THAT  WE  MAY  MINISTER  JUST  CAUSE  TO  OUB  BRETHREN  TO  GIVE  THANKS

FOB  THEM.    IV.  Paul  sayiug  that  he  heard  of  the  faith  and  love  of  Philemon,

PLAINLY  SHOWETH,  THAT  THEBE  WERE  SOME  THAT  RELATED  AND  REPORTED  THEM  TO  HIUT.

By  whose  example  we  must  learn  to  have  a  special  respect  of  the  good  name  of  our
brother,  being  always  ready,  as  occasion  shall  serve,  to  speak  of  those  good  things
that  are  in  others.  V.  Observe  God's  peovidencb,  becompensing  faith  with  fame
AND  good  name.  When  faith  shall  open  our  hearts  and  mouths  to  extol  God's
name,  God  will  open  our  brethren's,  yea,  sometimes  our  enemies'  mouths,  to  extol  ours
(Heb.  xi.  13).  "By  this"  (namely  faith)  "our  elders  obtained  a  good  report."  This
was  the  means  whereby  they  became  so  famous.  What  marvel,  then,  if  thou  hast
an  ill  name,  when  thou  hast  an  ill  conscience  ?  Naughty  faith  and  fame,  cracked
credit  and  conscience,  commonly  go  together.  (D.Dyke,  B.D.)  Faith  and  love: —
By  faith  understand  justifying  faith,  which  only  is  able  to  bring  forth  true  love,
either  to  God  or  man.  And  by  love,  as  the  apostle  showeth,  not  only  love  to  God,
but  also  to  man.    Here  observe— I.  The  distinction  of  these  obacbs  of  faith  and


82  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.

love.  They  are  named  diBtinctly  as  two  virtues  (1  Cor.  xiii.  13).  11.  Teb  oos-
JDNCTION  OF  THEBE  TWO  oRACEfl,  for  howsoever  they  are  to  be  distingaiohed,  yet  not
to  be  divided.  "Wheresoever  true  faith  is,  there  necessarily  love,  bath  to  God  and
our  brethren,  will  follow.  For  though  faith  be  alone  in  justification,  yet  not  in  the
justified.  As  the  eye,  though  alone  in  seeing,  yet  not  in  him  that  seeth,  but  joined
with  the  ears,  nose,  and  many  other  members  of  the  body.  Faith  therefore  is  a
fruitful  mother  of  many  daughters,  and  love  is  the  firstborn  of  them.  Faith,
though  it  be  in  regard  of  God  a  beggar,  always  holding  out  the  hand  to  receive,  and
crying,  "Give,  give,"  yet  in  regard  of  those  in  whom  it  dwelleth,  it  is  like  a  sovereign
lord  and  king,  and  hath  as  a  king  his  officers  under  Mm,  and  among  the  rest,  love,  his
almoner,  to  distribute  and  disperse  those  treasures  which  itself  hath  received  from
the  Lord.  1.  Our  love  towards  God  proceedeth  from  faith,  which^  apprehending
God's  love  to  us,  enflameth  our  afiEections  again  with  the  love  of  God.  The  beams
of  God's  love  lightning  upon  our  hearts  reflect  back  upon  God  Himself  by  the  virtue
of  our  faith.  "  The  love  of  Christ,"  saith  the  apostle — namely,  bein^;,-  apprehended
by  our  faith — " constraineth  us."  An  example  whereof  we  have  in  Mary  Magdalen,
whose  faith,  believing  that  much  was  forgiven  her,  caused  and  constrained  her  to
love  much.  (1)  This  plainly  convinceth  the  faith  of  many  to  be  nothing  but
vain  presumption,  because  their  love  to  God  is  so  lukewarm.  (2)  But  as  this
doctrine  is  terrible  to  the  hypocrite,  whom  it  unmasketh  of  his  vain  vizard  of  faith,
BO  it  is  no  less  comfortable  to  the  true  Christian.  For  what  dost  thou  feel  thy  soul
panting  in  the  earnestness  of  desire  after  God  t  Dost  thou  find  thyself  grieved
when  thou  missest  of  thy  desire  ?  Doth  thou  find  thy  heart  to  arise  when  thou
seest  God's  Name  dishonoured,  &o.  ?  Surely,  these  things  as  they  are  arguments
of  sincere  love,  so  likewise  of  faith  not  feigned.  If  thou  canst  with  David  (Psa.
xviii  1)  say  "  I  love  the  Lord,"  thou  mayest  as  truly  use  the  words  following,  and
say,  "  The  Lord  is  my  Bock."  (3)  This  doctrine  of  love  flowing  from  faith,
confuteth  those  that  teach,  our  election  dependeth  upon  our  foreseen  obedience.
By  that  which  hath  been  delivered  it  appeareth  that  our  love  of  God  is  caused  and
stirred  up  in  us  by  His  love,  to  us  apprehended  by  our  faith.  2.  Our  love  of  our
brethren  springeth  likewise  from  faith,  for  the  apostle  speaketh  here  of  both  loves.
This  will  appear,  if  either  we  consider  those  duties  of  love,  which  we  owe  generally
to  all,  or  in  special  to  some.  (1)  For  the  first  this  is  a  duty  which  we  owe  to  aU
indifferently,  to  be  ready  to  forgive  one  another,  being  offended.  Now  what  is  that
which  will  make  a  revengeful  nature  yield  to  this,  but  faith,  which,  when  once  it
hath  apprehended  God's  love,  forthwith  reasoneth,  as  the  Master  in  the  parable
with  His  servant  (Matt.  ziz.).  The  Lord  hath  freely  forgiven  me  my  whole  debt,
ought  not  I  then  to  show  the  like  compassion  to  my  fellow- servant?  Therefore  the
Lord  enjoining  the  duty  of  forgiveness ;  the  apostles  pray,  Lord,  increase  our  faith
(Luke  xvii.  4,  5).  (2)  Other  duties  there  are  which  we  owe  specially  to  some.
(a)  As  first,  to  those  that  are  yet  unconverted,  the  desiring  of,  and  by  all  means
possible  labouring  after  their  conversion.  Now,  it  is  faith  only  which  will  make  a
man  do  this.  For,  when  by  faith  we  have  felt  the  sweetness  of  God's  love  ourselves,
we  cannot  but  call  upon  others,  and  with  the  prophet  David  invite  them  to  the
eating  of  the  same  dainties  with  ourselves  (Psa.  xxziv.).  "  Come,  and  see,  and  taste
how  good,"  &c.  (b)  But  yet  a  more  special  love,  which  therefore  hath  a  special
name  of  brotherly  love,  is  due  unto  those  which  are  already  effectually  called,  and
BO  made  members  of  Christ.  This  love  also  oometh  from  faith,  which,  causing  us
to  love  Ood,  must  needs  also  force  us  to  love  all  those  in  whom  we  shall  see  the
very  face  and  lively  image  of  God  Himself  so  clearly  shining.  1.  Uses :  by  this
then  once  again  we  may  try  our  faith.  A  working  faith  hath  laborious  love  even  to
our  brethren  annexed  (1  Thess.  i.  8).  If  then  thou  art  of  a  hard  nature,  of  a  memory
fastly  retaining  injuries  of  affections  vindicative,  which  the  Scripture  calls  feet
swift  to  shed  blood,  this  shows  thou  hast  no  part  in  the  blood  of  Christ  by  faith.
The  like  is  to  be  thought  of  those  which  are  moved  with  no  compassion  towards  the
soul  of  their  brethren  sitting  iu  darkness  and  the  shadow  of  death,  but  can  suffer
them  to  pine  and  pirish  away  in  their  sins,  and  never  reach  forth  the  hand  to  pull
them  out  of  the  ditch.  2.  This  doctrine  serveth  not  only  for  the  trial  of  our  faith,
but  also  of  our  love  to  OTir  brethren.  For  as  that  faith,  which  is  without  this  love,
is  an  idle,  and  imaginary  faith,  so  that  love  of  our  neighbour,  which  cometh  not
from  faith,  is  blind  and  foolish,  and  in  the  end  will  prove  a  deceitful  and  unfaith-
ful love.  Natural  men,  that  seem  to  love  very  dearly  to-day,  to-morrow  are  at
deadly  fend.  The  reason  hereof  is  because  their  love  comes  not  from  faith.  3.  Ik
jai^  be  asked.  How  could  others  declare  to  Paul  the  love  and  faith  of  Philemon,


PHILEMON,  88


which  are  secret  and  hidden  virtues,  that  be  in  the  innermost  corners  of  the  heart,
far  from  the  sight  of  the  eye  ?  They  saw  not  Philemon's  faith,  but  his  outward
works,  and  by  them  they  judged,  and  so  did  Paul  too  of  his  faith,  discerning  the
tree  by  the  fruit.     (D.  Dyke,  B.D.)  Toward  the  Lord  Jesus. — Faith  toward

ChrUt : — Sometimes  faith  is  spoken  of  as  '*  in  "  Christ,  sometimes  as  '•  unto  "  or
"  upon  "  Him ;  here  it  is  "  toward  "  Him.  The  idea  is  that  of  aspiration  and
movement  of  yearning  after  an  unattained  good.  And  that  is  one  part  of  the  true
oflBce  of  faith.  There  is  fruition  and  contact  in  it.  We  rest  '♦  in  "  Christ  by  faith.
It  incorporates  us  into  His  mystical  body,  and  brings  about  a  mutual  indwelling.
We  lean  •'  on  "  Christ  by  faith,  and  by  it  build  the  fabric  of  our  loves,  and  repose
the  weight  of  our  confidence  upon  Him,  as  on  the  sure  foundation.  We  reach
••  unto,"  and,  in  deepest  truth,  pass  "  into  "  Christ  by  faith.  But  there  is  also  in
faith  an  element  of  aspiration,  as  of  the  soaring  eagle  to  the  sun,  or  the  climbing
tendrils  to  the  summit  of  the  supporting  stem.  In  Christ  there  is  always  something
beyond,  which  discloses  itself  the  more  clearly,  the  fuller  is  our  present  possession
of  Him.  Faith  builds  upon  and  rests  in  the  Christ  possessed  and  experienced,  and
just  therefore  will  it,  if  it  be  true,  yearn  towards  the  Christ  unpossessed.
(A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Faith  towards  Christ : — For  faith  is  just  like  the  coupling-
dhain  of  a  railway-carriage — everything  depends  on  where  its  fastenings  are
ultimately  attached.  The  carriage  moves  only  if  its  coupling-chain  communicate
with  the  moving  power.  And  faith  saves  only  as  it  takes  hold  of  the  Saviour  for
itself,  and  terminates  in  Him  as  its  object.  This  precious  faith  is  a  bond  of
attachment.  It  cannot  be  a  single  isolated  act,  but  an  abiding  attitude  of  confidence
towards  the  Lord  Jesus.  (A.  H.  Drysdale,  M.A.)  Love  to  Christ : — A  gentleman
when  visiting  in  a  hospital  in  London  sat  beside  the  cot  of  a  little  girl.  Wishing
to  win  her  confidence,  he  said,  "My  child,  do  you  love  your  mother?"  With
ft  very  serious  look  she  replied,  "Yes,  I  do  indeed."  "But  why  do  you  answer
so  gravely ;  what  is  that  you  are  thinking  about,  my  dear  7  "  Then  she  replied
with  great  earnestness,  "Because  I  can  never  love  my  mother  anything  as
she  loves  me."  Can  any  of  you  say  of  Jesus  as  the  little  girl  said  of  her
mother,  "  Yes,  I  love  Him  indeed,  but  I  can  never  love  Him  in  any  way  as
He  loves  me  ?  "  Toward  all  saints.— Clearly  their  relation  to  Jesus  Christ  puts
all  Christians  into  relation  with  one  another.  This  was  an  astounding  thought
in  Philemon's  days,  when  such  high  walls  separated  race  from  race,  the  slave
from  the  free,  woman  from  man;  but  the  new  faith  leaped  all  barriers,  and

Sat  a  sense  of  brotherhood  into  every  heart  that  learned  God's  fatherhood  in
esns.  .  .  .  The  love  which  is  here  commended  is  not  a  mere  feeling,  nor  does  it
go  oS  in  gushes,  however  fervid,  of  eloquent  emotion.  Clearly  Philemon  was  a
benefactor  of  the  brotherhood,  and  his  love  did  not  spend  only  the  paper-money  o£
words  and  promises  to  pay,  but  the  solid  coin  of  kindly  deeds.  Practical  charity  ia
plainly  included  in  that  love  of  which  it  had  cheered  Paul  in  his  imprisonment  to
hear.  Its  mention,  then,  is  one  step  nearer  to  the  object  of  the  letter.  Paul  conducts
his  siege  of  Philemon's  heart  skilfully,  and  opens  here  a  fresh  parellel,  and  creeps  a

{ard  or  two  closer  up.  "  Surely  you  are  not  going  to  shut  out  one  of  your  own
onsehold  from  that  wide-reaching  kindness."  So  much  is  most  delicately  hinted,
or  rather  left  to  Philemon  to  infer,  by  this  recognition  of  his  brotherly  love.  ^  A
hint  lies  in  it  that  there  may  be  a  danger  of  cherishing  a  cheap  and  easy  charity
that  reverses  the  law  of  gravity,  and  increases  as  the  square  of  the  distance,  having
tenderness  and  smiles  for  people  and  churches  which  are  well  out  of  our  road,  and
frowns  for  some  nearer  home.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Love  extending  to  the
iaints : — Philemon's  love  extended  itself  to  the  saints,  as  is  here  avouched  of  him  ;
yet  it  was  not  cooped  np  within  the  pen  of  the  saints :  the  saints  must  have  the
prime  place  in  our  love,  but  not  the  whole.  "  Do  good  to  all  men,  ohiefiy  to  them
of  the  household  of  faith  " :  chiefly,  but  not  wholly.  Aristotle  gave  an  alms  to  an
unworthy  man  :  one  reproved  him  for  it.  Says  he,  I  gave  it  to  the  nature  of  the
man,  not  to  the  man ;  tixe  nature  is  God's,  and  must  be  sustained :  the  vice  is  his
own  and  the  devil's,  and  must  be  reformed.  (W.  Jones,  D.D.)  The  saintly
hotuehold : — 1.  This  teacheth  that  there  ought  to  be  among  all  the  faithful  a
communion  of  saints;  they  are  as  a  family  or  household  among  themselves.
They  have  a  near  fellowship,  they  are  near  brethren,  they  are  fellow-memberg
of  one  body,  they  are  knit  together  by  one  spirit,  they  are  called  under  one
hope,  they  are  made  Christ's  by  one  faith,  they  are  made  one  by  one  baptism,
they  have  one  bread  to  feed  upon,  they  have  one  cup  to  drink  of,  they  have
one  table  to  meet  at,  thej  have  one  God  that  they  worship,  they  have  one

&


34  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.

salvation  that  they  aim  at  (Eph.  iv.  2,  3).  We  are  charged  to  have  a  oare  of  sQ
mankind,  but  as  it  is  fit  and  convenient  that  they  which  are  of  the  same  family
shonld  be  helpful  one  to  another  rather  than  to  snch  as  are  of  another  family,
which  are  not  so  nearly  joined  unto  them  (Phil.  ii.  1,  2).  The  gifts  of  God  to  b«
imparted  to  our  brethren  are  of  two  sorts.  For  as  we  consist  of  two  parts,  the
sool  and  the  body,  so  the  gifts  are  of  two  kinds — spiritual  graces,  and  temporal
blessings.  We  must  bestow  upon  them  spiritual  gifts,  procuring  their  good  by
example,  exhortation,  comfort,  prayer,  reproof.  Touching  temporal  blessings,  we
must  be  ready  and  content  to  bestow  such  goods  as  God  hath  bestowed  upon  us,  for
the  good  of  our  fellow-members.  If  we  have  this  world's  goods  we  must  not  hide
our  compassion  from  them,  for  then  we  cannot  assure  ourselves  that  the  love  of
God  dweUeth  in  us.  2.  Seeing  we  are  charged  to  provide  for  the  godly  poor,  and
not  to  see  them  want,  it  teacheth  that  we  are  all  the  Lord's  stewards,  to
dispense  and  dispose  His  blessings  to  others.  For  properly  we  are  not  lords,  but
tenants  ;  not  owners,  but  stewards ;  not  possessors,  but  borrowers ;  and  whatsoever
we  enjoy,  it  is  not  ours  only,  but  ours  and  the  poor's — they  have  their  share  and
portion  with  us.  A  CJhristian  man,  though  he  be  the  freest  man  upon  the  earth,
yet  he  is  a  servant  to  all,  especially  to  the  Church  of  God.  This  condemneth—
(1)  Such  as  seek  for  nothing  but  to  settle  themselves  and  maintain  their  own
estates,  to  enrich  themselves  that  they  may  live  in  ease  and  wealth,  like  the  rich
man  mentioned  in  the  gospel :  these  make  no  conscience  of  swearing,  forswearing,
lying,  dissembling,  oppressing,  and  such  like  unfruitful  works  of  the  flesh.  These
men  may  allege  and  plead  for  themselves  what  they  will,  but  in  truth  they  never
yet  knew  what  the  communion  of  saints  meaneth.  (2)  It  reproveth  such  as
waste  and  consume  the  good  creatures  of  Ck)d  in  riotousness,  in  drunkenness,
and  in  all  excess,  and  when  they  are  in  brotherly  love  and  Christian  compassion
admonished,  do  answer,  "What  have  you  to  do  with  my  spending  ?  I  spend  nothing
but  mine  own,  I  spend  none  of  yours."  Yes,  thou  spendest  that  which  is  thy  wife's,
thy  children's,  thy  family's,  the  poor's,  the  Church's,  yea  even  that  which  is  God's,
for  which  thou  shalt  give  an  account  at  the  great  and  dreadful  day  of  judgment.
(3)  Seeing  we  are  debtors  to  all  men,  but  specially  to  the  faithful,  it  reproveth
such  as  show  the  chiefest  fruit  of  their  love  and  charity  upon  the  ungodly
and  profane,  whom  it  were  many  times  more  charity  to  see  punished  than
relieved:  and  corrected  than  maintained.      (W.  Attersoll.)  Why  believers  are

called  saints : — 1.  Because  they  are  thereunto  called  and  chosen  in  Christ,  they  are
thereunto  justified  and  redeemed  by  Christ.  For  we  are  chosen  before  the  founda-
tions of  the  worid  to  be  holy  (Eph.  i.  4 ;  1  Thess.  iv.  3,  7 ;  Luke  i.  68,  74,  75).
2.  The  servants  of  God  must  be  saints,  to  the  end  there  may  be  a  conformity  and
likeness  unto  Him  that  hath  had  mercy  upon  us.  It  is  requisite  that  there  should  be
a  resemblance  between  God  and  His  people.  God  is  holy,  it  is  one  of  His  names.
He  is  called  the  Holy  One ;  Christ  is  Holy,  and  He  is  called  the  Holy  One  of  God ;
the  Spirit  is  holy,  and  therefore  is  called  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  Son  beareth  the
image  of  His  Father,  and  thereby  is  easily  known  whose  Son  He  is.  If  we  be
the  sons  of  God  we  must  express  His  image  in  holiness  and  true  righteousness
(Lev.  xi.  45 ;  1  Pet.  i.  14,  15).  3.  The  faithful  are  called  by  the  name  of  saints,
that  there  might  be  a  difference  between  that  which  we  have  of  ourselves,  and
that  which  we  receive  from  God :  between  the  old  man  and  the  new  man ;  between
our  first  birth  and  our  second  birth ;  between  nature  and  grace.  No  man  is  a
saint  by  nature,  we  have  no  holiness  from  ourselves,  but  we  are  strangers  to  it,
and  that  is  a  stranger  to  us ;  nay,  we  are  enemies  to  holiness  who  love  nothing  else
but  profaneness,  and  desire  to  be  anything  else  than  to  be  saints  and  holy.
(Ibid.)  Love  of  Christ  a  bond  of  brotherhood  : — An  unknown  man  one  day  dropped
dead  in  New  York.  He  seemed  to  have  been  very  poor,  for  in  the  pockets  of  his
shabby  clothes  there  was  not  a  cent.  His  description  was  published  in  the  news-
papers, and  among  other  details,  mention  was  made  of  a  tattoo  mark  on  his  right
arm.  It  represents  a  tomb  overhung  by  the  branches  of  a  weeping  willow.  Below
was  the  inscription,  "  In  memory  of  my  mother."  Nothing  was  known  of  him  ;  but
one  thing  was  clear — he  had  once  had  a  mother  whom  he  loved.  The  body  was  sent
to  a  station-house,  and  the  next  day  would  have  been  buried  in  Potter's  Field  at  the
expense  of  the  city,  if  a  merchant  had  not  interposed.  He  asked  permission  to  pay
tlie  cost  of  a  decent  funeral  in  a  cemetery  for  the  man.  He  did  not  know  him,  but
he,  too,  had  lost  his  mother,  and  the  memory  of  her  had  been  enshrined  in  his
heart  for  many  years.  He  felt  a  brotherhood  with  the  man  whose  love  of  his  dead
mother  was  displayed  in  the  tattoo  marks,  and  desired  to  do  a  brother's  part  to


PHILEMON.  85


bim.  If  erery  ChriBtian  felt  that  the  love  of  Christ,  common  to  him  with  other
Christians,  constituted  a  bond  of  brotherhood  with  its  claims  upon  him,  how  much
bard^p  and  pain  would  be  relieved  1  Love  to  taints : — The  magnetised  needle
turns  to  the  invisible  North  Pole  whenever  it  tarns  to  any  visible  object  that  Ilea
due  north  of  itself ;  and  so,  love  to  saints,  as  saints,  is  love  to  Christ  Himself
personally,  because  it  is  lova  to  whatever  of  Christ  is  manifest  in  them.  (A.  H,
Drysdale,  M.A.)

Yer.  6.  The  commnnlcation  of  thy  faith. — Communieation: — There  is  some  donbt
respecting  the  allusion  in  the  word  "  communication."  It  is  translated  "  fellow-
ihip  "  in  Acts  ii.  42,  2  Cor.  xiii.  14,  and  "  communion  "  in  1  Cor.  z.  16.  It  may
mean  that  the  imparting  to  others  of  their  faith  (when  they  see  the  fruits  of  it)  may
be  effectual,  &c. ;  or  "  communication  "  may  be  taken  as  meaning  distribution.  If
Philemon  loved  ihe  saints  he  would  distribute  liberally  to  their  needs.  Both  senses
ore  true  :  faith  "  may  become  effectual  by  the  acknowledging  of  every  good  thing."
In  the  eyes  of  St.  Paul  it  was  needful,  not  only  that  there  should  be  secret  good  in
a  man,  but  that  it  should  be  acknowledged  on  all  hands  as  good  springing  from  the
grace  of  God  and  Christ,  somewhat  analogous  to  "  Let  your  light  so  shine,"  &o.
[M.  F.  Sadler,  M.A.)  Christian  beneficence  a  means  of  spiritual  growth : — ^Phile*
mon's  "  communication  of  faith  "  will  help  him  to  the  knowledge  of  the  fulness  of
Christ.  The  reaction  of  conduct  on  character  and  growth  in  holiness  is  a  familiar
idea  with  Paul,  especially  in  the  prison  epistles  (see  Col.  i.  10).  The  faithful  carry-
ing out  in  life  of  what  we  already  know  is  not  the  least  important  condition  of
increasing  knowledge.  If  a  man  does  not  live  up  to  his  religion,  his  religion  shrinks
to  the  level  of  his  life.  Unoccupied  territory  lapses.  We  hold  our  spiritual  gifts  on
the  term  of  using  them.  The  practice  of  convictions  deepens  convictions ;  not  that
the  exercise  of  Christian  graces  wiU  make  theologians,  but  it  will  put  in  larger
possession  of  the  knowledge  which  is  life.  While  this  general  principle  is  abundantly
enforced  in  Scripture  and  confirmed  by  experience,  the  specific  form  of  it  here  is
that  the  right  administration  of  wealth  is  a  direct  means  of  increasing  a  Christian's
possession  of  the  large  store  treasured  in  Christ.  Every  loving  thought  towards  the
sorrowful  and  needy,  every  touch  of  sympathy  yielded  to,  and  every  kindly  Christ-
like  deed  flowing  from  these,  thins  away  some  fibn  of  the  barriers  between  the
believing  soul  and  a  full  possession  of  God,  makes  it  more  capable  of  beholding
Him  and  of  rising  to  communion  vrith  Him.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  A  communion
of  gifts  : — A3  there  is  a  communion  of  saints,  so  there  must  be  a  communion  of
gifts.  A  good  thing,  the  mors  o:mmon  it  is,  the  better  it  is.  The  sun  communi-
cates his  light  to  the  world,  and  shines  the  brighter  for  that;  the  springs  and
fountains  communicate  their  water,  and  are  the  fuller  for  that ;  a  nurse  or  mother
communicates  her  milk  to  the  infant,  and  her  breasts  are  replenished  still :  the  com-
munication of  faith,  of  knowledge,  and  other  gifts,  is  not  a  diminution,  but  an
augmentation  of  them.  Let  as  joyfully  communicate  that  which  we  have,  one  to
another.     {W.  Jones,  D.D.)        The  gifts  and  blessingt  of  God : — I.  It  is  the  dctt

OF  ALL  MEN  EARNESTLY  TO  DE8IBB  AND  PBOCUBE  THE  GOOD  OF  OTHERS,  AND  TO  STIR
UP    OURSELVES    AND    OTHERS    TO    INCREASE    IN    THE    GRACES    OF    God's    SPIRIT.       The

growing  and  proceeding  of  our  brethren  in  the  best  things  should  be  sought  for  of
us.  Eeasons  :  1.  Christian  profession  is  a  way  in  which  men  must  not  stand  still ;
they  must  not  stay  in  one  estate,  but  be  always  stirring  forward.  2.  Christians  are
compared  to  children.  Children  are  always  growing  in  age,  increasing  in  stature,
going  forward  in  knowledge.  So  must  we  grow  in  grace,  until  we  come  to  a  perfect
aged  man  in  Christ.  3.  We  must  so  walk  in  our  way  and  hasten  to  our  journey's
end,  that  we  may  obtain  the  prize.  He  that  overcome th  and  holdeth  out  to  the
latter  end  only  shall  be  saved.  He  that  giveth  over  is  a  faint  soldier,  a  weak  work-
man, a  slow  runner,  a  feeble  wrestler.  (1)  We  learn  that  God  hath  a  just  action
and  suit  to  commence  against  all  idle  and  unprofitable  drones,  that  be  truants  and
no  proficients  in  the  school  of  Christ.  (2)  We  are  bound  to  use  the  means
that  may  further  these  gifts  in  as,  that  is,  the  ministry  of  the  Word,  which  being
reverently  used  hath  a  promise  of  blessings.  (3)  Seeing  we  should  desire
oar  own  profit  and  others,  it  condemneth  three  sorts  of  men  :  first,  such  as  stand  at
a  stay ;  secondly,  such  as  go  backward ;  thirdly,  such  as  envy  the  good  and  growth
of  others  in  the  best  things.  (4)  Seeing  we  should  all  seek  to  profit  ourselves
and  others  in  godliness,  we  must  Know  that  it  is  our  duty  to  stir  up  the  gifts  of  God
in  as,  that  we  do  not  bury  them  as  in  a  grave  ;  we  must  exercise  the  gifts  that  we
have  bj  eontinoal  practice      Use  maketh  men  prompt  and  ready,  want  of  use


86  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.

maketh  men  untoward.    II.  The  qifts  and  BL3:ssiMas  of  God,  whetheb  tbhpobaa

OB  ETEBNAL,  BESTOWED  UPON  ANY,  HT7ST  MOT  LIE  HID  OB  DEAD,  BCT  BB  U8BD  ANB
EUPLOTED   TO   THE   OOOD   OF   OTHERS,  AND   80   YIELD   A   FELLOWSHIP   AND  COUHDNION  TO

OTHEBS.  Beasons :  1.  We  are  servants  unto  all,  to  do  them  good  and  to  farther
their  lalvation.  2.  We  are  members  of  the  same  body,  and  therefore  in  this  respeot
should  profit  one  another.  We  see  it  is  so  in  every  part  of  our  body :  the  eye
seeth  not  for  itself,  the  head  inventeth  not  for  itself,  the  hand  worketh  not  for  itself,
the  foot  walketh  not  for  itself,  but  they  do  these  duties  for  the  whole  body.  Thus  it
ought  to  be  among  all  the  faithful ;  if  Christ  Jesus  be  our  head,  we  must  be  afieoted
as  mutual  members  one  to  another.  3.  We  are  aU  of  us  stewards  and  disposers  of
the  manifold  graces  of  God.  God  committed  His  goods  to  us,  and  made  us  stewards
of  His  family,  to  minister  in  season  to  all  in  the  household,  and  He  will  take  an
account  how  we  use  them.  Uses :  (1)  This  teaches  us  to  remember  the  benefit  and
good  of  others,  and  not  only  to  desire,  but  to  effect  the  same  as  much  as  we  can,
especially  their  eternal  good.  It  is  a  good  thing  to  do  good  unto  the  bodies  of  oar
brethren,  but  the  chiefest  good  is  to  do  good  to  their  souls.  (2)  Such  are  reproved
as  have  gifts  and  yet  use  them  not  but  hide  them,  and  so  diminish  them  by  idleness
and  want  of  conscience.  (3)  Seeing  we  must  employ  that  which  we  have  received
to  the  benefit  of  others,  it  serveth  greatly  to  comfort  such  as  have  been  careful  to
communicate  to  others  those  things  that  they  have  received,  and  to  make  tibem
partakers  of  the  same  comfort  that  they  have  reaped  by  them.    III.  Ii  is  the  dijtz

or  EVEBY  ONE  TO  UANIFEST  AND  SHOW  FOBTH,  YEA,  TO  SPBEAD  ABROAD  AND  TO  8PBAK
or  THE   QIFTS  OF   GoD  BESTOWED  UPON   THEMSELVES  AND  OTHEBS.      When  God  iS  gOOd

towards  us,  and  distributes  His  graces  among  us,  we  must  be  ready  to  acknowledge
them,  when  we  feel  them  in  ourselves,  or  see  them  in  others.  Beasons :  1.  To  the
end  that  God's  graces  being  seen  and  known  He  may  be  glorified  and  blessed  for
them,  who  is  the  author  and  giver  of  them.  It  ought  to  be  our  chiefest  desire  and
study  that  God  may  have  His  praise  and  glory  among  us.  2.  Because  the  more  they
be  known  and  farther  they  are  spread,  the  larger  praise  and  more  abundant  thanks-
giving may  be  given  imto  God  and  yielded  to  His  name  by  many.  3.  In  respect  of
others,  because  the  more  the  goodness  and  graces  of  God  are  spoken  of,  and  the
more  largely  they  are  dispersed,  the  more  by  that  means  may  be  stirred  up  to  an
imitation  of  their  example.  Uses :  (1)  We  see  there  may  be  sometimes  a  foolish
modesty  in  concealing  those  good  things  which  should  be  uttered  and  published,  if
they  may  further  the  cause  of  religion,  or  provoke  others  to  godliness,  or  bring  glory
to  God.  God  is  not  ashamed  of  us  to  be  called  our  God,  and  to  do  us  good ;  let  us
not,  therefore,  be  ashamed  to  acknowledge  Him  to  be  good  unto  us,  and  confess  His
goodness  to  the  sons  of  men.  (2)  Seeing  it  is  our  duty,  when  God  hath  been  good
unto  us  or  others,  to  make  known  His  goodness.  We  learn  hereby  how  the  saints
of  God  may  be  rightly  and  religiously  honoured  of  us,  and  remembered  to  their
everlasting  praise.  It  is  our  duty  to  give  thanks  to  God  who  hath  blessed  them  with
His  graces  and  governed  them  by  His  Holy  Spirit,  and  to  pray  unto  Him  so  to  direct
us  and  dispose  of  our  ways  that  we  may  follow  their  godliness  and  walk  in  their
steps  wherein  they  have  gone  before  us.  (3]  We  must  beware  that  vainglory  be
not  the  end  which  we  seek  for.  We  are  to  give  the  glory  to  the  author,  not  to  the
instniment ;  to  God,  not  to  man ;  to  the  Creator,  not  to  the  creature.  (W.  Atterioll.)
The  efficacy  of  faith : — I.  That  efficacy  of  faith  which  here  Paul  desibeth  fob
Philemon  was  two.  First,  in  regard  to  Philemon  himself,  that  it  might  work  effectu-
ally in  him  ;  secondly,  in  regard  of  others,  that  it  might  be  exemplary  to  them,  and
BO  might  be  effectual  iu  provoking  them  to  the  like.  And  that  the  apostle  had  some
reference,  even  to  this  latter  kind  of  efficacy,  the  words  following  seem  to  import —
that  whatsoever  good  thing  is  in  you  may  be  known :  for  when  the  light  of  our  faith
shineth  to  others,  it  very  effectually  stirreth  them  up  to  the  glorifying  of  God's
name.  Hence  observe — 1.  That  true  faith  may  sometimes  faint,  and  be,  as  it  were,
raked  up  under  the  ashes.  A  kind  of  sleepiness  may  sometimes  seize  upon  it,  and
disable  it  for  spiritual  exercises.  As  we  see  in  the  disciples,  who  being  oppressed
with  carnal  grief  for  the  departure  of  Christ  now  at  hand,  were  not  able  to  attend
the  exercise  of  prayer,  no,  not  one  hour,  with  our  Saviour.  So  likewise  in  Phil.  It.
10.  Of  whom,  when  the  apostle  says,  that  they  were  revived,  or,  as  the  word  signi-
fies, waxen  green  or  fresh  again,  in  their  love  and  hberality  towards  Him ;  thereby
he  deolareth  that  for  a  time  tbey  were  like  trees,  that  in  the  winter  are  in  their
widowhood,  having  lost  their  leaves,  and  appearing  outwardly  as  dead,  all  their  sap
being  in  the  root  within.  2.  Observe  how  faith,  being  by  Satan's  craft  oast  into  thil
deep  sleep,  may  be  awakened,  and  how  it  may  shake  off  this  spiritaal  laziness,  Yii.«


PHILEMON.  87


by  this  spiritual  exercise  of  prayer.  3.  Paul  here  plainly  teaches  us  that  true  faith
in  his  own  nature  is  effectual,  lively,  full  of  vigour  and  spirits  (1  Thess.  i.  3).  I
discern  the  picture  of  a  man,  though  never  so  hvely,  to  be  no  true  man,  because  it
stands  still  and  stirs  not.  Therefore,  though  it  have  show  of  eyes,  mouth,  feet,  &c.,
yet  when  I  see  it  neither  goes,  sees,  nor  speaks,  I  know  it  is  no  man.  So,  when  I
look  upon  thy  faith,  and  find,  for  aU  the  colours  of  outward  profession,  that  it  ia
idle,  I  conclude  forthwith  that  it  is  an  idol,  a  shadow,  void  of  truth  and  substance.
II.  Wheeein  this  efficacy  of  faith  here  PBAyED  FOR  consists;  first,  in  com-
munication ;  secondly,  in  the  knowledge  of  every  good  thing.  1.  For  the  first,
observe,  that  faith  is  no  sparing  niggard,  but  of  a  very  bountiful  and  liberal  dis-
position. It  hoardeth  not,  it  hideth  not  those  treasures  which  she  receiveth  of  God,
but  communicateth  them  to  others.  2.  The  second  thing,  wherein  this  efficacy  of
faith  consisteth,  is  the  knowledge  of  all  that  good.  That  faith  then  is  effectual
which  hath  all  other  graces  at  command ;  so  that  when  it  says  to  one,  Go,  it  goeth ;
to  another,  Come,  it  comes ;  to  aU  of  them  I  would  have  you  known  of  others,  they
forthwith  come  forth  into  the  open  Hght,  and  by  practice  make  themselves  known
to  aU.  If  a  king  command  and  be  not  obeyed,  it  shows  his  power  is  not  great — that
he  is  not  as  yet  thoroughly  confirmed  in  his  authority.  So  it  is  an  argument  that
faith  as  yet  is  but  weak  and  of  small  force  when  it  commands  not  with  a  kingly  and
imperial  majesty  and  authority,  so  that  without  further  delay  his  commands  are
obeyed.  "  That  thy  faith  may  be  effectual."  But  how?  In  the  knowledge  of  every
good  thing  that  is  in  you.  (D.  Dyke,  B.D.)  By  the  acknowledging  of  every
good  thing. — The  acknowledgment  of  good  in  others: — We  must  acknowledge  the
good  things  that  are  in  others.  The  Queen  of  Sheba  extolled  the  good  things  that
were  in  Solomon,  and  blessed  God  for  them.  The  elders  of  the  Jews  acknowledged
the  good  things  that  were  in  the  centurion.  God  set  the  good  things  that  were  in
Job,  as  on  a  stage,  and  the  devil  himself  could  not  but  acknowledge  them,  though
mahciously  he  depraved  them.  Christ,  though  He  was  the  giver  of  them,  acknow-
ledged the  good  things  that  were  in  Nathaniel.  St.  Peter  acknowledges  the  good
things  that  were  in  St.  Paul.  Augustin  acknowledged  the  good  things  that  were
in  Jerome,  and  Jerome  also  the  good  things  that  were  in  Augustin,  as  appears  by
their  epistles  one  to  another.  We  are  injurious  to  God  if  we  do  not  acknowledge
them.  No  painter  but  would  have  his  picture  acknowledged :  every  good  man  is  the
beautiful  picture  of  God  Almighty ;  they  be  envious  persons  that  will  not  acknow-
ledge them.    {W.  Jones,  D.D.)

Ver.  7.  We  have  grreat  Joy  and  consolation  In  thy  love.— TA«  far-reaching  eon-
sequences  of  good  deeds  : — No  man  can  ever  tell  how  far  the  blessing  of  his  small
acts  of  kindness,  or  other  pieces  of  Christian  conduct,  may  travel.  They  may
benefit  one  in  material  fashion,  but  the  fragrance  may  reach  far  beyond.  Philemon
little  dreamed  that  his  small  charity  to  some  suffering  brother  in  Colosse  would  find
its  way  across  the  sea  and  bring  a  waft  of  coolness  and  refreshing  in  the  hot
prison  house.  Neither  Paul  nor  Philemon  dreamed  that,  made  immortal  by  the
word  of  the  former,  the  same  transient  act  would  find  its  way  across  the  centuries,
and  would  "  smell  sweet  and  blossom  in  the  dust "  to-day.  Men  know  not  who  are
their  audiences  or  who  may  be  spectators  of  their  works ;  for  they  are  all  bound  so
mystically  and  closely  together,  that  none  can  tell  how  far  the  vibrations  which  he
sets  in  motion  will  thrUL  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Refreshing  ministries: — The
Moors,  five  hundred  years  ago,  occupied  Granada  in  Spain,  and  if  you  go  there  to-day
you  may  find  traces  of  that  occupation.  But  where  will  you  find  them  ?  Their
empire  has  fallen.  Their  creed  has  passed  away.  Their  palaces  have  crumbled
into  dust.  But  you  wiU  find  traces  of  them  in  the  irrigating  rivulets  which  they
were  the  means  of  calling  into  existence.  The  traveller  who  may  pass  under  the
heights  of  Granada  to-day  hears  the  murmuring  music  of  those  beautiful  streams.
The  men  who  dug  them  have  gone  ;  but  there  are  these  streams  telling  their  own
story  and  doing  their  own  work.  So  let  us  cut  channels  through  which  God'a
blessing  may  flow.  It  is  hard  work.  We  have  to  remove  the  rock  and  the  soil,
but  by  and  by  others  will  come,  and  as  they  stoop  down  and  drink  of  these  beneficent
streams,  they  will  look  up  and  say,  "  Thank  God  for  the  workers  who  have  gone
before  I"  Spiritual  blessings  bestowed  on  others  give  occasion  of  joy  to  the  saints  • —
It  is  our  duty  greatly  to  rejoice,  when  we  see  spiritual  blessings  in  heavenly  things
given  to  the  children  of  God  (see  Luke  xv.  5,  6,  9,  10,  32).    David  rejoiced  with

great  joy  when  he  saw  that  the  people  offered  willingly  unto  the  Lord  with  a  perfect
eart,  and  he  blessed  the  Lord  God  of  Israel.    When  the  Jews  heard  of  the  con-


38  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.

version  of  the  Gentiles,  and  that  the  Holy  Ghost  fell  apon  them,  as  npon  themselvefl
at  the  beginning,  they  held  their  peace  and  glorified  God,  saying,  "  Then  hath  God
also  to  the  GentUes  granted  repentance  onto  life."  When  the  apostle  perceived  the
notable  zeal  of  the  Thessalonians,  in  receiving  and  entertaining  the  gospel,  not  as
the  word  of  man  bat  as  it  is  indeed  the  Word  of  God,  he  witnesselh  t^at  they  were
his  hope  and  his  joy,  his  crown  and  his  glory  in  the  presence  of  our  Lord  Jesus
Christ  at  His  coming.  Likewise  the  apostle  John  rejoiced  greatly  when  the
brethren  testified  of  the  truth  that  was  in  Gaius,  and  how  he  walked  therein.  He
had  no  greater  joy  &an  this,  to  hear  that  his  sons  walked  in  the  verity.  Beasons :
1.  The  glory  and  praise  of  God  is  much  increased,  which  should  comfort  the  hearts
and  rejoice  the  spirits  of  the  saints.  The  more  we  abound  with  spiritual  blessings
the  more  God  is  honoured  and  His  name  glorified.  2.  The  general  good  of  the
Church  must  lead  us  to  this  duty  and  cause  us  to  rejoice,  which  next  unto  God
should  be  dearest  to  us.  Who  can  have  such  hearts  of  flint  or  of  iron  as  not  to  be
moved  with  joy,  beholding  the  enlarging  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ?  3.  The
ordinances  and  laws  of  God  are  observed,  and  so  His  blessings  procured  and
obtained.  Now,  when  God  is  obeyed,  men  should  rejoice  and  be  glad ;  and  when
His  laws  are  broken,  they  should  be  much  grieved  and  troubled.  Uses :  1.  First  of
all,  seeing  God's  graces  upon  others  must  work  joy  in  ourselves,  we  learn  the  truth
of  that  article  of  our  faith,  which  all  profess  to  believe,  but  many  do  not  understand,
to  wit,  the  communion  of  saints.  There  is  a  double  communion,  one  which  we
have  with  Christ ;  the  other,  which  the  Church  hath  among  themselves,  and  the
former  is  the  cause  of  the  latter.  Our  commimion  among  ourselves  consisteth  in
three  things — (1)  In  the  affection  of  the  heart.  (2)  In  the  gifts  of  the  Spirit.  (3)
In  the  use  of  temporal  riches.  2.  We  learn  to  desire  the  best  gifts,  that  we  may
rejoice  and  comfort  the  godly.  For  when  we  profit  in  good  things,  we  cheer  the
hearts  and  minds  of  the  faithful.  Every  living  thing  bath  his  prospering  and
proceeding,  and  is  known  to  have  life  in  it  by  increasing  from  one  degree  of  per-
fection to  another.  The  grass  springeth,  the  plant  shouteth,  the  corn  fiourisheth,
the  tree  groweth.  If  we  have  any  life  in  us  of  God's  Spirit,  and  be  not  as  grass
that  is  withered,  as  plants  that  are  dead,  as  com  that  is  blasted,  and  as  trees  that
are  plucked  up  by  the  roots,  we  must  go  forward  from  one  measure  of  grace  to
another,  from  a  lesser  to  a  greater.  3.  It  is  our  duty  to  seek  the  good  and
prosperity  of  the  Church  by  all  good  means,  and  to  draw  them  and  move  them,  to
embrace  the  ways  of  salvation.  This  duty  hath  many  branches  growing  from  it.
For,  seeing  God's  graces  bestowed  give  occasion  of  great  joy,  it  ought  to  teach  us
to  exhort  one  another,  to  comfort  them  that  are  comfortless,  to  reprove  them  that
go  astray,  to  pray  for  our  brethren,  to  seek  to  gain  and  win  them  to  the  faith  ;  and
when  they  are  gained  and  won,  to  rejoice  unfeignedly  at  their  conversion,  and  if  we
see  any  hope  of  their  repentance  and  turning  to  God,  to  converse  with  them,  and
not  to  be  ashamed  of  their  company.  (W.  Attersoll.)  Thankfulness  for  love: —
I.  The  beason  ob  cause  that  moved  Facij  to  oive  thanks  fob  Fhileuon's  lovb.
1.  His  joy,  which  Philemon's  love  ministered  to  him,  and  that  no  small  or  slender
joy,  but  great  joy.  2.  His  comfort,  which  he  received  by  the  same  love,  and  this
latter  is  an  amplification  of  the  former :  for  Paul  hereby  signiiieth  that  the  joy  he
took  in  Philemon's  love  was  not  a  simple  joy  but  a  comfortable  joy,  such  a  joy  as
did  countervail  and  swallow  up  all  the  grief  of  his  present  afflictions.  Here
observe — 1.  That  whatsoever  breeds  joy  is  a  just  matter  of  thanksgiving ;  for  this
is  the  reason  of  Paul's  thanksgiving  for  Philemon — "  For  we  have  great  joy  in  thy
love."  2.  That  joy  is  a  singular  and  wonderful  blessing  of  God,  for  which  special
thanks  are  due  unto  him.  3.  Observe  what  that  is  which  must  stir  us  up  to  thanks-
giving, and  cause  us  to  perform  it  in  due  manner,  namely,  the  feeling  of  joy  in  the
benefit  bestowed  upon  us.  4.  Mark  that  Paul  did  not  only  take  joy  but  comfort  in
Philemon's  love  ;  comfort  pre-supposeth  grief  as  a  medicine,  a  disease.  Therefore
Paul  gives  as  to  understand  that  Philemon's  love  was  a  kind  of  counter-poison  to
the  grief  which  his  imprisonment  and  other  afflictions  wrought  him.  Whereby  we
may  learn  what  is  that  which  will  bring  ease  and  comfort  to  the  minds  of  God's
children  in  their  troubles,  namely,  the  virtue  and  good  carriage  of  those  whom  they
love  and  respect.  As  this  will  be  the  comfort  of  good  ministers  in  their  afilictious,
if  their  flocks  stand  fast  in  that  truth  which  they  have  preached.  6.  Observe  what
that  is,  wherefore  we  are  to  take  joy  in  another,  viz.,  his  grace.  *'  We  have  great
joy  in  thy  love."  This  is  that  which  may  justly  cause  parents  to  rejoice  in  their
children,  one  friend  and  kinsman  in  another.  II.  The  confibuation  or  thu
KEASON.    1.  Here  observe  that  Paul  doth  not  say  he  bath  joy  in  his  love  because


PHILEMON.  39


his  own  bowels  were  refreshed  by  him,  but  because  the  saints'  bowels  were  refreshed.
Many  will  rejoice  in  that  love  which  is  profitable  to  themselves ;  but  where  Is  he
that  will  as  well  rejoice  in  that  love  which  is  profitable  only  to  others  ?  2.  Mark
that  then  as  a  most  seasonable  time  of  rejoicing  when  we  see  the  bowels  of  Qod's
Baints  refreshed — the  Church  and  people  of  God  reheved  in  their  distresses.  8.  In
Philemon's  example  we  are  all,  according  to  our  power,  taught  to  refresh  the  bowels
of  God's  poor  distressed  saints,  if  we  will  show  ourselves  to  have  that  love  which
we  profess.  1.  In  speeches  of  comfort  (Fsa.  xli.  1).  2.  In  commending  and
remembering  their  afflicted  estate  to  God  in  prayer.  3.  In  the  works  of  liberality,
as  the  need  of  the  afflicted  shall  require,  and  our  own  ability  give  us  leave.  Let  as
imitate  Philemon  in  refreshing  the  bowels  of  the  saints,  knowing — 1.  That  God
Himself  hath  pronounced  such  blessed  (Psa.  xli. ;  Matt.  v.).  2.  That  herein  we
imitate  the  Spirit  of  God  (Bom.  viii.  26),  whose  office  it  is  to  comfort  the  hearts
of  the  afflicted  saints.  8.  That  by  the  same  means  we  refresh  the  bowels,  not  only
of  the  afflicted  but  also  of  others,  who  long  to  bear  the  afflictions  of  their  brethren.
4.  Yea,  not  only  so,  but  we  shall  refresh  the  bowels  of  Christ  Himself.  6.  That
hereby  we  shall  enlarge  the  spirit,  not  only  of  the  afflicted  but  of  all  other  good
men  besides,  to  whom  our  love  is  known,  in  praying  to  God  for  us.  6.  That  if  we
reap  not  this  benefit  of  our  love  from  men,  who  may  prove  ungrateful  and  unmindful,
yet  God  is  not  unjust,  that  He  should  forget  the  labour  of  our  love  which  we  have
showed  towards  His  name,  ministering  to  the  saints  (Heb.  vi.).  Nay,  He  will  cause
it  to  be  as  seed,  that  shall  bring  us  a  plentiful  harvest  of  many  temporal  blessings
in  this  life,  and  of  eternal  life  itself  at  the  resurrection  of  the  just.  (D.  Dyke,  B.D.)
Delight  in  love  manifested  by  others : — He  will  never  want  for  supplies  of  joy  and
consolation  who  finds  a  great  delight  in  love  manifested  by  others  or  enjoyed  by
them ;  who,  free  from  envy,  takes  an  exalted  pleasure  in  the  gifts  and  graces  of
others,  and  who,  ever  on  the  outlook  for  occasions  to  be  thankful,  is  willing  to
regard  as  mercies  to  himself  what  are  blessings  to  others.  The  vulgar  joy  of  earth
would  snatch  at  everything  for  itself ;  but  the  divinely  beautiful  disposition  of  being
happy  in  the  diffusion  of  happiness,  grows  radiant  with  a  sunshine  akin  to  the
Divine  blessedness  itself.  If  any  one  go  after  his  own  personal  joy  and  comfort
with  an  all-consuming  and  self-seeking  eagerness,  he  may  as  well  think  to  get  the
rainbow  by  chasing  it.  To  be  absorbed  in  our  own  private  comfort,  and  pursue  it
for  itself,  is  to  fare  like  the  man  who  in  his  foolish  over-anxiety  to  catch  a  delicate
creature  alive,  suddenly  puts  his  foot  on  it,  and  finds  it  just  dying  when  he  gets  it
in  his  hands.  "I  had  much  joy  in  thy  love,  because  the  hearts  of  the  saints  have
been  refreshed  by  thee,  brother,"  as  the  apostle  very  touchingly  adds,  in  token  of
his  kindly  and  fraternal  feeling  to  Philemon,  in  recalling  his  acts  of  benevolence.
{A.  H.  Drysdale,  M.A.)        The  bowels  of  the  saints  are  refreshed  by  thee. — Ainu-

{nving — alms,  or  a  tvork  ofviercy,  is  a  singular  work  above  others : — 1.  It  makes  men
ike  God.  A  bountiful  man  is  the  image  of  God.  2.  It  is  a  fair  broom  that  makes
all  clean  (Luke  xi.  41).  As  the  first-fruits  in  the  time  of  the  law  did  sanctify  the
rest  of  the  fruit,  so  alms  in  the  time  of  the  gospel  sanctify  all  unto  us ;  all  that  we
possess  are  unclean  without  them.  3.  It  is  an  usury  approved  by  God,  more  gainful
than  any  other  usury.  "  He  that  hath  mercy  on  the  poor  lendeth  to  the  Lord,"  Ac.  4.
It  is  an  harbinger  that  goes  before  to  provide  thee  a  place  in  heaven  (Acts  x.  4 ;  1  Tim.
vi.  18).  Therefore  let  us  refresh  the  bowels  of  the  saints  here,  that  we  may  enter  into
the  place  of  eternal  refreshing  hereafter.  We  are  too  straitlaced ;  we  make  this
mammon  of  unrighteousness  our  enemy,  whereas  we  should  make  him  our  friend.
Nazianzen's  mother  carried  such  a  bountiful  mind  to  the  poor,  that  a  sea  of  wealth
could  scarce  have  sufficed  her.  She  was  contrary  to  Solomon's  horse  leech,  that
cried,  "  Give,  give,"  namely,  to  me ;  she  cried,  "  Give,  give,  to  the  poor."  He
heard  her  often  say  that  she  and  her  children  should  want  before  the  poor  should
want :  we  are  all  for  ourselves,  our  wives  and  children ;  nothing  for  the  poor.
Amadeus,  Duke  of  Sabandia,  being  asked  whether  he  kept  hounds  or  not?  Tes,  says
be ;  come  to-morrow,  and  you  shall  see  them.  They  being  come,  he  opens  a
window  into  his  hall,  where  a  great  multitude  of  poor  people  were  dining :  these
are  my  dogs,  said  he,  and  with  them  I  hope  to  get  eternal  life.  {W.  Jones,  D.D.)
Benevolence  encouraged: — I.  Thb  pkopeb  office  of  love.  Should  be  exercised
towards  all,  even  enemies ;  but  is  due  in  especial  manner  to  "  the  saints  "  (Gal.  vi.  10).
Not  on  any  party  principle.  Due  to  them — 1.  Because  dearer  to  God  than  others.
(Chosen,  Eph.  i.  4-6;  called,  Bom.  viii.  30;  begotten,  1  Pet.  i.  3;  heirs,  Bom.
viii.  16, 17.  Hence,  1  John  v.  1).  2.  Because  Christ  is  more  deeply  interested  in
them.    Have  sought  Him,  hope  in  Him,  one  with  Him  (Eph.  v.  80 ;  1  Cor.  vi.  17).


40  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,

3.  Because  more  nearly  related  to  ourselves.  Naturally  alike,  spiritually  different
(Eph.  ii.  19 ;  1  Cor.  xii.  12,  20,  27).  4.  Because  they  are  themselves  of  superior
worth  (Prov.  xii.  26 ;  2  Pet.  i.  4 ;  John  xiv.  23).  The  Lord's  property.  II.  Its
EXCELLENCE,  WHEN  SO  EiviPLOYED.  Faul  had  a  high  idea  of  its  excellency,  because  ha
felt — 1.  How  pre-eminently  God  was  honoured  by  it.  He  commauds  it ;  it  displays
His  care  for  saints,  and  His  character;  it  excites  praise  to  Him  (2  Cor.  ix.  12,  13).
2.  How  greatly  the  gospel  also  was  recommended  and  adorned.  Love,  in  all
practical  forms,  the  spirit  of  the  gospel.  3.  What  extensive  benefits  accrued
from  it  to  the  Church.  4.  What  an  evidence  it  gave  of  substantial  piety  in  him
who  possessed  it.  An  evidence  to  himself  (1  John  iii.  14,  18,  19) ;  to  others
(John  xiii.  35).  (C  Simeon,  M.A.)  The  duty  of  looking  after  and  relieving  the
poor : — I.  It  is  not  enough  fob  us  to  give  good  wobds,  ob  to  dtteb  fbou  oub

MOUTHS  good  wishes,  BDT  WE  MUST,  IN  OUB  SEVEB&L  PLACES  AMD  PABIICULAB  OALLINGS,
DO  OUB  UTMOST  EKCEAVOUB  THAT  BELIEF  MAY   EVEN   BE  SEALED  TO  OUB  fOOB.      It  iS  UOt

enough  to  give  to  those  that  ask  and  crave  the  fruit  of  our  liberality,  but  we  must
learn  to  inquire  of  the  wants  of  the  saints,  and  to  search  what  is  their  condition.
It  belongeth  unto  us,  not  only  to  have  ears  prepared  to  hear  but  to  have  mouths
opened,  to  ask  of  the  welfare  of  those  that  are  in  necessity.  We  would  desire  to  be
80  dealt  withal  ourselves ;  and  therefore  let  us  be  so  minded  toward  our  brethren.
This  we  see  in  Abraham :  he  stayed  not  till  those  strangers  came  into  his  house,
till  they  desired  to  be  received  and  have  lodging  ;  but  he  went  out  of  his  tent  of  his
own  accord,  to  see  whom  he  could  espy,  that  he  might  bring  them  to  his  house.  So
did  Lot,  so  dealt  all  the  fathers.  Thus  did  Nehemiah,  when  he  saw  some  of  his
brethren  that  were  come  from  Jerusalem ;  he  asked  then  concerning  the  state  of  the
Church,  and  of  the  residue  of  the  captivity.  We  must  not  always  wait  till  we  be
entreated  and  urged  to  show  mercy,  but  offer  it  to  ourselves  to  testify  the  willingness
of  our  hearts.  As  Christ  hath  loved  as,  so  let  us  love  one  another.  There  have
ever  been  poor  that  make  not  their  wants  openly  known,  and  are  so  dejected  and
rejected  of  many,  that  they  are  ashamed  to  show  their  necessity.    II.  It  bepboveth

THOSE  that  do  NOT  SIGHTLY  CONSIDEB  WHAT   POOB  THE  APOSTLE  USANETH,  AND  SETTETH

BBFOBB  US  AS  OBJECTS  OF  OUB  COMPASSION.  He  doth  Hot  Understand  the  idle  beggar,
or  sturdy  rogue,  or  vagrant  companion,  who,  not  applying  himself  in  any  lawful
calling,  maketh  a  profession  of  beggary,  and  Uveth  altogether  upon  the  spoil  of
other  men's  goods.  Neither  doth  he  mean  such  manner  of  persons  as  are  continual
haunters  of  ale-houses,  spend-alls,  carders,  dicers.  These  are  excluded  and  wiped
out  of  the  register  of  the  poor  saints  spoken  of  in  this  place,  being  worse  than
infidels,  and  denying  the  faith.  But  the  apostle  pointeth  out  such  unto  as,  to  be
holpen  and  comforted,  as  it  hath  pleased  God  not  to  bestow  so  great  a  portion  of
worldly  blessings  upon  them,  as  upon  others,  as  the  artificer,  the  handicraftsman,
and  day-labourer,  yet  labour  diHgently.    UI.  It  bepboveth  such  as  neveb  open

THEIB  MOUTHS  TO  ENOW  THE   ESTATE   OF   THE   POOB   SAINTS,  OB  TO   INgUIBE   HOW   THEY

FABE.  Alas  I  how  should  they  offer  their  help  of  their  own  accord,  and  open  the
bowels  of  pity  before  they  be  entreated,  that  will  depart  from  nothing,  but  urged
and  constrained  by  force  of  law,  or  taxation  of  others  ?  Or  how  should  they  extend
their  compassion  to  the  poor  that  are  absent?  It  is  noted  to  the  great  commendation
of  David,  that  after  the  death  of  Saul,  his  enemy,  he  sought  not  revenge  upon  his
issue  and  posterity,  but  did  good  to  his  children's  children,  and  said — "  Is  there
any  left  of  the  house  of  Saul,  that  I  may  shew  mercy  for  Jonathan's  sake  ?  "  So
ought  we  to  seek  out  the  servants  of  God,  and  to  lind  out  the  poor,  and  to  inquire
after  the  distressed  saints,  and  say.  Is  there  any  of  the  poor  yet  left,  to  whom  we
may  show  mercy  for  the  Lord's   sake?      (W.   Attersoll.)  Commendation    of

Philemon's  liberality: — How  high  a  commeni'ation  is  this  of  Philemon's  bounty,
that  it  afforded  joy,  not  only  to  those  who  were  relieved  by  it  but  also  to  the  apostle
who  heard  of  it;  that  not  only  the  indigent  were  supported  by  it  in  their  necessiiiea,
but  St.  Paul  also  comforted  by  it  in  his  imprisonment ;  that  the  tidings  of  it  were
so  welcome  to  the  apostle,  tliat  t)iey  made  his  chaius  fit  easier  upon  him,  and  gave
him  consolation  in  his  distre.-s  ;  that  as  the  bowels  of  the  saints  were  refreshed,  so
also  the  spirits  of  the  apostle  were  revived,  by  the  diffusive  charity  of  this  hia
proselyte,  whom  he  might  style  his  son,  as  having  begotten  him  in  Christ  Jesus
through  the  gospel,  but  whom  he  here  styles  his  brother,  that  he  might  not  seem  to
affect  a  superiority  over  him,  but  might  place  himself  on  the  same  level  with  him.
How  apt  an  introduction  is  this  applause,  given  by  St.  Paul  to  Philemon,  to  that
request,  which  he  was  now  to  usher  in  ?  Had  he  been  so  universally  kind  to  all  the
faithfal,  and  woold  not  the  same  good  disposition  incline  him  to  be  kind  to  St.


PHILEMON,  41


Paul  f  Had  be  by  his  charity  towards  the  saints  gained  so  great  a  reputation,  and
woald  he  forfeit  his  character  by  an  unkind  repulse  of  the  apostle's  request  ?  Had
the  Apostle  found  so  much  joy  and  consolation  from  the  report  of  his  charity
towards  those  who  were  strangers  to  St.  Paul,  and  would  he  not  contribute  to  his
pleasure  and  comfort,  by  being  merciful  and  kind  to  Onesimus,  for  whom  the
apoftle  was  so  nearly  and  affectionately  concerned.    {Bp.  Smalridge.)

Ver.  8.  Though  I  might  be  much  bold  In  Christ  to  enjoin  thee. — Mingled  com-
tnand  and  entreaty : — The  balance  and  propriety  of  St.  Paul's  language  in  this  placa
is  not  always  understood.  He  does  not  say  "  I  have  no  right  at  all  to  command
you,"  but  "  authority  I  have  to  command  your  obedience — not,  indeed,  of  earthly
rank,  but  in  the  sphere  of  Christ."  This  mingled  tone  of  command  and  entreaiy
is  the  exact  re  Sex  of  the  mingled  respect  and  affection  which,  in  his  earliest  Epistle,
he  claims  for  the  ministerial  office  (1  Thess.  v.  12,  13).  There  are  two  spirits  which
have  prevailed  in  the  Christian  ministry  at  different  times  and  in  different  oircam<
stances — the  spirit  of  the  heirarch  and  the  spirit  of  the  religious  demagogue.  St.
Paul's  tone  here  shows  that  he  was  too  humble  for  the  first,  too  full  of  gentle  dignity
for  the  second.  {Bp.  Wm.  Alexander.)  Authoritative  in  Christ: — He  has  na
authority  in  himself,  but  he  has  in  Christ.  His  own  personality  gives  him  none,
but  his  relation  to  his  Master  does.  It  is  a  distinct  assertion  of  right  to  command,
and  an  equally  distinct  repudiation  of  any  such  right,  except  as  derived  from  hia
anion  with  Jesus.     {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Miniiterial  boldness : — Ministers  may

be  bold  in  the  execution  of  their  office.  1.  God  commands  it  (Jer.  i.  17).  2.  It  ia
that  which  they  themselves  beg  by  earnest  prayers  at  the  hand  of  God  (Acts  iv.  29,
30 ;  Eph.  vi.  18,  19).  8.  The  dignity  of  their  office  requires  it  (2  Cor.  v.  20).  4.
God's  protection  may  encourage  unto  it  (Jer.  i  18).  5.  It  procures  admiration
even  with  the  very  enemies  (Acts  iv.  13).     {W.  Jones,  D.D.)  The  ministerial

office  is  one  of  power  and  authority : — 1.  If  we  consider  the  names  that  are  given
onto  them,  and  the  honourable  titles  whereby  they  are  called,  we  shall  be  moved  to
confess  their  calling  to  be  accompanied  with  power  under  Christ.    If,  then,  the  true
ministers  of  Christ  be  fathers,  shepherds,  ambassadors,  and  captains  under  Christ,
the  great  Shepherd  of  the  sheep,  their  office  cannot  be  without  jurisdiction  and
authority  over  the  people  of  God  committed  to  their  charge.    2.  If  we  consider  the
fruits  and  effects  that  are  ascribed  in  the  Word  to  the  ministers  of  the  Word,  we
shall  see  that  their  ministry  is  joined  with  authority.    They  are  the  means  to  bring
us  to  the  knowledge  of  Christ,  to  the  bosom  of  the  Church,  and  to  the  kingdom  of
heaven.    Their  office  is  to  convert  sinners  and  to  save  souls.     3.  There  is  a  co-opera-
tion  of  God  and  the  minister's  office  together,  and  an  admirable  sympathy  between
them.    If,  then,  God  and  the  minister  do  work  together,  he  may  lawfully  enjoin
men  to  do  their  duties.     Uses — 1.  (1)  It  condemneth  those  that  think  the  ministers
proud  and  presumptuous,  and  accuse  them  as  saucy  and  malapert  when  they  com-
mand us  from  the  Lord  as  His  ambassadors,  and  arrest  us  for  our  sins  as  His
sergeants.    It  is  their  duty  not  only  to  teach  and  admonish,  to  exhort,  and  to  com-
fort, but  to  convince  and  reprove,  to  threaten,  and  to  denounce  judgments  from  God
against  the  obstinate  and  impenitent.    (2)   It  reproveth  those  that  account  the
ministers  their  vassals  and  slaves,  whereas  the  case  of  a  pastor  is  not  to  be  made
an  underling  or  a  block  for  every  one  to  insult  and  tread.     (3)  The  high  excellency
of  this  calling  reproveth  those  that  account  the  office  too  base  and  low  for  them
and  for  their  children.     Many  there  are  that  live  by  the  gospel  that  are  ashamed
to  preach  the  gospel.     (4)  If  it  be  a  calling  of  such  dignity,  it  reproveth  those  that
run  before  they  be  sent,  and  wait  not  a  lawful  calling  from  God,  that  they  may  dis-
charge it  afterward  with  peace  of  heart  and  comfort  of  conscience.     (5)  It  reproveth
such  as  regard  not  the  censures  of  the  Church  inflicted  upon  evil  doers.     2.  Seeing
boldness  to  command  under  Christ  belongeth  to  the  office  of  minister,  it  teacheth
us  and  putteUi  us  in  mind  of  many  good  duties;  as — (1)  To  ask  this  gift  of  God,  and
crave  of  Him  to  endue  us  with  the  zeal  of  His  glory  and  other  graces  of  His  spirit,
that  we  may  speak  the  Word  boldly,  as  we  onght  to  speak.     (2)  It  teacheth  the
ministers  not  to  lose  their  authority,  and  so  to  shame  their  oaUing,  and  their
Master  that  hath  put  them  in  their  calling,  bringing  themselves  and  their  ministry
under  the  subjection  and  slavery  of  others.     (3)  It  teacheth  the  ministers  to  take
heed  they  abuse  not  their  authority  and  turn  it  into  tyranny,  but  employ  it  unto
edification,  not  to  the  destruction  of  the  Church,  or  any  member  thereof.     (4)  It
serveth  for  instruction  of  the  people,  that  they  despise  not  the  ministry  of  the
Word,  but  alway  be  ready  to  hear  it  with  reverence.    For  wheresoevtr  there  ia


4S  TEE  BIBLICALJLLUSTRATOR,

aaihority  in  the  speaker  there  should  be  fear  and  reverence  in  the  hearar.
{W.  AttertoU.)  TFise  ministerial  exhortation: — I.  Observe,  first,  in  the  ezampl*
of  the  apostle,  that  hinistebs  htist  deal  in  the  mildest  atd  oentlbst  uannbi
THAI  HAT  BB  WITH  THEiB  HEABEBS,  entreating,  persuading,  exhorting,  beseeching,
even  then  when  they  may  lawfully  command.  II.  Observe,  further,  in  Paol'i
example,  that  BOMETniEs  WB  abb  to  tibld  or  oub  bioht,  neither  always  may  we
do  those  things  which  of  themselves  are  lawful  and  indifferent.  Here,  then,  ia
eondemned  the  tenacity  and  temerity  of  some  in  the  use  of  that  liberty  which  the
Word  hath  granted  them  in  things  indifferent.  Their  tenacity,  that  they  hold  their
own  stiffly,  and  will  not  let  go  the  least  part  of  their  right,  though  the  glory  of
God  and  good  of  their  brethren  do  earnestly  crave  it  at  their  hands.  Their  temerity,
Bot  only  that  they  themselves  rush  venturously  upon  all  things  that  in  themselves
are  lawful,  not  considering  whether  in  regard  of  some  circumstances  it  may  not  be
unlawful  for  them,  what  inconvenience  may  ensue,  what  hurt  may  also  arise  to
the  gospel,  but  also  censure  and  condemn  others,  who,  kept  back  by  Christian
wisdom  and  charity,  dare  not  run  with  them  to  the  same  excessive  use  of  their
Uberty.  Let  them  remember  that  Paul,  in  this  place,  having  much  liberty  of  command-
ing, yet  chose  rather  to  entreat  III.  Observe,  thirdly,  what  it  is  that  will  hakb
A  Cbbistian  abbidoe  himself  sometimes  or  THB  USB  or  ma  libebtt  ;  namely,
THB  LOVB  or  Goo  AND  ouB  BBETHBEM.  For  love's  Sake  I  rather  beseech  thee.  For
thia  is  reckoned  among  the  properties  of  love  by  the  apostle ;  that  it  seeketh  not
her  own,  but  His,  whom  it  loveth.  If  God's  glory  and  the  Church's  good  be  dear
vnto  ns,  we  will  not  use  our  liberty  to  the  full  in  those  things  which  may  hinder
and  hurt  both.    (D.  Dyke,  BJ).)

Yer.  9.  Tet  for  love's  saKe  I  rather  beseech  thee. — A  beautiful  ^edmen  of
Christian  humility  and  genuine  pathoB : — I  might  be  bold  to  command  thee  in
Christ's  name,  by  which  I  am  strong  ;  but  thou  dost  not  need  any  argument  derived
from  my  strength ;  and  for  love's  sake  I  rather  beseech  thee  by  my  own  weakneu,  by
my  years,  and  by  my  chains.  Such  language — the  language  of  entreaty— best  befits
me  now  in  my  prison  and  in  my  old  age.  {Bp.  Chris.  Wordsworth.)  The  entreaty
of  love : — Love  naturally  beseeches,  and  does  not  command.  The  harsh  voice  of
command  is  simply  the  imposition  of  another's  will,  and  it  belongs  to  relationships
in  which  the  heart  has  no  share.  But  wherever  love  is  the  bond,  grace  is  poured
into  the  Ups,  and  "  I  order  "  becomes  "  I  pray."  So  that  even  wliere  the  outward
form  of  authority  is  still  kept,  as  in  a  parent  to  young  children,  there  will  ever  be
some  endearing  word  to  swathe  the  harsh  imperative  in  tenderness,  Uke  a  sword
blade  wrapped  about  with  wool,  lest  it  should  wound.  Love  tends  to  obliterate  the
hard  distinction  of  superior  and  inferior,  which  finds  its  expression  in  laconic
orders  and  silent  obedience.  It  seeks  not  for  mere  compliance  with  commands,  but
for  oneness  of  will.  Its  entreaties  are  more  powerful  than  imperatives.  The
Ughtest  wish  breathed  by  loved  Ups  is  stronger  than  all  stem  injunctions — often,
ftlfm  1  than  all  laws  of  duty.  The  heart  is  so  tuned  as  only  to  vibrate  to  that  one
tone.  The  rocking  stones,  which  aU  the  storms  of  winter  may  howl  round  and  not
move,  can  be  set  swinging  by  a  Ught  touch.  Una  leads  the  lion  in  a  silken  leash.
Love  controls  the  wildest  nature.  Authority  is  the  weapon  of  a  weak  man,  who  is
afraid  of  his  own  power  to  get  himself  obeyed ;  or  of  a  selfish  one,  who  seeks  for
mechanical  submission  rather  than  for  the  fealty  of  willing  hearts.  Love  is  the
weapon  of  a  strong  man,  who  can  cast  aside  the  trappings  of  superiority,  and  is
never  loftier  than  when  he  descends,  nor  more  absolute  than  when  he  abjures
authority  and  appeals  with  love  to  love.    {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Oentle  meam  of

persuading  men  to  be  used  rather  than  severe : — L  Reasons.  1.  We  are  bound  to
nse  those  means  and  to  take  that  course  which  is  most  forcible  and  effectual.  But
to  deal  with  love,  and  to  handle  our  brethren  kindly  and  meekly,  is  most  likely  to
prevail  with  most  men.  Therefore  tbe  apostle  requireth  that  the  servant  of  God
must  not  strive,  but  must  be  gentle  toward  all  men,  apt  to  teach,  suffering  the  evil,
instructing  them  with  meekness  that  are  contrary  minded.  There  is  no  way  so
available  to  bring  evil  men  out  of  the  dangers  wherein  they  stand,  who  are,  as  it
were,  made  bondslaves  to  do  the  devil's  will,  than  to  allure  them  by  gentleness,  to
draw  them  by  long-suffering,  and  to  overcome  them  by  patience.  2.  Thia  course,
well  and  duly  observed,  serveth  to  persuade  them  with  whom  we  deal  of  our  love
and  tender  affection  towards  them.  For  loving  and  friendly  dealing  argueth  loving
and  affectionate  minds,  and  the  ready  way  to  bend  and  incline  him  unto  that  which
is  good,  and  to  torn  him  from  that  which  is  evil,  when  his  persuasions  are  per-


PHILEMON,  43


eeiyed  to  tend  to  the  profit  and  benefit  of  him  whom  we  would  persuade.  8.  We
are  to  imitate  oar  Head  and  Master,  Christ  Jesus ;  He  used  not  His  authority  and
power  that  was  in  Him ;  He  dealt  not  roughly  and  severely  with  His  enemies,  but
meekly  and  mercifully,  and  most  compassionately ;  He  was  meek,  and  as  a  lamb
before  the  shearer.  H.  Uses.  1.  We  learn  that  mercy  and  compassion — ^yea,  all
tokens  and  testimonies  of  love — are  to  be  showed  toward  malefactors,  even  when
justice  is  to  be  executed  and  punishment  inflicted.  2.  Seeing  we  are  to  win  men
rather  by  gentleness  and  love,  we  must  acknowledge  that  great  wisdom  and  discre-
tion is  required  in  the  ministry,  to  divide  the  Word  of  God  aright,  and  to  be  able  to
apply  himself  to  every  degree  and  caUrng  of  men.  When  the  people  of  God  went
out  to  war,  the  Lord  commanded  them  to  oiler  conditions  of  peace  to  that  city  ;  if
it  refuse  to  make  peace,  they  should  besiege  it,  smite  it,  and  destroy  it.  So  should
we,  when  we  execute  our  ofl5ce,  first  offer  peace  before  we  proclaim  war ;  first  allure
by  gentleness  before  we  thunder  out  judgments ;  first  exhort  before  we  threaten.
In  the  material  buUding,  all  the  stones  that  are  to  be  fitted  to  the  building  are  not
of  one  nature ;  some  are  soft  and  easy  to  be  fitted  and  hammered ;  others  more
hard  and  of  a  flintier  marble  disposition — they  require  sharp  tools,  strong  blows,
before  they  can  be  brought  into  form,  or  be  squared  for  that  place  which  they  are
to  hold.  So  it  is  with  the  lively  stones  of  the  spiritual  temple  of  God  :  some  have
soft  hearts  of  flesh,  and  are  of  humble  and  contrite  spirits,  Uke  the  bruised  reed  or
the  smoking  flax ;  others  have  hearts  hard  as  the  adamant,  and  cannot  easily  be
brought  to  feel  the  strokes  of  the  Word  of  God.  These  are  not  to  be  dealt  withal
and  handled  alike,  but  after  a  divers  manner.  This  is  the  counsel  of  the  apostle
Jude,  "  Have  compassion  of  some  in  putting  difference,  and  others  save  with  fear,
pulling  them  out  of  the  fire,  and  hate  even  that  garment  which  is  spotted  by  the
flesh."  This  serveth  to  reprove,  first,  such  as  use  unseasonable  lenity  when  godly
severity  is  required.  Some  diseases  require  sharp  medicines.  Secondly,  it  reproveth
such  as  are  too  sharp  and  vigorous  against  offenders,  and  forget  all  rules  of  charity
toward  them.  True  it  is,  the  pastors  and  ministers  are  to  rebuke  such  as  are
fallen ;  but  when  they  see  sorrow  for  sin,  and  repentance  from  dead  works  wrought
in  them,  they  should  begin  to  raise  them  up  again  and  comfort  them  with  the
precious  promises  of  the  gospel,  lest  they  should  be  overwhelmed  with  despair  and
be  swallowed  up  with  over-much  heaviness.  3.  And,  last  of  all,  we  learn  for  our
obedience,  that  whensoever  entreating,  gentle,  or  loving  dealing  is  used  to  call  men
home  to  God  and  to  themselves,  it  is  their  duty  to  yield  themselves  and  to  embrace
earnestly  the  mercies  of  God  offered  unto  them.  The  sin  of  contempt  and  con-
tumacy is  fearful,  when  the  bountifulness  of  God  is  despised.  His  mercies  loathed.
His  patience  and  long-suffering  abused.  If  we  will  not  hear  when  He  crieth  to  us,
we  shall  cry  also  in  the  days  of  our  misery,  and  He  will  not  hear  us  in  our  trouble,
but  mock  at  our  affliction.  {W.  Attersoll.)  Love  more  effective  than  severity  :—
One  winter  morning,  as  the  Wind  set  out  on  his  day's  work,  he  found  the  trees
loaded  with  ice.  Every  tiny  twig  was  bending  under  an  armour  many  times  its
weight  The  little  white  lady  birches  had  drooped  until  their  heads  touched  the
ground.  A  great  groan  to  be  delivered  went  up  from  all  the  trees.  •*  This  will
never  do  I "  cried  the  Wind ;  and  straightway  he  went  to  work  with  all  his  might.
The  branches  of  the  giant  elms  swung  and  creaked.  The  brown,  curled  leaves
Btill  clinging  to  the  oaks  were  snatched  away  and  went  whirling  through  the  air.
There  was  a  great  rustling  in  aU  the  wood.  But  the  ice  did  not  move.  Still  harder
the  wind  blew.  And  now  whole  branches  came  crashing  down,  until  they  lay  thick
on  the  ground  in  their  glittering  winding-sheets.  But  still  the  ice  did  not  move.
At  last  the  Spirit  of  the  Woods  came  forth,  frowning.  ••  Do  you  call  this  helpmg?  "
cried  she.  "  You  are  ruining  my  trees.  To  get  rid  of  the  ice,  forsooth,  you  are
breaking  off  the  boughs.  Get  you  gone  1 "  The  Wind  retired  to  his  cave,  and  was
melancholy  all  day.  He  had  had  a  sincere  desire  to  do  good,  but  now  he  saw  that
he  had  only  done  harm.  He  shuddered  as  he  thought  of  the  wrecks  he  had  made
in  his  nntempered  zeal.  "What  is  the  use  of  my  trying  to  do  anything?"  he
dghed.  Many  an  eager  soul  has  known  such  hours,  when  it  had  thought  to  add  its
note  of  praise  to  the  great  chorus,  and  has  only  succeeded  in  making  a  discord.
The  next  morning  the  Sun  knocked  at  the  door  of  the  cave,  and  cried,  in  genial
tones,  "  Come  on,  friend  I  I  want  your  help.  The  trees  must  be  rid  of  their  load.
I  will  shine  on  them,  and  then  do  you  gently  wave  their  branches  and  shake  off  the
loosened  ice."  They  went  forth  together,  and  the  Sun  shone  on  the  forest.  An
bonr  passed.  The  only  visible  result  was  here  and  there  a  drop  of  water  from  the
1^  boughs.     **  We  shall  never  get  through  at  this  rate  1 "  panted  the  Wind*


44  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.

"  Gently,  friend,  gently !  All  in  good  time  1 "  replied  the  Sun.  "  The  tee  was  a
day  and  a  night  in  forming.  Could  you  hope  to  get  rid  of  it  by  one  fierce  gust  ?
When  I  get  higher  in  the  sky,  I  can  strike  the  trees  more  directly  with  my  beams."
After  another  hour  of  silent  shining,  the  Sun  whispered,  "  Now,  friend,  with  your
wings  I  But  not  too  violently.  See,  now,  some  pieces  are  falling.  Two  or  three
hours  of  work  like  this,  and  our  task  is  done.  Ihere  is  another  piece  loose."  So
the  Sun  shone  on,  and  the  wind  from  time  to  time  shook  down  the  loosened  pieces
of  ice,  and  what  did  not  rattle  down  dissolved  in  fast-flowing  tears  under  the  gentle
yet  burning  eye  of  the  Sun.  The  birches  gradually  lifted  their  pliant  forms.  The
Spirit  of  the  Woods  came  out  with  her  blessing  for  the  two  workers.  And  that
night  the  Wind  returned  to  his  cave  humbled  but  joyous,  because  he  had  found
the  "more  excellent  way."  Paul  the  aged.— TTie  aged  Christian: — We  have

I.   In  Paul's  CIRCUMSTANCES  the  occupations  of  the  aged  Christian.      1.   He

preaches  and  teaches.  2.  He  is  full  of  care  for  distant  Churches.  3.  He  is  tenderly
mterested  in  individuals  near  him.  H.  In  Paul's  recollections  the  memories  of  the
AQED  Christian.  1.  Trials.  2.  Labours.  3.  Graces.  III.  In  Paul's  anticipations
THE  HOPES  OF  THE  AGED  CHRISTIAN.  1.  Hope  of  renewed  service  on  earth.  2.  Hope  of
the  victory  of  the  truth  on  earth.  3.  Hope  of  blessedness  in  heaven.  ( U.  R.  Thomas.)
Paul  the  aged  : — We  are  accustomed  to  think  of  Paul  the  persecutor,  the  Christian,
the  missionary,  the  apostle,  the  inspired  scribe,  the  sufferer  for  Christ.  Here
another  and  unexpected  epithet  pictures  him  to  us  as  "Paul  the  aged."  The  word
is  from  his  own  pen.  Perhaps  now  he  is  learning  for  the  first  time  that  his  days
of  mature  vigour  are  past.  Manifold  labours,  perils,  trials,  have  broken  him  in
premature  age.  I.  Paul  wears  old  age  as  a  crown  (see  Prov.  xvi.  31).  There
is  a  pleasant  story  told  of  Frederick  the  Great.  At  a  parade  of  the  guard  in  the
King's  apartments  at  Berlin,  Frederick's  quick  eye  picked  out  among  the  splendid
crowd  the  brave  old  Ziethen,  who,  though  turned  eighty-five  years,  had  come  to
pay  his  duty  to  his  monarch.  Greeting  the  veteran  with  a  cry  of  joy,  the  King
called  for  a  chair.  Objections  were  in  vain.  "Sit  down,  good  father,"  said  the
King.  "  I  will  have  it  so,  or  I  must  instantly  leave  the  room."  The  old  soldier
yielded,  and  Frederick  the  Great  continued  standing  before  him,  the  centre  of  the
illustricus  circle  that  had  gathered  around,  and  so  "  honoured  the  face  of  the  old
man."  The  aged  Christian  has  his  peculiar  infirmities,  but  he  also  has  his  peculiar
joys.  To  the  aged  saint  come  the  fullest  revelations  of  God,  the  most  comfortable
words  of  Christ,  the  sweetest  visitations  of  the  Spirit.  II.  Paul's  old  age  had
ITS  DUTIES  AND  LABOURS.  He  does  not  excuse  him>elf  from  duty  on  the  ground
of  age.  He  will  do  what  he  can  for  Onesimus.  He  writes  for  him  with  a  delicacy,
a  tact,  a  tenderness,  an  urgency,  such  as  he  himself  never  surpassed.  The  aged
Christian  is  still  a  unit  in  the  host  of  society,  still  kindred  to  some  and  neighbour
and  friend  to  others.  And  still,  however  much  may  be  lost,  duty  remains — duty
to  himself,  to  others,  and  in  all  to  God.  Life  is  lengthened  that  it  may  labour  for
Christ.  And  is  not  the  old  the  best  workman  ?  The  young  may  attract  more
attention,  but  it  is  the  experienced  hand  that  does  the  most  and  best.  III.  Paul
USED  HIS  AGE  AS  A  PLEA  OF  LOVE.  Where  wc  may  command,  it  is  wise  to  request.
Love  wins  love.  Gentleness  calls  out  gentleness.  IV.  Paul  is  "  Paul  the  aged  "
NO  MORE.  He  has  escaped,  through  death,  from  all  earthly  prisons,  and  is  op-
pressed by  old  age  no  longer.  He  is  "  with  Christ,  which  is  far  better."  (G.  T.
Coster.)  Reverence  due  to  old  age  .-—Old  men  are  to  be  reverenced— 1.  For
their  very  age,  because  they  draw  nearest  to  the  Ancient  of  Days  (Lev.  xix.  32).
2.  For  their  wisdom.  3.  For  then:  experience.  4.  For  their  piety  (Prov.  xvi.  31).
(TF.  Jones,  D.D.)  The  aged  minister  .-—I.  Eeview  his  past  history.     1.  His

character;  and  how,  during  this  long  period,  he  has  conducted  himself:  what
reputation  he  has  spent  so  m;tny  years  in  building  up,  and  in  what  estimate  he  is
now  held  when  grey  hairs  are  upon  him.  2.  His  labours.  True,  his  toils  are
chiefly  mental;  but  who  knows  not  that,  on  this  account,  they  are  the  more
exhausting  and  wearing?  3.  His  usefulness.  How  many  have  been  impressed  by
his  example,  enriched  by  his  beneficence,  blessed  by  his  prayers,  and  instructed  by
his  principles.  4.  His  trials.  Ah,  you  know  a  minister's  joys  far  better  thau  you
know  his  sorrows.  You  see  his  sails,  but  not  his  ballast.  You  follow  hiu»  in  his
public  walks  of  labour,  but  not  in  his  Gethsemane  retreat,  where  he  goes  to  pray
and  agonise  alone.  He  calls  you  to  shire  his  felicities,  but  he  carries  his  per
plexities  and  his  griefs  to  his  closet  and  his  God.  Look,  then,  at  the  hoary  man
over  whom  the  clouds  of  fifty  years  have  rolled.  How  many  stoims  have  burst
upon  that  aged  tree,  tearing  off  its  branches,  stripping  off  its  leaves,  and  dismantUng


PHILEMON,  45


it  in  some  cases,  till  little  else  but  the  mere  trunk  and  a  few  boughs  remain  of  all
that  once  umbrageous  top.  Still,  however,  the  venerable  trunk  does  remain,  and
there  is  life  in  it  to  the  last.  How  much  of  Divine  power  and  faithfulness  and
grace  we  associate  with  that  sacred  antique.  6.  His  temptations.  A  minister  is
the  chief  mark  for  Satan's  arrows.  H.  Estdiate  hib  present  claims.  1.  He  is
entitled,  if  a  holy  and  faithful  man,  and  in  proportion  to  his  sanctity  and  fidelity,
to  respect  and  veneration.  2.  He  is  entitled  to  affection.  It  is  not  claimed  for
what  he  is  in  himself,  but  what  he  is  to  his  people  as  their  friend  and  counsellor ;
in  fact,  the  instrument  of  their  salvation  and  the  promoter  of  their  progressive
sanctification.  3.  He  has  a  right  to  expect  gratitude.  4.  I  next  mention  candour
and  forbearance  as  virtues  which  an  aged  minister  is  entitled  to  expect,  and  of
which,  in  some  cases,  by  the  gathering  infirmities  of  declining  years,  he  will  stand
in  need.  5.  And  has  he  net  a  claim  upon  your  attendance  upon  his  ministry?
To  desert  him  when  he  is  old  is  a  poor  reward  for  the  more  eilective  services  ol
younger  and  stronger  days.  III.  AjfTiciPATE  ms  future  destint.  Growth,  decline,
and  death,  are  the  law  of  all  life  on  earth,  from  which  there  is  no  exemption  on
behalf  of  the  minister  of  the  gospel.  The  weary,  worn-out  labourer  goes  to  his
rest  and  to  his  reward ;  goes  to  be  associated  with  those  who  were  his  hope  and  joy
on  earth,  and  now  are  to  be  his  crown  of  rejoicing  in  the  presence  of  Christ;  goes
to  meet  his  Maker,  and  hear  Him  say,  "  Well  done,  good  and  faithful  servant ;  enter
thou  into  the  joy  of  the  Lord."  {J.  A.  James.)  A  review  of  life  and  a  glimpse
of  glory : — This  language — 1.  Supposes  childhood  and  the  scenes  of  life  already
past.  2.  Suggests  a  review  of  the  events  of  individual  life.  8.  Reminds  us  of  th»
infirmities  which  years  witness.  4.  Shows  Paul  to  ns  as  an  old  disciple — not  only
a  man,  but  a  "  new  man,"  a  man  in  Christ.  5.  Contains  a  touching  plea.  &
Suggests  that  the  aged  Christian  has  nearly  finished  his  course.  {J.  S.  PearsaU.)
The  standard  of  age : — He  was,  perhaps,  sixty,  perhaps  a  few  years  more.  Labour,
sorrow,  the  storms  of  ocean  and  the  fires  of  thought,  possible  sickliness — the  sad
and  solemn  maturity  which  is  the  portion  upon  earth  of  men  who  believe  intensely
— ^had  done  their  work.  Roger  Bacon  wrote  "  me  senem  "  at  fifty-two  or  fifty-three,
and  Sir  Walter  Scott  at  fifty-five  calls  himself  sadly  "  an  old  grey  man  and  aged."
In  truth,  the  standard  by  which  old  age  is  measured  is  pretty  much  subjective.  At
an  age  about  fifteen  years  earlier  than  that  of  St.  Paul  at  this  time,  Chateaubriand
writes,  "  Dkjk  je  n'appartenais  plus  a  ces  matins  qui  se  consolent  eux-mSmes — je
tonchais  &  ces  henres  du  soir  qui  ont  besoin  d'ltre  consol^es."  At  different  periods
of  life  we  adopt  a  different  standard.  It  was  said  by  Victor  Hugo  that  forty  is  the
old  age  of  youth,  and  fifty  the  youth  of  old  age.  {Bp.  Wm.  Alexander.)  Anxietie$
tell  on  age : — Such  a  multitude  of  anxieties  and  endurances  as  are  recounted  in
2  Cor.  xi.  23-30  must  have  told  upon  him  and  exhausted  his  manly  vigour.  (M.F.
Sadler,  M.A.)  Christian  old  age: — No  more  beautiful  picture  of  the  bright

energy  and  freshness  still  possible  to  the  old  was  ever  painted  than  may  be  gathered
from  the  apostle's  unconscious  sketch  of  himself.  He  delighted  in  having  fresh
young  life  about  him — Timothy,  Titus,  Mark,  and  others — boys  in  comparison
witk  himself,  whom  yet  he  admitted  to  close  intimacy,  as  some  old  general  might
the  youths  of  his  staff,  warming  his  old  age  at  the  genial  flame  of  their  growing
energies  and  unworn  hopes.  His  was  a  joyful  old  age,  too,  notwithstanding  many
burdens  of  anxiety  and  sorrow.  We  hear  the  clear  song  of  his  gladness  ringing
through  the  epistle  of  joy — that  to  the  Philippians — which,  like  this,  dates  from  his
Roman  captivity.  A  Christian  old  age  should  be  joyful,  and  it  only  will  be ;  for  the
joys  of  the  natural  Ufe  burn  low  when  the  fuel  that  fed  them  is  nearly  exhausted,
and  withered  hands  are  held  in  vain  over  the  dying  embers.  But  Christ's  joy
"  remains,"  and  a  Christian  old  age  may  be  like  the  polar  midsummer  days,  when
the  sun  shines  till  midnight,  and  dips  but  for  an  imperceptible  interval  ere  it  rises
for  the  unending  day  of  heaven.  Paul  the  aged  was  full  of  interest  in  the  things
of  the  day — no  mere  "  praiser  of  time  gone  by,"  but  a  strenuous  worker,  cherish-
ing a  quick  sympathy  and  an  eager  interest,  which  kept  him  young  to  the  end.
And  over  his  cheery,  sympathetic,  busy  old  age  there  is  thrown  the  light  of  a
great  hope,  which  kindles  desire  and  onward  looks  in  his  dim  eyes,  and  parts
"such  a  one  as  Paul  the  aged  "  by  a  whole  universe  from  the  old  whose  future  is
dark  and  their  pai^t  dreary,  whose  hope  is  a  phantom  and  their  memory  a  pang.
{A,  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Now  also  a  prisoner  of  Jesus  Christ. — Duty  enforced  by
personal  consideration  : — He  holds  up  his  fettered  wrist,  and  in  effect  says,  "  Surely
you  will  not  refuse  anything  that  you  can  do  to  wrap  a  silken  softness  round  the
eold,  hard  iron,  especially  when  you  remember  for  whose  sake  and  by  whose  will  I


4ft  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,

am  boimd  with  this  ohaio."  He  thns  brings  personal  motives  to  reinforce  dnty
which  is  binding  from  other  and  higher  considerations.  Christ  does  thus  with  His
servants.  He  does  not  simply  hold  up  before  us  a  cold  law  of  duty,  but  warms  it
by  introducing  our  personal  relation  to  Him  as  the  main  motive  for  keeping  it.
Apart  from  Him,  morality  can  only  poult  to  the  tables  of  stone  and  say,  '*  There  t
that  is  what  you  ought  to  do.  Do  it,  or  face  the  consequences."  But  Christ  sayi,
••  I  have  given  Myself  for  you.  My  will  is  your  law.  Will  you  do  it  for  My  sake?  ••
Instead  of  the  chilling,  statuesque  ideal,  as  pure  as  marble  and  as  cold,  a  Brother
stands  before  us  with  a  heart  that  beats,  a  smile  on  His  face,  a  hand  outstretched
to  help ;  and  His  word  is,  "  If  ye  love  Me,  keep  My  commandments."    {Ibid.)

Ver.  10.  I  beseech  thee  for  my  son  Oneslmns. — Softened  by  the  entreaty  of  a
friend: — This  and  the  previous  verse  taken  together  seem  to  contain  two  referenoef
to  the  Eoman  law.  "  For  the  love's  sake  I  rather  beseech — being  such  an  one  as
Paul,  an  old  man,  and,  as  it  is,  a  prisoner  of  Jesus  Christ,  I  beseech  thee  for  my  son,
Onesimus."  We  have  here  a  twofold  reference — a  plea  for  legal  pardon,  a  lUnt  at
emancipation.    1. 1  beseech — I  beseech  thee — puts  Paul  in  the  position  of  a  formal

eeeator.  The  law  gave  the  Eoman  slave  one  real  right.  It  relented  with  humane
consistency  upon  one  point,  and  one  only.  For  the  slave  in  the  Roman  Empire
the  right  of  asylum  did  not  exist.  His  only  conceivable  resource  was  that  he  might,
in  his  despair,  fly  to  a  friend  of  his  master,  not  for  the  purpose  of  concealment,  birt
of  intercession.  The  owner,  who  was  absolute  as  far  as  any  formal  tribunal  was  eon-
oemed,  might  be  softened  by  the  entreaties  of  the  friend  who  took  upon  himself  th«
office  of  intercessor.  The  Boman  jurisprudence  formally  declared  that  the  slave  in  fly-
ing to  a  friend  of  his  proprietor  with  this  intention  did  not  incur  the  enormous  guUt
of  becoming  ftigitivug,  St.  Paul,  indeed,  was  unable  to  appear  with  Onesimus.  But
in  the  emphatic  and  repeated  "beseech,"  he  seems  to  declare  himself  the  legal  j>r«-
cator,  2.  The  hint  at  the  emancipation  is  contained  in  the  recognition  of  Onesimui
by  St.  Paul  as  a  son.  Of  the  various  forms  of  manumissio  justa,  the  adoptive  stands
in  the  first  rank.  With  the  title  of  son,  the  rights  of  domestic  and  civil  life  flow  in
npon  the  slave,  new  born  into  the  common  family  of  humanity.  May  there  be  a
yet  further  allusion  ?  St.  Paul,  indeed,  hopes  to  see  Philemon  again  (ver.  22).  Yet
he  may  die.  In  these  literally  precativa  verba  ("I  beseech,"  " I  beseech  thee,"  vers.
9, 10),  in  what  may  be  his  last  will  and  testament,  he  lays  upon  Philemon,  as  if  his
heir,  the  duty,  not  only  of  pardoning,  but  of  giving  manumission  to  the  penitent
slave.     {Bp.  Wm.  Alexander.)        The  compassion  of  the  gospel: — I.  How  coiipas-

BIONATE  THE  GOSPEL  MAKES  A  MAN  TOWABD  HIS   8UITERINQ   FELLOW-MEN.       ThoUgh    the

greatest  man  then  alive — far  greater  than  the  Emperor  of  Home  himself — Paul,
illustrious  in  the  estimation  of  all  the  angels,  is  trying  to  do  good  to  a  poor  run-
away slave,  whom  the  pagan  Romans  looked  upon  as  a  mere  dog,  the  like  of  whom
many  a  Roman  master  had  flogged  to  death,  and  then  flung  into  the  pond  to  feed
the  fish.  He  acts  towards  Onesimus  as  a  father ;  calls  him  his  •'  son  converted  in
his  bonds."  Then  notice  the  prudence  and  tact  with  which  Paul  writes.  When  a
prudent  person  wishes  to  convey  a  piece  of  painful  news  to  another,  he  tries  to  pre-
pare the  mind  of  the  hearer  for  the  tidings.  For  example,  when  the  messenger
conveyed  to  Achilles  the  news  of  the  death  of  his  beloved  friend  Patroclus,  he  used
a  word  which  means  both  to  be  dead  and  to  be  asleep.  So  if  we  wanted  successfully
to  plead  the  cause  of  a  son  who  had  grievously  offended  his  father,  we  should  keep
out  of  sight  as  long  as  we  could  the  faults  of  the  son,  and  mention  all  we  could  in
his  favour.  So  Paul  acts  in  pleading  the  cause  of  Onesimus.  In  order  to  induce
Philemon  to  take  back  Onesimus,  he  first  calls  him  "  his  child  " ;  and  of  course
Philemon  would  respect  any  one  Paul  called  by  so  tender  a  name.  He  then  calls
him  •«  his  convert "  ;  and  of  course  Philemon  would  treat  with  affection  anv  convert
of  Paul.  He  then  speaks  of  his  conversion  during  his  imprisonment ;  and  then —
ast — comes  his  name,  "  Onesimus."  II.  How  mysteriously  God  often  works  in
THE  conversion  OF  SINFUL  MEN.  Onesimus  was  probably  born  at  Colosse,  in  Asia
Minor.  There  he  was  in  the  service  of  Philemon,  and,  having  robbed  his  master,
he  travelled  hundreds  of  miles  to  Rome,  to  hide  himself  from  pursuit.  Yet  there
the  Lord  met  him.  Perhaps  it  was  the  result  of  the  merest  accident  that  he  was
induced  to  enter  Paul's  humble  abode.  Perhaps  he  was  in  the  deepest  poverty,  and
meditated  drowning  himself  in  the  Tiber,  when  some  Christian  person  saw  him,
pitied  him,  and  induced  him  to  listen  to  that  gospel  he  had  often  heard  and  slighted
at  Colosse.  We  lately  heard  of  a  young  man  who  robbed  his  master  of  £10,  and
from  fear  of  detection  escaped  to  India.    The  preaching  of  a  missionary  was  the


PHILEMON.  47


means  ol  hia  eonversion,  and,  as  soon  as  possible,  he  sent  to  his  master  threefold
the  amount  stolen,  with  a  foil  and  contrite  confession  of  hisgailt.  III.  The  affuo-
TiOMS  OF  God's  bbbtants  nked  be  no  babbixb  to  their  spntrrnAL  usefclness.  Paal
was  a  prisoner  in  Borne  when  the  conversion  of  Onesimus  took  place.  Martin
Lather  was  called  to  endure  a  long  and  dreary  confinement,  but  daring  it  he  pro-
duced his  marrelloas  translation  of  the  Bible.  Bichard  Baxter  wrote  some  of  his
most  beautiful  works  in  prison,  or  at  seasons  of  bodily  affliction ;  and  if  John
Banyan  had  not  been  in  Bedford  jail,  most  likely  the  "  Pilgrim's  Progress  "  would
never  have  been  written.  Persecutors  have  tried  to  trample  under  foot  the  piety  of
the  people  of  God,  but,  like  the  aromatic  herb,  the  more  it  was  pressed,  the  more
sweet  odours  it  sent  forth.  If  we  have  the  will  we  have  the  power  to  serve  God  and
benefit  our  fellow-creatures.  In  health,  in  sickness,  in  death,  we  can  alike  glorify
God  and  honour  Christ.  IV.  A  faint  emblem  o»  the  compassion  of  Christ  fob
HUMAN  SOULS.  Says  Martin  Luther,  "  To  my  way  of  thinking,  we  are  aU  like  poor
Onesimus,  and  Christ  has  come  down  from  heaven  to  restore  us  to  our  Divine
Friend  and  Father."  (Homilist.)  Brotherly  regard  in  the  Church: — I.  We  learn
from  this  love  appearing  in  the  apostle  that  thb  basest  pebson  in  the  Ghubch,

TBULY  CONVEBTED  AND  BEOUOHT  UNTO  ChBIST,  SHOULD  NOT  BE  CONDEMNED,  BUT
HOST  IiOVINOLY,  TENDEBLY,  AND   BBOTHEBLY  BEOABDED.      The   least   and  loWCSt  mom-

ber  that  belongeth  to  God  ought  not  to  be  rejected  and  debased,  but  highly  for
Christ's  sake  to  be  honoured  and  respected.  Beasons:  1.  Those  that  are  least
esteemed,  and  are  of  lowest  condition,  were  bought  with  as  great  and  high  a  price
as  any  others.  2.  There  is  no  respect  of  persons  with  God.  3.  They  shall  re-
ceive  with  others  the  same  recompense  of  reward.  Uses :  1.  Seeing  we  are  bound
to  love  the  lowest  in  the  Church  that  belong  to  Christ,  we  learn  ^at  our  affections
must  be  carried  most  earnestly,  and  in  the  greatest  measure  to  those  that  have  the
greatest  measure  of  heavenly  graces,  not  regarding  riches,  or  kindred,  or  outward
respects  before  the  other.  2.  Seeing  every  member  of  Christ  must  be  much  esteemed,
be  he  never  so  mean,  it  teacheth  us  not  to  have  the  religion  of  God  and  the  faith
of  Christ  in  acceptation  of  persons.  3.  This  giveth  comfort  and  contentment  to
the  meanest  and  smallest  of  God's  saints,  and  putteth  them  in  remembrance  not  to
be  discomforted  and  out  of  heart  for  their  mean  calling  or  for  their  low  estate,  for
they  are  nothing  the  less  regarded  of  God,  or  to  be  esteemed  of  His  Church.  II.
We  learn  from  this  name  given  unto  Onesimus  converted  to  the  faith  that  thebb

OUGHT  to   be   the   SAME   AFFECTION   BETWEEN   THB   PASTOB  AND   THE   PEOPLE,  WHICH  IS

BETWEEN  THE  Fatheb  AND  THE  SoN.  Uscs  I — 1.  Seeing  the  minister  and  people
ought  to  love  as  father  and  son,  it  teacheth  both  of  them  to  cut  off  all  occasions  of
discord  and  division  and  to  nourish  love  and  mutual  concord  one  with  another.  It
may  be  many  occasions  may  arise,  which  if  by  wisdom  they  be  not  smothered  and
suppressed  in  the  beginning,  they  are  as  httle  sparks  that  quickly  break  out  into  a
flame,  and  the  flame  suffered  to  continue  consumeth  all  things  that  are  near  unto
it.  We  must  show  ourselves  ready  to  bring  water  to  quench  this  fire.  It  is  a  deceit-
ful snare,  and  wonderful  subtilty  of  Satan  to  cast  matters  of  dissension  between  the
minister  and  people  that  so  though  the  Word  be  among  them,  yet  that  it  may  by
that  means  be  with  less  fruit  and  profit  with  them.  2.  These  most  loving  titles
applied  to  the  minister  and  people  show  the  duties  required  of  pastors  toward  their
charge,  and  teach  them  to  love  them  as  tbeir  children,  to  tender  their  good,  to
exhort  them  to  lay  up  for  themselves  spiritual  riches.  Great  is  the  love  of  parents
towards  their  children.  If  the  child  be  sick  or  wayward,  they  do  not  cast  him  out
of  doors  or  withdraw  their  affection  from  him.  Hence  it  is  that  Christ  when  He
saw  the  people  scattered  abroad,  and  dispersed  here  and  there  as  sheep  without  a
Shepherd,  "  He  had  compassion  upon  them,  and  showed  great  love  toward  them."
We  see  how  Christ  applieth  this  to  the  conscience  of  Peter,  and  wUleth  him  to  try
his  love  toward  Him  by  feeding  His  sheep  and  lambs,  thereby  assuring  him  that  if
he  persuaded  himself  to  love  Christ  Jesus,  and  yet  was  not  careful  to  teach  His
people,  he  deceived  himself  and  Ued  to  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  would  find  him  out  in
his  sin.  Seeing  the  minister  and  people  ought  to  be  as  father  and  son,  this  showeth
the  duty  of  the  people  that  are  under  their  ministry  that  they  regard  their  ministers
as  their  parents,  honouring  them,  yielding  them  due  recompense,  esteeming  them
as  workers  together  with  God,  to  beget  them  to  Christ,  to  turn  them  to  salvation.
Of  our  parents  we  have  received  only  to  be,  of  our  ministers  we  have  received  to  be
well.  Of  our  parents  we  have  taken  our  first  buth,  of  our  ministers  we  have
obtained  our  second  birth.  Of  our  parents  we  have  been  brought  into  the  world  by
generation,  of  our  ministers  we  have  been  brought  into  the  Church  by  regeneration.


4S  THE  BIBLICAL  tLLUSTBATOR.

Our  first  begetting  waB  to  death,  our  second  or  new  life  is  to  life  and  salvation.   By
the  first  birth  we  are  heirs  of  wrath,  by  the  second  we  are  made  the  sons  of  God.
{W.  AtterioU.)        Onesimut : — 1.  The  love  which  St.  Paul  felt  towards  his  convert,
the  yearning  desire  with  which  he  longed  for  his  good.    He  overlooked  all  distinc-
tions of  rank ;  all  that  was  swallowed  np  by  a  deeper  bond  of  sympathy,  namely,
that  St.  Paul  had  been  the  means  of  bringing  bim  ont  of  darkness,  and  of  teaching
him  the  gospel  of  Christ  Jesus.     I  believe  there  is  no  nnion  more  lasting  and  true
than  the  spiritual  union  which  exists  between  those  who  have  done  and  those  who
have  received  good.    It  is  what  every  clergyman  longs  for,  that  he  may  know  that
his  ministrations  have  been  a  blessing  to  those  among  whom  he  ministers.    No
encouragement,  no  praise,  will  compare  for  a  moment  with  the  joy  of  feeling  that
he  has  souls  for  his  hire.  No  grief  is  so  heavy  as  the  fear  of  an  unblessed  ministry,
of  souls  not  drawn  towards  himself,  because  not  drawn  by  him  to  Christ  Jesus.    2.
St.  Paul  quite  foresaw  that  it  might  be  hard  for  Philemon  to  receive  back  his  slave
in  a  forgiving  spirit,  and  to  look  on  him  as  a  brother  through  faith  in  Christ,  and  as
an  equal  in  the  sight  of  God.     And  is  not  that  same  difficulty  of  daily  occurrence
among  us  ?    People  always  like  to  keep  up  the  notion  of  their  own  superiority  over
others  that  they  are  above,  and  others  below  them.     And  we  stand  on  our  rights,
and  we  resent  an  injury,  and  we  remember  a  wrong  that  has  been  done  us,  and  we
should  be  as  likely  as  Philemon  was  to  speak  in  disparagement  of  the  change  which
is  said  to  be  wrought  in  any  one  who  once  has  done  us  harm.    And  here  comes  up
the  evidence  of  a  truly  Christian  spirit.     To  forgive  those  who  have  injured  us ;  to
care  not  for  our  own,  but  for  another's  wealth ;  to  do  to  others  as  we  would  be  done
by ;  to  think  no  evil,  to  bear  no  malice,  to  rejoice  in  any  one's  conversion  to  Christ ;
here  are  the  signs  of  a  heart  renewed  and  sanctified  by  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Ghost.
3.  The  words  of  St .  Paul  may  remind  us  how  careful  we  ought  to  be,  how  much  of
pains  and  thought  we  ought  to  take  about  those  who  are  closely  connected  with  ns
in  the  affairs  of  our  daily  life.     Just  think  of  the  relations  which  should  exist
between  masters  and  servants,  between  employers  and  employed.     As  a  matter  of
fact,  how  little  there  is  for  the  most  part  of  mutual  interest  in  each  other's  welfare
beyond  the  mere  giving  and  receiving  of  wages,  and  the  good-natured  liking  which
may  exist  between  the  one  and  the  other.     How  seldom  the  matter  is  looked  on
from  a  Christian  point  of  view.    How  seldom  the  master  cares  for  more  than  to
prevent  dishonesty  and  vice,  and  to  avoid  scandal  in  his  house.  Is  he  really  anxious
about  the  spiritual  welfare  of  his  dependents  ?  Or  take  the  opposite  side.  For  those
who  go  out  to  service,  how  little  thought  is  given  to  any  part  of  the  engagement
beyond  th^  amount  of  wages,  or  the  lightness  of  the  work,  or  the  pleasantness  of
the  place.     Whether  the  household  be  one  where  Ood  is  really  served  is  a  less
common  question.    Everything  seems  to  be  remembered  but  the  one  chief  thing  of
all,  the  care  of  the  soul.     And  the  same  thought  may  be  applied  to  other  relations
of  life,  to  parents  and  children,  to  acquaintances  and  neighbours  and  friends.    God
allows  us  to  have  such  relations  one  to  another,  but  God  requires  that  He  should
stand  first  in  everything.    We  cannot  be  serving  God  in  sincerity  and  truth ;  we
cannot  be  fulfilling  the  charge  which  God  has  committed  to  ns,  unless  we  be  anxious
for  others  as  well  as  for  ourselves,  unless  we  would  depart  with  them  from  evil,  and
increase  with  them  in  good.     And  when  we  heartily  desire  and  pray  that  others,  as
well  as  ourselves,  may  have  God's  highest  blessing,  we  shall  find  now  wonderfully
the  Lord  answers  that  wish.  How  strange  that  the  running  away  of  Onesimus  from
his  master  should  have  led  to  his  conversion,  and  so  to  his  return.    But  not  one
whit  more  strange  than  are  the  great  results  which  have  come  to  us  all  from  what
seemed  the  smallest  and  most  unimportant  events.    A  word  will  change  the  current
of  a  man's  life,  will  lead  to  the  awakening  of  conscience,  to  the  searching  for  and
finding  salvation.     (H.  R.  Nevill.)        The  courtety  of  the  gospel .--  -I.  Thb  oemtlb
couBTEST  OF  THB  APOSTLE.    No  Christian  ought  to  be  rude  or  harsh.    This  letter  is
a  model  of  true  politeness — "  a  charming  and  masterly  example  of  Christian  love."
n.  Thb  electing  lovb  of  God.    Philemon  was  a  Christian ;  a  Christian  minister
too ;  yet  the  heart  of  Onesimus,  his  servant,  remains  hardened.    No  doubt  his
master  had  given  him  up.    But  the  Lord  had  not.    The  Lord  willed  not  that  he
should  perish.     III.  The  power  of  the  oospbl.    The  Holy  Ghost  brought  it  home
with  power  to  the  heart  of  Onesimus.    He  saw  the  evil  of  sin,  the  love  of  Jesus,  the
worth  of  his  soul.   IV.  The  value  or  a  Christian  servant  (ver.  11).  Now  Onesimus
is  really  a  changed  man,  he  will  be  "  profitable  "  to  Philemon.    A  truly  Christian
servant  will  serve  his  earthly  master  well,  because  he  serves  a  Master  in  heaven.
He  will  work  with  a  good  conscience,  and  prove  himself  faithful  and  true.     V.  Tea


PHILEMON.  49


aBoumi  ON  WHICH  St.  Paul  uboes  his  bequest  (ver.  19).  Those  who  are  God's
instroments  in  bringing  others  to  Jesas  onght  to  get  gratitude  from  their  spiritaal
children.  Strange  to  say,  this  is  almost  rare.  We  warmly  thank  friends  who  help
118  in  regard  to  this  world,  while  spiritual  blessings  are  too  often  forgotten.  (F.
Harper,  M.A.)  Spiritual  children: — Calvin's  three  children  all  died  in  infancy.
Of  the  last  he  wrote  to  a  friend :  "  The  Lord  gave  me  another  son,  and  the  Lord
hath  taken  him  away;  but  have  I  not  thousands  of  children  in  the  faith  of  Christ?"
(/.  F.  B.  Tinling,  B.A.)  The  after-life  of  One«mw«  .'—Ignatius  mentions  an
Onesimus  as  Bishop  of  Ephesus  at  the  time  of  his  journey  to  his  martyrdom  at
Borne,  and  though  we  must  allow  an  interval  of  forty-four  years  between  that  time
ftnd  the  date  of  this  Epistle,  it  is  at  least  possible  that  the  converted  slave  may  have
risen  to  that  high  position.  It  is  suggestive  that  Ignatius  speaks  of  him  in  the
highest  terms  as  a  man  of  "  inexpressible  love,"  and  exhorts  all  the  members  of  the
church  to  love  and  honour  him,  and  that  he  reproduces  St.  Paul's  allusion  to  the
meaning  of  his  name.  "  May  I,"  he  says,  after  naming  Onesimus,  "  have  joy  or
profit  of  you,  if  indeed  I  be  worthy  of  it."  ijiother  Onesimus  appears  half  a  century
later,  as  writing  to  Melito,  bishop  of  Sardis,  to  urge  on  him  the  compilation  of  a
volume  of  extracts  from  the  Scriptures ;  and  it  may,  perhaps,  be  inferred  from  its
occurrence  there  and  elsewhere,  in  the  regions  of  Asia  Minor,  that  the  memory  of
the  Colossian  slave  had  invested  the  name  with  a  special  popularity.  {Dean
Flumptre.)  Whom  I  have  begotten  in  my  ItonAs.— Spiritual  parentage  better
than  natural: — St.  Paul,  then,  was  Onesimus's  father — not  natural  but  Bpiritual;
and  we  are  more  beholden  to  our  spiritual  than  to  our  natural  fathers.  1.  They  beget
OS  of  B  woman ;  these  of  the  Church  which  is  the  spouse  of  Christ.  2.  They  beget
US  of  mortal  seed,  therefore  we  die  ;  these  of  the  immortal  seed  of  the  Word  of  God,
whereby  we  live  for  ever.  3.  They  beget  us  to  a  temporal  life ;  these  to  an  eternal.
4.  They  to  the  miseries  of  the  world ;  these  to  the  joys  of  the  world  to  come.  There-
fore let  OS  love  them,  let  us  have  them  in  singular  love  for  their  works'  sake.  As
Alexander  professed  he  was  more  beholden  to  Aristotle  than  Philip  ;  the  one  gave
him  esse,  being,  the  other  beiu  esse,  his  well-being.  Yet  this  is  little  considered  of.
{W.  Jones,  D.D.)        Eager  for  tuefulness : — I.  That  ministebs  may  love  theib  sons

WITH  AN  UNEQUAL  LOVE,  THST  HAT  LOVE  SOME  KOBE  THAN  OTHEBS,  aS  Christ  did  John

above  the  rest  of  the  disciples ;  namely,  those  in  whom  they  behold  a  more  lively
image  of  Christ,  and  in  the  begetting  of  whom  they  had  greater  experience  of  God's
power  and  mercy  than  in  others.  II.  That  the  Spibit  of  Gon  and  the  Wobd  or  God
IS  NOT  BOUND  TooETUEB  WITH  THE  BODIES  OF  THE  MiMisTEBs,  for  both  these,  namely,
the  Spirit  and  Word  of  God,  were  now  effectual  in  the  prison  for  Onesimus's  conver-
sion. The  adversaries  then  must  not  think  that  the  restraining  of  the  ministers  and  of
(he  gospel  will  prove  one  work.  The  Earl  of  Derby's  accusation  in  the  Parliament
House  against  M.  Bradford  was  that  he  did  more  hurt  (so  he  spake,  calling  good
evil)  by  letters  and  conferences  in  prison  than  ever  he  did  when  he  was  abroad  by
preaching.  ILL  Paul  bayino  that  he  beqot  hiu  in  his  bonds,  hence  it  is  easy  to
gather  that  after,  by  speech  had  to  and  fro  with  him  in  the  prison,  he  understood  in
what  case  he  was,  he  presently  wrought  upon  him,  to  bring  him  to  a  sight  of  hia
sin,  and  so  to  a  godly  sorrow  for  it.  By  which  example  ministers  must  learn  that
it  is  their  duty,  not  only  in  their  public  meetings  to  seek  men's  conversion  by  their
general  preaching  to  all,  but  if  at  any  time,  by  God's  providence,  they  shall  light
upon  any  whom  they  see  miserably  to  stray  out  of  the  ways  of  God,  though  it  be  in
private  places  and  companies,  as  Philip  and  the  Eunuch  in  journeying,  they  are  by
all  means  possible,  no  just  cause  detaining  them,  to  endeavour  the  conversion  even
of  such,  and  to  do  the  part  of  a  good  Samaritan  towards  them,  whom  they  find  so
dangerously  wounded  by  Satan.  lY.  But  as  all  ministers  are  greedily  to  catch  those
occasions  which  God  offers  for  furthering  the  salvation  of  their  brethren,  so
especially  those  who,  bkino  impbisoned,  ABE  bestbaiked  fbom  theib  publio
PBEACHiNo,  that  so  by  this  means  the  want  of  their  public  sermons  may  in  some
measure  be  supplied.  Now,  how  goodly  a  thing  it  is  for  ministers,  even  then  when
they  are  poorest,  to  make  others  rich  (2  Cor.  vi.  10),  and  when  they  are  bound  and
captive,  to  make  others  free!  (D.  Dyke,  B.D.)  Preaching  in  chains  : — The  fol-
lowing incident  is  related  by  one  of  the  leading  Christians  of  Russia : — ••  One  of  our
converts  was  wrongfully  accused  of  blasphemy  for  breaking  his  images.  He  was
sentenced  to  transportation  to  Siberia.  This  involved  trudging  on  foot  one  thousand
miles  in  chains  through  the  snow.  A  fellow  convert  went  to  see  him  depart,  and
to  cheer  him  up  as  he  left  his  friends  and  home  behind.  To  his  astonishment  he
iouiid  the  prisoner  full  of  peace  and  joy.    '  Thank  God,'  said  the  ezUed  one,  *  for

A


50  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.

the  privilege  of  preaching  Christ  in  chains  to  my  fellow  prisoners.'  A  nobler  ezampls
of  Christian  fortitude  than  this  it  wonld  be  difficult  to  find  in  any  religions  moTe>
ment."  The  effect  of  perflecution  generally  has  been  to  spread  the  gospel,  and  it
appears  that  Bussia  will  be  no  exception.

Yer.  11.  Now  profitable  to  thee  and  to  me. — A  new  leaf  turned  over: — The
apostle  has  had  but  short  experience  of  his  convert,  bat  he  is  qnite  sure  that  he  ia
a  Christian ;  and,  that  being  the  case,  he  is  as  sure  that  all  the  bad,  black  past  is
buried,  and  that  the  new  leaf  now  turned  over  will  be  covered  with  fair  writing,  not
in  the  least  like  the  blots  that  were  on  the  former  page,  and  have  now  been  dissolved
from  off  it  by  the  touch  of  Christ's  blood.  It  is  a  typical  instance  of  the  miracles
which  the  gospel  wrought  as  every-day  events  in  its  transforming  career.  Christianity
knows  nothing  of  hopeless  cases.  It  professes  its  ability  to  take  the  most  crooked
stick  and  bring  it  straight,  to  flash  a  new  power  into  the  blackest  carbon,  which  will
turn  it  into  a  diamond.  Every  duty  will  be  done  better  by  a  man  if  he  have  the
love  and  grace  of  Jesus  Christ  in  his  heart.  New  motives  are  brought  into  play,
new  powers  are  given,  new  standards  of  duty  are  set  up.  The  small  tasks  become
great,  and  the  unwelcome  sweet,  and  the  difficult  easy,  when  done  for  and  by  Christ.
Ta.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Self-profitableness  : — St.  Paul  does  not  commend  Onesimufl
for  being  profitable  to  himself,  but  to  him  and  Philemon.  He  that  is  not  good  for
himself  is  good  for  nobody  :  there  our  goodness  must  begin,  bnt  it  must  not  stay
there ;  do  good  to  all,  so  be  profitable  to  all.  (W.  Jones,  D.D.)  The  hurtful
made  profitable  by  conversion : — Philemon  might  object, "  I  have  found  him  hurtful;
why,  then,  should  I  receive  into  my  house  as  a  member  of  my  family  that  servant
which  will  cause  more  harm  than  bring  profit  ?  I  have  had  experience  of  the
damage  that  he  hath  done  me ;  what  homage  he  will  do  me  I  know  not."  To  thia
the  apostle  maketh  a  double  answer — first,  by  granting,  then  by  correcting  that
which  he  hath  granted,  and  both  ways  by  comparing  the  time  past  with  the  time
present — the  time  before  he  embraced  religion  with  the  time  of  his  conversion ;  aa
if  he  should  say :  "  True  it  is,  and  I  grant  he  was  once  unprofitable  to  thee,  for
while  he  was  unfaithful  to  God  he  could  do  no  faithful  service  unto  thee ;  but  why
dost  thou  urge  the  time  of  his  ignorance  ?  And  why  dost  tboa  consider  so  much
what  he  hath  been  7  For  now  he  has  become  a  new  man  ;  he  has  tasted  of  the  true
religion ;  he  hath  learned  to  know  God,  to  know  himself,  to  know  thee,  and  to  know
me — to  know  God,  his  merciful  Creator ;  to  know  himself,  a  wretched  siimer ;  to
know  thee,  his  loving  master ;  to  know  me,  his  spiritual  father ;  whereas  in  former
times  he  was  ignorant  of  all  these.  As  he  regarded  not  to  know  God,  so  he  could
not  regard  thy  good,  but  now  thou  shalt  receive  a  new  Onesimus,  a  new  servant,  a
new  man,  the  same  in  substance,  but  renewed  in  quality,  and  altered  from  the  crown
of  the  head  to  the  sole  of  the  foot.  He  was  not  before  so  profitable,  but  now  thoa
shalt  find  him  as  profitable  unto  thee  as  I  have  found  him  both  diligent  and  dutifnl
unto  me  in  my  bonds  and  imprisonment."  {W.  Attersoll.)  Altered  by  conversion  :—
Before  he  was  Onesimus  in  name,  now  he  is  so  indeed ;  before  he  held  the  title,  now
he  hath  the  truth;  before  thou  sawest  the  shadow,  now  thou  shalt  see  the  substance;
thou  hast  bad  experience  of  his  unprofitableness,  now  shalt  thou  have  the  benefit  of
the  profit  that  he  bringeth  with  him ;  being  made  a  new  creature  in  Christ  Jesus.
We  learn  from  hence  that  Christian  faith  or  religion  of  a  man  unprofitable  maketh
him  profitable,  and  of  one  unfit  maketh  him  fit  to  every  good  work.  The  conversion
of  men  to  the  true  faith  worketh  the  greatest  change  and  alteration  that  can  be,
and  maketh  them  good,  profitable,  and  helpful  unto  others  that  have  been  before
unjust,  injurious,  cruel,  and  hurtful.  (Ibid.)  Conversion  of  heart  produces  altera'
tion  in  the  life : — Where  is  a  right  conversion  of  the  heart  there  is  also  a  true
alteration  of  the  life,  and  where  there  is  an  embracing  of  the  true  Christian  religion
there  is  a  change  of  our  conversation.  I.  The  bbasons  or  this  dootbimb  abi
EviDKNT,  and  shine  as  clearly  as  the  sun  at  noonday.  1.  If  we  consider  our  natural
estate  and  condition,  what  we  were  before  our  conversion,  we  shaU  easily  be  brought
to  acknowledge  botb  where  and  what  and  whence  the  change  is  ;  for  naturally  we
hate  the  truth  and  the  professors  of  the  truth.  2.  When  men  are  truly  converted
they  will  make  conscience  of  hurting ;  they  will  abstain  from  wrongs  and  injuries  ;
they  will  be  ready  to  do  good  to  others,  to  profit  others,  to  walk  in  all  the  duties  of
their  callings,  and  to  keep  a  good  conscience  toward  God  and  man.  8.  True  conver-
sion worketh  in  us  the  love  of  God  and  men,  and  so  maketh  us  fruitful  in  all  good
workf! ;  it  snffereth  us  not  to  be  barren  and  unfruitful,  and  it  subdueth  the  rage  and
corruption  of  our  sinful  nature.    II.  Now  let  us  come  to  the  oonsideration  of  tbm


PHILEMON,  61


VBMB,  AHS  TO  VBS  APPLIOATION  OF  THB   DOCTBIMB  TO  OCBSBLTSB.      1.  We  866  hereby

that  they  are  greatly  deceived  that  think  true  godliness  to  be  nnprofiitable,  and  no
gain  at  all  to  return  to  the  practiser  of  it.  Great  is  the  benefit  of  true  religion,  and
much  IB  the  profit  of  our  conversion.  When  once  we  are  truly  converted  we  have
gotten  Christ ;  He  has  become  oars  ;  we  have  Him  dwelling  in  us — Him,  I  say,  in
whom  dwelleth  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily,  who  is  the  Head  of  the  Church,
whom  to  know  is  eternal  life.  By  Him  our  bondage  is  turned  into  freedom,  our
beggary  into  riches,  our  thraldom  into  liberty,  our  death  into  life.  Who  is  it,  then,
can  be  so  simple  or  ignorant  to  affirm  that  profession  to  be  without  gain  and  profit
that  bringeth  Christ  Jesus  with  it,  in  whom  all  treasures  are  hid  and  had  ?  2.
Seeing  Christian  religion,  planted  in  the  heart  of  a  man,  maketh  him  good  and
helpfi^  to  others,  who  before  was  unjust  and  unprofitable,  let  every  one  prove  his
effectual  caUing  and  true  conversion  by  earnest  seeking  after  the  good  of  others,  and
bv  a  careful  abstaining  from  hurting,  troubling,  and  wronging  of  others.  It  is  to  be
onosen  as  a  better  thing  to  suffer  than  to  offer  wrong,  to  receive  than  to  require,  to
take  than  to  give.  8.  Seeing  it  is  the  turning  of  us  to  God  that  tumeth  us  to  the
good  of  men,  it  serveth  as  a  notable  direction  unto  us,  to  teach  us  that  whosoever
desireth  that  such  as  belong  unto  him  should  be  profitable  and  faithful  unto  him,
let  him  labour  to  plant  godliness  in  their  hearts  and  to  sow  the  seeds  of  eternal  life
in  their  minds,  (ibid.)  Religion  makes  us  profitable : — To  render  us  profitable  is
the  design  of  religion,  and  it  is  easy  to  see  that  it  must  be  the  effect  of  it.  Beligion
is  social  and  diffusive.  According  to  our  Saviour's  language  the  possessors  of
Divine  grace  are  the  salt  of  the  earth  to  keep  it  from  corruption.  They  are  the
lights  of  the  world  to  keep  it  from  darkness ;  and  this  light  is  not  to  be  concealed
"  under  a  bushel,"  but  to  be  fixed  "  on  a  candlestick,  that  it  may  give  light  to  all
that  are  in  the  house."  The  blessings  they  enjoy  they  are  to  communicate.  Divine
grace  never  leaves  us  as  it  finds  us.  It  produces  a  change  the  most  wonderful  and
glorious  and  beneficial.  Divine  grace  destroys  those  vices  by  which  we  are  injurious
to  others.  For  the  best  charity  I  can  exercise  towards  my  fellow-creatures,  says  a
good  man,  is  to  leave  off  sinning  myself.  Every  company  and  neighbourhood  is
the  better  for  us:  we  are  as  "a  dew  from  the  Lord."  And  thus  the  promise  is
fulfilled  in  every  child  of  Abraham  by  faith  :  "  I  wiU  bless  thee,  and  thou  shalt  be
blessing."  Finally,  we  remark  that  our  being  useful  does  not  depend  upon  our
abilities  and  station.  See  Onesimus,  a  slave,  profitable  even  to  such  men  as
Philemon  and  Paul — profitable  to  "  thee  and  me."  It  is  with  the  community  as
it  is  with  the  body  (1  Cor.  xii.  14-21).  Thus  we  behold,  in  the  world  and  in  the
Church,  difference  of  rank,  of  office,  of  talents ;  but  there  is  a  connection  between
the  whole,  and  a  dependence  arising  from  it.  And  from  this  none  are  exempted ;
even  "  the  king  is  served  by  the  labour  of  the  field."  Every  man,  whatever  be  his
eondition  and  circumstances,  is  of  some  importance  in  society,  and  we  should  laboar
to  impress  our  minds  with  this  reflection,  especially  in  three  cases.  Let  us  remember
it  when  we  are  in  danger  of  pride  and  disdain  with  regard  to  any  of  our  fellow-
oreatures.  Perhaps  he  is  more  necessary  to  you  than  you  are  to  him.  Let  ns
remember  it  when  discouraged  from  exertion.  He  that  is  "  not  faithful  in  little"
has  no  reason  to  believe  that  he  would  be  "  faithful  in  much."  We  should  also
remember  it  when  we  are  tempted  to  do  good  in  unlawful  ways.  What  I  mean  is
this :  some  suppose  that  they  can  only  be  useful  in  such  a  particular  station  or
office,  and  hence  they  are  ready  to  leave  their  present  condition  to  rush  into  it.  But,
says  the  apostle,  "  Let  every  man  abide  in  the  calling  in  which  he  is  called  of  God."
Things  are  so  constituted  that  if  any  man  wishes  to  do  good  he  may  do  it  In  the
circumstances  in  which  he  is  placed  ;  he  has  some  influence.  Let  us  conclude  with
two  reflections.  First,  if  religion  renders  people,  in  all  situations,  valuable  and
useful,  how  deserving  is  it  of  encouragement !  Let,  therefore,  all  unite  to  promote
it.  Secondly,  if  religion  be  profitable  to  others,  it  is  much  more  so  to  ourselves.
It  sanctifies  all  our  mercies.  It  sweetens  all  our  trials.  It  teaches  us  "  in  whatever
state  we  are  therewith  to  be  content."  (W.  Jay.)  Manhood  raited: — Being
supplied  with  religious  principle  and  animated  with  ennobling  motives,  his  life
will  be  pervaded  by  a  new  and  improved  spirit.  The  man  was  raised.  His  service
will  rise  with  him.    Paul  had  found  it  so.    {A.  H.  Drysdale,  M.A.)

Ver.  12.  Wliom  I  have  sent  again. — Christianity  and  slavery  ; — Not  many  years
ago  the  conscience  of  England  was  stirred  because  the  Government  of  the  day  sent
out  a  circular  instructing  captains  of  men-of-war,  on  the  decks  of  which  fugitive
slaves  sought  asylum,  to  restore  them  to  their  "  owners."  Here  an  apostle  does  the


53  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.

same  thing — seems  to  side  with  the  oppressor,  and  to  drive  the  oppreBsed  from  th«
sole  refuge  left  him,  the  horns  of  the  very  altars.  More  extraordinary  still,  here  ia
the  fugitive  voluntarily  going  back,  travelling  all  the  weary  way  from  Rome  to
Colosse  in  order  to  put  his  neck  once  more  beneath  the  yoke.  Both  men  were  acting
from  Christian  motives,  and  thought  they  were  doing  a  piece  of  plain  Christian
duty.  Then  does  Christianity  sanction  slavery  ?  Certainly  not ;  its  principles  cut
it  up  by  the  roots.  Historically  it  is  true  that  as  Christianity  has  grown  slavery
has  withered.  But  the  New  Testament  never  directly  condemns  it,  and  by  regu-
lating the  conduct  of  Christian  masters,  and  recognising  the  obligations  of  Christian
slaves,  seems  to  contemplate  its  continuance,  and  to  be  deaf  to  the  sighing  of  tha
captives.  This  attitude  was  probably  not  a  piece  of  policy  or  a  matter  of  calculated
•wisdom  on  the  part  of  the  apostle.  He  no  doubt  saw  that  the  gospel  brought  a
great  unity  in  which  all  distinctions  were  merged,  and  rejoiced  in  thinking  that "  in
Christ  Jesus  there  is  neither  bond  nor  free  "  ;  but  whether  he  expected  the  distinc-
tion ever  to  disappear  from  actual  life  is  less  certain.  The  attitude  of  the  New
Testament  to  slavery  is  the  same  as  to  other  unchristian  institutions.  It  brings
the  leaven  and  lets  it  work.  That  attitude  is  determined  by  three  great  principles.
First,  the  message  of  Christianity  is  primarily  to  individuals,  and  only  secondarily
to  society.  It  leaves  the  units  whom  it  has  influenced  to  influence  the  mass.
Second,  it  acts  on  spiritual  and  moral  sentiment,  and  only  afterwards,  and  conse-
quently on  deeds  or  institutions.  Third,  it  hates  violence,  and  trusts  wholly  to
enlightened  conscience.  So  it  meddles  directly  with  no  political  or  social  arrange*
ments,  but  lays  down  principles  which  will  profoundly  affect  these,  and  leaves
them  to  soak  into  the  general  mind.  If  an  evil  needs  force  for  its  removal,  it  ia
not  ready  for  removal.  If  it  has  to  be  palled  up  by  violence,  a  bit  of  the  root  will
certainly  be  left,  and  will  grow  again.  The  only  true  way  is  by  slow  degrees  to
create  a  state  of  feeling  which  shall  instinctively  abhor  and  cast  off  the  evil.  There
will  be  no  hubbub  and  no  waste,  and  the  thing  once  done  will  be  done  for  ever.  So
has  it  been  with  slavery ;  so  will  it  be  with  war,  and  intemperance,  and  impurity,
and  the  miserable  anomalies  of  our  present  civilisation.  Coming  centuries  will  look
back  on  the  obtuseness  of  the  moral  perceptions  of  nineteenth-century  Christians
in  regard  to  matters  of  Christian  duty  which,  hidden  from  us,  are  sun-clear  to  them,
with  the  same  half-amused,  half -tragic  wonder  with  which  we  look  back  to  Jamaica
planters  or  South  Carolina  rice-growers  who  defended  slavery  as  a  missionary
institution,  and  saw  no  contradiction  between  their  religion  and  their  practice.  (A.
Maclaren,  D.D.)  Thou  therefore  receive  him. — Forgiveness : — L  The  duty  or
FOBoivENESS.  1.  An  imperative  gospel  demand  (Matt.  vi.  15,  xviii.  21,  22;
Mark  xi.  25 ;  Luke  vi.  36,  xvii.  4 ;  Eph.  iv.  32 ;  Col.  iii.  13 ;  James  ii.  13).
To  fail  in  this  is  to  seek  judgment  for  ourselves.  2.  Culture  essential  to  its
discharge.  This  virtue  results  from  experience,  trial,  exercise.  More  natural
for  men  to  consider  themselves  ingenious  as  they  are  able  to  detect  an  injury,
and  manly  as  they  promptly  and  energetically  resent  it.  The  vengeful  spirit
among  the  earliest  revelations  of  childhood.  A  child  hurts  himself  in  his
efforts  to  walk ;  incipient  revenge  on  table  or  chair.  Parents  often  show  how
little  they  apprehend  the  virtue  of  forgiveness.  The  spirit  of  retaliation  lives  long
within  us.  "  Revenge  is  sweet "  has  become  a  hideous  proverb.  Louis  XII.  said :
"Nothing  smells  so  sweet  as  the  dead  body  of  an  enemy."  We  are  supposed  to
have  got  beyond  that.  Yet  what  is  the  measure  of  grace  within  us?  3.  Christian
faith  is  equal  to  the  demand.  Intimate  fellowship  with  Christ  will  "  transform  by
the  renewing  of  the  mind."  "  Learn  of  Me,"  says  Jesus  ;  and  "  He  that  doeth  His
will  shall  know"  (CoL  iii.  12-16).  H.  The  prayer  for  forgiveness.  A  model  for
imitation,  whether  God  or  man  be  approached.  Contains — 1.  Humble  confession.
Apostle,  for  Guesimus,  assumes  becoming  attitude  of  an  offender.  But  deals  mora
tenderly  with  the  offence  than  the  guilty  one  himself  could  do.  Apostle  shows  the
part  of  the  wrong-doer  as  well  as  of  the  wronged.  Gn  the  one  hand  acknowledgment,
which  is  a  manly  because  a  severe  duty,  as  first  steps  towards  moral  elevation  ;  on
the  other  pardon,  complete  and  absolute,  as  proof  of  sympathy  with  Christ,  and  in
imitation  of  His  example.  Intention  of  Epistle  missed  if  both  obligations  be  not
recognised.  Only  by  confession  can  it  be  known  that  pardon  is  desired  or  deserved.
Honest  avowal  to  one  who  knows  the  Lord  will — (1)  Insure  success  of  suit.  Tha
spirit  that  would  reprove  will  be  disarmed.  (2)  Restrain  from  future  error.  Memorr
of  struggle  to  tell  of  sin  and  shame  will  strengthen  in  seasons  of  weakness  and  peril.
2.  Implicit  expectation  (ver.  21).  The  whole  spirit  of  the  gospel  warrants  tha
expectation  that  wrong  frankly  confessed  will,  by  him  who  is  subject  to  the  gospelf


PHILEMON,  53


be  freely  forgiven.  Vindictiveness  alien  to  kingdom  of  Christ,  as  darkness  to  light.
Christianity  God's  own  protest  against  revenge.  III.  The  law  of  foboiveness.
The  special  instance  of  generous  love  solicited  by  apostle  was  claimed — 1.  On  the
ground  of  friendship.  A  true  fellowship  gives  right  of  mediation.  2.  On  the
stronger  ground  of  Christian  relationship.  Friendship  had  sprung  from  highest  and
holiest  source,  and  was  thereby  intensified  and  glorified.  Still  more,  Paul  was  the
agent  in  Philemon's  salvation.  3.  On  the  strongest  ground  of  Christ's  will.  "  la
the  Lord,"  "  In  Christ  Jesus,"  appear  throughout.  IV.  The  policy  of  FORorvEifEss.
1.  Each  needs  it  himself.  "Who  is  he  that  doeth  good,  and  sinneth  not  ?  "  Our
necessity  of  Divine  forbearance  prohibits  resentment.  2.  Our  wrong  is  against  God.
Customary  to  measure  guilt  by  the  rank  of  the  person  injured.  Consequences  of
insolence  and  wrong  not  so  serious  when  offered  to  a  private  person  as  when
committed  against  a  magistrate.  Penalty  greater  still  when  the  sin  is  against  a
king.  Act  may  be  the  same,  but  punishment  gauged  by  dignity  of  offended  person.
How  great  the  grace  we  claim  when  we  pray  "  forgive  "1  3.  Aggravations  of  sin
increase  our  need.  Careful  in  reference  to  men,  while  unrestrained  before  God,
whom  we  cannot  see.  These  we  fear,  Him  despise  1  His  love  despised,  His  Word,
Son,  Spirit.  As,  therefore,  forgiveness  is  desired,  forgive.  (A.  W.  Johnson.)  The
sinner's  Substitute  : — I.   Generous  conduct  of  the  apostle — he  pleads  fob  a

FUQITITE.      n.   InTBBEBTIKG  PARALLEL   TO   THIS   EXAMPLE— OUB   SALVATION   BY  ChBIST.

III.  Pbaotxcal  beuabes.  1.  How  abundant  is  the  comfort  against  sin  provided  for
believers  in  Christ.  2.  How  much  it  concerns  every  soul  to  be  a  partaker  of  Christ's
mercy.  3.  How  binding  is  the  example  of  Paul,  and  the  greater  example  of  Christ,
upon  the  Church,  to  welcome  penitents  of  every  class.  (Biblical  Museum.)  Forgive-
ness— connection  between  forgiveness  and  readiness  to  forgive  : — 1.  Forgiveness  makes
us  ready  to  forgive.  2.  Readiness  to  forgive  inspires  us  with  courage  to  seek
forgiveness,  3.  The  spirit  of  forgiveness  ever  joins  the  two  more  closely  together.
{J.  P.  Lange.)        He  ivho  cannot  forgive  man  cannot  find  forgiveness  with  God:—

1.  Because  he  will  not  believe  in  forgiving  love.  2.  Because  he  will  not  act  upon
its  directions.  (Ibid.)  In  what  sense  is  it  true  that  he  who  forgives  shall  he
forgiven  f — 1.  His  forgiving  is  not  the  ground,  but  the  evidence  of  his  forgiveness.

2.  His  forgiving  is  an  evidence  that  the  forgiveness  of  God  preserves  him.  3.  His
forgiving  shows  the  truth  of  his  testimony,  that  there  is  forgiveness.  [Ibid.)
The  duty  of  reconciliation : — There  must  be  a  reconcihation  between  Christians :  all
offences  must  be  buried  (Col.  iii.  12).  1.  God  offers  reconciliation  to  us ;  and  shall
we  be  so  hard-hearted  as  not  to  be  reconciled  one  to  another  ?  2.  All  we  do  is
abominable  in  the  sight  of  God  without  it  (Matt.  v.  23,  24).  God  should  be  first
served,  yet  He  will  have  His  own  service  to  stay  till  thou  be  reconciled  to  thy  brother.

3.  We  can  have  no  assurance  of  our  reconciliation  to  God  without  it  (Matt,  xviii.
35).  4.  We  have  no  certainty  of  our  Uves.  This  night  may  our  souls  be  taken
from  OS.  Jovinian  the  emperor  supped  plentifully,  and  went  to  bed  merrily,  yet
was  taken  up  dead  in  the  morning ;  and  if  death  take  us  before  we  take  another  hj
the  hand,  as  a  token  of  hearty  reconciliation,  what  shall  become  of  us  ?  (Eph.  iv.
26).  Johannes  Eleemosynarius,  Archbishop  of  Alexandria,  being  angry  in  the  day
with  Nicetus,  a  senator,  towards  night  sends  this  message  to  him :  "  My  honourable
brother,  the  sun  is  setting ;  let  there  be  a  setting  of  our  anger,  too."  If  we  do  it
not  within  the  compass  of  a  day  and  night,  yet  let  us  do  it  within  the  compass  of
our  lives ;  let  not  our  anger  be  like  the  fire  of  the  temple,  that  went  not  out  day  nor
night.  Let  our  anger  be  the  sting  of  a  bee,  that  is  soon  gone  ;  not  the  sting  of  a
serpent,  that  tarries  long,  and  sometimes  proves  fataL  {W.  Jones,  D.D.)  Forgive-
ness : — Count  Enzenberg,  who  was  formerly  Eesident  Minister  of  Hesse  in  Paris,
has  in  his  album  of  autographs  three  entries  on  the  subject  of  forgiveness.  M.
Guizot  has  written  :  "  In  the  course  of  my  long  life  I  have  learnt  two  wise  rules  :
the  first  to  forgive  much,  the  second  never  to  forget."  M.  Thiers  follows  this  with :
•'A  little  of  forgetfulness  would  not  injure  the  sincerity  of  the  forgiveness."  Below
these  Prince  Bismarck  penned  the  striking  words :  "  I  have  learnt  in  my  life  to
forget  much,  and  to  make  myself  much  forgiven."  Forgiveness  of  others: — He
that  cannot  forgive  others  breaks  the  bridge  over  which  he  must  pass  himself  ;  for
every  man  has  need  to  be  forgiven.  (Lord  Herbert.)  Reconciliation  of  broth^t  ;—
The  reconciliation  of  two  brothers,  gentlemen  of  position  in  Liverpool,  was  effected
by  the  late  Bev.  Dr.  McNeile  as  follows : — Although,  on  account  of  an  anhappy  feud
which  was  publicly  known,  they  scarcely  recognised  each  other,  yet  they  both
attended  Dr.  McNeile's  church.  He  therefore  preached  on  one  Communion  Sunday
on  the  duty  of  brotherly  reconciliation,  taking  his  text  from  MatL  v.  83,  24


54  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.

The  blessed  effect  upon  the  alienated  brothers  was  simnltaneons.    They  remained
as  if  by  consent  to  communicate,  and  as  they  advanced  from  their  respective  pews
towards  the  Communion-table  the  pastor  motioned  them  into  juxtaposition  at  the
rails,  and  as  they  knelt  side  by  side  he,  in  silent  but  expressive  action,  joined  their
hands  together  in  the  mutual  grasp  of  restored  fraternal  affection,  continuing  till
they  sealed  their  reconciliation  over  the  memorials  of  their  Lord's  dying  love.  Their
widowed  mother  rejoiced  as  only  a  fond  Christian  mother  could  over  the  reunion  of
her  children.        Mine  own  bowela. — PauVt  affection  for  Onesimtu  : — Of  coarse
••  mine  own  bowels  "  is  simply  the  Hebrew  way  of  saying  '« mine  own  heart."    We
think  the  one  phrase  graceful  and  sentimental,  and  tbe  other  coarse.    A  Jew  did
not  think  so,  and  it  might  be  difficult  to  say  why  he  should.     It  is  a  mere  question
of  difference  in  localising  certain  emotions.    Onesimus  was  a  piece  of  Paul's  very
heart,  part  of  himself ;  the  unprofitable  slave  had  wound  himself  round  his  affec-
tions, and  become  so  dear  that  to  part  with  him  was  like  cutting  his  heart  out  of  his
bosom.     Perhaps  some  of  the  virtues,  which  the  servile  condition  helps  to  develop
in  undue  proportion,  such  as  docility,  light-heartedness,  serviceableness,  had  made
him  a  soothing  and  helpful  companion.     What  a  plea  that  would  be  with  one  who
loved  Paul  as  well  as  Philemon  did!     (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)         Christian  love  for
eonvertg : — We  learn  from  hence  that  the  love  which  Christians  ought  to  bear  to  all
the  saints,  especially  to  those  whom  they  have  been  the  means  to  convert,  ought  to
be  entire,  hearty,  earnest,  most  faithful,  and  most  fervent.    It  is  our  duty  to  love
all  men,  more  especially  the  saints,  but  most  especially  such  as  have  been  gained  to
the  faith  by  us.    The  reasons  that  may  be  rendered  to  uphold  this  doctrine  are
many  and  infallible.    1.  For,  first,  there  is  great  labour  employed,  long  time  spent,
many  means  used,  and  continual  care  bestowed  to  convert  a  soul  to  God.    It  is  no
idle  work ;  it  is  not  brought  to  pass  without  much  ado.     2.  Secondly,  by  testifying
of  our  love  and  showing  forth  the  fruits  thereof  we  gather  great  assurance  that  we
are  of  the  company  of  the  faithful,  of  the  communion  of  saints,  and  of  the  society
of  them  that  belong  to  the  truth,  when  we  love  unfeignedly  those  that  are  of  the
truth.     8.  Lastly,  it  is  the  sum  of  the  whole  law,  and  a  token  and  testimony  that
we  make  conscience  to  walk  in  the  ways  and  commandments  of  God.   Uses :  1.  This,
then,  being  a  virtue  so  necessary  that  every  one  which  belongeth  to  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ  must  yield  their  obedience,  even  to  love  the  brethren,  and  show  himself  a
true  Christian  by  showing  charity  to  his  neighbour,  let  us  consider  the  nature  and
properties  of  this  love,  that  we  may  have  right  and  true  use  of  this  doctrine.     (1)
First,  therefore,  let  us  know  what  brotherly  love  is.    It  is  a  work  of  God's  Spirit,
whereby  a  man  is  moved  to  affect  his  brother  for  God's  sake,  and  to  show  forth  the
fruits  of  this  affection.     (2)  Secondly,  we  are  to  consider  the  property  of  this  love,
how  it  is  to  be  performed  ;  for,  as  we  have  seen  the  parties  who  are  to  be  loved,
even  all,  so  we  must  mark  the  manner  how  they  are  to  be  loved — that  is,  fervently
and  earnestly.  (3)  Thirdly,  we  must  know  the  form  and  manner  how  we  are  to  love
our  brethren ;  to  wit,  even  as  ourselves.    2.  Seeing  this  is  the  love  that  must  be
found  in  us  towards  the  saints,  it  serveth  to  meet  with  many  enormities,  and  to
reprove  many  sins  that  reign  in  the  world,  and  are  as  the  forerunners  of  the  full  and
final  ruin  thereof.   (1)  Our  love  to  others  is  a  cold  love ;  frozen,  without  beat ;  dead,
without  Ufe ;  barren,  without  fruit ;  such  as  our  Saviour  speaketh  of  in  the  gospel :
"  Because  iniquity  shall  be  increased,  the  love  of  many  shall  be  cold."  But  our  love
is  hot  toward  ourselves ;  we  have  abundance  of  self-love,  which  overfloweth  in  us,
and  overcometh  true  love.     This  is  almost,  or  for  the  most  part  the  only  love  that
remaineth  in  the  world  in  these  days,  which  is  the  corruption,  nay,  the  bane
and  poison  of  true  love.     (2)  As  we  see  self-love  checked  and  controlled,  so
they  are  condemned  that  place  brotherly  love  in  fair  words  and  gentle  speeches
(and  yet  many  fail  in  these,  and  cannot  afford  them,  as  if  every  word  of  the  mouth
were  worth  gold),  whereas  in  snch    is   no  sound   religion,  but  a  vizor  only  of
holiness.    Trae  love  must  be  shown  in  the  fruits.  In  sustaining,  helping,  pitying,
and  relieving  those  that  crave  our  releape  and  are  in  necessity.    (3)  It  reproveth
such   as  give  themselves  to  fraud   and    deceit,   to    cruelty  and  oppression,    to
subtlety  and  circumventing  their  brethren,  to  lying  and  using  false  weights  and
measures ;  for  if  this  should  be  the  rule  of  our  love,  that  it  ought  to  be  fervent,  we
should  examine  our  own  hearts  whether  we  would  have  anoUier  man  to  deceive
and  oppress  us  by   forgery  and   falsehood.     3.   Seeing  all  are  to  be  loved,  bnt
especially  such  as  have  been  converted  by  us,  it  teacheth  na  to  further  their
salvation  that  have  been  brought  into  the  way  by  us,  and  never  to  forsake  them
until  we  have  brought  them  to  their  journey's  end ;  for  what  a  vain  thing  were  it  to


PHILEMON.  65


find  a  man  wandering  ont  of  his  way  and  going  astray  from  the  right  path,  and
when  we  have  brought  him  back  to  leave  him  without  further  direction  ?  or  what
an  unnatural  part  were  it  for  a  mother  to  bring  forth  her  child  into  the  world  and
then  to  take  no  more  care  of  it,  neither  to  wash  it  in  water  nor  to  wrap  it  in
Bwaddling  clothes,  nor  to  have  any  compassion  upon  it,  but  to  cast  it  out  into  the
open  field.    ( W.  A  ttersoll.)

Yer.  13.  In  thy  stead  he  might  have  ministered  unto  me. — What  i$  thi*  minUter-
ing  ? — No  doubt  it  is  aiding  Paul  in  his  ministerial  work,  or  he  would  not  have
saiJ,  "  In  thy  stead."  It  is  scarcely  to  be  supposed  that  Philemon  would  have
ministered  to  St.  Paul  in  the  capacity  of  a  domestic  servant ;  and  if  Onesimns  was
to  have  ministered  to  the  apostle,  it  was  to  supply  the  absence  of  Philemon  in  being
St.  Paul's  deacon.  There  must  have  been  something  peculiarly  thorough  in  the
conversion  of  Onesimus,  that  the  apostle  should  so  desire  him  to  be  near  him,
(M.  F.  Sadler,  M.A.)  A  ministering  friend: — There  is  no  need  to  enlarge  on  the
winning  courtesy  of  these  words,  so  full  of  happy  confidence  in  the  friend's  disposi-
tion, that  they  could  not  but  evoke  the  love  to  which  they  trusted  so  completely.
Nor  need  I  do  more  than  point  their  force  for  the  purpose  of  the  whole  letter,  the
procuring  a  cordial  reception  for  the  returning  fugitive.  So  dear  had  he  become,
that  Paul  would  like  to  have  kept  him.  He  goes  back  with  a  kind  of  halo  round
him,  now  that  he  is  not  only  a  good-for-nothing  runaway,  but  Paul's  friend,  and  bo
much  prized  by  him.  It  would  be  impossible  to  do  anything  but  welcome  him,
bringing  such  credentials ;  and  yet  all  this  is  done  with  scarcely  a  word  of  direct
praise,  which  might  have  provoked  contradiction.  One  does  not  know  whether  the
confidence  in  Onesimus  or  in  Philemon  is  the  dominant  note  in  the  harmony.  In
the  preceding  clause,  he  was  spoken  of  as,  in  some  sense,  part  of  the  apostle's  very
self.  In  this  he  is  regarded  as,  in  some  sense,  part  of  Philemon.  So  he  is  a  link
between  them.  Paul  would  have  taken  his  service  as  if  it  had  been  his  master's.
Can  the  master  fail  to  take  him  as  if  he  were  Paul  ?  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Chnt-
tian  ministration : — The  gospel  is  the  common  cause,  that  concerns  ns  all :  if  any
suffer  for  it,  we  are  bound  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest  to  assist  them  with  our
purses,  prayers,  and  personal  presence  too  if  conveniently  it  may  be  ;  yea,  though
we  be  never  so  great  personages.  Our  Saviour  Himself  washed  His  disciples'  feet.
St.  Cjprian  writes  to  the  priests  and  deacons,  to  provide  all  things  necessary  for
them  that  were  in  prison,  wishing  that  he  himself  were  present  with  them,  readily
and  willingly  he  would  perform  all  obsequious  duties  of  love  unto  them.  Helena,
the  mother  of  Constantine,  when  at  Jerusalem  herself  served  meat  to  the  virgins
there.  PlaciUa,  the  wife  of  Theodosius  the  Emperor,  ministered  to  the  poor  in  her
own  person ;  and  PhUemou  himself  should  have  ministered  unto  Si  Paul.  The
angels  minister  to  us,  yea,  when  we  be  in  prison,  as  to  St.  Peter;  and  shall  we
Bcom,  be  we  never  so  wealthy,  worshipful,  honourable,  to  minister  to  them  that  are
in  bonds  for  the  gospel  ?  Let  us  count  it  an  honour  to  us.  In  ministering  to  them
we  minister  to  Christ,  and  He  will  reward  it.  (W.  Jones,  D.D.)  A  welcome
service: — I.  The  apostle  intimateth  his  desire  to  have  retained  Onesimus
with  him,  and  that  he  was  loath  to  suffer  him  to  depart  from  him  :  which
declareth   that    the    fbesence    of  those  that  abe  deab  unto   ns  in   Chbist

IS     WELCOME,   PLEASANT,    COMPOBTABLE,   AND   MUCH    SET    BT,   AND   WE    OBEATLT  DESIBB

TO  KEEP  THEH  CONTINUALLY  WITH  US.  For  as  lovo  is  the  knot  of  conjunction  that
bindeth  us  together,  though  we  be  absent  and  far  severed  one  from  another,  so  it
craveth  and  requireth  the  bodily  presence  of  those  whom  we  entirely  love,  which
howsoever  we  cannot  obtain  in  this  life,  forasmuch  as  our  earthly  affairs  will  not
suffer  it,  yet  we  shall  be  sure  to  enjoy  it  perpetually  and  without  end  in  the  life  to
come,  when  we  shall  have  the  greatest  joy  and  comfort  one  in  another  that  can  be
wished  or  desired  ;  such  as  the  eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  the  ear  heard,  neither  hath
it  entered  into  the  heart  of  man  to  conceive.  U.  Note  with  me  the  end
why  he  desired  to  retain  Onesimus  with  him,  that  the  servant  might  do  sebvicb
TO  him  in  the  master's  stead.  The  end,  then,  is  the  ministry  and  attendance
which  Paul  might  of  duty  require  of  Philemon  himself.  If  then  the  master  be
bound  to  do  his  service,  and  wait  upon  the  apostle,  much  more  the  servant  1
Whereby  we  may  note  how  great  right  and  jurisdiction  he  that  hath  gained  a  man
to  Christ  hath  over  him  whom  he  hath  gained,  so  that  he  may  challenge  not
only  one  of  his  servants,  but  himself  to  minister  unto  him,  and  to  help  him  in
temporal  and  transitory  things.  For  he  that  hath  received  spiritnal  blessings
cannot  without  great  unthankfulness  deny  corporal  benefits,  so  that  it  cannot  be


56  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.

expressed  how  well  he  hath  deserved  of  that  person  whom  he  hath  won  by  the
Word  of  God.  "  And  delivered  him  by  his  ministry  from  the  power  of  darkness,
and  translated  him  into  the  kingdom  of  His  dear  Son."  III.  We  may  observe
in  the  apostle's  correcting  of  his  former  grant,  that  as  he  is  commended  that  doth
his  duty  that  is  required  of  him,  freely  and  willingly,  so  he  is  worthy  to  be  praised
and  commended,  that  doth  not  go  about  to  wrino  and  wbest  a  benefit  aoainsi
A  man's  will,  though  it  be  due  debt  and  a  bounden  duty,  but  laboureth  by  all  means,
that  it  may  be  voluntary,  and  not  upon  necessity ;  for  hereby  it  cometh  to  pasa
oftentimes,  that  he  not  only  getteth  a  benefit,  but  winneth  his  heart  and  good  will
that  giveth  it,  and  many  times  it  falleth  out  that  the  mind  of  the  giver  is  more  to
be  respected  than  the  gift  itself,  as  we  see  in  the  poor  widow  mentioned  in  tha
gospel,  who  casting  into  the  treasury  two  mites,  is  said  to  have  given  of  her  penury
more  than  all  the  rich  men  that  bestowed  of  their  superfluity.  {W.  Attersoll.)
Ministering  to  the  saints: — I.   Whateveb  gifts  abb  bestowed  upon  us,  to   this

BND     THEY  ABE   BESTOWED  TO    PBOFIT  WITHAL,   TO   HELP  ONE   ANOTHEB,    and    tO    edif/

that  body  whereof  we  are  members,  n.  It  is  our  duty  to  follow  the  example  or
OUB  LoBD  AND  Masteb  Chbist  Jesus,  He  came  to  serve,  not  to  be  served:  to
minister,  not  to  be  ministered  unto :  to  redeem,  not  to  rale.    III.  Tbub  beliqion

CONSISTETH  in  MINISTERINQ  to  the  saints,  in  helping  AND  BUCCOUBING  OF  THE  POOB,  ill

employing  himself  to  the  good  of  others,  as  a  candle  that  spendeth  and  wasteth
itself  to  give  light  to  them  that  are  in  the  house.  It  consisteth  not  in  bare  know*
ledge,  but  in  practice  ;  not  in  an  idle  faith,  bat  in  the  fruits  of  love.  Uses :  1.  This
serveth  to  reprove  those  that  have  forgotten  all  trae  service  to  the  faithful.  Many
there  are  that  have  no  feeUng  of  the  troubles  that  fall  upon  the  servants  of  God.
Their  eyes  are  closed,  and  their  hearts  are  hardened ;  they  have  no  bowels  of  com-
passion to  minister  unto  them,  they  have  no  hands  open  to  relieve  them.  The  rich
of  our  Gharches,  who  have  this  world's  goods  given  unto  them,  are  either  in  their
nnsatiable  desires  poor,  wrongfully  getting,  miserably  keeping,  onconscionably
scraping,  and  unjustly  pulling  from  others  without  mean  or  measure ;  or  else  they
spend  their  wealth  and  consume  their  substance,  some  in  sumptuous  apparel,
others  in  excessive  feastings,  others  in  worse  uses,  all  being  nnnecessary  and  fruit-
less  things,  unprofitable  for  the  Church  or  commonwealth,  so  that  Uttle  can  be
spared  for  the  poor  saints,  and  that  which  is  spared  is  as  hardly  drawn  from  them
as  a  piece  of  flesh  out  of  their  sides.  These  men  never  think  of  doing  service  to
others,  but  of  serving  their  own  turns  and  commodities,  which  ought  not  so  to  be
among  them  that  profess  Christ  Jesus,  who  served  not  Himself.  2.  Seeing  we  are
servants  to  all,  to  help  them  by  all  the  means  we  can,  by  comfort  or  counsel,  by
word  or  deed,  by  our  wealth  or  authority,  or  whatsoever  God  shall  enable  us ;  from
hence  ariseth  a  great  comfort  unto  a  man's  conscience,  and  an  assurance  of  hia
peace  and  acceptation  with  God,  to  pray  onto  Him  with  comfort  for  His  graces,  not
doubting  to  obtain  them,  if  we  have  been  serviceable  and  comfortable  unto  others,
especially  to  the  servants  of  God,  that  are  as  dear  to  Him  as  the  apple  of  His  eye.
It  is  a  means  of  excellent  joy  and  peace  to  a  man,  to  consider  that  he  hath  employed
all  the  good  things  he  hath  to  the  use  of  God's  house  and  His  household  servants,
for  when  any  common  danger  shall  fall,  or  he  find  anguish  and  affliction  of  con-
Bcience  for  sin,  he  may  be  assured  of  comfort,  seeing  God  hath  wrought  this  sincerity,
and  set  it  as  a  seal  of  His  mercy  in  his  heart.  3.  Seeing  God  requireth  of  all  true
Christians,  of  what  condition  soever  they  be,  according  to  the  means  afforded  onto
them,  to  use  their  gifts,  their  power,  their  possessions,  and  whatsoever  benefits  they
have  received,  to  use  them  to  the  comfort  and  service  of  God's  saints,  it  kindleth
the  affections  of  God's  people  to  bless  and  praise  God  for  them,  to  speak  well  of
them,  to  pray  unto  God  for  them,  and  to  obtain  greater  blessings  for  them  than
they  have  bestowed.  Thus  they  that  do  good  to  the  Church  do  good  to  themselves  ;
they  that  give  much  unto  them  do  receive  more  themselves,  and  such  as  have  been
helpful  and  serviceable  to  God's  people,  shall  find  them  as  their  remembrancers  to
God,  who  will  not  forget  the  labour  of  their  love,  and  the  duty  of  their  service.  4.
Seeing  God  requireth  service  to  His  Church  at  our  hands  to  do  all  good  to  them  by
all  good  means,  it  is  our  duty  to  inquire  and  learn  the  estate  of  the  distressed
Church,  that  we  may  know  and  be  informed  where  and  when  and  how  it  is  afiUo*
ted.  This  is  one  misery  of  the  faithful,  that  men  do  not  regard  them  when  they
are  in  misery.  The  Lord  hath  determined  that  there  shall  be  always  some  objecta
offered  unto  as  and  set  before  us  to  exercise  the  froits  of  oar  faith  and  lovflw
(Ibid.)


PHILEMON.  67


Yer.  14.  Without  thy  mind  would  I  do  nothing. — This  final  resolation  was,  no
doubt,  the  result  of  seyeral  motives.  1.  To  harbour  and  detain  a  slave,  who
applied  to  him  to  become  a  precator,  beyond  a  limited  period,  would  have  been  dis-
tinctly to  violate  the  Roman  law.  2.  The  apostle  might  have  seemed  to  inflict  a
pecuniary  loss  upon  Philemon  by  depriving  him  of  a  "  chattel  personal, "  and
morally  constraining  him  to  put  up  with  the  loss  by  imposing  a  severe  strain  upon
the  bonds  of  friendship.  3.  Onesimus,  in  the  depth  and  reality  of  his  repentance,
saw  the  duty  of  returning.  What  truer  piece  of  restitution  was  ever  made  ?  4.  St.
Paul  was  peculiarly  "  sensitive  "  as  to  the  scandal  which  the  Church  might  occasion,
if  slaves  received  encouragement  to  become  fugitives.  See  Col.  ill.  22 ;  1  Tim.  vi.
1.  {Bp.  Wm.  Alexander.)  Servants  not  to  be  detained  from  their  masten  .*—
Servants  must  not  be  detained  without  their  masters'  liking.  Eustathius,  Bishop
of  Armenia,  was  deposed  from  his  see  because  under  a  colour  of  piety  he  had
taken  servants  from  their  masters.  (W.  Jones,  D.D.)  Willingly. — Voluntary
virtue : — Jerome  from  this  passage  justly  deduces  as  a  conclusion  that  St.  Paul
held  the  principle  that  nothing  in  moral  action  is  good  which  is  not  voluntary.  He
applies  it  to  the  solution  of  the  question  which  has  been  so  often  asked — • '  Why  God
did  not  make  men  absolutely  good  ?  "  God  might  have  made  man  good  without
man's  will.  But,  had  He  done  so,  the  good  would  not  have  been  voluntary,  but
necessary.  But  what  is  necessarily  good  is  not  good  in  the  highest  sense,  and  is
even  relatively  and  in  another  point  of  view  evil.  Therefore,  in  leaving  us  to  our
own  free  will,  He  made  us  more  truly  after  His  image  and  likeness.  Freedom
essential  to  virtue  : — Freedom  is  essential  to  virtue.  If  a  man  "  could  not  help  it "
there  is  neither  praise  nor  blame  due.  That  freedom  Christianity  honours  and
respects.  So  in  reference  to  the  offer  of  the  gospel  blessings,  men  are  not  forced  to
accept  them,  but  appealed  to,  and  can  turn  deaf  ears  to  the  pleading  voice,  ••  Why
will  ye  die  ?  "  Sorrows  and  sins  and  miseries  without  end  continue,  and  the  gospel
is  rejected,  and  lives  of  wretched  godlessness  lived,  and  a  dark  future  pulled  down
on  the  rejecters'  heads,  and  all  because  God  knows  that  these  things  are  better  than
that  men  should  be  forced  into  goodness,  which  indeed  would  cease  to  be  goodness
if  they  were.  For  nothing  is  good  but  the  free  turning  of  the  will  to  goodness,  and
nothing  bad  but  its  aversion  therefrom.  The  same  solemn  regard  for  the  freedom
of  the  individual  and  low  estimate  of  the  worth  of  constrained  service  influence  the
whole  aspect  of  Christian  ethics.  Christ  wants  no  pressed  men  in  His  army.
"  Must "  is  not  in  the  Christian  vocabulary,  except  as  expressing  the  sweet  con-
straint which  bows  the  will  of  him  who  loves  to  harmony,  which  is  joy,  with  the
will  of  Him  who  is  loved.  Christ  takes  no  offerings  which  the  giver  is  not  glad  to
render.  (A,  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Voluntary  goodness  : — It  is  a  received  axiom —
That  which  is  good  of  necessity,  is  not  good,  yet  this  is  to  be  understood  of  a
coacted  necessity,  not  of  a  voluntary.  God  is  necessarily,  yet  willingly,  good.
Death  comes  necessarily  upon  all ;  yet  some  die  willingly.  But  the  good  which  is
done  upon  a  constrained  necessity,  loses  the  name  of  good :  patience  perforce
is  no  patience.  A  willing  mind  in  a  good  action  is  all  in  all.  If  Solomon
had  not  willingly  built  the  temple,  it  had  not  been  pleasing  to  God;  if  the
centurion  had  not  willingly  set  up  the  synagogue,  God  would  not  have
respected  it ;  if  the  woman  of  Shunem  had  not  willingly  entertained  the  prophet,
it  had  been  no  good  work  in  the  sight  of  God ;  if  Dorcas  had  not  made
the  coats  willingly,  they  had  not  been  acceptable  to  God.  {W.  Jones,  D.D.)
Spontaneity  in  goodness : — I.  A  pbefbbencb  with  respect  to  goodness.  Paul
was  anxious  not  simply  about  the  pardon  of  Onesimus,  but  as  to — 1.  The  moral
quality  of  the  action  of  Philemon.  Spontaneousness  is  an  element  of  the  highest
goodness.  The  necessity  which  dictates  to  the  Christian  should  be  from  within
rather  than  from  without.  2.  The  principle  it  was  to  illustrate.  That  Christianity
is  not  a  mere  adjustment  of  external  relations,  but  a  spirit  which  interpenetrates
and  transfigures  all.  3.  Its  spiritual  effect  upon  the  age.  It  has  a  greater  effect
upon  the  receiver,  and  upon  onlookers,  when  a  good  deed  is  perceived  to  be  spon-
taneous and  not  due  to  the  influence  of  another.    II.  A  spibit  of  consideratiok

FOB    THE     FBBEDOM     AND   INDrVCDUAIi    EESP0N8IBILITT   OF  A  FELLOW   CHRISTIAN.       St.

Paul's  behaviour  throughout  this  episode  is  an  example  to  us  all  of  the  courtesieB
that  ought  to  soften  and  dignify  the  general  relations  of  life;  but  of  greater  value  is
its  suggestiveness  in  the  spiritual  sphere.  It  teaches  us — 1.  To  do  justice^  to  the
spiritual  life  of  others.  2,  To  respect  the  diverse  operation  of  the  One  Spirit.  8.
To  maintain  a  confident  faith  in  the  promptings  of  Christian  principle.  {A.  F,
Huir,  M.A.)        Willinghood    in   service  : — 1.    Seeing   no  man   must   perform


S8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.

any  holy  duty  to  God  or  man  upon  oompnision,  or  against  his  will,  bat  with  all  hlB
mind  and  might,  we  learn  that  every  action  or  doty  is  accounted  of  by  God,  not
according  to  the  greatness  of  the  worker,  or  ontward  show  of  the  work,  bat  accord-
ing to  the  will  and  affection  of  the  doer ;  it  is  the  manner  of  doing  that  God  more
accepteth  than  the  action  or  deed  itself.  A  child  in  his  obedience  to  his  father  is
esteemed  for  his  reverent,  loving,  obedient,  and  dutiful  heart,  and  not  for  the  great-
ness or  worthiness  of  his  work.  For  what  can  he  do  when  he  hath  endeavoored
to  the  utmost  to  pleasure  his  father  7  So  it  is  with  us,  when  we  have  done  all  that
we  can,  we  must  confess  we  have  been  unprofitable  servants,  and  therefore  God
more  respecteth  the  intention  than  the  action,  the  workman  than  the  work,  the
affection  than  the  effect.  2.  Seeing  only  that  duty  which  is  done  freely
and  not  by  compulsion  deserveth  due  commendation,  this  reproveth  all  those
things  Uiat  are  done  upon  wrong  grounds  and  evil  foundations.  It  is  not  enough
to  do  a  good  thing,  but  we  must  do  it  well;  it  is  not  sufficient  to  do  those  things
that  are  godly,  but  we  must  do  them  in  a  godly  manner.  3.  This  confnteth
those  who  ascribe  all  to  the  work  done,  and  regard  nothing  at  all  either  the  mind
of  the  doer  or  the  manner  of  doing.  Outward  observations  of  religion  will  deceive
OS  if  we  rest  upon  them  and  put  our  trust  in  them.  If  we  perform  a  worship  to
Ood  without  the  heart,  we  dishonour  God,  we  deceive  our  own  soula,  and  we
increase  our  condemnation.  We  must  make  the  house  of  God  a  paradise,  or  place
•f  pleasure;  we  must  make  His  word  our  meat  and  drink,  and  our  continual  hear-
ing must  be  a  daily  refreshing  unto  our  souls.  4.  Seeing  all  Christian  daties
must  be  performed  of  us  willingly,  we  are  hereby  guided  and  directed  in  oar
obedience,  that  we  are  not  to  hinder  the  necessary  duties  of  Christianity  belonging
unto  as  by  objecting  fleshly  reasons,  as  it  were  laying  stumbling  blocks  in  our  own
ways,  to  keep  us  back  from  a  willing,  free,  and  cheerful  going  forward  in  the  works
of  oar  calling,  and  in  the  parts  of  God's  worship.    (W.  Attersoll.)

Ver.  15.  Perhaps. — Contingency ; — The  word  is  used  to  express  every  degree  of
contingency  from  the  faintest  possibility  to  the  highest  probability.  Two  reasons
may  underlie  the  peculiar  timidity  and  hesitation  implied.  1.  This  "departure"
nught  have  been  allowed  with  a  view  to  a  higher  good.  This  case  might  have  been
like  Joseph's  (Gen.  xlv.  5).  Certainly  a  beginning  which  appeared  so  unpromising
looked  like  the  very  path  that  had  led  to  happiness.  Had  not  Onesimus  fled  from
Philemon,  he  would  not  have  arrived  in  Borne,  nor  have  found  St.  Paul.  Had  not
Paul  been  imprisoned,  Onesimus  would  never  have  believed,  or  been  baptized,  or
become  a  minister  of  Christ — perhaps  a  bishop  and  martyr.  Taking  the  two
extreme  points  of  the  story,  and  connecting  them  together,  it  might  be  said,
Onesimns  became  a  minister  of  the  gospel,  because  he  fled  from  his  master.  St.
Paul  softens  the  sentence  by  the  words,  "  it  may  be,"  because  the  judgments  of
God  are  hidden,  and  it  is  culpably  rash  to  pronounce  certainly  on  that  which  must
be  doubtful  for  creatures  like  ourselves.  2.  If  he  had  not  so  qualified  his  state-
ment, slaves  might  have  appealed  with  too  much  readiness  to  the  example  of
Onesimus.  (Bp.  Wm.  Alexander.)  Perhaps : — Paul  will  not  be  too  sure  of  what
God  means  by  such  and  such  a  thing,  as  some  of  us  are  wont  to  be,  as  if  we  had
been  sworn  of  God's  privy  council.  •'  Perhaps,"  is  one  of  the  hardest  words  for
minds  of  a  certain  class  to  say ;  but  in  regard  to  all  such  subjecta,  and  to  many
more,  it  is  the  motto  of  the  wise  man,  and  the  shibboleth  which  sifts  out  the
patient,  modest  lovers  of  truth  from  rash  theorists  and  precipitate  dogmatisers.
Impatience  of  uncertainty  is  a  moral  fault  which  mars  many  an  intellectual
process ;  and  its  evil  effects  are  nowhere  more  visible  than  in  the  field  of  theology.
{A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  "  Perhaps," — "  therefore  " ; — I.  Unoebtaintibs.  God  often
allows  us  no  more  than  a  "  perhaps  " ;  and  for  a  time  does  not  give  as  the  slightest
indication  in  any  direction  of  what  good  turn  our  trial  is  to  take.  And  it  is
wonderful  of  what  use  this  "  perhaps,"  with  its  uncertainty,  is  to  the  believer.
While  he  is  saying  "perhaps  this,"  or  ''perhaps  that,"  his  mind  wanders  away
far  afield,  seeing  how  a  blessing  may  come  from  this  unlikely  quarter  or  from  that,
and  how  his  trouble  may  link  in  with  one  thing  and  another,  until  he  gets  op  from  his
thoughts  full  of  wonder  at  what  God's  resources  are,  and  full  of  happiness  at  the
thought  that  he  is  within  such  reach  of  blessing,  and  that  it  can  travel  to  him  by
such  hundreds  of  hitherto  unknown  ways.  The  very  uncertainty  which  is  so
harassing  to  the  natural  man  is  educational  to  the  believer ;  he  is  taught  to  look
out  for  God  in  all  possible  directions  ;  the  very  uncertainty  prevents  his  trying  to
flz  God  to  this  mode  of  action,  or  to  that.    The  "perhaps  "  of  the  believer  never


PHILEMON.  n


diet ;  when  it  sees  one  door  plainly  dosed,  it  immediately  opens  another ;  that  is
its  very  nature.  II.  Separations.  1.  Separations  are  to  be  traoed  farther  back
than  what  we  call  the  accidental  oiroumstances  which  apparently  have  caused
them.  It  is  sonl  teaching,  and  soul  strengthening,  when  we  discern  that  things
are  "  of  the  Lord."  2.  We  have  God  deep  in  the  background  of  trial  for  good,  if  we
by  our  waywardness  hinder  Him  not.  The  loss  for  a  season  to  Philemon  of  the
services  of  Onesimus  was  great ;  but  it  was  to  be  met  by  a  greater  gain.  The
bringing  of  good  out  of  evil  is  the  prerogative  of  God.  He  permits  the  evil,  to
produce  the  good.  6.  Here  there  seems  to  meet  us,  also,  a  working  of  what  might
almost  be  said  to  be  a  law  of  God's  dealing  with  us  in  our  present  fallen  state,  viz.,
that  loss  iiiUBt  precede  gain  ;  that  seed  corn  must  die,  before  harvest  com  can  be
reaped.  III.  Uestobatioms.  If  we  could  but  introduce  those  words  "  for  ever  "  in
their  deep  meaning  into  our  trials — into  the  decision  as  to  the  course  of  action  we
would  pursue — into  the  results  which  naturally  belong  to  them,  how  differently
would  things  be  often  done  from  the  way  in  which  they  are  now.  Let  us  apply
the  "  for  ever  "  to  earth's  great  things  to  make  them  small,  and  to  Christ's  small
things  to  make  them  great.  The  tears  which  at  the  most  we  can  shed  are  but  few
— the  watercourse  of  a  cheek  is  short ;  but  who  can  tell  the  depth  of  the  pure  river
of  the  water  of  life,  clear  as  crystal ;  or,  whither  flows  that  stream,  concerning
which  all  that  we  are  told  is  this — "  that  it  proceedeth  out  of  the  throne  of  the
Lamb."  It  is  through  temporary  losses  that  we,  if  we  yield  ourselves  to  their
teaching  and  power,  pass  to  eternal  gains.  (P.  B.  Power,  M.A.)  The  runaway
slave  ient  back  :—l.  "  Pebhaps  he  thebefobe  depabted,"  <&c.  Wonderful
dealings  of  God  in  providence — ordering  all,  overruling  even  faults.  Onesi«
mas  had  done  wrong;  yet  God,  instead  of  giving  him  up  to  the  consequences,
in  mercy  overruled  all  for  good ;  led  him  to  Borne ;  brought  under  Paul's
teaching,  where  converted.  Doubtless  he  had  suffered  hardships  and  want.
Humbled  thus  perhaps.  Thus  often.  Chastisement,  suffering ;  yet  good  at  last.
Even  faults  often  overruled.  Some  in  prison  for  crime  have  there  learnt  the  way
of  salvation.  Wild  young  man  enlists,  sent  abroad,  there  learns  "the  way."
Boy  goes  to  sea,  endures  hardship,  brought  to  repentance.  The  "  therefore  "  runs
through  aU.  II.  Observe  how  confidentlt  Paul  asks  Philemon  to  fobgive.
Could  he  have  done  so,  unless  Philemon  had  been  a  Christian  ?  No.  Little  hope
of  mercy  otherwise.  Nothing  would  have  been  thought  too  heavy  punishment
for  dishonest  runaway  slave.  What  change  the  gospel  makes  I  Thankful  for
it  even  in  this  view.  Thankful  to  be  bom  and  live  under  it.  Paul,  we
may  be  sure,  appealed  not  in  vain.  Onesimus  forgiven  and  restored.  All
past  forgotten.  Of  all  the  fruits  of  the  gospel,  none  more  striking  or
peculiar  than  forgiveness  of  injuries.  III.  But  mobe  than  forgiveness  was
expected  of  him,  and  doubtless  not  in  vain.  He  and  Onesimus  now,  not  merely
master  and  servant,  but  fellow- Christians,  brethren.  Surely  he  would  be
a  slave  no  more  I  1.  This  is  such  forgiveness  as  we  receive,  returning  and
confessing.  Not  bare  pardon,  but  rich  and  full  blessing  too.  Made  free  ;  made
happy.  Servants,  yet  children  too.  All  in  Christ  2.  Such  also  the  forgiveness
we  should  practise.  Not  grudging,  but  bountiful,  generous.  And  every  Christian
we  should  treat  as  a  brother.      {F.   Bourdillon,  M.A.)  Departed  for  a

season. — Sin  not  to  be  exaggerated : — He  does  not  say,  "  Perhaps  he  therefore  ran
away  "  ;  he  uses  a  word  of  better  report :  he  "  departed,"  was  separated  from  thee,
by  the  permissive  hand  of  God's  providence.  After  men  have  repented  of  their
sins,  we  must  not  aggravate,  but  in  some  measure  extenuate  them.  Not  "  Noah'a
drunkenness,"  but  "  Noah's  unadvised  drinking  "  ;  not  "  David's  adultery,"  but
"the  matter  of  Uriah";  not  "Peter's  apostasy,"  but  "Peter's  denial";  not
"  Onesimus'  running  away,"  but  "  departing."  Before  they  be  humbled,  we  must
be  as  trumpeters  to  waken  them  out  of  their  sins ;  after  that,  we  must  be  as  nurses
to  cherish  them  :  before  corazives,  after  lenitives  :  before,  we  must  come  with  the
law  as  a  schoolmaster  to  whip  them  ;  after,  with  the  gospel  to  comfort  them  ;  before,
we  must  be  Boanerges,  sons  of  thunder;  after.  Barnabases,  sons  of  consolation.
{W.  Jones,  D.D.)        Philemon  and  Onesimus : — I.  What  sort  of  results  St.  Paul

EXPECTED  TO  FLOW  FROM  THE    RECONCILING    AND    COMBINING    POWER   OF  THE  CHRISTIAN

.FAITH.  Certainly  slavery  was  repugnant  to  the  spirit  of  Christianity,  to  the  spirit  of
Him  who  had  vindicated  the  rights  of  our  human  nature,  and  who  had  indefinitely
enhanced  its  dignity  by  taking  that  nature  upon  Him  at  His  incarnation.  But  the
basiness  of  the  apostles  was  of  a  higher  and  of  a  Diviner  sort  then  that  of
iaangurating  a  violent  social  revolution.    The  revolt  of  Spartioas  with  all  that  had


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.

followed  was  still  fresh  in  the  memory  of  the  world,  axid  the  apostles  addressed
themselves  to  the  practical  task  of  lodging  the  Christian  faith  and  life  in  the  minds
and  hearts  of  masters  and  slaves  alike,  confident  that  in  time  that  faith  would  act
as  a  powerful  solvent  upon  the  institution,  by  eating  out  its  very  spirit.  The
Christian  master  would  feel  that  the  slave  was  certainly  as  a  man  his  equal,  and
possibly  in  the  kingdom  of  the  Kedeemer  his  superior,  and  that  he  too,  the  while,
had  a  Master  in  heaven.  And  the  Christian  slave  would  feel  that  the  circumstances
of  this  life  mattered  little  if,  through  the  Divine  redemption,  he  were  secure  for  the
next ;  and  he  would  see  in  liis  master's  will,  wherever  he  could,  nothing  less  than
the  will  of  God.  ^  The  apostles,  then,  would  not  anticipate  the  slow  but  certain
action  of  the  Christian  principles  upon  society,  the  infiltration  of  the  Christian
spirit  into  the  Imperial  codes  ;  the  gradual  legislation  of  the  great  Catholic  councils ;
the  work  which,  too  long  delayed,  is  associated  in  our  latter  days  with  the  honoured
names  of  Wilberforce  and  Clarkson.  When  Philemon  received  Onesimus,  a  great
Christian  enterprise  of  reconciling  classes  bad  indeed  begun.  What  are  we  doing
to  further  it?  II.  How  entirely,  for  the  time  being,  St.  Paul's  interest  is  concen-
trated ON  A  SINGLE  SOUL.  He  wiitcs  just  as  though  there  was  no  person  in  the  world
to  think  about  except  Onesimus,  and  relatively  to  Onesimus  his  master  Philemon.
Now,  here  is  a  lesson  which  is  much  needed,  it  seems,  in  our  day.  Our  fashion
is  to  think  and  speak  of  religion  as  an  abstract  influence,  to  forget  that  to  be  worth
anything  it  must  be  a  power  reig.iing  in  the  individual  life.  We  talk  grandly  and
vaguely  about  the  tendencies  of  the  age,  about  the  dangers  of  the  age,  about  the
modern  spirit,  about  a  number  of  fine  abstract  phrases  and  conceptions,  which  just
slightly,  each  one  of  them,  stimulate  the  imagination,  and  which  exact  no  sacrifice
whatever  from  the  will.  We  utter  or  we  listen  to  these  imposing  abstractions  at  a
public  meeting,  and  we  forget  that  they  mean  nothing — nothing  whatever — apart
from  the  life  and  experience  of  each  separate  soul.  They  are  creations  of  our  own
thought ;  but  souls,  they  are  independent  realities.  The  soul  is  there,  whether  we
think  about  it  or  not.  All  the  real  good  that  is  to  be  done  in  the  Church  or  in  the
world  must  begin  with  individual  characters,  with  single  souls.  Phrases  die  away
upon  the  breeze — souls  remain.  They  remain  in  their  ignorance,  in  their  per-
plexity, in  their  sorrows.  They  remain  awaiting  death,  awaiting  eternity.  Many
a  teacher  of  two  or  three  children,  of  a  few  pupils,  who  seem  dull  and  irresponsive,
and  little  likely  to  do  their  instructor  credit — many  a  teacher  is  often  tempted  to
wish  that  he  had  what  is  called  a  larger  sphere  of  action,  where  he  might  control
great  issues,  and  become  a  leader  or  a  fashioner  of  the  thought  of  the  time.  If
any  such  one  hears  me,  let  him  think  of  Paul,  the  aged  apostle  of  the  nations,
working  away  as  the  dreary  hours  passed,  working  away  on  the  duU  brain  and  on
the  sluggish  affections  of  the  slave  Onesimus.  The  world,  it  has  been  well  said,  is
not  saved  by  abstract  ideas,  however  brilliant.  The  world  is  saved  by  the  courageous
individualising  efforts  of  Christian  love.  IIL  How  a  Christian  should  look  at
THE  EVENTS  OF  LIFE,  at  the  commonplacc  and  trivial  events,  as  well  as  those
which  appear  to  be  striking  and  important.  Every  such  event  has  a  purpose,
whether  we  can  trace  it  or  not.  It  is  a  purpose  which  will  be  made  plain  in  the
eternal  world,  in  the  mysterious  state  of  existence  which  awaits  every  one  of  as
when  we  have  passed  the  gate  of  death.  To  St.  Paul,  the  future  life  was  just  as
certain  as  the  shining  of  the  sun  in  the  heavens,  and  therefore  he  writes  quite
naturally  to  Philemon  :  "Perhaps  Onesimus  was  therefore  parted  from  thee  for  a
season,  that  thou  mightest  receive  him  for  ever."  And  yet  observe  the  "  perhaps"]!
St.  Paul  will  not  encourage  us  in  a  rash  and  presumptuous  confidence  when  we
endeavour  to  interpret  in  detail  God's  providences  in  this  life  by  the  light  of  the  next.
We  may  conjecture  that  such  and  such  an  event  is  permitted  for  such  and  such  an
end,  which  will  be  agreeable  to  the  known  will  and  attributes  of  God ;  we  cannot
know  that  it  is  so.  Some  well-meaning,  but  unthinking  people,  undertake  to
interpret  a  human  life,  just  as  they  undertake  the  Revelation  of  St.  John,  with  an
easy  reliance  on  their  own  insight,  which  nothing  but  ignorance  of  the  real
difficulties  of  the  subject  can  possibly  explain.  St.  Paul  saw  as  far  as  most  men
into  the  purposes  of  God,  and  yet,  when  he  would  interpret  God's  purpose  in
respect  of  a  given  human  life,  he  reverently  adds  "  Perhaps  " — "  Perhaps  he
therefore  was  parted  from  thee  for  a  season,  that  thou  mightest  receive  him  for
ever."  St.  Paul  describes  what  took  place,  but  in  his  own  religious  language.
Onesimus  had  robbed  Philemon  and  had  fled  from  justice  :  St.  Paul  says,  "  He
was  parted  from  thee  for  a  time."  St.  Paul  sees  a  higher  hand  in  what  seemed  to
be  only  the  act  of  Onesimus.     II  Onesimus  robbed  and  fled  from  his  master,  Qod


PHILEMON,  61


permitted  him  to  do  so,  and  this  permission  we  are  told  was  probably  given  in  order
to  bring  abont  the  conversion  of  Onesimns  to  the  Christian  faith  and  bis  reunion
with  his  master  Philemon,  first  in  this  life  at  Colosse,  and  then  for  ever  in  the  life
everlasting.  Now,  what  is  here  remarkable  is  that  even  the  misconduct  of
Onesimus  seems  to  have  been,  according  to  St.  Panl,  permitted  for  a  purpose
which  would  be  made  plain  in  tiie  future  life.  God  knew  what  he  was  doing  in
permitting  the  misconduct  of  Onesimns.  It  was  for  Philemon  to  forget  the  petty
and  personal  aspects  of  the  case,  to  recognise  God's  hand  and  mind  in  it ;  to  throw
his  thought  upward  and  forward  from  the  present  to  the  future  ;  upward  from  the
lower  world  of  sense  and  time,  to  the  mighty  world,  with  its  immense  proportions,
of  eternity.  Observe  this  is  a  rule  of  thought.  It  is  not  for  us  men  a
role  of  action.  Never  are  we  authorised  to  do  evil  that  good  may  come,  though
we  are  bound  to  extract  all  the  good  we  can  out  of  the  evil  that  may  be  done  by
others ;  and  to  trace  God's  hand  in  bringing  good  out  of  evil  which  He  permits  His
creatures  to  work.  {Canon  Liddon.)  The  ttory  of  a  runaway  slave: — I.  Look  at
Onesimus  as  an  instai^ce  or  Ditike  grace.  1.  In  his  election.  Were  there  no
free  men,  that  God  must  elect  a  slave  ?  Were  there  no  faithful  servants,  that  He
must  choose  one  who  had  embezzled  his  master's  money  ?  Were  there  none  of
the  educated  and  polite,  that  He  must  needs  look  upon  a  barbarian  ?  Were  there
none  among  the  moral  and  the  excellent,  that  infinite  love  should  fix  itself  upon
this  degraded  being,  who  was  now  mixed  up  with  the  very  scum  of  society  f  "I
will  have  mercy  on  whom  I  will  have  mercy,  and  I  will  have  compassion  on  whom
I  will  have  compassion,"  rolls  like  thunder  alike  from  the  cross  of  Calvary  and
from  the  mount  of  Sinai.  The  Lord  is  a  Sovereign,  and  doeth  as  He  pleases.  Let
QS  admire  that  marvellous  electing  love  which  selected  such  a  one  as  Onesimus  I
2.  In  his  conversion.  Look  at  him  I  How  unlikely  he  appears  to  become  a
convert.  He  is  an  Asiatic  slave  of  about  the  same  grade  as  an  ordinary  Lascar,  or
heathen  Chinee.  He  was,  however,  worse  than  the  ordinary  Lascar,  who  is
certainly  free,  and  probably  an  honest  man,  if  he  is  nothing  else.  This  man  had
been  dishonest,  and  he  was  daring  withal,  for  after  taking  his  master's  property  he
was  bold  enough  to  make  a  long  journey,  from  Colosse  to  Rome.  Some  of  us,  I
have  no  doubt,  are  quite  as  wonderful  instances  of  Divine  election  and  effectual
calling  as  Onesimus  was.  Let  us,  therefore,  record  the  lovingkindness  of  the  Lord,
and  let  us  say  to  ourselves,  "  Christ  shall  have  the  glory  of  it.  The  Lord  hath
done  it ;  and  unto  the  Lord  be  honour,  world  without  end."  3.  The  grace  of  God
was  conspicuous  in  the  character  which  it  wrought  in  Onesimus  upon  his  conversion,
for  he  appears  to  have  been  helpful,  useful,  and  profitable.  So  Paul  says.  What
wonders  the  grace  of  God  can  do  !  Many  plans  are  employed  in  the  world  for  the
reformation  of  the  wicked  and  the  reclaiming  of  the  fallen,  and  to  every  one  of
these,  as  far  as  they  are  rightly  bottomed,  we  wish  good  success ;  for  whatever
things  are  lovely  and  pure,  and  of  good  report,  we  wish  them  God  speed.  But
mark  this  word — the  true  reforming  of  the  drunkard  lies  in  giving  him  a  new
heart;  the  true  reclaiming  of  the  harlot  is  to  be  found  in  a  renewed  nature.  The
lowest  strata  of  society  wUl  never  be  brought  into  the  light  of  virtue,  sobriety,  and
purity,  except  by  Jesus  Christ  and  His  gospel ;  and  we  must  stick  to  that.  Let  all
others  do  what  they  like,  but  God  forbid  that  I  should  glory  save  in  the  cross  of  our
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  II.  A  very  interesting  instance  of  sin  ovekruled.  The  Lord  must
have  Onesimus  in  Eome  to  hear  Paul,  and  the  sin  of  Onesimus,  though  perfectly
voluntary  on  his  part,  so  that  God  had  no  hand  in  it,  is  yet  overruled  by  a  mysterious
providence  to  bring  him  where  the  gospel  shall  be  blest  to  his  soul.  Now,  I  want  to
speak  to  some  of  you  Christian  people  about  this  matter.  Have  you  a  son  who  has
left  home?  Is  he  a  wilful,  wayward  young  man,  who  has  gone  away  because  he
could  not  bear  the  restraints  of  a  Christinn  family  ?  It  is  a  sad  thing  it  should  be  so,
but  do  not  desi^ond.  You  do  not  know  where  he  is,  but  God  does  ;  and  you  cannot
follow  him,  but  the  Spirit  of  God  can.  Many  a  sailor  boy  has  been  wild,  reckless.  God-
less, Christless,  and  at  last  has  got  into  a  foreign  hospital.  Ah,  if  his  mother  knew
that  he  was  down  with  the  yellow  fever,  how  sad  her  mind  would  be,  for  she  would
conclude  that  her  dear  sou  will  die  away  at  Havannah  or  somewhere,  and  never
come  home  again.  But  it  is  just  in  that  hospital  that  God  means  to  meet  with
him.  A  sailor  writes  to  me  something  like  that.  He  says,  "  My  mother  asked  me
to  read  a  chapter  every  day,  but  I  never  did.  I  got  into  the  hospital  at  Havannah,
and,  when  I  lay  there,  there  was  a  man  near  to  me  who  was  dying,  and  he  died
one  night ;  but  before  he  died  he  said  to  me,  '  Mate,  could  you  come  here  f  I
want  to  speak  to  you.    I  have  got  something  that  is  very  precious  to  me  here.    X


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,


was  a  wfld  fellow,  bat  reading  this  packet  of  Bermons  has  bronght  me  to  the
Savioar,  and  I  am  dying  with  a  good  hope  through  grace.  Now,  when  I  am  dead
and  gone,  wiil  yon  take  these  sermons  and  read  them,  and  may  Qod  bless  them  to
yoa.  And  will  you  write  a  letter  to  the  man  that  preached  and  printed  those
sermons,  to  tell  him  that  God  blessed  them  to  my  conversion,  and  that  I  hope  Ha
¥dll  bless  them  to  yourself  ? '"  It  was  a  packet  of  my  sermons,  and  God  did  bless
them  to  that  young  man  who,  I  have  no  doubt  whatever,  went  to  that  hospital
because  there  a  man  who  had  been  brought  to  Christ  would  hand  to  him  the
words  which  God  had  blessed  to  himself  and  would  bless  to  his  friend.  You  do  not
know,  dear  mother,  you  do  not  know.  The  worst  thing  that  can  happen  to  a  young
man  is  sometimes  the  best  thing  that  can  happen  to  him.  III.  Our  text  may  be
viewed  as  am  example  of  belationb  improved.  "He  therefore  departed  for  a
season,  that  thou  shouldest  receive  him  for  ever ;  not  now  as  a  servant,  but  a
brother  beloved,  specially  to  me,  but  how  much  more  unto  thee  ?  "  You  know  we
are  a  long  while  learning  great  truths.  Perhaps  Philemon  had  not  quite  found
out  that  it  was  vn-ong  for  him  to  have  a  slave.  Some  men  who  were  very  good  in
their  time  did  not  know  it.  John  Newton  did  not  know  that  he  was  doing  vrrong
in  the  slave  trade,  and  George  Whitfield,  when  he  left  slaves  to  the  orphanage  at
Savannah,  which  had  been  willed  to  him,  did  not  think  for  a  moment  that  he  was
doing  anything  more  than  if  he  had  been  dealing  with  horses,  or  gold  and  silver.
Public  sentiment  was  not  enlightened,  although  the  gospel  has  always  struck  at  the
very  root  of  slavery.  The  essence  of  the  gospel  is  that  we  are  to  do  to  others  as
we  would  that  others  should  do  to  us,  and  nobody  would  wish  to  be  another  man's
slave,  and  therefore  he  has  no  right  to  have  another  man  as  his  slave.  Perhaps,
when  Onesimus  ran  away  and  came  back  again,  this  letter  of  Paul  may  have
opened  Philemon's  eyes  a  little  as  to  his  own  position.  No  doubt  be  may  have
been  an  excellent  master,  and  have  trusted  his  servant,  and  not  treated  him  as  a
slave  at  all,  but  perhaps  he  had  not  regarded  him  as  a  brother  ;  and  now  Onesimus
has  come  back  he  will  be  a  better  servant,  but  Philemon  will  be  a  better  master,  and
a  slave-holder  no  longer.  He  will  regard  his  former  servant  as  a  brother  in  Christ.
Now,  this  is  what  the  grace  of  God  does  when  it  comes  into  a  family.  It  does  not
alter  the  relations ;  it  does  not  give  the  child  a  right  to  be  pert,  and  forget  that  he
is  to  be  obedient  to  his  parents ;  it  does  not  give  the  father  a  right  to  lord  it  over
his  children  without  wisdom  and  love,  for  it  tells  him  that  he  is  not  to  provoke  his
children  to  anger,  lest  they  be  discouraged ;  it  does  not  give  the  servant  the  right
to  be  a  master,  neither  does  it  take  away  from  the  master  his  position,  or  allow  him
to  exaggerate  his  authority,  but  all  round  it  softens  and  sweetens.  Rowland  Hill
nsed  to  say  that  he  would  not  give  a  halfpenny  for  a  man's  piety  if  his  dog  and  his
cat  were  not  better  off  after  he  was  converted.  There  was  much  weight  in  that
remark.  Everything  in  the  house  goes  better  when  grace  oils  the  wheels.  The
mistress  is,  perhaps,  rather  sharp,  quick,  tart ;  well,  she  gets  a  little  sugar  into  her
constitution  when  she  receives  the  grace  of  God.  The  servant  may  be  apt  to
loiter,  be  late  up  of  a  morning,  very  slovenly,  fond  of  a  gossip  at  the  door ;  but,  if
she  is  truly  converted,  all  that  kind  of  thing  ends.  She  is  conscientious,  and
attends  to  her  duty  as  she  ought.  The  master,  perhaps — well,  he  is  the  master,
and  you  know  it.  But  when  he  is  a  truly  Christian  man — he  has  a  gentleness,  a
suavity,  a  considerateness  about  him.  The  husband  is  the  head  of  the  wife,  bat
when  renewed  by  grace  he  is  not  at  all  the  head  of  the  wife  as  some  husbands  are.
The  wife  also  keeps  her  place,  and  seeks,  by  all  gentleness  and  wisdom  to  make
the  house  as  happy  as  she  can.  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  A  runaway  converted : —
Some  years  ago  I  was  talking  with  an  aged  minister,  and  he  began  fumbling  about  in
his  waistcoat  pocket,  but  he  was  a  long  while  before  he  found  what  he  wanted.  At
last  he  brought  out  a  letter  that  was  well  nigh  worn  to  pieces,  and  he  said,  "  Gk>d
Almighty  bless  you  1  God  Almighty  bless  you  I "  And  I  said,  ••  Friend,  what  is
it?  "  He  said,  "  I  had  a  son.  I  thought  he  would  be  the  stay  of  my  old  age,  but
he  disgraced  himself,  and  he  went  away  from  me,  and  I  could  not  tell  where  he
went,  only  he  said  he  was  going  to  America.  He  took  a  ticket  to  sail  for  America
from  the  London  docks,  but  he  did  not  go  on  the  particular  day  that  he  expected."
This  aged  minister  bade  me  read  the  letter,  and  I  read  it,  and  it  was  like  this : —
"Father,  I  am  here  in  America.  I  have  found  a  situation,  and  God  has  prospered
me.  I  write  to  ask  your  forgiveness  for  the  thousand  wrongs  that  I  have  done  you,
and  the  grief  I  have  caused  you,  for,  blessed  be  God,  I  have  found  the  Saviour.  I
have  joined  the  Church  of  God  here,  and  hope  to  spend  my  life  in  God's  service.
It  happened  thus :  I  did  not  sail  for  America  the  day  I  expected.     I  went  down  to


PHILEMON.  63


the  Tabernacle  to  see  what  it  was  like,  and  God  met  with  me.  Mr.  Spurgeon  said,
*  Perhaps  there  is  a  runaway  son  here.  The  Lord  call  him  by  His  grace.'  And  he
did."  "  Now,"  said  he,  as  he  folded  up  the  letter  and  put  it  into  hia  pocket,  "  that
son  of  mine  is  dead,  and  he  is  in  heaven,  and  I  love  you,  and  I  shall  do  so  as
long  as  I  live,  because  you  were  the  means  of  bringing  him  to  Christ."  (Ibid.)
The  providence  of  God  in  human  life  : — The  great  idea  underlying  the  present  turn
of  thought  is,  that  in  every  event  of  life,  good  or  bad,  God  has  not  only  an  interest,
but  a  meaning  or  purpose  through  it,  aU  His  own.  There  is  not  merely  a  general
Buperintendence  of  Providence  over  the  affairs  of  men,  but  a  Providential  agency
at  work  in  the  very  midst  of  them.  Very  different,  no  doubt,  is  the  Divine  agency
from  the  human,  with  which  it  mysteriously  mingles.  Not  more  distinct  is  the  Lord
of  all  from  the  works  of  His  own  hands,  than  is  His  providential  government
distinct  from  what  it  regulates ;  yet  moving  freely  in  the  midst  of  His  creation,  He
no  less  freely  interlaces  human  agencies  with  His  own.  Man's  history,  in  short,  ia
not  the  mere  sum  of  his  own  thoughts  and  doings,  any  more  than  the  well-com-
pacted web  is  the  mere  sum  of  the  weft-threads  shot  across  its  range — there  are
the  slowly  unrolling  warp-threads  as  well ;  and  not  less  surely  is  there  the  unfold-
ing of  a  providential  agency  to  bind  into  one  the  crossing  and  recrossing  lines  of
human  activity.  Hence  we  continually  see  results  issuing  from  trivial  matters
which  the  actors  in  them  never  contemplated.  But  the  special  feature  in  Divine
Providence  on  which  the  apostle's  argument  proceeds  is  the  fact  that  God  brings
good  out  of  man's  evil.  (A.  H.  Drysdale,  M.A.)  The  providence  of  Ood  in
the  life  of  man: — I.  An  encouraging  view  op  the  providence  of  God.  1.
The  minuteness  of  its  operation.  2.  The  beneficence  of  its  operation.  "Why
did  God  permit  evil  in  the  world  ?  "  (1)  To  bind  man  more  closely,  lastingly,
lovingly  to  Himself.  (2)  To  awaken  nobler  developments  of  human  cha-
racter. (3)  To  manifest  more  conspicuously  His  own  character  and  glory.
(4)  To  increase  human  joy.  The  joy  of  gratitude  for  redemption,  of  deliverance
from  direst  perils,  of  victory  over  subtlest,  strongest  foes,  <fec.  H.  A  view  o»
THE  PBE-EMiNENCE  OF  SPIRITUAL  RELATIONSHIPS,  1.  Christianity  does  not  weaken
any  of  the  bonds  of  our  civil  or  other  earthly  relationships.  2.  Personal  Christi-
anity exalts  and  ennobles  all  other  relatiou  ships.  3.  Spiritual  relationships  are
pre-eminently  over  all  others.  (1)  They  are  independent  of  differences  of  rari  and
condition.  (2)  They  are  perpetual  in  their  duration.  (3)  They  centre  and  subsist
in  Jesus  Christ.  {W.  Jones.)  More  than  a  servant : — 1.  Mark  that  the  apostle
entitleth  the  shameful  running  away  of  Onesimus,  the  servant  of  Philemon,  by  the
name  of  a  departure.  If  we  will  speak  properly,  a  departing  is  one  thing,  a  running
away  is  another  thing.  For  albeit  every  one  that  runneth  away  departeth ;  yet  every  one
that  departeth  runneth  not  away  from  his  master,  because  he  may  depart  by  consent
either  having  leave  and  Ucence,  or  that  the  time  of  his  service  is  expired.  So  a
little  before  (ver.  11),  he  called  him  "  unprofitable,"  whereas  he  might  lawfully
have  given  him  a  harder  title.  This  was  not  done  in  regard  of  the  offence  because
it  was  small,  but  in  regard  of  his  repentance  because  it  was  great.  2.  In  the
apostle's  answer  to  Philemon's  objection  we  may  mark  that  we  are  bound  to  forgive
and  forget  injuries  and  offences  done  unto  us,  when  once  God  hath  forgiven  and
covered  the  sins  committed  against  Him  and  received  the  sinner  that  repenteth  to
mercy ;  when  God  maketh  all  things  turn  to  our  good  that  love  Him  and  thereby
recompenseth  by  a  double  benefit  the  loss  and  damage  that  we  have  sustained.  3.
We  may  observe  that  Christian  religion  doth  more  strongly  bind  all  persons  to  their
particular  callings  and  maketh  the  knot  greater  than  it  was.  For  that  which  he
apeaketh  here  of  a  Christian  servant,  even  a  brother,  is  true  of  all  callings  in  the
family  and  commonwealth.  For  as  a  faithful  servant  is  more  than  a  bare  servant,
BO  a  Christian  king  is  more  than  a  king ;  a  Christian  master  is  more  than  a  master ;
a  Christian  father  is  more  than  a  father;  a  Christian  husband  is  more  than  a
husband ;  so  on  the  other  side  a  Christian  wife  is  more  than  a  wife ;  a  Christian
subject  is  more  than  a  subject ;  and  so  of  all  the  rest.  4.  The  apostle  notwithstand-
ing the  great  account  he  maketh  of  this  servant  doth  not  deny  subjection  to  hia
master  nor  exempt  him  from  the  condition  of  a  servant,  but  he  addeth  "  More  than
a  servant."  He  saith  not,  he  is  no  more  a  servant,  but  he  is  more  than  a  servant ;
BO  that  our  Christian  calling  doth  not  abolish  policy  and  politic  constitutions  and
domestic  government;  but  rather  doth  strengthen  and  sanctify  them.  He  that  is
called  to  the  truth  being  a  servant,  must  not  be  discouraged  and  discontented,  bat
rejoice  in  this  that  he  is  the  Lord's  freeman.  6.  When  he  styleth  him  "  A  brother  "
he  doth  after  a  aort  signify  he  is  equal  unto  him.    For  albeit  in  the  commonwealth


M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.

and  private  family  it  be  necessary  that  some  should  be  superiors  and  other  inf erion ;
and  that  this  disparity  and  inequality  among  men  be  the  ordinance  of  God  ;  yet  in
the  kingdom  of  God  and  in  Christ  Jesus  there  is  no  distinction.  6.  We  may  observe
that  he  joineth  love  with  Christian  brotherhood,  and  calleth  Onesimns  "  A  beloved
brother,"  not  only  a  servant,  not  only  a  brother,  but  a  brother  dear  and  beloved  ;
signifying  thereby  that  where  a  Christian  calling  is  found,  there  charity  and  love  is
as  a  due  debt  required.  [W.  Atteraoll.)  For  ever. — A  brother  for  ever : — There
.  may  probably  be  here  an  allusion  to  that  which  is  written  in  the  Hebrew  law  about
the  slavery  of  •'  the  children  of  the  strangers  that  sojourned  among  the  Israelites  "
(Lev.  XXV.  46).  Onesimus  was  to  be  his  master's  property— his  to  have  and  hold,
to  enjoy  as  his  possession — "  for  ever,"  as  the  old  law  said  of  the  slave  in  permanent
servitude.  But  in  how  much  a  deeper  and  truer  sense  I  To  be  with  him  not  only
for  time,  but  in  eternity,  in  the  eternal  communion  of  saints.  The  time  of  the
absence  of  Onesimus,  during  which  he  was  "  parted  "  from  Philemon,  might  have
entailed  some  Uttle  discomfort  upon  his  master.  What  of  that  ?  Why  count  up
the  weeks  and  months?  They  were  but  as  the  slave's  "Httle  hour"  of  holiday
compared  with  the  gain  of  a  brother  "  for  ever."  {Bp.  Wm.  Alexander.)  Eternal
/riendthip : — Since  he  left  Onesimus  had  obtained  eterntd  life,  and  eternal  life
involves  eternal  interchange  of  friendship.  His  servioes  to  his  old  master  were  no
longer  barred  by  the  gates  of  death.  {Bp.  Lightfoot.)  All  things,  even  tin  ittelf,
are  turned  by  God's  providence  to  the  good  of  the  elect : — I.  Thk  beasonb  of  this

DOOTBINK  ABE   APPABENT,  TO  SETTLE    OUB  HEABTS  AND  CONSCIENCES    THEBEIN.       1.   The

infinite  wisdom  and  unsearchable  power  of  God,  who,  as  the  apostle  teacheth,  bringeth
light  oat  of  darkness,  and  worketh  by  contrary  means,  such  as  men  count  foolish-
ness, as  to  save  men  by  the  foolish  preaching  of  the  gospel,  that  is,  which  is  esteemed
among  the  wise  men  of  the  world  no  better  than  foolishness.    2.  It  is  the  pleasure
of  God  to  confound  the  wisdom  of  man  that  cannot  attain  to  great  matters  bat  by
great  means  (1  Cor.  i.  27).     God  disposeth  of  all  things  as  pleaseth  Him,  and  often-
times orosseth  the  devices  of  men.     They  intend  one  thing,  but  God  bringeth  to
pass  another ;  they  purpose  one  end,  but  He  will  have  another  come  forth  to  teach
man's  wisdom  to  be  but  foolishness.     3.  He  expresseth  His  wonderful  love,  making
all  things  that  fall  out  in  the  world  to  serve  His  Church.  II.  This  doctrine  sebvbth
FOB  bepboof,  fob  comfobt  AND  FOB  OBEDiEKCK.     1.  FoT  it  serveth  to  reprove  and
convince  sundry  persons,  that  either  know  not  or  knowing  do  abuse  this  providence
of  God  whereby  He  taketh  care  of  all  things  that  are  in  the  world  and  direoteth
them  to  a  right  end.     (1)  And  first  of  all,  we  set  against  it  and  oppose  onto  it  the
dreams  of  atheists,  epicures,  libertines,  who  either  deny  wholly  there  is  a  God,  or
make  Him  sit  as  idle  in  heaven  as  themselves  are  upon  the  earth  :  so  that  albeit  He
know  and  see  all  things  yet  He  worketh  or  ordereth  not  the  special  actions  of  men
that  fall  oat.     These  are  they  that  pull  God  out  of  His  kingdom  and  set  up  chance
and  fortune  as  an  idol  and  make  it  their  God.     We  must  all  learn  and  confess  that
the  Lord,  that  is  the  Creator  of  heaven  and  earth,  is  also  the  Euler  and  Governor  of
all  creatures.  The  whole  world,  from  the  highest  heaven  to  the  centre  of  the  earth,
is  subject  to  His  providence.     (2)  It  reproveth  such  as  from  hence  take  encourage-
ment to  commit  sin,  to  break  out  into  sundry  outrages,  or  to  live  securely  because
God  can  turn  it  to  our  good  and  maketh  it  serve  to  set  forth  His  mercy.     This  is
that  presumption  and  sin  of  rebellion  touched  by  the  apostle,  "  Why  do  we  not  evil
that  good  may  come  thereof,  whose  damnation  is  just."  So  in  another  place.  "  What
shall  we  say  then  ?    Shall  we  continue  still  in  sin  that  grace  may  abound  f     How
shall  we  that  are  dead  in  sin  live  yet  therein  7  "  We  confess,  indeed,  that  God  is  the
sovereign  cause  of  all  events  that  are  brought  to  pass,  and  whatsoever  the  enemies
of  the  Church  intend  and  enterprise,  whether  the  sons  of  men,  or  the  devil  and  his
angels.  He  stayetb  and  hindreth  or  represseth  and  disappointeth,  and  always  dis-
poseth it  to  the  good  and  salvation  of  His  children.     Nevertheless,  this  doth  not
excuse  or  free  the  instruments  that  He  useth  from  fault.     They  do  the  will  of  God
blindly  and  ignorantly,  but  they  do  cross  His  will  openly  and  purposely,  so  that  His
providence  doth  not  exempt  the  wicked  from  their  evil  doing.    2.  This  doctrine
serveth  greatly  to  comfort  us  both  hi  prosperity  and  adversity,  and  that  for  the
time  to  come  we  should  repose  our  whole  hope  in  God.    For  seeing  all  things  come
to  pass  by  the  providence  of  God  so  that  not  so  much  as  sin  itself  is  committed  with-
out His  will,  it  is  a  great  comfort  many  ways  to  God's  Church  and  chosen  children.
We  know  that  He  can  moderate  and  will  moderate  the  rage  of  the  devil  and  the
maUoe  of  wicked  men  that  they  shall  not  hurt  or  hinder  their  salvation.     For  the
devil  is  the  Lord's  servant  or  slave  to  work  His  will,  albeit  he  do  it  unwillingly  and


PHILEMON.  6S


by  eompnlsion.  3.  This  providence  of  God  in  everything  teacheth  contentment  of
mind  in  every  estate ;  yea,  in  adversity  when  we  lie  under  the  cross,  so  that  all  things
go  against  us ;  forasmuch  as  God's  providence  hath  appointed  us  our  lot  and  por-
tion. 4.  This  should  be  a  very  strong  reason  unto  ns  not  to  be  unmeasurably  dis-
mayed when  offences  and  great  evils  break  out  among  us  as  oftentimes  it  f alleth  out,
whereby  many  are  ready  to  shrink  back,  and  others  are  much  disquieted  to  see  the
Church  of  God  so  troubled.  We  are  not  to  think  it  strange  or  to  forsake  the  faith
through  these  scandals,  for  God  would  not  suJffer  any  evil  to  come  to  pass  unless  out
of  that  evU  He  were  able  to  bring  good,  and  out  of  that  sin  to  bring  forth  righteous-
ness te  the  glory  of  His  great  name,  and  for  the  salvation  of  His  dear  Church.  5.
Seeing  God's  providence  extendeth  to  everything  that  is,  and  disposeth  it  according
to  Bos  own  pleasure,  it  directeth  us  in  our  obedience  and  putteth  us  in  mind  of  a
Christian  duty,  namely,  to  be  patient  in  all  adversity.  This  wiU  keep  us  that  we  do
not  rage  against  second  causes,  that  we  do  not  mutter  and  murmur  against  Oroi,
that  we  seek  not  revenge  against  our  enemies.  We  are  ready  in  sickness  to  com-
plain, in  poverty  to  repine,  in  injuries  and  oppressions  to  retail  and  return  like  for
like,  and  in  all  troubles  to  be  impatient  and  to  use  unlawful  means  to  deliver  oor-
eelves,  not  attending  the  Lord's  leisure ;  and  the  reason  is  because  the  providence  of
God  is  not  learned  of  us  we  cannot  depend  upon  Him,  we  know  not  that  He  hath  all
things  in  His  power  to  employ  them  to  His  glory  and  to  use  them  to  our  good.  {W.
Attersoll.)  God's  power  to  bring  good  out  of  evil : — This  must  not  make  us  do
evil  that  good  may  come  of  it,  which  we  are  forbidden  (Bom.  iii.),  for  God  only
hath  this  skill,  by  reason  of  His  infinite  wisdom  and  power,  to  work  good  out  of  evil,
to  draw  hght  out  of  darkness.  He  only  hath  the  philosopher's  stone  to  turn  dross
into  gold.  In  vain,  therefore,  is  it  for  us  to  assay  any  such  thing.  The  right  use
of  this  doctrine  is  for  us  to  comfort  ourselves  when  we  see  wicked  men  plotting  and
practising  mischief  against  God's  poor  Church.  Their  heads  and  hands  work  not
BO  fast  but  God  works  as  fast.  When  they  go  and  strive  one  way  He  sets  them
awork  another  way ;  as  the  sun  going  in  his  own  proper  motion  one  way  is  every
day,  by  the  violent  circumvolution  of  the  heavens,  turned  another  way :  nay.  He
makes  their  striving  against  His  glory  and  His  Church's  good  to  be  the  means  of
furthering  both.  As  in  a  boat,  when  tiie  rowers  go  with  their  faces  striving  towards
the  east,  they  set  the  boat  going  apace  towards  the  west.  Onesimus  in  running  away
from  his  master's  house,  the  Church  of  God,  did  as  much  as  in  him  lay,  strive  against
his  own  conversion,  and  yet  it  is  made  a  means  of  conversion.  Joseph's  brethren
in  selling  him  thought  to  have  frustrated  his  dreams  and  to  have  made  him  sure  for
ever  having  dominion  over  them ;  and  yet  their  selling  of  him  was  the  special  means
of  accomplishing  his  dreams.  Satan,  in  Christ's  death,  thought  to  have  wounded
the  Church  to  the  death ;  and  yet  thereby  we  were  healed  of  his  deadly  wounds.
This  is  the  work  of  the  Lord,  who  knoweth  how  to  catch  the  wise  in  their  own  wiles,
and  it  must  be  marvellous  in  our  eyes.  Let  not,  then,  the  power  and  policy  of  all
the  Achitophels  and  Machiavels  in  the  world,  combining  themselves  against  the
gospel,  dismay  us;  for  God  hath  His  oar  in  their  boat,  He  hath  a  special  stroke  in
all  actions  whatsoever,  and  can  easily  overreach  and  make  stark  fools  of  the  wisest
by  making  their  own  counsels  and  endeavours  like  Chushais,  to  overthrow  those
intentions  which  Ihey  seem  to  support.     (D.  Dyke,  B.D.)

Ver.  16.  A  brother  beloved. — Christian  brotherhood: — As  has  been  well  said,  "In
the  flesh,  Philemon  has  the  brother  for  his  slave ;  in  the  Lord,  PhUemon  has  the
slave  for  his  brother."  He  is  to  treat  him  as  his  brother,  therefore,  both  in  the
common  relationships  of  everyday  life  and  in  the  acts  of  religious  worship.  That
is  a  pregnant  worci  I  True,  there  is  no  gulf  between  Christian  people  nowadays,
like  that  which  in  the  old  times  parted  owner  and  slave  ;  but,  as  society  becomes
more  and  more  differentiated,  as  the  diversities  of  wealth  become  more  extreme  in
our  commercial  communities,  as  education  comes  to  make  the  educated  man's
whole  way  of  looking  at  life  differ  more  and  more  fiom  that  of  the  less  cultured
classes,  the  injunction  implied  in  our  text  encounters  enemies  quite  as  formidable
as  slavery  ever  was.  Tiie  highly-educated  man  is  apt  to  be  very  oblivious  of  the
broUierhood  of  the  ignorant  Christian,  and  he,  on  his  part,  finds  the  recognition
just  as  bad.  The  rich  mill  owner  has  not  much  sympathy  with  the  poor  brother
who  works  at  his  spinning  jennies.  It  is  often  difficult  for  the  Christian  mistress
to  remember  that  her  cook  is  her  sister  in  Christ.  There  is  quite  as  much  sin
against  fraternity  on  the  side  of  the  poor  Christians  who  are  servants  and  illiterate,
M  on  the  Bide  of  the  rich  who  are  masters  or  cultured.    Bat  the  principle  that

6


66  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.

ChriBtian  brotherhood  is  to  reach  across  the  wall  of  class  distinctions  is  as  binding
to-day  as  it  was  on  Philemon  and  Onesimas.  That  brotherhood  is  not  to  be  con-
fined to  acts  and  times  of  ChriBtian  commanion,  bat  is  to  be  shown  and  to  shape
conduct  in  common  life.  "  Both  in  the  flesh  and  in  the  Lord  "  may  be  put  into
plain  English  thus — a  rich  man  and  a  poor  one  belong  to  the  same  Church ;  they
unite  in  the  same  worship  ;  they  are  "  partakers  of  the  one  bread,"  and  therefore,
Paul  thinks,  "  are  one  bread."  They  go  outside  the  church  door.  Do  they  ever
dream  of  speaking  to  one  another  outside ?  "A  brother  beloved  in  the  Lord  " —
on  Sundays,  and  during  worship,  and  in  Church  matters — is  often  a  stranger  "in
the  flesh  "  on  Mondays  in  the  street,  and  in  common  life.  Some  good  people  seem
to  keep  their  brotherly  love  in  the  same  wardrobe  with  their  Sunday  clothes.
Philemon  was  bid,  and  all  are  bid,  to  wear  it  all  the  week,  at  market  as  well  as
church.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Regard  for  those  in  whom  grace  it  found: —
Here  we  see  the  apostle  reasoneth  for  Onesimus ;  to  have  him  received  and
respected  above  an  ordinary  servant  because  he  was  truly  converted,  and  had  in
him  a  good  measure  of  grace,  and  was  become  a  true  and  sonnd  Christian.  We
learn  from  hence  that  the  more  grace  appeareth  in  any,  the  more  should  they  be
tended  and  regarded  of  us,  whether  they  be  servants,  children,  neighbours,  pastors,
people,  wife,  kinsfolk,  or  acquaintance.  In  whomsoever  the  greatest  store  of
heavenly  things  is  to  be  found,  such  are  most  of  all  to  be  loved  and  regarded,
tendered,  and  respected.  I.  The  reasons  hereof  are  plain  to  ineorh  us.  1.
Where  grace  is,  it  bringeth  blessedness  to  that  society,  kingdom,  congregation,
family,  and  person,  as  appeareth  by  the  confession  of  Joseph's  master  (Gen.
zxxix.  2,  3),  whom  he  served.  Now,  who  are  more  to  be  regarded,  or  better  to  be
thought  of,  than  such  as  are  blessed,  and  cause  blessedness  to  others  ?  2.  We  see
that  God  is  most  gracious  to  such  as  have  most  grace  in  their  hearts ;  He  tendereth
them  as  the  apple  of  His  eye,  and  loveth  them  as  His  own  sons.  Indeed,  He
loveth  all  the  works  of  His  hands  as  they  are  His  creatures  :  He  maketh  His  sun
to  shine,  His  rain  to  fall,  His  fruitful  seasons  to  refresh  them  :  He  had  not  left
Himself  without  witness  among  the  infidels,  that  He  might  make  them  without
excuse.  He  giveth  to  beasts  and  to  beastly  men  their  food ;  their  comers  and
gamers  are  full,  and  abounding  with  divers  sorts  ;  but  God  is  specially  known  in
Judah;  His  name  is  great  in  Israel.  He  showeth  His  Vfori  and  His  statutes
among  them ;  He  hath  not  dealt  so  with  every  nation,  neither  have  they  known  His
judgments.  3.  The  more  grace  appeareth  in  any,  the  nearer  he  doth  resemble
God,  the  more  evidently  doth  the  image  of  God  show  itself  in  him.  The  image  of
God  standeth  and  consisteth,  especially  in  holiness  and  true  righteonsness.    II.  Let

VB  GATHER   THE  USES  7HAT  ARISE   FROM  THIS  DOCTRINE.      1.   This  OUght  to  Stir  OB  all

up  to  labour  to  grow  in  grace  and  in  the  gifts  of  the  Spirit,  that  thereby  we  may
procure  and  deserve  the  love  of  men.  They  that  grow  in  grace  are  truly  to  be
reputed  and  accounted  gracious.  2.  Seeing  it  is  our  duty  to  respect  every  one  of
the  faithful,  according  to  the  grace  of  God  measured  out  unto  him,  it  is  required  of
all  men  to  look  always  to  the  best  things  in  the  choice  of  the  companions  of  their
life.  3.  Seeing  it  belongeth  as  a  special  duty  unto  us,  to  show  our  greatest  affection
to  such  as  have  in  their  hearts  most  religion ;  it  serveth  as  a  comfort  and  encourage-
ment to  all  callings,  even  the  lowest  that  are  amongst  men,  to  labour  after  good
things,  and  to  seek  to  serve  and  fear  the  Lord,  seeing  such  as  are  the  meanest,
and  of  basest  reckoning  with  many,  are  respected  and  recompensed  of  Him.  (TT.
A  ttersoll.)  Brethren  in  Christ : — 1.  Seeing  that  in  Christ,  who  is  the  Elder  Brother  of
the  house,  we  are  all  made  brethren  and  sisters  together,  having  one  Father,  which
is  God ;  one  mother,  which  is  the  Church ;  one  inheritance,  which  is  heaven.  It
is  our  duty,  being  nearly  joined  by  so  strong  bands,  and  in  so  fast  and  firm  a
society,  to  love  one  another,  to  seek  the  good  one  of  another,  and  to  out  off  all
nccasions  of  discord  and  division  that  may  arise  among  qs.  For,  shall  such  as  are
members  of  one  body  be  divided  one  against  another?  2.  Seeing  the  gospel  of
Christ  teacheth  us  to  account  ourselves  as  brethren,  albeit,  it  take  not  away  the
degrees  of  persons  and  the  differences  of  callings ;  it  serveth  as  a  good  instruction
to  all  superiors,  to  use  all  mildness  and  moderation,  patience  cmd  meekness  towards
those  that  are  their  inferiors,  and  placed  under  them,  and  to  teach  them  not  to
contemn  and  abhor  them,  not  to  despise  and  disdain  them.  For  howsoever
there  be  one  way  a  great  inequality  between  them  in  matters  of  this  world,  and  in
the  things  of  this  life,  inasmuch  as  God  set  superiors  above  ns  in  an  higher  place,
and  requireth  subjection,  reverence,  and  obedience  of  those  that  are  beneath,  yet
in  another  respect  they  are  matches  and  equals,  having  a  like  portion  in  Christ,  and


PHILEMON,  67


a  like  interest  In  the  means  of  salvation.  3.  This  title  of  brethren  oommnnicated
to  ftll  the  faithful,  serveth  as  a  comfort  and  consolation  to  all  inferiors,  and  to  teach
them  this  duty,  that  thej  ought  not  to  grudge,  or  to  be  grieved  that  they  are  placed
in  a  low  estate,  as  though  they  were  therefore  less  esteemed  and  regarded  of  Gk>d.
4.  Seeing  Ood  respecteth  all  alike,  and  hath  made  all  as  one,  and  as  brethren  that
are  in  Christ,  it  serveth  as  a  reproof,  and  threatening,  and  terror,  to  all  drowsy  and
secure  persons  that  think  they  shall  escape  the  judgments  of  God  for  their  high
places.  There  is  no  difference  with  God,  there  is  no  inequality  with  Christ,  to
them  that  are  in  Christ ;  high  and  low  are  all  alike  with  Him.  None  are  saved  for
their  highness ;  none  are  condemned  for  their  lowness.  Christ  Jesus  accepteth  no
man  for  his  glory ;  He  rejecteth  no  man  for  his  ignominy.  Let  us,  therefore,  not
bear  ourselves  bold  and  confident  upon  oar  outward  excellency,  but  stand  in  fear  of
His  judgments,  and  prepare  ourselves  with  all  reverence  and  diligence,  that  we  may
be  found  worthy  to  stand  before  the  great  God  in  that  great  day  of  account.  {Ibid.)
Christian  brotherhood: — I.  Hebe  note  the  spibittjal  kindred  that  is  bbtwect
TBTTS  Chbistians.  They  are  all  brethren — brethren  by  the  Father's  side,  having
one  Father,  God  the  Father  of  spirits ;  brethren  by  the  mother's  side,  lying  in  the
same  womb  of  the  Church,  having  one  and  the  self -same  elder  brother,  Christ  Jesns,
begotten  with  the  same  spiritual  seed ;  fed  at  the  same  table  with  the  same  nourish-
ment. This  brotherhood  must  far  exceed  the  natural,  even  as  God's  fatherhood
towards  us  far  exceedeth  the  natural  fatherhood  among  men.  Look,  then,  what
nature  tieth  natural  brethren  to,  that  doth  grace  much  more  tie  spiritual  nnto,  as —

1.  Amity  and  unity  (Psa.  cxxxiii.  10).  How,  then,  do  they  show  themselves
brethren  that  do  bite,  yea,  and  devour  those  that  are  of  the  same  holy  profession
with  themselves  ?    Even  as  in  the  sea,  the  greater  fishes  swallow  up  the  lesser.

2.  It  is  the  part  of  brethren  to  take  one  another's  part,  to  cleave  one  to  another,
taking  thai  which  is  done  to  their  brother  as  done  to  themselves.  3.  It  is  the
property  of  a  brother,  though  at  other  times  he  have  been  something  more  unkind
to  his  brother ;  yet  in  his  affliction  and  extremity,  then  to  feel  nature  working  in
him,  and  to  show  and  express  his  affection  by  doing  his  best  (Frov.  zvii.  17).  If
we  then  will  show  ourselves  true  and  natural  sons  of  God,  and  so  brethren  to  His
children,  when  we  see  His  honour  ready  to  be  trod  under  foot,  when  we  see  His
children  evil  intreated,  then  is  it  high  time  for  us  to  manifest  our  affection.
n.  Observe  that  this  spiritual  brotherhood  is  betwixt  all  Christians  indiffebentlt,

WHATSOEVEB  DIFEBBENCE  THEBB  BE  AMONGST  THEM  IN  OUTWABD  CIVII,  BESPECTS,  YET
THEY  ABB  NOTHING  PBEJUDICIAL  TO   THIS  SPrEITUAIi  FBATEBNITY  IN   ChBIST  :   fOr  here

Philemon  and  Onesimus,  the  master  and  the  servant,  are  made  these  kind  of
brethren.  This  doctrine  is  of  special  use,  both  for  comfort  to  inferiors  and  for
humiliation  and  moderation  of  mind  to  superiors,  inasmuch  as  the  servant  is
Christ's  free  man,  and  the  master  is  Christ's  servant.  (D.  Dyke,  B.D.)
Christianity  and  slavery : — Christianity  entered  on  no  superficial  and  obvious
contest  with  this  ancient,  consolidated,  and  haughty  iniquity,  so  general  in  the
world  and  so  intricately  involved  with  the  customs  of  the  rude,  the  laws  of  the
advanced,  with  barbarian  ferocities,  Grecian  philosophies,  Eoman  power.  It  sent
no  formal  challenge  to  the  system,  to  which  it  was  as  fatally  hostile  as  it  was  to
idolatry.  But  it  smote  it  with  blows  more  destroying  than  of  arms,  and  caused  it
to  vanish  as  summer  skies  and  melting  currents  consume  the  glacier,  which  we  call
an  iceberg,  which  has  drifted  down  from  Arctic  coasts.  The  Sermon  on  the
Mount,  God's  affectionate  and  watchful  Fatherhood  of  all,  the  brotherhood  of
disciples,  the  mutual  duty  and  the  common  immortality  of  poor  and  rich — these
were  the  forces  before  which  slavery  inevitably  fell.  Where  philosophies  had
utterly  failed  and  eloquence  bad  been  wanting,  and  the  progress  of  arts,  cities  or
states,  had  only  clenched  tighter  the  manacles  of  the  bondman.  He  who  taught  on
the  narrow  Galilee  beach  overwhelmed,  by  the  mystic  energy  of  His  words,  the
consummate  oppression.  It  fell  before  Him  as  the  warrior  falls,  more  surely  than
by  bullets,  by  famine  and  thirst ;  as  the  giant's  strength  fades  in  fatal  atmospheres.
"  Not  now  a  slave,  but  above  a  slave,  as  a  brother  beloved,  so  receive  him  "  ;  it  was
the  voice  not  of  one  apostle  only,  though  he  were  the  chiefest,  but  of  the  whole
Church,  to  the  master  who  was  himself  in  Christ.  "  The  grace  of  God  that
bringeth  salvation  hath  appeared  to  all  men,"  before  that  announcement  slavery
could  not  stand,  any  more  than  flax  before  shrivelling  fires.  (R.  S.  Stom,  D.D.)
Care  for  servants : — The  celebrated  Earl  of  Chesterfield  left,  by  his  will,  legacies  to
all  his  menial  servants,  equal  to  two  years'  wages  each,  considering  them  "  as  his
nnfortunate  friends,  equal  by  birth,  and  only  inferior  by  fortune."    John  CUaude


68  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.

■when  on  his  dying  bed,  thus  addressed  his  son,  who,  with  an  old  servant,  waa
kneeling  before  him — "  Be  mindful  of  this  domestic ;  as  yon  value  my  blessing,
take  care  that  she  wants  nothing  as  long  as  she  lives."  Mutual  obligations  of
Christian  masters  and  servants : — Onesimus  might  remain  a  slave ;  there  might
be  no  change  in  their  relative  positions ;  but  then  as  the  slave  went  about  his
ordinary  duties ;  duties  in  which  there  was  nothing  degrading — for  duty  cannot  be
degrading ;  if  it  is  actually  God  to  whom  it  is  rendered ;  and,  I  might,  therefore,
dare  to  say  that  it  must  be  honourable — as  the  slave  then  went  about  his  ordinary
duties,  the  master  was  to  regard  him  as  the  free  man  of  Jehovah,  the  heir,  with
himself,  of  an  incorruptible  ijoheritance.  The  slave  was  to  regard  his  master  as
possessing  authority  from  God,  to  whom  he  was  bound  to  yield  a  devoted  obedience;
but  at  the  same  time,  as  a  fellow  traveller  with  himself  to  a  city  where  each  should
be  judged  according  to  his  works.  And  what  but  a  holy  and  close  brotherhood
could  subsist  between  the  master  and  the  slave  when  each  thought  of  the  other  as
he  appeared  in  God's  sight,  and  each  being  himself  accountable  to  that  God  for
every  word  and  every  work  ?  Would  that  rich  and  poor  would  both  keep  more  in
mind  these  which  are  the  only  levelling  principles  of  the  Christian  religion.  It
would  do  more  towards  cementing  together  the  several  classes  of  society,  now,  alas,
so  much  disjoined !  than  all  the  well  meant  endeavours  of  statesmen  and  economists.
It  is  a  grievous  thing  for  a  country,  more  grievous  than  foreign  invasion,  when  there
is  little  or  nothing  of  kindly  feeling  between  the  several  ranks,  but  jealousy  and  envy
separate  them  even  more  than  titles  and  property.  The  rich  and  the  poor  filling  their
respective  places  in  a  well-ordered  community,  each  class  dependent  on  the  other,
and  neither  able  to  subsist  by  itself,  ought  to  present  the  same  spectacle  as  the
members  of  the  body ;  their  offices  different,  but  their  concord  so  great,  that  the
whole  framework  is  sensitive  to  the  least  injury  done  to  the  least  part.  And  we
know  of  nothing  but  the  diffused  influence  of  Christianity  which  can  either  pro-
duce this  state,  or  restore  it  when  impaired.  This,  however,  can,  and  that,  too,  on
the  simple  principle  that  while  it  puts  a  sort  of  sacredness  around  civil  institutions,
and  thus  is  a  better  upholder  of  the  rights  of  the  rich  than  despotism  with  its
armies,  or  legislation  with  its  statutes ;  it  puts  also  a  dignity  round  poverty,  and
lifts  it  to  at  least  equality  with  wealth,  by  merging  all  human  distinction  in  the
being  sons  of  God,  and  heirs  of  God.  Let  the  rich  feel  this,  and  where  is  pride  ?
Let  the  poor  feel  this,  and  where  is  discontent  7  Oh,  the  beauty  of  the  spectacle
which  might  be  presented  if  the  brotherhood  which  Christianity  recognises  and
enforces  were  practically  instituted  throughout  a  community  !  There  is  little  else
needed  for  the  making  that  millennium  on  which  prophecy  has  poured  its  most
gorgeous  colouring.  {H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  Specially  to  me,  but  how  much  more
unto  thee,  both  in  the  flesh,  and  In  the  Lord. — Reasons  for  the  increase  of  mutual
lave : — Hereby  there  is  offered  to  our  considerations  this  lesson  to  be  learned,  that
the  more  bands  and  reasons  are  given  unto  us  of  God  to  care  for  any,  the  more  we
are  bound  to  care  for  Him,  and  to  respect  Him.  A  professor  of  the  gospel  is  more
to  be  regarded  than  he  that  is  without.  One  of  the  same  nation,  more  than  a
stranger ;  one  of  our  own  kindred,  more  than  another  farther  from  us ;  a  neighbour,
more  than  one  that  dwelleth  many  miles  from  us ;  one  of  a  man's  house,  more  than
him  that  is  out  of  his  house  ;  a  kinsman  converted  to  the  faith,  and  become  a  true
and  perfect  Christian,  more  than  a  kinsman  not  converted  ;  a  child  that  hath  the
sparks  of  grace  in  him,  more  than  a  child  void  of  them ;  a  servant  feariug  God,
more  than  a  servant  in  the  same  family  that  doth  not  fear  God,  nor  regard^  His
Word,  nor  make  conscience  of  the  means  of  his  salvation.  The  reasons  being  wisely
considered  will  make  this  plainly  to  appear  unto  us.  1.  It  is  a  general  sentence
delivered  by  Solomon  in  the  book  of  Ecclesiastes,  "  Two  are  better  than  one,  and
a  threefold  cord  is  not  easily  broken."  Wheresoever  there  are  stronger  cords  to
tie  us,  and  no  bands  to  join  us  together,  our  love  ought  to  be  the  greater  one
towards  another.  Many  sticks  make  the  greater  fire,  and  many  strings  the  better
music.  2.  It  is  a  thing  very  well  pleasing  in  the  sight  of  God,  to  consider  what
means  He  hath  afforded  to  increase  mutual  love  and  society  one  with  another.  This
is  the  reason  urged  by  the  apostle  to  persuade  the  children  and  nephews  of  poor
widows  to  take  cars  for  their  parents  according  to  their  ability,  because  that  ia  an
honest  thing,  and  acceptable  before  God.  Now  we  are  bound  unto  them  by  many
effectual  reasons,  as  it  were  with  bars  of  iron,  and  bands  of  brass,  to  nourish  those
that  have  nourished  us,  that  have  fed  us,  that  have  clothed  as,  that  have  begotten
as,  and  brought  us  into  the  world,  so  that  we  must  acknowledge  it  both  right  and
reasonable,    8.  Sach  as  break  these  bands  and  cast  away  these  oords  from  them.


PHILEMON.  69


do  set  themselves  against  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  and  may  be  sent  to  school  to  tha
infidels ;  naj,  to  the  brute  beasts,  which  are  not  void  of  a  certain  natural  affection.
This  the  apostle  teacheth,  "  If  there  be  any  that  provideth  not  for  his  own,  and
specially  for  them  of  his  household,  he  denieth  the  faith,  and  is  worse  than  an
infidel."  For  howsoever  they  profess  the  faith  in  words,  yet  in  deed  and  in  truth
they  deny  it.  But  God  is  delighted  with  our  works,  not  with  our  words,  and
looketh  upon  the  substance,  not  the  show  of  our  religion.  (W.  Attersoll.)  Love
for  ever : — Very  dear  was  Onesimus  to  the  apostle ;  dear  as  being  a  spiritual  son,
whom,  as  he  expresses  it,  he  had  "  begotten  in  his  bonds."  But  dearer  still  must  ha
be  to  Philemon  who  had  not  succeeded  in  the  endeavour  to  turn  him  from  the  error
of  his  ways.  It  may  be,  and  it  should  be,  a  deep  gladness  to  the  minister  of  Christ
if  God  employ  him  in  inducing  the  prodigal  to  return  to  his  home.  But  even  this
gladness  is  nothing  to  that  of  a  parent  or  guardian  who  receives  back  the  wanderer,
and  views  in  his  conversion  the  fruit  and  the  recompense  of  his  prayers  and  his
tears.  The  parent  seems  to  have  laboured  in  vain  when  another  is  employed  whera
all  his  efforts  have  failed.  But  oh,  think  not  on  this  account  that  the  joy  is  trans-
ferred from  the  parent  to  the  minister — "A  brother  beloved,  specially  to  me,  but
how  much  more  unto  thee."  I  have  not  robbed  thee  of  thy  rapture  through  taking
from  thee  the  office  wherein  thou  didst  so  devotedly  toil.  I  have  gained  indeed  a
rich  delight  for  myself;  but  there  is  a  richer — richer  as  succeeding  to  fear,  and
watching,  and  anxiety — richer  as  thou  now  dost  receive  back  a  beloved  one,  of  whom
thou  thoughtest  that  thou  hadst  lost  him  for  ever.  Surely,  the  apostle  seems  hera
to  imply  that  ties  of  earthly  relationship  and  family,  though  they  will  not  subsist
hereafter  in  anything  of  their  present  selfishness  and  contraction,  shall  nevertheless
not  wholly  disappear  from  our  future  and  everlasting  condition.  He  speaks,  yoa
observe,  of  Philemon  as  having  received  Onesimus  for  ever ;  and  of  Onesimus  aa
dearer  to  Philemon  than  even  to  himself  who  had  turned  him  to  the  Lord.  If  it
was  for  ever  that  Onesimus  was  received  ;  and  if  he  have  reason  to  be  dearer  to  hia
master  than  to  any  one  beside,  we  can  hardly  avoid  the  inference,  that  in  a  higher
and  better  state  of  being  there  will  be  something  corresponding  to  human  friend-
ships and  associations  —that  parents  and  children,  husbands  and  wives,  brothers
and  sisters,  wiU  be  more  to  each  other  than  parties,  who  have  been  wholly  strangers
on  earth  ;  that  although  in  that  lofty  and  ethereal  condition,  "  they  neither  marry,
nor  are  given  in  marriage,"  still  it  will  be  in  the  purifying  and  refining  rather  than
in  the  actual  destruction  of  earthly  relationships  that  the  future  shall  be  dis*
tinguished  from  the  present.  All  of  you,  we  believe,  admit  that  those  who  hava
known  each  other  on  earth  shall  know  each  other  in  heaven.  This  seems  to  follow
on  our  preserving  our  identity  ;  on  our  remaining,  and  on  our  feeling  ourselves  the
same  persons  hereafter  as  here.  You  all,  moreover,  admit  that  the  saints  in  heaven
shall  constitute  but  one  vast  family,  every  member  of  which  shall  be  bound  to  every
other  by  intimate  as  well  as  indissoluble  ties.  But  it  seems  necessary  in  order  to
there  being  any  worth  in  the  first  part — that  of  our  knowing  each  other  in  heaven,
that  this  shoiild  not  interfere  with  the  second  part — that  all  the  redeemed  shall
constitute  one  family  above,  that  we  suppose  human  associations  so  far  to  remain
that  Philemon  should  single  out  Onesimus  and  regard  him  as  with  a  special
affection.  There  is  perhaps  but  very  little  that  is  cheering  in  the  prospect  of  a
reunion  with  friends  whom  we  have  long  lost,  if  they  are  to  be  nothing  to  us  through
eternity  but  what  others  will  be  whom  we  never  saw.  It  will  hardly  help  to  dry
the  tears  of  the  mother  as  she  weeps  over  her  child,  to  tell  her  that  she  shall  see
that  child  again,  but  see  it  only  where  it  shall  be  to  her  nothing  more  than  what  a
thousand  others  are.  There  must  be  some  place,  some  play  for  human  affections,
else  shall  we  so  spiritualise  the  future  as  to  strip  it  of  all  influence  on  such  beinga
as  ourselves.  And  there  is  place,  and  there  is  play  for  human  affections.
(E.  Melvill,  B.D.)

Ver.  17.  If  thou  cotmt  me  therefore  a  partner. — A  partner,  not  a  prelate ;— He
does  not  say,  If  thou  count  me  a  prelate,  a  ruler  of  the  Church,  but  a  partner ;  he
is  content  to  be  one  of  them,  not  above  them.  The  angels  couiit  ua  partners  (Rev.
xiz.  10) ;  Christ  counts  us  partners  (Heb.  ii.  14) ;  and  shall  we  disdain  to  call  one
another  partners?  There  are  partners  in  nature,  so  are  we  all;  partners  of  the
same  air,  water,  fruits  of  earth,  misery,  death;  there  are  partners  in  office,  as
churchwardens,  and  constables ;  there  are  also  partners  in  grace — partakers  of  the
Divine  nature,  of  one  Christ,  of  one  heaven.  Such  a  partner  did  St.  Paul  desire  to
be  accounted;  and  happy  are  they  that  are  in  this  partnership.    {W.  Jonee,  D  D.)


70  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,

A  partner : — Philemon  and  the  apostle  had  been  at  one  time  associated  as  partners
in  their  secular  calling.  The  latter  accordingly  now  falls  back  upon  the  language
which  business  men  who  are  so  connected  use  in  writing  to  each  other.  "  If  thou
count  me  a  partner,  receive  him  as  myself.  Let  the  runaway  slave  stand  on  the
footing  of  my  agent,  and  be  treated  as  the  agent  of  a  partner  ought  to  be."  But
then  there  came  the  fact  which,  both  for  the  sake  of  justice  and  of  the  penitent
himself,  St.  Paul  had  no  wish  to  gloss  over,  that  there  had  been  a  wrong  committed.
OneisimuB  had  stolen  or  embezzled.  How  was  that  to  be  dealt  with  7  Here  also  he
falls  into  the  business  language  of  partners.  "  If  he  hath  wronged  thee,"  i&o.  He
was  ready  to  debit  himself  with  that  responsibility.  (Dean  Plutnptre.)  New  argu-
menu : — The  words  in  this  verse  are  not  many,  but  the  observations  are  not  few
that  might  be  concluded  and  collected  out  of  the  same.  1.  First  of  all,  many  may
marvel  that  the  apostle  is  so  earnest,  importunate  for  a  servant,  and  especially  for
such  a  servant.  Surely,  fear  of  hard  and  severe  dealing  might  have  moved  Onesi-
mus  to  distrust  and  despair,  and  therefore  he  useth  all  means  to  hold  him  up,  to
cherish  his  faith,  and  to  further  the  good  work  begun  in  him,  being  as  yet  a  young
plant,  a  new  convert,  as  a  joint  newly  restored,  and  having  yet,  as  may  be  thought,
a  tender  conscience ;  whereby  he  provoketh  us  and  all  others,  to  seek  tenderly  the
upholding,  maintaining,  con^rming,  and  comforting,  such  as  have  given  witness  of
their  true  repentance,  not  to  quench  the  smoking  flax,  nor  to  break  the  bruised
reed.  For  seeing  we  are  with  all  mildness  to  receive  unto  us  such  as  are  weak  in
the  faith ;  woe  unto  them  that  stay  them  that  are  coming  forward,  and  lay  stumbling-
blocks  in  their  way  to  bring  them  back,  and  to  cause  them  to  return  to  their  vomit
with  the  dog,  and  to  the  wallowing  in  the  mire  like  the  sow  that  was  washed.  And
seeing  the  sinner  is  thus  to  be  helped,  which  hath  approved  his  conversion  unto  us,
that  we  are  to  make  intercession  unto  others,  to  obtain  pardon  for  the  penitent ;
we  are  admonished,  that  they  are  much  more  favourably  to  be  handled,  and
carefully  to  be  received,  and  gently  to  be  remitted  by  ourselves.  2.  We  see
that  to  the  old  request  he  added  a  new  reason ;  for  we  shall  never  find  in  this
epistle  his  petition  barely  and  nakedly  propounded.  He  hath  used  diverse  argu-
ments before  to  persuade  Philemon,  yet  here  we  have  another  annexed,  to  move
him  to  grant  it  without  denial  or  resistance.  This  giveth  instruction  to  the  minis-
ters of  the  gospel,  to  teach  the  truth  soundly  and  substantially,  as  that  the  con-
sciences of  the  people  may  be  well  grounded  and  thoroughly  settled  therein.  When
matters  of  weight  and  importance  are  in  question  they  must  not  deal  rawly,  they
must  not  use  weak  proofs  and  unsufficient  reasons,  whereby  men  may  be  rather
hardened  in  their  errors  than  helped  out  of  their  errors.  3.  The  apostle
doth  not  simply  say :  If  our  things  be  common  (as  he  might  have  done),  but  it
thou  account  them  common,  and  us  to  have  a  communion  between  ourselves,
declaring  thereby  that  it  is  not  enough  to  know  a  truth,  unless  we  also  yield  unto
it  as  unto  a  truth.  It  is  one  thing  to  know  what  is  good  in  our  judgments,  and
another  thing  to  embrace  it  in  our  practices.  It  is  one  thing  to  know  what  is  evil
in  our  minds,  and  another  to  refuse  it  in  our  actions.  We  must  labour  not  only  to
have  our  thoughts  cleared,  our  understanding  and  our  judgments  rectified,  to  see
the  truth,  but  to  have  our  hearts  and  affections  sanctified  to  follow  it.  It  behoveth
therefore  not  to  rest  ourselves  satisfied  with  general  notions,  but  so  to  ensue  after
them,  as  that  we  make  special  application  of  them.  David  in  general  knew  that
adultery  was  evil ;  Noah  knew  that  drunkenness  was  beastly ;  Peter  knew  that
denying  of  his  Master  was  fearful,  yet  in  the  brunt  of  temptation,  though  the  mind
had  knowledge  of  it,  the  affections  would  not  refuse  it,  but  yielded  as  a  city
besieged  by  an  enemy.  4.  The  apostle  putteth  Philemon  in  mind,  that  seeing
there  was  so  near  a  conjunction  between  them  twain,  that  they  were  become
as  it  were  one  man,  and  had  one  mind  in  two  bodies ;  it  followeth  that  whosoever
was  joined  to  one  of  them  ought  of  necessity  to  be  joined  to  the  other.  Whereby  we
see  that  such  as  are  our  friends  ought  to  be  also  the  friends  of  our  friends,  that  is,
of  those  that  are  joined  unto  us.  Philemon  was  the  friend  of  Paul,  and  therefore
if  OnesimuB  were  the  friend  of  one  he  must  needs  be  the  friend  of  the  other.  Paul
and  Philemon  were  as  two  brethren  ;  if  then  Onesimus  were  the  brother  of  Paul  he
ought  also  to  be  accounted  the  brother  of  Philemon,  and  therefore  he  would  have
him  received  as  himself.  It  is  no  true  friendship  when  one  maketh  profession  to
love  another  man,  and  yet  hateth  him  which  is  his  chiefest  and  dearest  friend ;  for
if  indeed  we  loved  him  we  would  for  his  sake  love  the  other  that  loveth  him.  This
we  see  in  the  covenant  made  with  Abraham,  who  is  called  the  friend  of  Ood,
whereby  it  appeareth  that  the  Lord  promised  to  be  a  friend  to  his  friends,  and  an


PHILEMON.  71


enemy  to  his  enemies.  6.  In  the  amplification  of  the  conclusion  he  addeth
(as  myself),  thereby  showing  that  he  would  have  him  regarded  no  otherwise  than
bimself.  Whereby  we  learn  that  our  love  to  the  brethren  ought  not  to  be  in  word,
or  in  tongue,  or  in  show,  but  in  deed,  in  truth,  and  in  heart.  This  is  Christian
love,  this  was  in  Christ  towards  as,  and  this  should  be  in  all  of  as  one  toward
another  (1  John  iii.  18  ;  Bom.  xil.  9;  1  Pet.  iv.  8).     (W.  Attersoli:^

Yer.  18.  If  he  hath  wronged  thee,  or  oweth  thee  ought. — Theft : — The  form  only  ii
hypothetical.  The  case  is  put  as  one  which  is  absolutely  unquestionable.  No  doubt
Onesimus  robbed  his  master  when  he  ran  away.  The  consequence  of  this  is  a  debt
at  present  unpaid.  He  wronged  Philemon  once  for  all,  and  consequently  is  in  debt.
Flight  and  theft  were  instinctively  associated  in  the  minds  of  Romans  as  the
kindred  offences  of  slaves.  It  will  be  observed  that  St  Paul's  teaching  was  not
Bocialistic.  Not  private  property,  but  the  abstraction  of  it,  was  theft  in  his  estima-
tion. (Bp.  W.  Alexander.)  Ownership  of  goods : — We  learn  from  hence  that  the
communion  which  is  among  the  faithful  saints  doth  not  take  away  the  private
possession,  dominion,  distinction,  and  interest,  in  the  things  of  this  life.  Albeit
the  things  belonging  to  this  temporal  life  be  in  some  respect  common,  yet  in  another
respect  they  are  private.  They  are  common  touching  use,  they  are  private  touching
possession.  I.  This  truth  will  yet  further  and  better  appear  unto  us,  if  we  enter
into  the  considerationb  of  the  reasons  that  serve  to  strengthen  rr.  1.  It  is
confirmed  by  the  Commandments  of  God,  and  by  the  fonrth  petition  of  the  Lord's
Prayer.  The  Eighth  Commandment  forbiddeth  us  to  steal  away  our  neighbour's
goods,  and  to  do  him  the  least  hurt  therein.  The  Tenth  Commandment  restraineth
the  inward  lusts  and  motions  that  arise  in  our  minds,  and  condemneth  the  coveting
of  his  house,  of  his  wife,  of  his  servant,  of  his  ox,  and  his  ass,  or  of  anything  that
belongeth  unto  him.  If  then  God  commandeth  the  preservation  of  every  man's
goods,  and  forbiddeth  all  injuries  to  be  offered  unto  them,  it  standeth  us  upon  to
acknowledge  a  right  and  interest  that  every  one  hath  in  earthly  things  given  unto
him.  Likewise  our  Saviour  Christ  teacheth  us  daily  to  ask  our  daily  bread,  so  that
no  man  ought  to  desire  that  which  is  another's  bread,  bat  every  one  to  know  his
own,  what  God  hath  given  him,  and  what  he  hath  given  to  others.  If  then  there
be  bread  that  is  ours,  then  also  there  is  bread  that  is  not  ours.  And  if  somewhat
be  ours  and  somewhat  not  ours  it  followeth  that  every  one  hath  an  interest  in  his
own  goods,  and  cannot  lay  hold  of  another  man's.  2.  The  invading  of  other  men's
inheritances,  and  the  encroaching  upon  their  private  possessions,  is  the  fruit  either
of  a  confused  anarchy,  or  of  a  loose  government ;  and  both  of  them  are  contrai-y  to
that  ordinance  which  God  establisheth,  and  the  order  that  He  requireth.  3.  Every
one  hath  a  proper  and  pecuhar  possession,  his  own  servants  to  order,  his  own
ground  to  till,  his  own  fields  to  husband,  his  own  family  to  govern,  and  his  own
domestical  affairs  to  manage,  that  he  may  provide  things  honest  in  the  sight  of
God,  that  he  may  rejoice  in  the  labour  of  his  own  hands,  and  be  thankful  to  the
Father  and  giver  of  all  good  things.  It  is  a  rule  taught  by  nature,  approved  by
experience,  strengthened  by  customs,  and  established  by  the  founders  of  cities  and
kingdoms,  that  whatsoever  is  cared  for  of  all  is  cared  for  of  none  as  it  ought  to  be,
but  is  neglected  of  all.  II.  As  we  have  seen  the  reasons  that  confirm  this  doctrine,
so  let  us  see  the  uses  that  instruct  us  in  many  profitable  points  tending  to
EDIFICATION.  1.  This  confuteth  and  convinceth  the  detestable  sect  who  deny  to
men  any  property  in  anything,  but  would  have  all  things  common.  2.  Seeing  every
man  hath  a  state  in  his  own  goods,  it  teacheth  us  this  duty,  that  we  ought  to  be
content  with  the  portion  which  we  have,  be  it  more  or  less,  be  it  a  simple  or  a
worthy  portion,  and  to  be  by  all  means  tbankful  for  it ;  considering  with  ourselves
that  the  difference  of  places,  lands,  possessions,  with  the  priperties  thereof,  be  of
God,  and  are  to  be  acknowledged  as  His  gift.  3.  We  learn  Irom  this  doctrine  to
take  good  heed  that  we  do  not  aliuse  our  piopeity  and  dominion  of  those  gifts  that
God  hath  given  us,  bestowing-  them  only  to  our  inivate  use,  and  withholding  the
comfort  of  them  from  others,  to  whom  tLey  ought  of  right  to  be  imparted  and
employed.  For  albeit  the  possession  of  them  be  ours,  yet  there  is  a  use  of  them
belonging  to  the  saints ;  the  property  of  goods  and  the  communion  of  saints  stand-
ing together.  Whensoever  we  have  these  outward  things  we  must  not  withhold
them,  when  they  may  profit  the  Church  and  refresh  the  saints.  {W.  Attersoll.)
Put  that  on  mine  account. — Taking  the  slave's  debt : — The  verb  used  here  for  "put
to  the  account  of  "  is  a  very  rare  word  ;  and  perhaps  the  singular  phrase  may  be
ohosen  to  let  another  great  Christian  truth  shine  through.    Was  Paul's  love  the


n  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.

only  one  that  we  know  of  which  took  the  slave's  debts  on  itself?    Did  anybody  elM
ever  say,  "  Put  that  on  mine  account "?    We  have  been  taught  to  ask  for  the  for-
giveness  of  oar  sins  as  "debts,"  and  we  have  been  taught  that  there  is  One  on
whom  God  has  made  to  meet  the  iniquities  of  as  all.    Christ  takes  on  Himself  all
Paol's  debt,  all  Philemon's,  all  ours.    He  has  paid  the  ransom  for  all,  and  He  so
identifies  men  with  Himself  that  they  are  "  received  as  Himself."    It  is  His  great
example  that  Paul  is  trying  to  copy  here.    Forgiven  all  that  great  debt,  he  dare  not
rise  from  his  knees  to  take  his  brother  by  the  throat,  bat  goes  forth  to  show  to  his
fellow  the  mercy  he  has  found,  and  to  model  his  life  after  the  pattern  of  that
miracle  of  love  in  which  is  his  trust.     It  is  Christ's  own  voice  which  echoes  in
"put  that  on  mine  account."    (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)        Suretyship: — From  this
offer  that  Paul  maketh,  which  is,  to  satisfy  another  man's  debt,  we  learn  that  it  is
a  lawful  thing  for  one  man  to  become  surety  for  another,  and  to  engage  himself  for
his  sure  and  faithful  friend,  of  whom  he  is  well  persuaded.    Howsoever  suretyship
be  to  some  very  hurtful,  and  to  all  dangerous,  yet  it  is  to  none  in  itself,  and  of  its
own  nature,  unlawful  or  sinful,  when  the  merciless  creditor  shall  take  his  debtor  by
the  throat  and  say,  "  pay  me  that  thou  owest."    I.  And  if  we  require  better  grounds
to  satisfy  us  in  this  truth,  let  us  enter  into  the  strength  of  reason  to  assure
us,  without  any  wavering  herein.    1.  Weigh  with  me  the  example  of  Christ,  an
excellent  pattern  and  president  of  the  practice  of  this,  an  example  far  beyond  aU
exception,  an  example  that  overshadoweth,  and  dazzleth,  and  darkeneth,  all  that
cloud  of  witnesses  produced  by  the  apostle  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  ;  He  became
surety  for  His  Church  unto  His  Father,  to  pay  the  debt  of  our  sins,  and  to  satisfy
His  justice.     2.  It  is  a  fruit  of  love  and  brotherly  kindness,  even  this  way  to  relieve
and  help  such  as  are  like  to  suffer  damage  and  detriment  by  want  of  outward  things.
There  is  no  man  so  rich  but  may  become  poor ;  no  man  so  high  but  may  be  brought
low;    as  there  is  no  full  sea  but  hath  his  ebbing.      Now  humane  society  and
Christian  piety  requireth  that  one  should  sustain  and  succour  another  in  their
necessity.    We  are  commanded  to  help  up  our  enemy's  ox  that  is  fallen,  or  his  ass
that  is  sunk  down  under  his  burden ;  how  much  more  ought  we  to  show  pity  and
compassion  to  our  brother  himself,  vexed  with  the  creditor,  terrified  with  the  prison,
oppressed  with  the  debt,  and  dismayed  and  discouraged  with  the  payment  at  hand
that  is  to  be  made  ?     So  then,  whether  we  do  consider  that  Christ  Jesus  is  made
our  surety,  and  that  suretyship  is  a  fruit  of  Christian  love  one  toward  another,  in
both  respects  we  see  that  in  itself  it  is  not  to  be  disallowed  or  condemned.    H.  The
uses  op  this  doctrine  are  diligently  to  be  considered  op  us.     1.  If  it  be  law-
ful to  become  surety  one  for  another,  it  convinceth  and  confuteth  those  that  hold  it
to  be  evil  and  unlawful,  to  give  their  word,  or  offer  their  hand,  or  tender  their
promise,  for  their  brethren.    Love  is  a  debt  that  we  owe  to  all  men,  as  the  apostle
testifieth  (Bom.  xiii.  8),  and  therefore  we  ought  not  to  fail  in  the  performance
thereof.    2.  Seeing  we  have  showed  it  to  be  lawful  to  enter  into  suretyship  (for  if
it  had  been  simply  and  altogether  forbidden  Paul  would  never  have  proffered  himself
to  be  surety  unto  Philemon  for  Onesimus),  this  serveth  divers  ways  for  our  in-
struction.   For  hereby  we  are  directed  to  be  careful  to  use  it  lawfully.    It  is  good
and  lawful  if  a  man  use  it  well  and  lawfully.    But  if  we  use  it  and  enter  into  it  rashly,
not  rightly,  ordinarily,  not  warily,  foolishly,  not  wisely,  desperately,  not  discreetly ;  if
we  entangle  ourselves  with  it  without  much  deliberation,  without  good  circumspec-
tion, and  without  due  consideration,  it  becometh  unlawfrd  unto  us.    Wherefore  that
this  giving  of  assurance  to  others,  and  for  others,  either  by  our  word  or  hand,  may  be
performed  lawfully  to  the  good  of  others,  and  not  the  hurt  of  ourselves,  we  must  mark
and  practise  two  points  : — (1)  Consider  the  persons  of  others  for  whom  it  is  done.
|2)  Our  own  persons  that  do  it ;  and  these  two  are  caveats  for  all  sureties.  Touching
khose  persons  for  whom  we  become  sureties,  we  must  know  that  we  are  not  to  engage
ourselves  and  our  credit,  for  every  one  that  will  crave  it  at  our  hands,  and  enter
into  bands  for  them,  and  promise  us  fair  to  see  us  discharged ;  but  in  such  men,  who
oftentimes  have  a  greater  feeling  of  their  own  wants  and  necessities  than  of  freeing
them  out  of  woe  that  have  pledged  themselves  for  them,  we  are  to  observe  three
things,     (a)  That  they  be  well  known.     (6)  Tliat  they  be  honest  and  godly,     (c)
That  they  be  sufficient  to  pay  that  which  they  would  have  us  bound  unto  another,
to  assure  him  that  they  will  pay.     3.  Touching  our  own  persons,  before  we  are  to
enter  into  band  or  suretyship  for  others  we  must  mark  and  meditate  upon  two
things.     (1)  What  is  the  sum  for  which  we  shall  be  obliged.     (2)  The  means  how
we  may  be  discharged.     It  standeth  us  greatly  upon  to  bethink  ourselves  both
what  is  the  quantity,  and  what  is  our  ability  to  answer  it.    It  is  A  moral  precept


PHILEMON.  73


and  wise  saying,  worthy  to  be  written  in  our  hearts,  "  be  not  surety  above  thy
power ;  for  if  thou  be  surety,  think  to  pay  it."  Let  every  man  therefore  well  weigh
his  own  strength.  It  were  foolish  pity  for  the  saving  of  another  man's  life  to  lose
our  own.  It  were  a  merciless  kind  of  mercy  to  leap  into  the  water  and  drown  our-
selves while  we  seek  to  deliver  another.  We  are  commanded  to  bear  the  burden
one  of  another,  but  it  were  more  than  foolish  pity  to  break  our  own  shoulders,  by
sustaining  the  weight  and  bearing  the  burden  of  another  man.  Again,  as  we  are
to  mark  our  own  strength,  so  we  are  to  consider  our  own  discharge,  how  we  may  be
secured  and  set  at  liberty.  For,  before  we  pass  our  word,  or  give  our  band  and
hand  for  the  payment  of  other  men's  debts  and  duties,  we  must  know  how  we  shall
be  assured  to  be  delivered  from  that  burthen  and  bondage  that  we  have  undertaken.
We  ought  indeed  to  bear  good  will  to  all  men,  but  our  good  will  should  not  be  a
loser.  It  15  no  charity  to  receive  a  blow  upon  our  own  heads  to  keep  the  stroke
from  another.  Know  what  kind  of  man  he  is  for  whom  thou  becomest  a  surety.
If  he  be  a  stranger  to  thee  meddle  not  with  him  ;  if  he  have  broken  his  credit  with
any  before,  suspect  him ;  if  he  be  a  shifting  companion,  discard  him ;  if  he  be
nnsuffieient  to  pay  his  own  debt,  deny  him  ;  if  the  sum  be  great  and  thy  ability
little  so  that  it  may  hinder  thee  and  thy  calling,  if  thou  be  driven  to  pay  it,  enter
not  into  it ;  and  if  thou  cannot  see  which  way  thou  mayest  be  freed  from  the  peril
and  danger  that  hangeth  over  thy  head,  fly  away  from  it  as  from  a  serpent  that
will  sting  thee,  as  from  a  canker  that  will  consume  thee,  as  from  a  gulf  that  is  ready
to  swallow  thee.  4.  Seeing  it  is  not  unlawful  or  forbidden  to  bind  a  man's  self  by
band  or  otherwise  to  another,  it  ought  to  teach  all  creditors  and  lenders  not  to  be
rough  and  rigorous  over  a  surety.  No  cruelty  toward  any  is  lawful.  {W.  Attersoll.)
The  atonement — an  illustration  : — Suppose,  then,  that  PhUemon  had  demanded  the
repayment  of  what  he  had  lost  to  the  uttermost  farthing  ;  suppose  that  for  many
months  St.  Paul  had  had  to  work  very  hard,  and  to  live  very  sparely,  in  order  to
earn  the  required  sum,  and  that  at  last  he  had  actually  paid  it  to  the  rich  Philemon,
in  order  that  Onesimus  might  be  got  out  of  his  debt :  would  that  have  been  wrong
and  base?  wrong  of  St.  Paul,  I  mean.  Would  you,  would  any  man,  have  blamed
him  for  it  ?  Would  you  not,  rather,  have  been  moved  to  an  enthusiastic  admiration
of  the  man  who  was  capable  of  so  singular  and  so  signal  an  act  of  self-forgetting
generosity  and  compassion  ?  And  what  would  you  have  thought  of  Philemon  if  he
had  taken  the  money  ?  Surely  you  would  have  been  as  quick  to  condemn  him  as
to  admire  Paul.  "  Which  things  may  be  allegorised."  Let  us,  then,  for  our  in-
struction in  righteousness,  turn  this  story  into  an  allegory  or  parable.  Let  Phile-
mon, the  just  and  kind  master,  stand  for  God,  our  Father  and  Lord.  Let  St.  Paul,
the  generous  debt-assuming  apostle,  stand  for  Christ,  our  Saviour.  Let  Onesimus,
the  fraudulent  and  runaway  slave,  stand  for  man,  the  sinner.  And  then,  sinful
man,  fleeing  from  the  God  he  has  wronged,  falls  into  the  hands  of  Christ,  and
comes  to  know  and  hate  his  sins.  Christ  goes  to  the  Father  saying,  "  If  he  [t.«.,
man]  hath  wronged  Thee,  or  oweth  Thee  ought,  put  that  to  My  account ;  I  will  repay
it."  And,  according  to  one  theory  of  the  Atonement  at  least,  God  takes  the  money;
He  demands  that  Christ  should  exhaust  Himself  with  toil  and  suffering  in  order
that  man's  debt  may  be  paid,  and  then  blots  out  the  debt  from  his  account.  As-
suming for  a  moment  this  theory  of  the  Atonement  to  be  a  true  theory,  what  are  we
to  think  of  Christ  ?  Was  it  wrong,  was  it  blameworthy  of  Him,  to  take  the  siimer's
place,  to  pay  the  sinner's  debt,  to  atone  the  sinner's  offence  ?  If  we  hold  to  our
parallel,  so  far  from  thinking  it  wrong,  we  can  only  pronounce  it  an  unparalleled
act  of  generous  and  self-forgetting  love  :  so  far  from  blaming  Him  for  it,  we  can
but  honour  and  admire  Him  for  it  with  all  our  hearts.  But  if  God  took  the  money
— if  He  would  not  release  man  from  his  debt  till  some  one,  no  matter  who,  had  paid
the  debt — what  are  we  to  think  of  Him  ?  Had  Philemon  taken  St.  Paul's  money,
we  agreed  that  in  him  it  would  have  been  an  action  almost  incredibly  mean  and
base  ;  we  agreed  that  we  should  have  felt  nothing  for  him  but  contempt.  Are  we
to  lower  our  standard,  and  alter  our  verdict,  because  it  is  God,  and  not  man,  who  is
called  in  question — God,  from  whom  we  expect,  and  have  a  right  to  expect,  so  much
more  than  from  man  ?  No,  we  cannot,  we  dare  not,  either  lower  our  standard  or
alter  our  verdict.  What  would  have  been  wrong  in  man  would  have  been  at  least
equally  wrong  in  God.  And  as  God  can  do  no  wrong,  either  our  parallel  does  not
hold  good,  or  this  theory  of  the  Atonement  must  be  radically  misleading  and  in-
complete. Is  the  parallel  at  fault,  then  ?  Look  at  it  again.  Philemon  was  a  just
and  kind  master.  And  does  not  Qoi  Himself  claim  to  hold  a  similar  relation  te
OS?    Onesimas  was  an  "unprofitable"  servant — nmning  awaj  from  a  master  ha


74  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.

had  robbed.     And  have  not  we  again  and  again  robbed  God  of  His  due,  and  left
His  service  to  walk  after  onr  own  lusts?    St.  Panl  loved  Onesimns  "as  his  own
heart,'*  "  as  himself "  (vers.  12, 17) ;  and,  in  his  Jove,  he  even  pat  himself  in  the
place  of  Onesimus,  assumed  his  debt,  interceded  for  him  with  his  justly  offended
master,  and  raised  him  from  the  status  of  a  slave  to  that  of  a  "  brother  beloved."
Are  there  any  words,  even  in  the  Bible  itself,  which  more  accurately  and  happily
describe  Christ's  relation  to  ns?    The  parallel  holds  good  then.    We  may  take
Philemon  as  setting  forth  God's  relation  to  us,  Onesimus  as  setting  forth  our  rela-
tion to  God,  and  St.  Paul  as  setting  forth  Christ's  relation  both  to  God  and  man.
But  as  the  parallel  does  hold  good,  must  not  that  theory  of  the  Atonement  to  which
I  have  referred  be  radically  misleading  and  incomplete  f    No  doubt  any  theory  of
the  Atonement  must  be  incomplete,  for  the  Atonement  is  the  reconciliation  of  man
to  God ;  and  which  of  as  fully  comprehends  either  God  or  man  ?    How,  then,  can
we  comprehend  and  express  that  Divine  act  or  process,  "  that  miracle  of  time,"  by
which  the  relations  of  God  with  man  and  of  man  with  God  were  or  are  being
drawn  into  an  eternal  concord  ?    No  theory  of  the  Atonement  conceived  by  the
human  mind,  and  expressed  in  human  words,  can  possibly  be  perfect  and  entire,
lacking  nothing.      The  great  ••  mystery  of  godliness "  must  ever  remain  a  deep
••  in  which  all  our  thoughts  are  drowned."    And  any  man  who  assumes  that  he
can  comprehend  it,  and  crush  it  into  some  narrow  and  portable  formula,  does  but
prove  that  he  pertains  to  that  well-known  category  or  class  which  presumes  to
"  rash  in  where  angels  fear  to  tread."     Still  we  may  refuse  to  hold  any  theory  of
the  Atonement  which  is  obviously  untenable.    "We  may  know,  we  may  learn  from
Scripture  at  least  enough  of  the  Atonement  for  faith  to  grasp,  and  for  the  salvation
that  comes  by  faith.    And,  surely,  it  is  impossible  to  deny  that  in  sundry  places
Scripture  does  teach  what  is  known  as  the  vicarious  or  substitutionary  theory  of
the  Atonement ;  that  it  speaks  of  Christ  as  taking  our  place,  paying  our  debt,  suf-
fering in  our  stead.     Whether  we  like  it  or  not,  there  it  is  :  the  writings  of  St.  Paul
are  full  of  it.     Whatever  the  moral  effect  of  it  were,  candour  would  compel  as  to
confess  that  this  aspect  of  Christ's  work  and  ministry  of  reconciliation  is  set  forth
in  the  Scriptures  of  the  apostles — not  as  the  only  aspect,  only,  indeed,  as  one  of
three  or  four,  but  stiU  as  a  true  aspect,  as  demanding  our  acceptance.    Nevertheless,
I  confess  that  I  for  one  should  hesitate  to  accept  it,  were  I  unable  to  see  and  to
show  that  the  proper  moral  effect  of  it  is  not  evil,  but  good ;  that  it  does  not  tend
to  weaken  our  hatred  of  sin,  or  to  relax  our  struggle  against  it,  but  tends  rather  to
strengthen  our  hatred  of  it,  and  to  brace  as  for  new  endeavours  to  overcome  it.
And  I  value  this  story  of  Onesimus  very  highly  because  it  suggests  a  reasonable
and  a  complete  answer  to  this  common  difficulty  and  objection.     For,  consider :
Was  St.  Paul's  offer  to  pay  the  debt  of  Onesimus  in  the  very  least  degree  likely  to
confirm  Onesimus  in  his  knavery?    Suppose  the  offer  accepted  ;  suppose  he  had
seen  the  busy  and  weary  apostle  toiling  night  and  day,  suffering  many  additional
hardships,  in  order  to  clear  him  of  his  debt — would  Onesimus,  after  having  thus
seen  what  his  crime  had  cost,  have  been  the  more  likely  to  rob  Philemon  again  ?
Would  that  have  been  the  natural  and  proper  effect  on  his  mind  of  the  apostle's
generous  and  self-sacrificing  love  for  him  ?     We  know  very  well  that  it  would  not.
We  know  very  well  that  Onesimus,  touched  and  melted  by  the  love  St.  Paul  had
shown  him,  would  rather  have  starved  than  show  himself  wholly  unworthy  of  it.
Why,  then,  if  we  believe  that  Christ  Jesus,  in  the  greatness  of  His  love,  took  our
place,  paid  our  debt,  toiled  and  suffered  for  onr  sins,  and  so  reconciled  us  to  the
God  we  had  wronged — why  should  that  have  a  bad  moral  effect  upon  us  ?     If  Christ
so  loved  us  as  to  give  Himself  for  us,  the  just  for  the  unjust ;  if  we  clearly  and
honestly  believe  that,  surely  its  proper  moral  effect  on  us  will  be  that  we  shall  love
Him  wbo  so  loved  us  :  and  how  can  we  love  Him,  and  yet  not  hate  the  evil  that
caused  Ilim  so  much  pain?     But  here  we  come  back  to  a  still  graver  difficulty.
As  St.  Paul,  to  Philemon,  for  Onesimns,  so  Christ  says,  to  God,  for  us,  "  If  they
have  wronped  Thee,  or  owe  Thee  ought,  put  that  to  My  account ;  I  will  repay  it."
Let  it  be  granted,  as  I  have  tried  to  show,  that  this  assumption  of  our  place  and
debt  by  Christ  Jesus  was  an  act  most  noble  and  generous  and  Divine.     Let  it  be
granted,  as  I  have  also  tried  to  show,  that  by  our  faith  in  His  great  love  we  are
incited  to  more  strenuous  efforts  after  moral  purity  and  righteousness,  instead  of
being  degraded  and  demoralised  by  it.    Grant  both  these  points :  and,  then,  what
are  we  to  think  of  God  if  He  took  from  Christ  the  money  which  paid  our  debt  ?
All  that  series  of  Scriptural  figures  which  represents  our  sins  as  debts,  and  the
Father  Almighty  as  keeping  a  book  in  which  they  are  entered,  and  as  blotting  theaa


PHILEMON.  75


from  that  book  when  they  are  paid,  may  be  necessary,  and  may  once  have  been
still  more  necessary  than  it  is  now,  to  set  forth  certain  aspects  of  spiritual  truth.
But  we  need  not  conceive  of  God's  book  as  though  it  were  a  ledger,  nor  of  God
Himself  as  a  keen,  hard-eyed  merchant,  still  less  as  a  peddling  huckster,  indifferent
where  his  money  comes  from  so  that  he  gets  it,  and  gets  enough  of  it.  All  this  is
not  in  the  Bible,  though  it  may  be  in  certain  creeds  and  systems  of  divinity  which,
although  they  "  have  bad  their  day,"  have  not  even  yet  altogether  "  ceased  to  be."
And  even  the  mercantile  and  forensic  metaphors  which  are  in  the  Bible  are  but
metaphors  after  all ;  i.e.,  they  are  but  human  forms  of  Divine  truth  adapted  to  the
weakness  and  grossness  of  our  perceptions.  Nor  do  they  stand  alone.  Lest  we
should  misinterpret  them,  they  stand  side  by  side  with  figures  and  words  which  set
forth  other  aspects  of  the  self-same  truth  in  fovms  we  cannot  easily  mistake.  Eecall
and  consider,  for  exampl'^,  such  sayings  as  these: — "God  so  loved  the  world  that
He  gave  His  only  begotten  Son,  that  whosoever  believeth  in  Him  might  have
eternal  life"  ;  and  again,  "  God  was  in  Christ  reconciling  the  world  unto  Himself  ";
and  again,  "Herein  is  love,  not  that  we  loved  God,  but  that  He  loved  us,  and  sent
His  Son  to  be  the  propitiation  for  our  sins."  Are  not  these  words  sufiQciently
simple  and  clear  and  direct  ?  Are  they  not  instinct — charged  and  surcharged —
with  a  Divine  tenderness  ?  But  if  these  sacred  and  tender  words  be  true  ;  if  God
was  in  Christ,  if  He  against  whom  we  had  sinned  Himself  took  our  debt  upon  Him
that  He  might  frankly  forgive  us  all,  is  there  any  lack  of  love  and  kindness  in
Him  then  ?  "  It  was  noble  in  St.  Paul,"  you  admit,  "  to  take  the  debt  of  Onesimua
upon  him ;  but  it  would  have  been  ignoble  of  Philemon  to  let  the  apostle  pay  it."
Granted.  But  suppose — for  even  impossibilities  are  supposable — that  St.  Paul  had
been  both  himself  and  Philemon.  Suppose  that  when,  in  the  form  of  Philemon,
he  had  been  robbed  at  Colosse,  he  forthwith  posted  to  Eome  in  order  that,  in  the
form  of  St.  Paul,  he  might  bring  Onesimus  to  repentance,  in  order  that,  at  any  cost
of  toil  and  suffering  to  himself,  he  might  wipe  out  his  debt  and  atone  his  wrong.
Would  not  that  have  been  nobler  still  ?  And  if  God,  the  very  God  whom  we  had
defrauded,  from  whom  we  have  fled,  Himself  came  down  into  our  low  and  miserable
estate,  to  toil  and  suffer  with  us  and  for  us,  in  order  that  He  might  bring  us  back
to  our  better  selves  and  to  Him,  in  order  that  He  might  wipe  out  the  debt  we  had
contracted,  convince  ns  that  He  had  remitted  it,  and  raise  us  to  a  new  life  of
service  and  favour  and  peace — what  was  that  but  a  love  so  pure,  so  generous,  so
Divine,  that  the  mere  thought  of  it  should  melt  and  purify  our  hearts  ?  We  are
to  think  of  God,  then,  not  simply  as  taking  the  money  offered  Him  by  Christ  on
oar  behalf,  but  also  as  paying  it ;  not  as  exacting  His  due  to  the  uttermost  farthing,
but  rather  as  Himself  discharging  a  debt  we  could  never  have  paid.  In  the  terms
of  our  parable,  He  is  Paul  as  well  as  Philemon — not  only  the  Master  we  have
wronged,  but  also  the  Friend  who  takes  the  wrong  upon  Himself.  And  we  owe
to  Him  both  whatever  service  and  duty  the  forgiven  Onesimus  owed  to  Philemon,
and  whatever  gratitude  and  love  he  felt  for  St.  Paul.  (S.  Cox,  D.D.)  Re-
paration to  God: — ^And  what  a  light  is  shed  on  the  gospel  idea  of  making  re-
paration to  God  by  means  of  a  substitute,  according  to  this  earthly  analogy  1  How
finely  the  apistle  here  follows  in  the  footsteps  of  Him  who,  on  a  higher  plane,
offered  Himself  as  pledge  or  pawn  for  us  who  had  failed  to  render  the  service  that
was  due  !  Sin  is  no  doubt  much  more  than  debt,  but  it  is  debt  in  so  far  as  human
defalcations  stand  in  the  account  with  God.  Through  melancholy  faithlessness
and  derehction  and  apostasy  toward  Him,  what  debts  have  been  accumulating
beyond  all  human  power  to  liquidate  1  Neither  regrets  nor  promises  can  here
avail.  Debts  must  be  paid,  if  they  would  creditably  be  written  off.  The  grace  of
the  Lord  Jesus  admits  of  Him  being  debited.  To  the  trusting  soul  He  says  :  "  I
am  your  written  and  covenant  surety" ;  and  so  far  as  sin  is  a  load  of  debt  to  Qod,
it  is  His  alone  to  say :  "  Put  this  down  to  My  account.  I  will  repay."  Not  as  if
there  were  any  transference  of  moral  quaUties,  or  confusion  of  merit.  Human
guilt  or  blameworthiness  can  never  be  transferred  to  Christ,  only  imputed  or
reckoned  to  His  account.  What  is  actually  transferred  is  the  liability.  And  so
most  Christ's  merit  be  ever  His  own — its  benefits  only  can  be  transferred,  when
it  itself  is  imputed  or  put  to  any  human  account.  In  this  sense  Christ  is  ever
holding  Himself  forth  as  able  and  ready  to  bear  away  the  burden  of  human  debt,
ftnd  cancel  sin,  in  the  account  of  any  soul  with  God.    {A.  H,  Drysdale,  M.A.)

Yer.  19.  Written  it  wltb  mine  own  haAd.— St.  Paul  may  have  written  the  whole  of
this  letter  with  his  own  hand,  contrary  to  his  usual  practice.  (Jerom*.)      A  frteiov$


76  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,

relic : — What  a  precious  relic,  in  that  case,  for  Philemon  and  his  family  I  {Bp.  Wm
Alexander.)  A  signed  bond  : — It  does  not  follow  from  this  sentence  that  the  whole
Epistle  was  written  with  the  apostles  own  hand  ;  rather  it  would  seem  that  he  made
this  engagement  of  repayment  to  be  more  emphatic  and  significant  by  distinguish-
ing it  from  the  rest  of  the  Epistle,  and  by  taking  the  pen  from  the  hand  of  his  secre-
tary, and  by  inditing  that  particular  clause  with  his  own  autograph,  well  known  to
Philemon.  (Bp.  Chris.  Wordsworth.)  A  Christian's  word  should  be  enmigh : — If
we  did  live  as  becometh  Christians,  there  should  need  no  greater  bond  than  the
word  of  a  Chrietian.  The  saying  is,  "  By  the  word  of  a  king  " ;  who  would  not
take  a  king's  word,  so  royal  are  they  in  their  performances?  Christ  has  made  ua
all  kings,  to  God  His  Father  ;  therefore  we  should  have  a  singular  care  of  any  of
our  bare  words ;  tbough  the  witnesses  die,  yet  God  who  heard  our  word  lives  for
ever.  But  we  are  fallen  into  such  an  age  that  many  men's  bonds  are  of  no  validity.
Samson  broke  the  cords ;  and  some  break  the  seals  of  green  wax  at  their  pleasure ;
they  make  no  account  of  paper  or  parchment  bonds  till  they  be  cast  into  iron  bonds.
Some  put  their  hands  and  seals  to  a  writing,  that  make  no  conscience  of  the  accom-
plishment of  that  which  they  have  written.  They  are  content  to  go  so  far  with
Pilate  as  to  acknowledge  their  handwriting — "What  I  have  written,  I  have
written  "  ;  but  they  will  not  say,  "  What  I  have  written  I  will  perform."  St.  Paul
was  of  another  mind  ;  as  he  gave  him  his  hand  for  the  payment,  so  he  gives  him
his  heart  and  faithful  promise  to  pay  it.  {W.  Jones,  D.D.)  Written  covenants : —
We  learn  from  hence,  that  civil  instruments  and  covenants  in  writing,  together  with
other  assurances  that  may  be  asked  and  granted,  are  good  and  lawful,  even  amongst
the  best  and  greatest  friends.  I  say,  when  debts  are  owing,  when  bargains  are
made,  when  money  is  lent,  when  lands  are  sold,  and  when  there  are  mutual  con-
tracts between  man  and  man,  between  friend  and  friend,  between  kinsman  and
kinsman,  assurance  in  writing  with  hand  and  seal  may  be  interchangeably  given
and  received.  And  if  we  would  enter  into  a  further  consideration  of  this  truth  we
shall  see  a  plain  confirmation  of  it  by  sundry  reasons.  1.  It  is  a  common  proverb
among  us,  fast  bind,  fast  find.  That  which  is  loosely  bound  is  lightly  lost ;  but  a
three-fold  cord,  well  tied  and  twisted  by  word,  by  writing,  by  seal,  is  not  easily
broken.  A  word  afiSrmeth,  a  writing  confirmeth,  a  seal  assureth,  and  every  one  of
them  bindeth  to  confirm  our  promise.  We  see  by  daily  experience  that  men  are
both  mortal  and  mutable,  and  words  prove  oftentimes  but  wind,  albeit  ratified  with
the  greatest  solemnity.  True  it  is,  our  word  ought  to  be  as  good  as  a  thousand
obligations,  but  deceit  is  bred  naturally  in  our  hearts,  so  that  we  cannot  ground  upon
the  bare  word  of  men  to  find  good  dealing.  Otherwise,  the  Lord  would  never  have
given  so  many  laws  to  restrain  wrong  and  injustice,  fraud,  and  oppression.  All  these,
or  at  least  a  great  part  of  them,  are  prevented  by  setting  down  our  covenants  and
agreements  in  writing  under  our  hands  and  seals.  2.  It  is  needful  to  have  this
manner  of  dealing  among  us,  to  the  end  that  equity  and  upright  dealing  might  be
observed  among  us,  and  that  all  occasions  of  wrangling  and  wresting  of  words  and
bargains  might  be  cut  off  as  with  the  sword  of  justice.  3.  That  all  occasion  of
controversy  and  cousenage  might  be  taken  away.  For  if  there  were  no  writing  to
show  (the  memories  of  men  being  frail,  and  their  practices  being  unfaithfol)  the
world  would  be  full  of  all  loose  dealings,  and  concord  would  be  banished  from
among  men.  4.  Good  assurance  is  to  be  allowed  and  received,  to  the  end  we  may
safely  dispose  of  such  things  that  are  in  our  power  and  possession,  either  to  our
posterity  or  otherwise.  Hence  hath  been  in  all  ages,  the  laudable  and  commend-
able use  of  making  wills  and  testaments,  which  the  word  of  God  approveth  by  de-
livering divers  rules  belonging  to  that  profession.  The  law  of  God  and  of  nature
hath  taught :  that  the  will  and  testament  of  the  dead  ought  not  to  b*  abrogated  or
altered  ;  and  that  no  will  is  of  force  until  the  testator  be  dead.  Now  we  know  not
whether  the  gifts  that  we  give,  and  the  legacies  that  we  bequeath,  be  of  our  own
proper  goods  or  the  goods  of  other  men,  except  we  have  beforehand  a  sufficient
assurance  of  them  made  unto  as.  Seeing,  therefore,  where  there  is  a  fast
knot,  there  is  a  sure  keeping ;  seeing  upright  dealings  is  to  be  observed ;  seeing
occasions  of  quarrels  and  contentions  are  to  be  stopped ;  and  seeing  the  goods  that
God  hath  given  unto  us  are  rightly  to  be  bestowed :  it  foUoweth  that  every  one  is  to
provide  for  the  security  and  quietness  of  his  estate  by  all  lawful  means,  not  only  by
word  of  mouth,  but  by  assurance  in  writing,  that  thereby  he  may  foresee  the  danger
that  may  come  upon  him  and  be  wary  and  circumspect  in  all  his  doings,  according
to  the  saying  of  Christ,  the  Teacher  and  Author  of  true  wisdom,  "  Be  ye  wise  as
serpents  and  innocent  as  doves*      For  if  wisdom  do  season  all  our  affairs,  then  also


PHILEMON.  77


our  contracts  that  are  common  in  this  life.  {W.  Attersoll.)  Man's  debt  remitted
by  Chritt : — Of  what  has  not  man  robbed  God  ?  He  has  assailed  His  government,
His  laws,  His  honour.  He  has  stolen  and  prostituted  His  gifts,  time,  health,  mind,
influence,  to  the  serrice  of  sin,  and  striven  to  dethrone  Him  in  the  very  world  which
He  made,  and  in  the  heart  whose  every  pulsation  is  at  His  will.  Who  shall
atone  for  the  great  wrong  ?  Only  a  surety,  and  He  a  Divine  one,  who  is  willing  to
draw  upon  His  own  head  the  punishment,  and  submit  to  "  be  wounded  for  cor
transgressions,  and  bruised  for  our  iniquities,"  and  to  do  and  suffer  whatever  the
claims  and  honour  of  Divine  love  required,  till  He  could  say,  "  It  is  finished,"  and
depart  in  peace,  the  Author  of  an  eternal  salvation  to  all  that  believe  on  His  name.
Graciously  has  God  made  earthly  relations  between  man  and  man  the  representa-
tives  and  explainers  of  higher  things,  and  Paul's  generously  undertaking  the  debt
of  the  guilty  Onesimus  sets  vividly  before  us  that  Saviour  whom  it  was  his  whole
life  to  preach  and  his  brightest  hope  to  enjoy.  {JR.  Nisbet,  D.D.)  Thou  owest
unto  me  even  thine  own  self  besides. — Man  restored  to  himself: — Very  pregnant
words  indeed.  He  that  accepts  the  gospel  of  Christ  is  made  the  true  possessor  of
himself.  Before  this  his  soul  was  enslaved  to  evil,  so  that,  humanly  speaking,  it
would  have  been  better  for  him  if  he  had  not  been  born.  Now  his  true  being  is
restored  to  him,  so  that  by  God's  grace  he  can  fulfil  that  purpose  for  which  he  was
created  and  redeemed — the  glorifying  of  God  in  his  whole  self — in  his  body  and  in  his
spirit,  which  are  God's.  (M.  F.  Sadler,  M.A.)  We  owe  ourselves  to  Christ:—
Does  not  Christ  speak  to  us  in  the  same  language  ?  We  owe  ourselves  to  Him,  as
Lazarus  did,  for  He  raises  us  from  the  death  of  sin  to  a  share  in  His  own  new,  un-
dying life.  As  a  sick  man  owes  his  life  to  the  doctor  who  has  cured  him,  as  a
drowning  man  owes  his  to  his  rescuer  who  dragged  him  from  the  water  and  breathed
into  his  lungs  till  they  began  to  work  of  themselves,  as  a  child  owes  its  life  to  its
parents,  so  we  owe  ourselves  to  Christ.  But  He  does  not  insist  upon  the  debt ;  He
gently  reminds  us  of  it,  as  making  His  commandment  sweeter  and  easier  to  obey.
Every  heart  that  is  really  touched  with  gratitude  will  feel  that  the  less  the  giver
insists  upon  his  gifts,  the  more  do  they  impel  to  affectionate  services.  {A.  Maclaren,
D.D.)  What  do  you  owe  f — Have  not  all  of  us  received  benefits  ?  Have  we  paid
our  gratitude  ?  I  do  not  mean  how  much  you  owe  to  the  grocer,  baker,  and  land-
lord ;  but  how  much  do  you  owe  to  yourself,  to  humanity,  to  God.  I.  God  is  our
Father  who  cares  for  us,  and  we  therefore  owe  submission  to  His  will  when  crosses
and  tribulation  come.  Tribulations  borne  with  resignation  shall  mellow  our  nature,
and  be  as  a  mould  to  fashion  our  character  like  unto  Christ.  II.  Do  you  not  owe
to  yourself  and  to  your  fellow-men  the  doing  of  ddtt  ?  As  the  men  who  built  Jem-
salem,  each  repaired  the  wall  before  his  door,  so  let  us  each  do  the  duty  that  lies
next  us.  We  are  not  like  the  spectators  in  a  theatre.  We  are  the  tragedians ;  we
are  the  actors ;  daily  life  is  our  stage ;  Christ,  and  the  angels,  and  our  feUow-men,
are  the  spectators.  Let  us  do  our  duty  manfully,  as  Christ  did.  Do  it  because  it  is
right ;  and  remember  that  duty  well  done  will  honour  us  at  the  judgment  day.  III.  Pat
TOTTB  DEBT  OF  RELIGION  TO  THE  WORLD.  When  passing  Westminster  Abbey  or  St,
Paul's  Cathedral,  if  I  have  a  quarter  of  an  hour  to  spare,  I  always  enter  the  sacred
building  aud  walk  reverently  over  the  graves  of  the  good  men  of  the  past,  and
while  looking  on  tiieir  partly  obliterated  names,  I  am  inspired  by  their  example  to
pray  that  my  life  may  also  be  beneficial  to  my  fellow-men.  What  can  be  grander
than  a  life  which  exhibits  true  Chiistian  religion  !  Cannot  you  make  yom's  such  a
life  ?  Is  it  not  a  debt  you  owe  to  your  neighbour?  Pay  the  debt  by  embodying  in
your  life  the  eternal  truth  which  Christ  has  given  to  the  world.  {Tf^.  Birch.)
Reverence  and  love  due  to  ministers : — From  hence  we  learn  that  such  as  have  gained
as  to  God,  or  preserved  us  in  the  state  of  salvation  by  the  preaching  of  the  gospel,
ought  to  be  most  dear  unto  us,  we  owing  unto  them  even  ourselves,  and  whatsoever
we  have  besides  to  do  them  good.  The  benefits  bestowed  upon  us  by  the  ministry
of  the  Word  can  never  be  sufficiently  esteemed,  nor  worthily  enough  prized,  nor
aboundantly  enough  be  recompensed  and  rewarded  with  our  love  and  the  fruits  of
our  love.  Neither  should  this  seem  strange  unto  us.  1.  They  are  most  of  all
to  be  loved  and  highly  esteemed  of  us  that  do  us  most  good ;  we  are  most  deeply
indebted  unto  them  that  labour  most  for  our  benefit.  2.  Again,  they  are  unto  us
instead  of  Christ.  They  are  His  officers  that  He  hath  appointed  in  His  Church,
who,  when  He  ascended  into  heaven,  gave  gifts  unto  men  and  ordained  those
that  should  teach  His  people  unto  the  end  of  the  world.  3.  They  are  the
ministers  by  whom  we  believe,  and  consequently  by  whom  we  are  saved.  They  are
oor  fathers  in  Ohrist,  by  whom  we  are  begotten  to  eternal  life.    The  ases  arising


78  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,

from  hence  are  of  divers  sorts.  (1)  It  directeth  us  to  other  necessary  truths
to  be  learned  of  us.  It  is  noted  by  the  apostle  to  be  one  general  use  of  the
Scripture,  that  it  serveth  and  sufficeth  to  teach  all  truth  needful  to  salvation,  so  the
former  point  being  received  will  help  us  to  find  out  and  conclude  other  truths.
First  we  learn  that,  wheresoever  there  is  a  true  profession,  a  sound  feeling,  a  true
taste  of  religion,  or  joy  of  salvation,  there  will  be  a  reverent  account  and  joyful
entertainment  of  the  teachers  and  publishers  of  the  gospel.  On  the  other  side,  a
light  and  slender  account  of  the  ministers  argueth  a  light  account  of  the  word  of
Christ,  of  the  doctrine  of  salvation,  and  of  the  trueness  of  religion.  Thus  then  we  see
how  we  may  prove  ourselves  whether  we  be  in  the  faith  or  not,  even  by  the  good
estimation  that  we  have  of  such  as  are  the  bringers  of  it.  Secondly,  we  may  gather
from  hence  that  the  greatest  part  of  the  world  heth  deeply  and  dangerously  in  condem-
nation, because  such  hath  been  the  unthankfulness  thereof  toward  the  ministers
and  messengers  of  salvation,  that  it  never  respected  them  or  gave  them  any  rever-
ence. (2)  As  this  doctrine  serveth  to  teach,  so  it  is  profitable  to  reprove  divers
sorts  of  men;  but  I  will  only  touch  these  three.  First,  it  maketh  against
such  as  make  a  bad  and  base  account  of  the  ministers  of  God,  and  think  they  owe
no  duty  to  their  pastors,  but  reckon  them  as  their  vassals  and  servants ;  suppose
that  they  are  bound  to  please  them  and  follow  their  humours,  and  account  their
teachers  beholden  unto  them  for  vouchsafing  to  hear  them  as  crediting  their
ministry  by  their  presence.  If  a  man  abuse  an  ambassador  of  a  prince  and  set  him
at  nought,  it  is  reputed  and  revenged  as  a  disgrace  and  dishonour  done  to  the  prince
himself ;  so,  if  we  shall  abase  and  disgrace  the  ministers  of  the  gospel,  which  are
the  messengers  of  God,  we  shall  never  escape  without  punishment,  but  bring  upon
ourselves  swift  damnation.  Is  not  he  a  godless  and  ungracious  child  that  mocketh
and  despiseth  his  father,  after  the  example  of  cursed  Shem,  who  tasted  of  Ood's
wrath  for  his  contempt  ?  Lastly,  it  reproveth  such  as  refuse  to  give  them  sufficient
maintenance,  and  do  bar  them  of  that  competent  and  convenient  portion  that  God
hath  allotted  unto  them  in  His  word.  For,  if  such  as  have  spent  their  strength  to
bring  us  unto  God,  ought  above  all  others  to  be  regarded  of  us  and  have  a  worthy
recompense  of  their  labours  ;  surely  they  deserve  to  be  checked  and  controlled  that
deal  niggardly  toward  them,  who  have  kept  back  nothing  from  them,  but  revealed
unto  them  the  whole  counsel  of  God.  Thirdly,  seeing  the  benefits  brought  unto  ua,
both  upon  our  bodies  and  souls,  by  the  means  of  the  ministry,  can  never  be  worthily
esteemed  and  sufficiently  expressed ;  it  serveth  to  instruct  us  in  the  necessary
duties  of  our  obedience,  even  to  testify  our  love  to  the  truth  by  reverencing  and
respecting  them  that  are  the  Lord's  messengers  to  bring  the  truth  unto  our  doors.
Lastly,  seeing  they  by  whose  ministry  we  are  gained  to  God  and  preserved  in  the
state  of  salvation  being  gained,  ought  to  be  most  dear  unto  us,  we  owing  unto  them
our  own  selves  ;  this  must  teach  the  ministers  of  God  a  necessary  duty  and  lesson
to  be  marked  of  them,  to  wit,  to  endeavour  by  their  daily  diligence  and  continual
preaching  of  the  gospel,  to  make  the  people  indebted  unto  them.  For  how  do  the
people  come  so  much  in  their  debt  but  that  they  receive  heavenly  doctrine  by  their
ministry  as  from  the  mouth  of  God  ?  All  men  are  not  to  be  handled  after  one
manner,  but  one  after  one  manner,  and  another  after  another.  He  were  a  bad  and
mad  physician  that  would  use  all  his  patients  to  one  receipt.  Some  have  gross
humours  in  them,  and  stand  in  need  to  be  purged ;  some  more  strongly,  others  more
gently,  according  to  their  condition  and  constitution.  Others  have  more  need  to
have  nature  restored  than  purged,  such  must  have  cordials  and  restoratives
ministered  unto  them.  So  it  is  with  such  as  need  physic  for  the  soul.  {W.  Atter-
aolU)  Ourselves  received  from  and  given  to  Christ : — I  venture  to  take  these  words
as  spoken  to  each  Christian  soul  by  a  higher  and  greater  voice  than  Paul's.  "  I  will
repay  it ;  albeit  I  do  not  say  to  thee  how  thou  owest  unto  Me  even  thine  own  self
besdies."  I.  Oub  transcendent  debt.  The  Christian  teacher  may  say  to  the  soul
which  by  his  ministrations  has  been  brought  back  to  God  and  to  peace  in  a  very
real  sense :  "  Thou  owest  thyself  to  me."  But  I  pass  from  that  altogether  to  the
consideration  of  the  loftier  thought  that  is  here.  It  is  a  literal  fact  that  all  of  yoa
Christian  people,  if  you  are  Christians  in  any  real  sense,  do  owe  your  whole  selves
to  Jesus  Christ.  Does  a  child  owe  itself  to  its  parent  t  And  has  not  Jesus  Christ,
if  you  are  His,  breathed  into  you,  by  supernatural  and  real  communication,  a  better
life  and  a  better  self,  so  that  you  have  to  say,  "  I  live,  yet  not  I,  but  Jesus  Christ
liveth  in  me."  And  if  that  be  so,  is  not  your  spiritual  being,  your  Christian  self,
purely  and  distinctly  a  gift  from  Him  t  Does  a  man  that  is  lying  wrestling  with
mortal  disease,  and  who  is  raised  up  by  the  skill  and  tenderness  of  his  physician,


PHILEMON.  79


owe  his  life  to  the  doctor  ?  Does  a  man  that  is  drowning,  and  is  dragged  out  of  the
river  by  some  strong  hand,  owe  himself  to  his  rescuer  ?  And  is  it  not  true  that  you
and  I  were  struggling  with  a  disease  which  in  its  present  form  was  mortal,  and  would
very  quickly  end  in  death  ?  Is  it  not  true  that  all  souls  separated  from  God,  howso-
ever they  may  seem  to  be  living,  are  dead ;  and  have  not  you  been  dragged  from  that
living  death  by  this  dear  Lord,  so  as  that,  if  you  have  not  perished,  you  owe  your-
selves to  Him  ?  Does  a  mad  man  who  has  been  restored  to  self-control  and  sanity  owe
himself  to  the  sedulous  care  of  him  that  has  healed  him  ?  And  is  it  not  true,
paradox  as  it  sounds,  that  the  more  a  man  lives  to  himself  the  less  he  possesses  him-
self ;  and  that  you  have  been  delivered,  if  you  are  Christian  men  and  women,  from
the  tyranny  of  lust  and  passions,  and  from  the  abject  servitude  to  the  lower
parts  of  your  nature,  and  to  all  the  shabby  tyrants,  in  time  and  circumstance,
that  rob  a  man  of  himself  ;  and  have  been  set  free  and  made  sane  and  sober,  and
your  own  masters  and  your  own  owners,  by  Jesus  Christ  ?  To  Uve  to  self  is  to  lose
self,  and  when  we  come  to  ourselves  we  depart  from  ourselves ;  and  He  that  haa
enabled  us  to  rule  our  own  mutinous  and  anarchic  nature,  and  to  put  will  above
passions,  and  tastes,  and  flesh,  and  conscience  above  will,  and  Christ  above  con-
science, has  given  us  the  gift  which  we  never  had  before  of  an  assured  posses-
sion of  our  own  selves.  U.  The  all-comprehending  obligation  based  upon  this.
If  it  be  true  that  by  the  sacrifice  of  Himself  Christ  has  given  us  ourselves,  what
then  ?  Why,  then,  the  only  adequate  response  to  that  gift,  made  ours  at
such  cost  to  the  giver,  is  to  give  ourselves  back  wholly  to  Him  who  gave  Him-
self wholly  to  us.  Christ  can  only  buy  me  at  the  cost  of  Himself.  Christ  only
wants  myself  when  He  gives  Himself.  In  the  sweet  commerce  of  that  reciprocal
love  which  is  the  foundation  of  all  blessedness,  the  only  equivalent  for  a  heart  is  a
heart.  As  in  our  daily  life,  and  in  our  sweet  human  affections,  husband  and  wife,
and  parent  and  children,  have  nothing  that  they  can  barter  the  one  with  the  other
except  mutual  interchange  of  self ;  so  Jesus  Christ's  great  gift  to  me  can  only  be
acknowledged,  adequately  responded  to,  when  I  give  myself  to  Him.  And  if  I
might  for  a  moment  dwell  upon  the  definite  particulars  into  which  such  an  answer
will  expand  itself,  I  might  say  this  entire  surrender  of  self  will  be  manifested  by
the  occupation  of  all  our  nature  with  Jesus  Christ.  He  is  meant  to  be  the  food  of
my  mind  as  truth ;  He  is  meant  to  be  the  food  of  my  heart  as  love ;  He  is  meant
to  be  the  Lord  of  my  will  as  supreme  Commander.  Tastes,  inclinations,  faculties,
hopes,  memories,  desires,  aspirations,  they  are  all  meant  as  so  many  tendrils  by
which  my  many-fingered  spirit  can  twine  itself  round  Him,  and  draw  from  Him
nourishment  and  peace.  Again,  this  entire  surrender  will  manifest  itself  in  the  de-
votion of  our  whole  being  to  His  name  and  glory.  Words  easily  spoken  1  words
which,  if  they  were  truly  transmuted  into  life  by  any  of  as,  would  revolutionise  our
whole  nature  and  conduct !  And  further,  tbis  entire  surrender  of  self  will  manifest
itself  in  regard  not  only  of  our  being  and  our  acting,  but  of  oar  having.  I  do  not
want  to  dwell  upon  this  point  at  any  length,  but  let  me  remind  you,  that  a
slave  has  no  possessions  of  his  own.  And  you  and  I,  if  we  are  our  own  owners,
are  so  only  because  we  are  Christ's  slaves.  Therefore  we  have  nothing.  In
the  old  bad  days  the  slave's  cottage,  his  httle  bits  of  chattels,  the  patch  of  garden
ground  with  its  vegetables,  and  the  few  coins  that  he  might  have  saved  by  selling
these,  they  all  belonged  to  his  master  because  he  belonged  to  his  master.  And  that
is  true  about  you  and  me,  and  our  balance  at  our  bankers',  and  our  houses  and  our
possessions  of  aU  sorts.  We  say  we  believe  that ;  do  we  administer  these  posses-
sions as  if  we  did  believe  it?  III.  The  repayment.  Jesus  Christ  stops  in  no
man's  debt.  There  is  an  old  story  in  one  of  the  historical  books  of  the  Old  Testa-
ment about  people  who,  in  the  middle  of  a  doubtful  negotiation,  were  smitten  by
conscience  and  drew  back  from  it.  But  one  of  them,  with  commercial  shrewdness,
remembered  that  a  portion  of  their  capital  was  already  invested,  and  he  says,
"  What  shall  we  do  for  the  thousand  talents  that  we  have  given,  and  are  now
sacrificing  at  the  bidding  of  conscience  ?  "  And  the  answer  was :  "  The  Lord  is
able  to  give  thee  much  more  than  these."  That  is  true  of  all  sacrifices  for  Him.
He  has  given  us  abundant  wages  beforehand.  What  we  give  is  His  before  it  was
ours.  It  remains  His  when  it  is  called  ours.  We  but  give  Him  back  His  own.
There  is  really  nothing  to  repay,  yet  He  repays  in  a  hundred  ways.  He  does  so  by
giving  as  a  keen  joy  in  the  act  of  surrender.  "It  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to
receive."  Christ  bestows  ourselves  upon  ourselves  that  we  may  have  some  portion
of  that  joy.  And  with  it  come  other  gladnesses.  There  is  not  only  the  joy  of  sur-
render and  the  enhanced  possession  of  all  which  is  surrendered,  but  there  is  the


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.

larger  possession  of  Himself  which  comes  always  as  the  issue  of  a  sarrender  of  oar-
Belves  to  Him.    When  we  thus  yield  He  comes  into  our  souls.    {A.  Maclaren^  D.D.)

Ver.  20.  Let  me  have  Joy  of  thee  in  the  Lord. — In  that  thou  doest  what  thoa
doest  through  the  grace  of  Christ,  through  His  dwelling  in  thee,  and  particularly
thou  imitateet  Him  in  the  breaking  of  bonds  and  freeing  the  captive.  (M.  F.  Sad-
ler, M.A.)  Christ  the  true  sphere  of  action: — If  Philemon  receives  his  slave  for
Christ's  sake  and  in  the  strength  of  that  communion  with  Christ  which  fits  for  all
virtue,  and  so  for  this  good  deed — a  deed  which  is  of  too  high  and  rare  a  strain  of
goodness  for  his  unaided  nature — then  "  in  Christ "  he  will  be  helpful  to  the
apostle.  In  that  case,  the  phrase  expresses  the  element  or  sphere  in  which  the  act
is  done.  But  it  may  apply  rather,  or  even  also,  to  Paul,  and  then  it  expresses  the
element  or  sphere  in  which  he  is  helped  and  refreshed.  In  communion  with  Jesus,
taught  and  inspired  by  Him,  the  apostle  is  brought  to  such  true  and  tender  sym-
pathy with  the  runaway  that  his  heart  is  refreshed,  as  by  a  cup  of  cold  water,  by
kindness  shown  to  him.  Such  keen  sympathy  is  as  much  beyond  the  reach  of
nature  as  Philemon's  kindness  would  be.  Both  are  "  in  Christ."  {A.  Maclaren,
D.D.)  Provoked  to  virtue  by  a  good  example: — Let  me  have  profit  of  thee.
There  is  here  a  play  on  the  slave's  name,  and  the  words  are  equivalent  to,  "  Be
thou  to  me  an  Onesimus. "  He  would  extinguish  the  rising  feeling  of  conscious
merit  and  of  boasting  Philemon  might  entertain  in  compliance,  and  reminds  him
that  by  such  compliance  he  would  still  be  less  helpful  to  him  than  had  been  Onesi-
mus. He  had  Paul's  messenger,  servant,  fellow-worshipper,  and  friend,  and  all
he  would  have  Philemon  do  was  so  to  act  as  not  to  allow  one  of  so  despised  a  class
to  surpass  him  in  generosity.  It  is  good  for  men  that  are  provoked  to  emulation
by  the  Christian  virtues  of  those  around  them.  Their  presence  slays  pride  and
inflames  zeal,  and  invites  to  effort  and  to  prayer,  and  makes  it  matter  for  shame
even  should  slender  abilities  and  advantages  cast  superior  endowments  into  shade,
should  a  Philemon  be  surpassed  in  Christian  feehng  and  usefulness  by  an  Onesimus.
(R.  Nisbet,  D.D.)

Ver.  21.  Having  confidence  In  thy  obedience. — A  good  opinion  of  othtrs:— In

these  words  the  apostle  excuseth  that  he  hath  hitherto  been  so  earnest  with  Phile-
mon, declaring,  that  notwithstanding  his  exact  and  effectual  manner  of  handling
the  matter,  he  doubted  not  of  his  receiving  of  him  into  his  favour  again.  So  then
his  drift  is  to  show  his  good  opinion  of  him,  that  he  would  not  stick  to  forgive  him
but  yield  readily  to  every  honest  and  reasonable  request.  He  knew  not  certainly
what  Philemon  would  do,  he  knew  what  wrongs  he  had  received  and  what  losses  he
had  susti.ined  at  his  servant's  hands  ;  yet  we  see  how,  grounding  himself  upon  the
former  trial  of  his  faith  and  obedience,  he  hopeth  the  best,  he  doubteth  not  the
worst ;  he  trustcth  in  his  obedience,  he  feareth  not  his  denial.  I.  From  hence  we
learn  that  it  is  oub  duty  always  to  hope  well  and  to  think  the  best,  not  to
suspect  the  worst,  of  our  brethren.  1.  It  is  a  property  of  love  to  be  charitably
affected,  as  the  apostle  testifieth  in  his  description  of  it,  "  Love  thinlieth  not  evil "
(1  Cor.  xiii.  5-7).  Again,  he  saith,  "  It  suffereth  all  things,  it  believeth  all  things,
it  hopeth  all  things,  it  endureth  all  things."  The  wise  man  also  teacheth  •' that
love  covereth  a  multitude  of  sins."  So  then,  where  Christian  love  and  brotherly
kindness  is,  there  is  the  best  opinion  and  judgment  one  of  another.  2.  It  is  a  fruit
of  a  righteous  man  to  hope  the  best  and  to  judge  charitably  of  his  brother.  The
.  best  man  doth  hardly  suspect  others  to  be  bad.  It  is  a  common  proverb,  "  A  man
doth  muse  as  he  doth  use  " ;  as  himself  useth  to  do  so  he  imagineth  of  another.
He  that  judgeth  lewdly  of  another  by  mere  suspicion  or  supposition  is  commonly
lewd  himself.  For  such  as  are  wicked  do  think  others  as  wicked  as  themselves  ;
and  such  as  are  hypocrites  themselves  are  most  forward  to  tax  others  of  hypocrisy.
Seeing  therefore  to  be  charitably  minded  is  both  a  property  of  love  and  a  fruit  of
righteousness,  it  foUowelh  that  we  ought  to  hope  the  best  of  all  our  brethren.  H.
The  cbes  remain  to  be  considered.  1,  This  serveth  to  reprove  sundry  abuses
that  are  crept  in  among  us  and  are  too  common  in  our  practice,  and  are  directly
condemned  in  the  Ninth  Commandment,  which  tend  to  the  hurt  of  our  brother's
good  name,  as  all  hard  conceits  and  evil  Burmises,  all  uncharitable  opinions  and
suspicions  against  them.  The  good  name  of  a  man  is  very  precious,  better  than
silver  ;  yet  it  hath  many  enemies.  If  then  we  be  charged  to  conceive  the  best  in
'loubtful  cases  one  of  another,  the  capital  sin  of  calumniation  or  slander  isherebv
cuQdemned  as  the  chief  opposite  to  a  man's  estimation  and  credit.      This  hatn


PHILEMON.


many  branches  that  are  breaches  of  the  law  :  all  of  one  kind  and  kindred,  and  all
enemies  unto  the  good  names  of  our  brethren.  In  this  number  are  arranged  these
three  as  companions  one  of  another :  the  tale-breeder,  the  tale-bearer,  the  tale-
believer.  2.  It  is  our  duty  to  expound  and  interpret  all  doubtful  things  in  the
best  part  before  the  truth  do  plainly  and  clearly  appear  unto  us,  and  labour  what
we  may  to  cover  their  infirmities.  We  must  not  be  suspicious  without  great  cause
or  good  ground,  but  to  give  all  uncertain  and  wandering  reports  of  our  brethren
the  best  interpretation,  according  to  the  rule  before  remembered,  "  Love  believeth
all  things,  it  hopeth  all  things."  3.  Albeit  we  are  to  hope  the  best  of  others  and
to  judge  charitably  of  them,  yet  we  must  know  that  it  is  our  duty  to  admonish
one  another  and  seek  to  convert  one  another  from  going  astray.  Hereby  we  shall
save  a  soul,  clear  their  good  name,  and  cover  a  multitude  of  sins.  For  it  is  most
certain,  we  can  never  conceive  a  good  opinion  of  them,  nor  have  them  in  any
estimation,  nor  entertain  a  charitable  judgment  of  their  doings,  unless  we  show
ourselves  forward  to  exhort  and  admonish  them  when  we  see  they  walk  not
with  a  right  foot  nor  tread  in  the  steps  that  lead  unto  eternal  life.  4.  Lastly,
seeing  it  is  our  duty  to  hope  and  esteem  the  best  of  one  another,  let  this  be  acknow-
ledged and  confessed  of  us,  that  we  must  judge  of  no  man  before  the  time ;  we
must  take  heed  of  rash  judgment.  We  must  despair  of  no  man's  salvation  but
hope  the  best  of  them,  that  God  will  give  them  repentance  to  come  out  of  the
snares  and  subtleties  of  the  devil  whereby  they  are  holden  captives  to  do  his  will.
III.  This  offebeth  unto  ns  thesk  meditations.  1.  It  is  a  comfort  to  those  that
at  the  last  are  brought  to  repentance.  No  man  is  excluded  from  grace  in  this  life,
and  from  glory  in  the  world  to  come,  that  turneth  unto  God  with  all  his  heart.
Let  none  despair  through  the  greatness,  heinousness,  and  multitude  of  his  sins,
but  rather  make  haste  and  delay  not  the  time  to  put  ofi  from  day  to  day,  consider-
ing how  ready  the  Lord  is  to  embrace  him,  to  receive  him,  to  forgive  him.  2.
Albeit  the  gate  of  mercy  be  set  wide  open  for  all  penitent  persons,  yet  this  ought
not  to  harden  men's  hearts  in  carelessness  and  security.  For  the  ungodly  that
continue  in  their  sins  have  no  defence  for  themselves  and  their  presumption  in
God's  mercy,  by  the  example  of  those  that  were  called  at  the  last  hour  of  the  day.
Mark,  that  so  soon  as  the  thief  and  labourers  were  called,  by  and  by  they  repented :
the  reason  why  they  turned  from  their  sins  no  sooner  was  because  grace  was  no
sooner  offered  unto  them  :  but  when  God  spake,  they  heard  His  voice  with  joy ;
when  God  called,  they  answered  without  delay :  whereas  these  impenitent  persons
have  had  the  means  oftentimes  offered  unto  them,  and  yet  refuse  the  calling  of
the  Lord.  3.  We  are  to  hope  the  best  of  our  brethren,  to  commend  them  unto
God,  to  pray  for  their  conversion.  There  cannot  be  a  greater  injury  done  unto
them  than  to  pass  the  sentence  of  condemnation  upon  them,  and  as  much  as  lieth
in  OS  to  blot  them  out  of  the  book  of  life.  Hence  it  is  that  the  apostle  saith  (1  Cor.
iv.  5).  {W.A  ttersoll.)  Earnest  confidence  in  others : — I.  Paul's  confedknce  abates  not
HI8  EABNESTNESS.  Even  where  there  is  greatest  hope  of  speed,  it  is  no  error  to  put  to
our  best  strength.  Even  the  most  forward  may  be  quickened.  Assurance  of  speed
should  not  cool  onr  fervour  in  our  suits  for  God.  God  loves  not  only  obedience  but  a
cheerful  spirit  therein.  Though  we  be  assured  of  men's  obedience,  yet  who  knows
what  oppositions,  relactations,  and  discouragements  may  come  from  Satan,  and  a
man's  own  corrupt  heart  ?  How  seasonable  then  in  such  cases  may  some  motives
be !  and  how  may  our  warmth  heat  another  !  It  is  no  absurdity  in  this  case  to
put  spurs  to  a  running  horse.  II.  Mark  what  hath  all  this  while  made  Paul
6o  earnest  with  Philemon,  "  having  confidence  of  thine  obedience."  Never  hath
a  man  a  better  heart  to  speak  than  where  he  hath  an  hope  to  speed.  Surely  people's
zeal  kindles  ministers',  the  forwarder  they  are  to  hear  the  forwarder  are  they  to
speak.  Philemon's  obedience  puts  heat  and  life  into  Paul  and  makes  him  earnest.
A  man  hath  but  little  heart  to  speak  where  he  hath  but  little  hope  to  speed.  When
a  man  fears  he  shall  have  but  a  cold  suit  of  it,  it  chiUs  his  affections  and  makes
him  a  cold  suitor.  Examine  therefore  thine  own  heart,  and  try  if  thou  find  not
the  cause  of  thy  minister's  defects  in  thyself.  Many  a  minister  would  be  better  if
he  had  a  better  people,  and  a  good  people  makes  a  good  minister  as  well  as  a  good
minister  makes  a  good  people.  III.  See  the  ceedit,  iea  the  honoub,  that  con*
science  and  obedience  puts  upon  a  man.  Paul  makes  no  question  but  to  prevail
with  Philemon,  because  he  knew  him  even  before  to  make  a  conscience  of  yielding
obedience.  IV.  The  pbopebty  of  a  obacious  and  an  bnlaboed  heabt.  It  is  not
so  illiberally  and  niggardly  disposed  as  to  give  God  no  more  than  His  just  dues  io
extremity,  bat  enlarges  itself  so  as  to  go  further  than  it  is  tied  by  express  command

6


89  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,

ment.  (D.  Dyke,  B.D.)  Thou  wilt  also  do  more  than  I  say. — Something  more : —
What  was  the  Fomething  •which  lay  outside  of,  beyond,  and  over,  the  wide  range  of  all
that  St.  Paul  had  claimed — forgiveness  of  two  great  offences  on  the  part  of  Onesimna
—deletion  of  his  debt,  his  exaltation  and  ennoblement  into  a  brother  ?  There  were
overwhelming  reasons  why  St.  Paul  should  not  demand  the  manumission  of  One-
simus.  The  slave  would  thus  have  been  forced  by  St.  Paul's  action  into  a  position
in  which  he  would  have  derived  an  enormous  gain  from  gross  wrong-doing.
Philemon,  besides,  would  have  been  a  pecuniary  loser  without  a  free  and  hearty
consent.  Yet  there  has  been  a  very  general  feeling  that  the  word  *'  liberty  "  fills
St.  Paul's  heart,  hangs  upon  his  lips  though  unuttered,  and  hovers  over  his  pen
though  unwritten.  (Bp.  Wm.  Alexander.)  Obedience: — If  St.  Paul  had  thought
Philemon  a  churlish,  hard  man,  he  would  not  have  written  such  a  letter,  but  he
knew  him  to  be  a  kind,  considerate  man,  and  so  he  would  be  ready,  not  only  to
comply,  but  to  go  beyond  the  expressed  desire  of  the  apostle.  Notice  the  word
•*  obedience."  It  is  the  only  one  in  the  letter  which  implies  apostolic  authority,
but  it  t«  in  the  letter,  and  justly  reminds  Philemon  that  it  was  no  ordinary  servant
of  Christ  who  was  making  the  request,  (M.  F.  Sadler,  M.A.)  More  hinted  than
stated: — Was  he  hinting  at  emancipation,  which  he  would  rather  have  to  come  from
Philemon's  own  sense  of  what  was  due  to  the  slave  who  was  now  a  brother,  than
be  granted,  perhaps  hesitatingly,  in  deference  to  his  request?  Possibly,  but  more
probably,  he  had  no  definite  thing  in  his  mind,  but  only  desired  to  express  his
loving  confidence  in  his  friend's  willingness  to  please  him.  Commands  given  in
such  a  tone,  where  authority  audibly  trusts  the  subordinate,  are  far  more  likely  to
be  obeyed  than  if  they  were  shouted  with  the  hoarse  voice  of  a  drill-sergeant.  Men
will  do  much  to  fulfil  generous  expectations.  Christ's  commands  follow,  or  rather
set,  this  pattern.  He  trusts  His  servants,  and  spesiks  to  them  in  a  voice  softened
and  confiding.  He  tells  them  His  wish,  and  commits  Himself  and  His  cause  to
His  disciples'  love.  Obedience  beyond  the  strict  limits  of  command  will  always  be
given  by  love.  It  is  a  poor,  grudging  service  which  weighs  obedience  as  a  chemist
does  some  precious  medicine,  and  is  careful  that  not  the  hundredth  part  of  a  grain
more  than  the  prescribed  amount  shall  be  doled  out.  A  hired  workman  will  fling
dovm  his  lifted  trowel  fuU  of  mortar  at  the  first  stroke  of  the  clock,  though  it  would
be  easier  to  lay  it  on  the  bricks ;  but  where  affection  moves  the  hand,  it  is  delight
to  add  something  over  and  above  to  bare  duty.  The  artist  who  loves  his  work  will
put  many  a  touch  on  it  beyond  the  minimum  which  will  fulfil  his  contract.  Those
who  adequately  feel  the  power  of  Christian  motives  will  not  be  anxious  to  find  the
least  that  they  durst,  but  the  most  that  they  can  do.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Super-
abounding  obedience : — The  doctrine  arising  from  hence  is  this,  that  righteous  men
being  moved  to  honest,  charitable,  just,  and  necessary  duties,  will  yield  more  than
men  can  well  request  and  require  them  to  do.  1.  The  obedience  of  the  faithful  will
Buper-abound  because  they  set  before  them  the  example  of  God  ajid  dehght  to  come
near  unto  Him.  They  have  experience  of  His  bountiful  dealing  toward  them.  He
is  ready  to  grant  not  only  what  they  ask  but  more  than  they  ask.  2.  The  children
of  Ood  have  a  free  and  willing  mind,  and  seek  to  walk  before  Him  with  a  perfect
heart.  And  what  will  not  a  willing  heart  do  ?  Will  it  not  strive  to  attain  to  per-
fection ?  3.  Their  joyfulness  in  the  works  of  righteousness  and  godliness  do  exceed
the  trial  of  necessity.  Though  the  Lord  try  His  people  with  manifold  afflictions,
yet  they  are  so  far  from  quailing  and  cooling  their  willing  readiness  and  ready
willingness  to  do  according  to  that  they  are  required,  nay,  above  that  they  are
required,  that  they  make  the  same  much  more  excellent  and  famous.  4.  They  ao*
knowledge  all  things  to  be  from  God  and  to  be  His  ;  and  therefore  they  will  yield
freely  where  He  requireth  and  what  He  requireth  and  as  far  as  He  enableth  them
to  their  uttermost  strength.  The  uses  remain  to  be  handled.  1.  From  hence  we
learn  this  point,  that  forwardness  and  zeal  in  good  things  is  greatly  to  be  commended.
We  cannot  yield  more  than  is  looked  for  at  our  hands,  unless  we  be  earnest  and
fervent  in  the  Spirit  as  men  that  are  led  by  the  Spirit.  True  it  is  there  is  no  warrant
to  walk  without  our  warrant  or  to  run  too  fast  without  any  guide.  Hence  it  is  that
Solomon  saith  (Eccles.  vii.  18,  19).  Meaning  thereby  that  as  we  should  not  suffer
sin  to  reign  iu  our  mortal  bodies  (though  we  cannot  wholly  drive  it  away),  so  we
should  not  seek  a  righteousness  beyond  the  law.  So  then  we  must  understand  that
albeit  we  are  to  be  ready  to  yield  more  than  can  be  required  of  us,  yet  we  must  not
think  to  do  more  than  God  requires  of  us.  If  we  speak  of  the  duties  that  Gk>d  com-
mandeth,  we  come  far  short  when  we  have  done  what  we  can,  and  we  must  confess
we  are  unprofitable  servants ;  but  when  we  speak  of  good  and  Christian  dutlM  which


PHILEMON.  83


onr  ministers  or  brethren  crave  of  as  and  desire  us  to  practise,  we  should  willingly
perform  more  than  they  ask  at  our  hands.  Let  us  therefore  be  fervent  and  zealous
in  all  lawful  and  honest  things.  It  is  good  always  to  be  earnest  in  a  good  thing.
2.  This  doctrine  is  a  comfort  to  ourselves  and  to  other  the  servants  of  God,  and  an
occasion  of  great  joy  when  as  we  ourselves  or  others  are  forward  and  cheerful
beyond  expectation  in  good  things.  A  notable  example  of  both  is  offered  to  our
consideration  in  the  provision  that  was  made  and  the  furniture  that  was  provided
for  the  buUding  of  the  Temple  (1  Chron.  xxix.  9).  Where  we  see  that  when  David
himself  having  a  great  zeal  and  delight  in  the  house  of  his  God  gave  of  his  own
gold  and  silver,  and  the  people  and  princes  following  his  example  spared  no  cost
and  expenses,  it  is  said,  "  The  people  rejoiced  when  they  offered  willingly,  for  they
offered  willingly  to  the  Lord,  with  a  perfect  heart :  and  David  the  king  also  rejoiced
with  great  joy. "  Again,  there  is  great  occasion  offered  unto  us  to  glorify  God  and
to  praise  His  Name,  whensoever  He  worketh  this  willingness  in  the  hearts  of  His
children,  and  when  we  see  their  zeal  to  abound  and  their  readiness  to  go  beyond
any  request  that  we  can  make  unto  them.  Lastly,  it  is  the  duty  of  every  man  to
labour  to  be  answerable  at  the  least  to  the  expectation  that  the  Church  hath  had  of
him,  and  to  endeavour  to  be  as  good  as  he  hath  made  show  of,  performing  therein
the  practice  of  his  profession,  not  deceiving  any  of  the  servants  of  God  therein.
This  requireth  of  us  a  careful  observation  and  marking  of  the  manners  of  men,  both
of  their  beginnings  and  proceedings,  and  not  to  stand,  as  idle  beholders,  gazing  in
the  air ;  that  we  may  understand  the  time,  the  means,  the  forwardness,  the  know*
ledge,  the  show  that  hath  been  in  many ;  all  which  have  promised  much  and  caused
as  to  expect  good  things  at  their  hands,  and  yet  oftentimes  in  vain.  {W.  Attersoll.)
Philemon's  willing -heartedness : — There  are  labourers  whose  hammers  or  spades
move  more  or  less  briskly  according  as  the  foreman  is  near  at  hand  or  away.  They
need  both  an  overseer  and  a  stint  of  work.  There  are  also  those  whose  work  is
turned  off  changeably  as  to  quantity,  according  to  the  terms  of  agreement  signify-
ing "  by  the  day  "  or  "  by  the  job."  Selfishness  is  not  easily  laid  aside  always
when,  hired  to  perform  work  for  another,  one  lays  off  the  coat  to  set  about  it.  That
under  garment  still  remains,  fitting  more  closely  than  tailor  ever  cut;  Nessus-like,
cleaving  to  the  very  skin.  But  an  unselfish  workman,  even  though  but  hired,  is
more  like  a  partner  in  the  firm.  What  interest  he  manifests  in  the  successful
issue  I  With  hearty  love  for  the  end  to  be  accomplished,  making  the  work  his  own
apparently,  see  how  the  better  motive  keeps  every  muscle  up  to  its  full  tension  I
Not  easily  does  he  tir«.  Stint  him,  and,  if  possible,  he  will  over-do  the  stint.  No
danger  but  that  in  a  full  day  he  will  accomplish  a  fuU  day's  work — without  any
overseer.  There  are  such  Christian  workmen.  Paul  regarded  Philemon  as  one  of
this  sort.  Some  one  has  suggested  that  that  accounts  for  Philemon's  Epistle  having
but  one  chapter.  Writing  to  him,  Paul  needed  not  to  spin  out  directions  and
exhortations  page  after  page.  Twenty-five  verses  were  sufficient.  No  more  than
that  to  Philemon — whose  heart  was  in  the  work  !  Possibly  certain  congregations,
clamorous  for  short  sermons,  in  these  days  might  take  a  hint  from  the  brevity  of
Philemon's  Epistle.  At  least  shorter  sermons  might  find  more  appropriate  place
if  Philemon's  spirit  was  more  generally  diffused  throughout  the  Churches.  As  it
is,  may  they  not  already  be  disproportionately  brief,  especially  as  we  consider  the
half-heartedness  for  the  Christian  task  with  which  so  many  of  us  go  to  our
■work  ?  We  deserve  watching.  We  deserve  stinting.  We  deserve  long  epistles,
like  overseer's  lash,  laid  over  us.  It  is  the  boy  who  hates  work  to  whom  his
father  must  address  himself  with  ever-wearying  particulars  of  direction  each
morning.  "  Before  you  go  off  to  play  to-day,  you  must  saw  twenty-five  sticks
at  the  wood-pile,  or  help  mother  about  the  house  two  hours  and  a  half.  That's
your  stint."  Such  a  boy  one  must  be  particular  with,  or,  likely  as  not,  he'll  do
nothing.  You  know  very  well  he  will  do  no  more  than  he  has  been  directed  to
do.  But  the  boy  Philemon — when  his  father  is  leaving  home,  and  must  give
directions  to  the  hired  servant  for  the  management  of  affairs  about  the  place
during  his  absence,  will  he  need  directiog  also  ?  Is  his  father  anxious  about
him  ?  "  What  will  he  be  about  while  I  am  away  so  long  ?  "  Oh,  no  I  Phile-
mon has  a  son's  interest  in  the  work  to  be  carried  forward.  "  I've  told  him  a
few  things  to  be  remembered ;  but  he  is  as  much  interested  in  affairs  as  I  am,
and  he  will  do  much  more  than  I  have  said.  I  can  trust  Philemon  1 "  Phile-
mon-Christians, too,  require  but  short  sermons.  To  the  Corinthians,  however,
chapter  after  chapter  1  Specific  information  bow  to  conduct  themselves  :  Not  to
vez  their  brethren,  going  to  law  with  them  ;  not  to  defile  themselves  shamelessly ;


84  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.

not  to  eat  meats  offered  to  idols,  nor  cover  their  heads  in  prayer,  nor  profane  the
Lord's  Supper  by  over-drinking.  Finally,  Paul  had  even  to  add  that,  notwith-
standing all   his  instructions,   he   feared,  when  he  should  come  again  to  them,

lest  there  should  be  "  debates,  envyings,  wraths,  strifes,  swelMnga,  and  tumults  "

enough  to  require  some  more  very  long  sermons,  just  such  as  Paul  could  preach
on  occasions,  as  at  Troas,  where  one  poor  man  got  asleep  under  it  and  fell  out  of
the  window.  But  Philemon — a  whole  church  full  of  such  Corinthians  as  he
would  have  required  very  simple  directions  by  epistles  or  sermons — in  fact,  would
have  constituted  a  model  Church,  no  less  than  one  easy  to  preach  to  in  these  hot
days  of  summer.  Somehow,  a  minister  rather  longs  for  Philemons  in  the  pewi,
with  hearts  so  much  in  the  work  they  need  Uttle  but  leading  ;  never  pushing,  never
stinting,  never  overseeing,  never  long  sermons.     (6.  G.  Phipps.)

Ver.  22.  Prepare  me  also  a  lodging. — A  lodging: — 1.  If  St.  Paul's  direction
here  arose  from  a  real  anxiety  upon  the  subject  of  the  "  lodging  "  itself,  we  shall
not  be  likely  to  suppose  that  he  required  much  comfort  or  preparation  for  an  ample
retinue.  The  lodgings,  as  Jerome  happily  says,  "  were  for  the  apostles  rather  than
for  Paul.  He  anticipated  a  large  concourse  of  hearers.  This  would  involve  a
situation  convenient  of  access ;  large  enough  to  hold  a  number  of  people ;  in  a
locality  of  good  report,  and  undisturbed  by  a  troublesome  neighbrrarhood."  2.
St.  Paul  had  evidently  changed  his  plans  since  writing  Eom.  xv.  24-28.  With
this  verse  cf.  Phil.  ii.  24.  3.  Ehtttorically,  this  request  would  tell  doubly — (1)
"Prepare  me  a  lodging,  or  arrange  for  me  at  an  inn."  Nay,  surely  he  will  be  the
honoured  and  beloved  guest  of  Philemon  and  Apphia.  Will  not  Onesimus  be
there?  And  in  what  position?  (2)  St.  Paul  wrote  to  a  true  and  devoted  friend.
This  simple  direction  would  excite  hope  and  joy,  the  passions  which  beyond  all
others  make  the  human  heart  unable  to  refuse  anything  to  those  whom  it  loves.
{Bp.  Wrtu  Alexander.)  A  hope  of  liberty  : — A  thought  concerning  himself,  intro-
duced here  not  for  the  sake  of  himself,  but  because,  as  he  adds,  they  prayed  to  God
that  his  presence  might  be  vouchsafed  to  them,  not  only  for  their  personal  grati-
fication, but  that  he  might  impart  to  them  some  spiritual  gift  as  an  apostle  (Rom .
i.  11 ;  cf.  Phil.  i.  25  ;  ii.  24),  where  a  similar  hope  of  liberation  is  expressed.  (Bp.
Chris.    Wordsworth.)  St.    Paul    coming   to  Philemon: — Whereas,   therefore,

Philemon  might  have  thought  with  himself,  and  thus  reasoned  touching  Paul's
suit.  "  It  skilleth  not  whether  I  grant  it  or  not,  he  hath  been  a  most  lewd  servant
unto  me,  and  Paul  liveth  far  off  from  me,  he  is  held  in  prison  at  Rome;  either  he
will  not  hear  what  becometh  of  Onesimus,  or  if  he  does  hear,  peradventure  he
shall  never  be  delivered  out  of  prison,  but  remain  a  prisoner  all  the  days  of  his
Ufe;  and  therefore  I  will  deal  with  Onesimus  as  seemeth  good  to  myself."  These
and  such  like  imaginations  the  apostle  putteth  out  of  his  head,  and  telleth  him  he
should  shortly  look  for  his  coming  unto  him,  whereby  he  should  know  what  account
he  made  of  his  words,  and  what  obedience  he  would  yield  to  his  request.  Hence
it  is  that  for  this  cause  Paul  craveth  to  have  lodging  prepared  for  him  rather  by
Philemon  than  any  other  citizen  at  Colosse  ;  not  that  he  required  much  provision
and  preparation  to  be  made  for  his  entertainment,  who  had  taught  others,  and
learned  himself  to  be  content  with  a  little,  but  because  by  this  commandment,  as
by  a  sharp  sword,  he  would  pierce  the  bowels  of  Philemon,  and  as  by  a  strong
engine,  batter  the  fort  and  bulwark  of  his  heart,  and  thoroughly  persuade  him  and
prevail  with  him  to  receive  Onesimus,  both  into  his  house  and  into  his  favour.
(W.  Attersoll.)  Christian  friendship : — I.  Its  dependence  (ver.  22).  1,  On  God.
His  restoration  would  be  an  act  of  Divine  grace.  2.  On  each  other.  Mutual  de-
pendence a  privilege  as  well  as  necessity.  Includes — (1)  Intercession.  (2)
Hospitality.  II.  Its  recipeocation  (vers.  23,  24).  1.  Of  faith  and  feeling.  Aa  a
thousand  particles  of  iron  are  held  together  by  invisible  magnetic  current,  so  the
hearts  of  men  by  unseen  force  of  faith  in  Jesus  and  love  for  Him.  2.  Of  labour
and  endurance.  The  first  named  in  the  salutation  is  more  than  a  fellow-worker.
He  had  joined  the  apostle  in  combat  with  the  powers  of  darkness,  and  now  shared
his  captivity.  III.  Its  benediction  (ver.  25).  1.  Testimony  concerning  Christ.
Main  teachings  of  the  gospel  concerning  Him  concentrated  here.  (1)  That  He  is
alive  and  a  Divine  Benefactor.  (2)  Anointed  "  Lord."  Appellative  of  Jehovah  in
Old  Testament.  So  in  Col.  i.  16  ;  John  L  1-3  ;  Heb.  i.  2.  Equal  with  God,  whose
grace  alone  can  sustain  the  spirit  of  men.  (3)  Faith  in  Him  the  origin  and  power
of  all  worthy  life  (ver,  5, 6).  No  good  done  without  His  grace.  All  and  in  all.  2.
Teaching  for  followers  of  Christ.    Grace  of  Christ  the  supreme  fount  of  goodness


PHILEMON,  85


and  blessing.  The  Alpha  and  Omega  of  joyfulness  and  power.  Thence  comes —
(1)  Forgiveness  (Matt.  i.  21 ;  Eph.  i.  7 ;  1  John  i.  7,  9).  (2)  Renovation.  One-
simns  a  **  new  creation  "  (2  Cor.  v.  17).  (3)  Sanctification  (2  Cor.  v.  21).  (4)
Wisdom  (1  Cor.  i.  24,  30  ;  Col.  ii.  3  ;  Eph.  i.  8).  (5)  Hope  (Rom.  v.  2  ;  1  Pet.  i.
S-8).  (6)  Consolation  (2  Cor.  i.  5,  zii.  9 ;  Heb.  iv.  15).  All  we  need  and  can
wish.  (A.  W.  Johnson.)  Chrhtian  hospitality  : — I.  This  duty  is  ubged  upon
us  BT  DiVBBS  EXAMPLES  IN  THE  HoLY  ScEiPTURES.  1.  It  is  to  be  practised  of  as
because  it  is  the  commandment  of  God  that  we  should  love  and  lodge  strangers,
and  show  all  pity  and  compassion  toward  them,  to  succour  them  in  their  necessity.
This  it  is  which  Moses  saith,  "  Love  ye  the  stranger,  for  ye  were  strangers  in  the
land  of  Egypt  "  (Deut.  x.).  Hereunto  cometh  the  rule  of  the  apostle,  "  Distribute
to  the  necessities  of  the  saints,  give  yourselves  to  hospitality"  (Rom.  xii.).  This  is
the  precept  of  the  apostle  Peter,  "  Be  ye  harbourers  one  towards  another  without
grudging  "  (1  Pet.  iv.  9).  Seeing,  therefore,  God  commandeth,  it  is  our  part  to  obey,
and  submit  ourselves  to  His  will  and  pleasure.  2.  As  God  requireth  this  duty  of
us,  so  we  have  His  own  example  to  teach  it  unto  us.  It  is  a  property  of  God  to
love  strangers,  and  therefore  to  be  imitated  and  followed  of  all  that  belong  unto
Him.  This  reason  is  expressed  in  Deut.  x.  18.  3.  God  doth  greatly  honour  such
as  honour  strangers.  They  have  been  so  far  honoured  by  God  as  that  angels  have
entered  into  their  houses,  been  entertained  by  them,  and  have  blessed  them.  II.
The  doctrine  being  thus  cleared,  the  uses  semain  to  be  showed.  1.  This
declareth  that  hospitality  is  a  commendable  virtue,  and  a  worthy  fruit  of  love ;
yea,  an  excellent  ornament  in  the  children  of  God,  whereby  they  receive  good
report  of  the  Church.  2.  Secondly,  this  doctrine  serveth  for  reproof.  Of  all,
of  such  as  think  that  hospitality  consisteth  in  feasting  and  keepeth  great  cheer,
and  bidding  the  rich  to  their  tables ;  whereas  the  Scripture  understandeth  by  it  a
courteous  entertainment  of  such  poor  Christians  as  are  banished  out  of  their
countries.  2.  This  meeteth  with  the  corruption  of  our  times,  we  cannot  abide
those  that  are  strangers,  but  are  enemies  to  the  very  name  when  we  hear  of  it.
But  all  neglect  of  them  and  injurious  dealing  towards  them  is  a  great  sin,  and
such  as  are  haters  of  strangers  are  grievous  sinners.  3.  It  is  our  duty  to  take  the
opportunity  offered  unto  us  of  God  ;  nay,  it  is  required  of  us  to  seek  the  opportunity
to  express  our  obedience  to  God,  and  our  love  to  our  people,  in  doing  all  good  to
such  as  stand  in  need.  4.  Lastly,  it  is  a  great  comfort  and  peace  to  a  man's  con-
science that  God  will  in  His  Son  Christ  regard  him,  when  with  a  single  heart  he
hath  been  careful  to  testify  his  love  toward  distressed  strangers  for  the  truth's
sake.  Let  us  rejoice  in  this  consolation,  that  we  shall  be  assured  that  God  will
pity  us  when  we  have  thus  pitied  others.  {W.  Attersoll.)  Letters  do  not  blush  : —
It  is  a  known  observation  that  letters  do  not  blush.  What  men  would  be  ashamed
to  ask  in  person,  that  they  are  bold  enough  to  ask  by  letter  ;  and  it  is  as  true  that
the  readers  of  letters  do  not  blush ;  they  are  hardy  enough  to  deny  that  to  their
absent  friends,  which  they  could  not  refuse  them  if  present.  The  apostle  therefore
intimates  to  Philemon  his  intention  to  visit  him  shortly,  who  must  for  that  reason
be  the  more  inclined  to  gratify  him  as  not  being  able  to  look  him  in  the  iace  and
to  bear  his  presence,  if  he  should  deny  him  this  small,  this  reasonable,  this  im-
portunate request.  (Bp.  Smalrldge.)  I  trust  that  througli  your  prayers. —
Prayer  for  temporal  blessings  : — The  limits  of  Paul's  expectation  as  to  the  power  of
his  brethren's  prayers  for  temporal  blessings  are  worth  noting.  He  does  believe
that  these  good  people  in  Colosse  could  help  him  by  prayer  for  his  liberation,  but
he  does  not  beUeve  that  their  prayer  will  certainly  be  heard.  In  some  circles
much  is  said  now  about  "  the  prayer  of  faith" — a  phrase  which,  singularly  enough,
is  in  such  cases  almost  confined  to  prayers  for  external  blessings — and  about  its
power  to  bring  money  for  work,  which  the  person  praying  believes  to  be  desir-
able, or  to  send  away  diseases.  But  surely  there  can  be  no  "  faith  "  without  a
definite  Divine  word  to  lay  hold  of.  Faith  and  God's  promise  are  correlative ;  and
unless  a  man  has  God's  plain  promise  that  A.  B.  will  be  cured  by  his  prayer,
the  belief  that  he  vrill  is  not  faith  but  something  deserving  a  much  less  noble
name.  The  prayer  of  faith  is  not  forcing  our  wills  on  God,  but  bending  our
will  to  God's.  The  prayer  which  Christ  has  taught  in  regard  to  all  outward  things
is,  "  Not  my  will,  but  Thine  be  done,"  and  "  May  Thy  will  become  mine."  That
is  the  prayer  of  faith,  which  is  always  answered.  The  Church  prayed  for
Peter,  and  he  was  delivered.  The  Church,  no  doubt,  prayed  for  Stephen,  and
ht  was  stoned.  Was,  then,  the  prayer  for  him  refused  ?  Not  so,  but  if  it  were
pnyw  9i  all,  tiie  izunost  meaning  of  it  was,  "  Be  it  aa  Thoa  wilt  "  ;  and  that  wa4


8S  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.

accepted  and  answered.  Petitions  for  oatward  blessings,  whether  for  the  petitioner
or  for  others,  are  to  be  presented  with  submission ;  and  the  highest  confidence
which  can  be  entertained  concerning  them  is  that  which  Paul  here  expresses :  "  I
hope  that  through  your  prayers  I  shall  be  set  free."  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The
duty  of  praying  for  ministers  : — 1.  In  regard  of  the  love,  which  is  due  from  people
to  minister.  People  are  bound  to  love  their  pastors.  Now  love  seeks  not  her  own
things.  He  that  prays  not  for  hia  minister,  loves  him  not.  2.  In  regard  of  their
great  charge  wherewithal  they  are  betrusted.  A  charge  of  greater  worth  than  aU
the  world — the  soul  of  their  people.  The  greater  the  charge  the  greater  the  gifts
required  to  discharge  it.  The  more  graces  they  need  the  more  earnest  should  our
prayers  be  to  procure  the  same.  3.  In  regard  of  their  danger  as  in  the  former
point.  They  are  in  danger  of  Satan's  malice,  he  knows  if  he  can  but  with  nis  tail
cause  these  stars  to  fall  from  heaven,  that  he  shall  cause  the  greater  darkness  and
the  greater  scandal;  their  corruption  in  life  or  doctrine  will  be  exemplary  and
infectious.  They  are  also  in  danger  of  unreasonable  men  (2  Thess.  iii.  2).  The
greater  reason  that  they  should  be  holpen  with  our  prayers.  4.  Pray  for  your
ministers,  because  in  praying  for  them  .^ou  pray  for  yourselves,  and  procuring
their  good  you  procure  your  own.  The  better  ministers  are,  the  better  is  it  for
people.  Many  people  complain  of  the  insufficiency  of  their  teachers,  and  as  many
ministers  may  complain  of  the  negligence  of  their  people.  For  if  they  were  more
diligent  in  prayer  their  ministers  would  be  more  able  to  preach  if  they  would  pray
more  for  them,  then  should  they  be  able  to  preach  better  unto  them.  What  be  the
things  we  should  beg  for  them?  Paul  specifies  some  particulars,  wherein  he
would  be  remembered.  As — (1)  Free  and  bold  utterance  of  the  gospel  (Epb.  vi.
19  ;  Col.  iv.  3,  4).  (2)  Free  passage  of  his  ministry  (2  Thess.  iii.  1).  (3)  Deliverance
from  wicked  men  (Eom.  xv.  30  ;  2  Thess.  iL  3).  (4)  Other  particulars  are  mentioned
(Rom.  XV.  31).  {D.  Dyke,  B.D.)  I  shall  be  given  unto  you. — Answered  prayer
unmerited : — The  meaning  of  the  apostle  is  thus  much  in  effect.  The  prayers  of  the
saints  shall  prevail  with  God,  and  being  offered  up  for  my  deliverance,  shall  not  return
to  them  without  comfort,  nor  ascend  to  Him  without  effect,  nor  concern  me  without
profit.  Notwithstanding,  albeit,  they  shall  not  go  empty  away,  but  have  their  full
force  and  power,  yet  it  is  to  be  acknowledged  and  learned  that  they  so  obtain,  as  that
my  deliverance  is  to  be  wrought  out  by  the  free  gift  of  His  grace,  not  by  the  merit  and
desert  of  your  prayers.  If  we  would  know  the  causes  and  reasons  why  the  graces
of  God  are  freely  bestowed  upon  us,  and  nothing  given  for  our  deserts.  1.  Let  us
consider  that  all  matter  of  boasting  is  taken  from  us,  and  God  will  have  the  glory
of  His  own  work,  and  the  praise  of  His  mercy.  2.  There  are  no  such  properties
in  any  man's  works  as  that  they  can  merit,  or  proceed  from  any  other  fountain
than  grace.  Let  us  therefore  see  what  properties  are  necessarily  required  in  works
to  make  them  meritorious.  (1)  They  must  be  done  of  a  man  of  himself,  and  by
himself ;  but  we  have  nothing  of  our  own  to  give  Him,  but  are  most  poor  men  and
mere  beL'gars,  and  can  but  pay  God  with  His  own.  Without  Him,  therefore,  we
can  do  nothing ;  it  is  He  that  must  work  in  us  the  will  and  the  deed.  (2)  They
must  be  such  works  as  are  not  due  unto  Him,  they  must  not  be  due  debt,  they
must  come  from  our  own  free  will,  they  must  be  such  as  God  cannot  justly
challenge  at  our  hands.  We  are  miserable  bankrupts,  we  have  nothing,  we  have
less  than  nothing  to  pay.  (3)  The  work  must  be  done  to  the  benefit  and  profit  of
Him,  from  whom  we  look  to  be  repayed.  But  our  goodness  and  well-doing
reacheth  not  to  the  Lord  (Psa.  xvi.).  We  may  benefit  men,  but  we  cannot  benefit
our  Maker,  from  whom  we  have  received  soul  and  body.  Now  they  that  cannot
give  anything  to  God  can  deserve  nothing  from  Him.  (4)  Whatsoever  is  imperfect
cannot  stand  in  the  presence  of  the  most  just  and  perfect  God.  We  must  bring
nothing  before  Him  but  that  which  is  absolute  and  able  to  bear  and  sustain  His
wrath.  But  all  that  we  do  offer,  or  can  offer,  unto  God  is  maimi  d  and  imperfect.
Lastly,  the  work  and  the  reward  must  be  in  proportion  equal,  for  if  the  reward
be  more  than  the  work  it  is  not  a  reward  of  desert,  but  a  gift  of  good  will.
For  grace  and  glory  are  unmatchable,  no  price  can  purchase  them,  no  merits
can  match  them.  This  doctrine  being  thoroughly  strengthened,  let  us  see  what
uses  may  be  grounded  from  thence.  (1)  We  learn  from  thence  that  seeing  God
giveth  not  by  desert,  but  of  His  mercy;  that  whatsoever  we  have  obtained  and
received  by  any  prayer,  or  other  means  from  the  hand  of  God,  we  must  ascribe
all  to  the  glory  and  praise  of  His  name,  and  acknowledge  Him  to  be  the  Author
and  Giver.  (2)  As  by  the  free  bestowing  of  the  graces  of  God  we  are  taught  to
give  Him  all  possible  praise,   so  it   taketh  away  all  opinion  of  the  meriti  of


PHILEMON.  87


works  wherein  proud  flesh  is  ready  to  trust.  Lastly,  seeing  all  God's  gifts  oome
from  Him  to  us  of  grace  and  mercy,  it  is  our  duty,  above  all  things,  to  desire
mercy,  and  to  crave  the  free  gifts  of  God.     {W.  Attersoll.)

Ver.  23,  24.  There  salute  thee. — Apostolic  salutations : — The  salutations  which
the  apostle  delivered  in  such  numbers  and  so  earnestly — 1.  Eest  on  faith  and  a  con-
fession of  the  one  true  Church  of  the  Lord.  2.  Are  an  expression  of  the  feeling  of  oar
communion,  of  our  higher,  heavenly  relati'  nship  in  the  family  of  God.  3.  Furnish
significant  proofs  of  Christian  love.  (Nitzsch.)  Observations : — I.  We  see  the
apostle  setteth  down  a  salutation  PBocEEDrNG  fkom  others  which  teaeheth  that
salutations  are  an  ordinary  means  ordained  of  God  to  nourish  and  cherish  mutual
love,  and  that  union  and  conjunction  which  the  members  of  Christ's  body  have  one
•with  another.  II.  Albeit  the  apostle  were  a  prisoner  for  the  faith's  sake,  yet
God  doth  not  leave  him  alone.  Thus  we  see  the  endless  mercy  of  God  towards
His  afflicted  and  distressed  servants,  He  raiseth  them  up  some  comfort,  verifying
the  promise  made  to  His  Church,  "If  I  depart,  I  will  send  the  Comforter  unto  you."
He  knoweth  our  infirmities,  He  seeth  how  ready  we  are  to  yield  and  slide  back,  and
therefore  as  He  strengtheneth  us  by  others,  so  He  maketh  us  means  to  strengthen
others.  III.  He  caUeth  Epaphras  a  prisoner  of  Christ,  as  he  also  had  called  him-
self before  in  the  beginning  of  this  Epistle.  The  reason  is,  because  he  had  preached
Christ.  There  might  haply  be  others  in  the  same  prison  who  might  suffer  as  male-
factors, and  justly  deserve  the  restraint  of  the  prison,  but  such  were  none  of  Paul's
fellow-prisoners.  Hereby  we  learn  that  persecutions  often  follow  the  sincere
preaching  of  the  gospel,  not  that  it  is  the  property  of  the  gospel,  but  the  cause  is
the  malice  of  such  as  will  not  receive  the  gospel,  and  therefore  they  hate  and  per-
secute those  that  believe  in  Christ  and  give  entertainment  to  the  gospel.  This  is  it
our  Saviour  teaeheth  (Mat.  x.  34,  35).  So,  then,  let  us  not  think  it  a  strange  thing
when  we  see  such  tumults  arise,  but  arm  ourselves  with  patience.  Learn  to  be
wise  as  serpents  and  innocent  as  doves,  and  condemn  those  that  are  the  authors
and  beginners  of  those  broils  and  contentions.  IV.  Observe  the  titles  that  he
giveth  unto  our  Lord  and  Saviour — he  describeth  Him  by  two  names.  First  he
calleth  Him  Christ,  then  he  calleth  Him  Jesus.  Christ  signifi^th  as  much  as
anointed.  Under  the  Law  the  priests  were  anointed  (Exod.  xxx.  30) ;  so  were  the
kings  (1  Sam.  x.  1 ;  xvi.  13) ;  and  the  prophets  (1  Kings  xix.  16).  Christ  is  the
true  anointed  Priest,  King,  and  Prophet  of  His  Church  (Acts  iv.  27 ;  x.  38),  and  the
only  person  that  had  aU  these  offices,  and  therefore  is  said  to  be  anointed  with  the
oil  of  gladness  above  all  His  fellows  (Psa.  xlv.  7 ;  Heb.  i.  9 ;  John  iii.  34).  From
this  title  it  is  that  we  are  called  Christians  (Acts  xi.  26 ;  Psa.  cv.  15).  Jesus
importeth  as  much  as  a  Saviour,  who  was  so  called  because  He  saveth  His  people
from  their  sins  (Mat.  i.  21).  From  whence  observe  that  Christ  is  the  King,  Sie
Prophet,  and  the  Priest  of  His  Church,  to  govern  us,  to  teach  as,  to  redeem  us,  to
save  as.  This  is  His  office,  for  these  ends  and  uses  He  was  anointed  of  the  Father
with  the  Spirit  of  God  itseli  This  serveth  to  our  great  good,  and  the  benefit  of  it
is  communicated  onto  us;  He  maketh  us  kings  and  priests  to  God  His  Father
(Rev.  i.  6).  He  armeth  us  with  power  and  strength  against  sin,  the  flesh,  the
world,  the  devil,  and  maketh  us  able  to  overcome  them.  Through  Him  we  have
aooess  to  the  Father,  and  may  boldly  appear  in  His  sight,  and  offer  up  oar  prayers
with  assarance.  Tea,  He  enableth  as  to  offer  ap  ooreelves,  our  souls,  and  bodies,
an  holy,  lively,  and  acceptable  sacrifice  unto  Him,  which  is  oar  reasonable  serving
of  Him.  He  doth  instruct  as  in  the  will  of  His  Father,  enhghten  us  in  the  know-
ledge of  the  truth,  and  maketh  as,  as  it  were,  EUs  household  disciples  and  scholars
to  reveal  onto  us  all  things  needful  for  our  salvation.  Let  us  therefore  confess
Him  to  be  the  only  Son  of  God,  perfect  God  and  perfect  Man,  the  sole  Mediator
between  God  and  man.  V.  Observe  that  speakiug  of  Marcus,  Aristarchus,  Demas,
and  Lake,  hb  oallbth  thbh  his  nujiOW-HELPEBs;  whereby  he  putteth  the  ministers
of  the  gospel  and  all  the  children  of  God  in  mind  to  be  helpers  to  the  truth,  and  to
farther  the  preaching  and  propagation  of  th«  gospel  by  all  possible  means  that  God
hath  enabled  them.  This  reproveth  those  that  employ  their  wits  and  bestow  their
strength  to  hinder  the  truth  and  the  professors  thereof.  These  have  no  part  nor-
fellowship  in  the  ministration,  nor  in  the  sound  profession  of  the  gospel,  bat  are
professed  enemies  to  the  faith  of  Christ.  Moreover,  this  shall  minister  unspeakable
comfort  anto  as  to  consider  that  we  have  been  helpers  to  the  truth  and  furtheren
of  the  faith  which  is  in  Christ  Jesos,  we  shall  leave  a  good  name  behind  us,  and
reoeiye  an  inoorroptible  etown  of  eternal  gloij.    {W.  Atter$oll.)       Cwrteou*


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.


tpeeehet  are  becoming  to  Chrittians : — L  Our  well  wishing  one  to  another  ii  •  froit
m  onr  love,  smd  a  means  to  maintain  and  continue  love  among  us.  If  we  would
maintain  love,  we  must  wisely  and  carefully  entertain  such  helps  as  may  further
■8  in  the  performance  of  that  duty,  whereof  this  that  now  we  speak  of  is  one,  so
that  we  are  to  express  onr  inward  love  by  outward  tokens,  to  the  end  that  it  may
be  seen  and  appear  unto  others.  II.  Onr  salutations  are  remembrances  of  our  sare
and  good  affections  toward  those  whom  we  greet  well.  It  is  a  sign  that  we  are  not
forgetful  of  them,  but  do  greatly  regard  and  respect  them.  III.  To  desire  the  good
of  others  from  the  heart  is  both  a  fruit  of  the  Spirit  and  a  good  sign  and  testimony
to  our  own  selves  that  we  are  chosen  of  Ood  to  eternal  life.  1.  We  learn  that
eourtesy  with  civil,  gentle,  friendly,  and  soft  speeches  are  to  be  entertained  of  the
servants  of  God.  A  fire  is  soonest  quenched  by  water,  and  anger  is  soonest  appeased
by  gentleness.  Let  us  plant  this  in  the  garden  of  our  hearts,  and  learn  to  give
good  speeches  one  to  another,  and  show  a  friendly  countenance,  even  to  them  that
wrong  us  and  abuse  us,  without  any  purpose  or  desire  to  revenge.  This  is  a  virtue
hard  to  be  found  in  these  days  among  the  sons  of  men,  they  cannot  speak  well  one
of  another.  This  gentleness  that  teacheth  us  to  deal  courteously  toward  each
other  is  thinly  sown  in  the  furrows  of  our  hearts.  Wherefore,  we  must  know  that
humanity  and  courteous  dealing  are  not,  as  some  imagine,  excluded  from  Christians,
as  if  nothing  should  be  in  them  but  rigour  and  austerity.  Indeed  they  are  to  deal
roughly  and  rigorously  with  wilful  and  wicked  men  that  are  offensive  and  unruly,
bat  we  must  be  gentle,  meek,  and  lowly  toward  such  as  are  willing  to  be  instructed.
Let  us  therefore  accustom  our  tongues  to  civility,  to  blessing,  and  wishing  all  good
one  to  another.  This  becometh  our  profession,  and  witnesseth  to  all  the  world
that  we  are  of  pure  conversation.  2.  This  doctrine  serveth  for  reproof  of  divers  and
sundry  abuses  that  are  too  rife  and  common  among  us.  It  seemeth  a  light  and
ridiculous  thing  to  many  to  salute  and  to  be  saluted,  but  it  is  of  great  force,  and
availeth  much  to  the  obtaining  and  getting  of  good  will.  It  is  a  point  of  courtesv
and  humanity  to  salute  others  and  to  pray  for  them.  Let  no  man  say  these  are
very  small  matters  to  be  spoken  of  and  stood  upon.  We  must  acknowledge  that
oar  obedience  is  to  be  showed  even  in  the  least,  and  not  in  the  greatest  matters
only.  And  a  true  Christian  is  to  be  seen  and  known  when  he  will  yield  in  the
practise  of  lesser  points  and  such  as  are  not  of  greatest  importance.  3.  Seeing  we
are  taught  to  use  all  gentle  and  courteous  communication,  and  all  loving  saluta-
tions and  well-wishing  one  toward  another,  this  teacbeth  us  that  we  must  all
diligently  study  and  practise  the  government  of  the  tongue,  to  order  it  aright  and
in  due  manner.  This  is  a  worthy  study,  it  is  a  hard  study,  it  is  a  profitable  study
(Psa.  xxxiv.  12,  13 ;  xxxix.  1).  To  this  purpose  the  apostle  teacheth  us  to  be
alow  to  speak  and  swift  to  hear.  This  virtue  appeared  notably  in  Elihu  (Job
zxxii.),  who  waited  till  Job  had  spoken,  for  they  were  more  ancient  in  years  than
he.  In  our  speaking  we  must  be  careful  that  our  words  be  gracious,  and  seasoned
with  wisdom,  truth,  reverence,  modesty,  meekness,  and  sobriety,  as  it  were  with
salt,  which  are  contrary  to  the  foolish,  rotten,  and  graceless  talk  that  aboundeth  in
onr  days,  wherein  men  are  grown  to  be  very  beasts  (Bom.  iii.  13,  14).  {Ibid.)
Courtesy  : — Courtesy  is  not  confined  to  rank,  or  wealth,  or  station.  Nature's  noble-
men, without  Uneage,  or  heraldry,  or  fame,  may  be  found  sitting  in  the  cottage,
working  in  the  fields,  toiling  with  their  hands.  Though  unlettered  and  untrained,
their  instincts  are  the  instincts  of  gentlemen.  They  speak  restrainedly,  they  would
not  wrong  another  for  any  gain;  they  would  put  themselves  to  any  trouble  for
another's  sake.  Courtesy  is  not  mere  manners  ;  neither  does  it  spring  from  mere
amiable  meekness.  True  courtesy  is  wedded  to  true  pride  and  a  fearless  self-
respect.  The  strong  man  is  courteous  because  he  is  strong.  The  vacillating  man
is  uncivil  because  he  is  weak.  True  courtesy  shines  most  brightly  in  the  sphere  of
home.  The  stripling,  who  is  all  grace  to  outside  young  ladies,  and  neglects  bis
mother;  the  girl  who  is  radiant  as  a  butterfly  at  a  ball,  and  surly  as  a  wasp
at  home ;  the  apprentice  who  addresses  his  employer  as  "  Sir,"  and  talks  of  his
father  as  "  the  old  boy,"  may  possess  the  polish,  but  have  not  the  principle,  of
eourtesy.  Courtesy  shows  itself  not  only  upon  great  occasions,  but  also  in  little
things.  In  a  drawing-room  it  will  listen  to  playing  or  singing  which  may  not  be
vary  brilliant,  for  the  performer's  sake.  True  courtesy  is  kind  to  inferiors  and
servants.  It  knocks  at  the  cottage  door  just  as  it  rings  at  the  mansion's  hall.  It
ia  chivalrous  to  woman,  not  because  she  is  rich,  or  young,  or  handsome,  or  gifted,
but  because  she  is  woman.  It  is  kind  to  old  age :  the  grey  head  is  venerable  in  the
eyes  of  oourtesy.  The  same  fine  feeling  which  ia  called  courtesy  in  seoular  condaot


PHILEMON.  9»


Indl  to  reTerenoe  in  saored  tbiogs.  Irreverence  is  a  coarse  form  of  mdenen.
Oonrtesy  makes  ns  bow  to  oor  fellows:  reverence  makes  as  kneel  before  God.
What  would  be  bad  condoot  in  a  drawing-room  is  worse  than  bad  eondaot  In
ohorch.  Coartesy  of  heart  overflows  in  coartesy  of  action.  By  imitating  the
gentleness  of  Christ,  Christians  become  Christ's  gentlemen.    (/.  W.  Diggle.)

Yer.  26.  The  grace  of  onr  Lord  Jesus  Christ. — Grace  the  gift  of  CkrUt  :■— 1.  At
the  beginning  of  the  Epistle  Panl  invoked  grace  apon  the  household  *'  from  God  our
Father  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  Now  he  conceives  of  it  as  Christ's  gift.  In
Him  all  the  stooping,  bestowing  love  of  God  is  gathered,  that  from  Him  it  may  be
poured  on  the  world.  That  grace  is  not  diffused  like  stellar  light  through  some
nebulous  heaven,  but  concentrated  in  the  Sun  of  righteuu3neBS,  who  is  the  light  of
men.  That  fire  is  piled  on  a  hearth  that,  from  it,  warmth  may  ray  out  to  all  that
are  in  the  house.  2.  That  grace  has  man's  spirit  for  the  field  of  its  highest  opera-
tion. Thither  it  can  enter,  and  there  it  can  abide,  in  union  more  close  and  oom>
monion  more  real  and  blessed  than  aught  else  can  attain.  The  spirit  which  hait
the  grace  of  Christ  with  it  can  never  be  utterly  solitary  or  desolate.  8.  The  graco
of  Christ  is  the  best  bond  of  family  life.  Here  it  is  prayed  for  on  behalf  of  aU  ths
group,  the  husband,  wife,  child,  and  the  friends  in  their  home — church.  Idke
grains  of  sweet  incense  cast  on  an  altar  flame,  and  making  fragrant  what  wai
already  holy,  that  grace  sprinkled  on  the  household  fire  will  give  it  an  odour  of  a
sweet  smell,  grateful  to  men  and  acceptable  to  God.  4.  That  wish  is  the  purest
expression  of  Christian  friendship,  of  which  the  whole  letter  is  so  exquisite  an
example.  Written  as  it  is  about  a  common,  every-day  matter,  which  could  have
been  settled  without  a  single  rehgious  reference,  it  is  saturated  with  Christian
thought  and  feehng.  So  it  becomes  an  example  of  how  to  blend  Christian  senti-
ment with  ordinary  affairs,  and  to  carry  a  Christian  atmosphere  everywhere.
Every  Christian  ought  by  his  life  to  be,  as  it  were,  floating  the  grace  of  God  to
others  sinking  for  want  of  it  to  lay  hold  of,  and  all  his  speech  should  be  of  a  piece
with  this  benediction.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Orace  to  be  moat  desired : — I.  First  of
all,  we  see  here,  that  as  in  the  entrance  of  the  Epistle,  and,  as  it  were,  at  their  first
meeting,  he  wished  unto  him  the  grace  of  Christ,  so  he  doth  in  the  farewell  and  depart-
ing, hereby  teaching  that  nothing  is  better  or  more  to  be  desired  than  His  grace ;  that
all  our  salutations  and  farewells  should  be  grounded  in  His  grace ;  this  must  be  the
beginning  and  the  ending  of  all  onr  talk  and  communication ;  and  as  he  began  with
prayer,  so  he  endeth  with  prayer.  Thus  ought  our  actions  to  be,  that  whatsoever  we
do  in  word  or  in  deed,  we  should  do  all  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  (Col.  iii.  17).
This  bringeth  good  success  to  our  works,  and  maketh  that  which  we  do  to  prosper.
U.  When  the  Son  of  God  is  called  Jesus,  we  observe  again  that  He  is  a  peifect  and
absolute  Saviour ;  the  alone  Saviour,  inasmuch  as  the  work  of  onr  salvation  and
redemption  is  wholly  and  only  wrought  out  by  Him,  and  no  part  left  unfinished
and  reserved  for  any  creature  in  heaven  or  in  earth.  lU.  The  Son  of  God  is  called
Christ,  which  signifieth  as  much  as  anointed.  IV.  Let  us  consider  the  third  title
given  to  the  Son  of  God.  He  is  called  onr  Lord ;  which  teacheth  us  to  acknow-
ledge Him  to  be  the  Buler  and  Governor  of  His  Church,  and  of  every  particular
member  thereof.  And  if  He  be  the  Governor  and  Guide,  woe  unto  them  /hat  wiU
not  be  ruled  and  governed  by  Him.  V.  Observe  that  the  grace  here  aiLiked  for
Philemon  and  others  to  whom  the  apostle  wrote,  is  called  the  grace  of  Jesus  Christ,
to  teach  as  that  God's  graces  and  benefits  come  upon  us  through  Him,  and  as
nothing  was  made  without  Him  that  was  made,  so  nothing  is  given  without  Him
that  is  given.  If,  then,  we  would  have  right  and  interest  in  any  of  the  blessings  of
God,  we  must  labour  to  be  in  Christ  and  to  have  assurance  that  we  are  in  Christ.
{W.  Attersoll.)  The  apostolic  benediction : — 1.  Some  explanation  of  the  words  of
the  text,  "  The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  2.  What  we  may  learn  from  it.
(1)  The  grand  foundation  of  a  sinner's  hope.  (2)  How  to  make  a  practical  use
of  Christian  doctrines.  (3)  The  simplicity  of  the  faith  and  the  fervency  of  the  love
of  the  primitive  Church — the  Church  of  the  apostle's  time.  (B.  Cecil,  M.A.)
The  Christian's  prayer  for  his  brethren  in  Christ : — 1.  Breathes  family  affection —
affection  to  all  who  love  Christ — affection  to  them  as  brethren,  for — (1)  They  are
bom  of  the  same  Father.  (2)  They  are  taught  by  the  same  preceptor.  (3)  They
are  severed  from  the  world  and  dedicated  to  God,  body,  soul,  and  spirit.  2.  uivokea
a  family  blessing — grace — the  grace  of  Christ.  3.  Describes  family  experience.  II
we  have  realised  the  text  in  our  experience,  then  we  have  attained  the  climax  ol
Christian  attainments.     {J.  Dillon,  D.D.)        Qraes: — 1.  The  sum  of  all  othac

7


90  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.

blessings.  2.  Obtained  through  Christ.  3.  The  greatest  happiness  we  can  desire
for  others.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Grace : — 1.  Its  source.  2.  Its  fulness.  3.  Its  flow.
4.  Its  power.  (Ibid.)  Grace : — 1.  Is  needed  by  aU.  2.  Is  provided  for  all.  3.  Is
offered  to  all.  4.  Is  supplicated  for  alL  5.  May  be  enjoyed  by  all.  (Tbid.)  The
grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ : — Very  powerful  was  the  impression  which  Lady
fanny  Shirley  on  her  sick  bed  made  upon  the  surrounding  attendants.  Once,  as
a  reigning  beauty  at  Court,  Chesterfield  had  addressed  to  her  some  of  his  most
famous  epigrams ;  since  then  she  chose  that  better  part  which  could  never  be
taken  from  her.  "  I  am  quite  at  a  loss  to  explain  how  Lady  Fanny  is  enabled  to
bear  such  a  severity  of  suffering  with  so  much  tranquillity  and  so  few  symptoms
of  restlessness  and  murmuring,"  said  her  physician  to  Mr.  Venn.  "  Can  you
account  for  it,  sir  ?  "  "  Sir,"  answered  Venn,  "  that  lady  happily  possesses  what
you  and  I  ought  daily  to  pray  for,  the  gi'ace  of  her  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  love  of
God,  and  the  fellowship  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  Grace: — With  a  prayer  for  this
grace  Paul  had  opened  the  Epistle,  and  with  a  prayer  for  this  grace  he  now  will
close.  It  is  the  most  all-inclusive  wish  for  good  he  can  indite  in  so  few  words —
the  free  and  saving  favour  of  the  Lord,  with  all  its  holy  and  happy  influences  for
soul  and  body,  for  time  and  for  eternity.  This  grace  sanctifies  earth's  fellowships,
and  protects  them  from  degeneracy  and  social  corruption.  It  raises  life  above  the
entanglements  of  ennui  and  chagrin,  of  cynicism  and  despair.  It  weans  the  heart
from  the  world,  without  permitting  it  to  be  soured.  It  lends  dignity  to  suffering,
and  gilds  the  gloom  of  sorrow  with  radiant  hope.  To  the  apostle  had  been  often
verified  the  soul-sustaining  words,  "  My  grace  is  sufiQcient  for  thee."  As  the  day
grows,  the  warmth  increases  and  the  shadows  flee  away ;  so,  as  grace  is  realised,
the  heart  basks  and  suns  itself  in  the  glow  of  heaven's  love,  and  everything  gets
bathed  in  heaven's  own  light.  {A.  H.  Drysdale,  M.A.)  Amen.— This  is  set  down
in  a  word,  and  yet  it  containeth  more  than  the  prayer  itself.  For  in  prayer  we  testify
our  desire,  by  this  we  witness  our  faith.  By  this  we  observe  that  unto  our  requests
and  petitions  in  prayer  must  be  joined  faith  and  belief  that  God  will  grant  the
things  craved.  To  pray  without  faith  is  not  to  pray  at  all.  And  to  say  amen  in
the  end  of  our  prayers,  and  yet  to  pray  with  doubting,  and  without  believing,  is  to
make  a  lie  and  to  teach  our  tongues  to  deceive  our  hearts.  For  this  is  a  great  jar
and  discord  when  infidelity  is  in  the  heart  and  faith  in  the  tongue  ;  when  inwardly
we  waver,  and  outwardly  the  mouth  uttereth  amen.  Moreover,  so  often  as  weuse
public  prayers  they  must  be  pronounced  and  deUvered  with  that  plainness,  feeling,
and  zeal,  as  that  the  people,  being  thereby  moved,  and  their  faith  and  affections
going  with  that  which  is  deUvered  and  prayed  for,  may  answer  amen  anto  that
whidi  is  desired.    This  is  it  which  the  apostle  teacheth  (1  Cor.  xiv.).


Theological  Semmary-Speer  Library


1    1012  01127  8134


'^=~=4iJiass>>r';v^


DATE  DUE
